**Daniel J. Hruschka and Brandon A. Kohrt**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Mongolian, Mongol.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Mongolian People's Republic (MPR) is a landlocked country in northern Central Asia flanked by Russian Siberia to the north and surrounded by China to the east, south, and west. Many authors have referred to the region as Outer Mongolia in contrast to Inner or Southern Mongolia, which is now an autonomous region within the People's Republic of China. The majority (- 90%) of the MPR's 2,374,000 inhabitants (NSO, 2000) are ethnically Mongolian, speakers of an Altaic language distantly related to Turkic. Although Mongolian speakers also reside in Russia (308,000; SCRFS, 1994) and China (4,800,000; Tianlu & Rongqing, 1996), this article will concentrate on Mongolians living within the MPR.

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Three cultural systems—Central Asian mobile pastoralism, Tibetan Buddhist lamaism, and a Soviet model of development—have profoundly shaped Mongolian society. Although it is difficult to trace the ethnic term "Mongol" much farther back than Genghis Khan's 13th century confederacy of nomads (Morgan, 1996), today's Mongolian pastoralists maintain cultural patterns that are characteristic of many traditional Central Asian societies (Humphrey & Sneath, 1999). Most economic activity revolves around livestock grazing. The steppe's sparse vegetation constrains population density and requires frequent moves between pasture sites. Horses, which are the most prized of domesticated animals, have historically served to connect the territory's sparse human population. To accommodate annual mobility in a rugged climate, traditional Mongolian dwellings (the circular felt-lined *ger*) combine structural stability, heat insulation, and a flexible framework that can be dismantled and rebuilt in hours. The annual cycle revolves around herd animals, and involves long stretches of relaxed activity punctuated by intense periods of work during the birthing, shearing, branding, and slaughter seasons.

The household and labor organization of Mongolian pastoralists is surprisingly consistent across regional space and historical time (Cheney, 1968; Humphrey & Sneath, 1999; Shombodon, 1996). Nuclear households, consisting of parents, children, and elder family members, serve as the primary economic unit (Neupert, 1995). These households own herds, while higher social bodies administer the rights to grazing land. Settlements rarely grow larger than several *ger* households that converge for the sharing of person and animal power (*khot ail*) or circles of *gers* that are set up for defensive purposes (*khuree*; Bold, 1996; Vreeland, 1962). Marriage, generally monogamous, is deeply tied with the establishment of a new *ger* household and further reinforces a complex gendered division of labor (Cheney, 1968; Neupert, 1996; Shombodon, 1996). Senior males hold the highest authority (Cheney, 1968). Numerous Mongolian women, however, have possessed political or military authority, and socialist policies in the 20th century have further encouraged the economic and political participation of women in Mongolian society (Cheney, 1968; Skapa, 1995).

Tibetan Buddhism firmly infiltrated Mongolian culture in the 17th century when religious missionaries established a network of monasteries throughout the current MPR's territory. Monasteries served both as religious centers and as sites of education, and with 1/3 of all male Mongolians educated as lamas in these monasteries, the philosophy, art, ceremony, and medicine of Tibetan Buddhism soon became embedded in Mongolian life (Cheney, 1968; Heissig, 1980). Although the new religious regime persecuted non-Buddhist knowledge specialists, their indigenous forms of knowledge and practice eventually merged with Tibetan Buddhist forms

to generate a uniquely Mongolian syncretism (Heissig, 1980).

During the three hundred years that Tibetan Buddhism reigned in Mongolia, the Manchu Qing dynasty administered the region. When the Qing dynasty fell in 1911, Mongolia quickly declared independence, and after a series of failed governments and foreign occupations, the Mongolian People's Republic was formed in 1924. Under the guidance of its Soviet neighbor, the MPR embraced a centrally planned socialist model for society. Buddhism and other traditional practices were suppressed, with a series of purges killing tens of thousands of Tibetan lamas and other political dissenters in the late 1930s (Batbayar, 1999). Key goals of the socialist regime were universal education and health coverage and by the 1970s, all Mongolians had access to free health care and all children were provided with at least 8 years of full-time education (Smith & Lannert, 1995). In the late 1980s, Mongolia, with many of its former socialist allies, transitioned from a socialist to a free-market system (Bawden, 1989; Bruun & Odgaard, 1996).

As heirs of mobile pastoralists, Tibetan Buddhist, and socialist traditions, Mongolians today engage in a wide range of lifestyles. Less than one third of the population remains in rural areas, while another third lives in urban settlements, and another third resides in the MPR's capital city, Ulaanbaatar (NSO, 2000). A universal mandatory education system with post-secondary training opportunities has generated a highly literate (- 80% literate) and specialized society. At the end of the socialist period, for example, only 33% of the population was involved in agricultural production, with 17% in manufacturing and mining, 7% in specialist areas such as medicine, law, and teaching, and 33% in the service industry (NSO, 2000). Although, Mongolia is classified as a low-income country, with per capita gross national income hovering from \$350 to 450 (World Bank, 2000), the country ranks surprisingly well on a number of worldwide indicators. Women have achieved a relatively high level of equality (Skapa, 1995), universal education in the second half of the 20th century has raised literacy rates to higher than 95% (NSO, 2001), and a comprehensive health infrastructure extends to most parts of the country. Mongolians stay tuned to modern forms of media, with 80% getting information from the radio, 75% from newspapers, and 68% from televisions (Avirmed & Marckwardt, 1999). In a post-socialist atmosphere of religious freedom, two thirds of the population is Buddhist and one third claims no religious affiliation (Avirmed & Marckvardt, 1999). Despite the eclectic set of cultural resources now available in the MPR, Mongolians continue to maintain a relatively coherent set of traditions and attitudes that places them in contrast to their international neighbors (China and Russia) and to other cultural systems.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

At the border of dense Siberian forests and the vast Central Asian plains, the MPR is the most sparsely populated state on the planet (1.4 persons per km2 ). Life expectancy at birth is 64 years for men and 68 for women (WHO, 1999). The leading causes of mortality are cardiovascular disease (31%), cancer (20%), and respiratory infections (13%) (WHO, 1999). The infectious diseases with highest incidence in the 1990s have been viral hepatitis (22–39 per 10,000), tuberculosis (11–14 per 10,000), brucellosis (4–6 per 10,000), gonorrhea (9–14 per 10,000), and syphilis (3–9 per 10,000) (NSO, 2000). As of 1998, there were only 2 confirmed cases of HIV/AIDS (WHO, 1999). However, the dramatic increase of HIV/AIDS in the Russian Federation and China coupled with an increased incidence of other STIs in Mongolia suggests that the country may soon experience its own increase in HIV/AIDS incidence (Purewdawa, 1997). Women suffer from increased rates of depression and indigenous forms of mental illness (*yadargaa*) (Kohrt et al., 2003a), but men seem to have been hit hardest (in both mortality and morbidity) by the recent shift from socialism to a market economy (see section on sociocultural change).

Mongolia's culture, society, and environment have deeply influenced the country's health profile. This section will discuss several of the most important influences on health: environment, mobile pastoralism, diet, and infrastructure. Sociohistorical changes dramatically transformed the health profile of Mongolians in the last century, and these changes will be discussed in the final section of this article.

#### **Environment**

Mongolia has an extreme continental climate, with low precipitation, long, cold winters (average January temperature ranging from 35C in the north to 15C in south) and short, hot summers (average June temperatures ranging from 15–30C). Temperatures are generally below freezing for 7 months out of the year (Academy of Sciences, 1990). The country's low population density and cold climate have limited potential disease vectors (humans or otherwise), and Mongolians have had only rare encounters with a number of infectious diseases. Cholera, for example, was first reported in Mongolia in 1996 (WHO, 1999). Similarly, Mongolia experienced smallpox epidemics much later than did its southern neighbors (Fisher, 1988; Serruys, 1980). At the same time, the extremely cold, dry environment provides a fertile bed for respiratory infections, which contribute to nearly half of all newborn, infant, and child deaths (Neupert, 1995; WHO, 1999). In contrast, diarrheal diseases contribute to fewer than 15% of infant and child deaths (WHO, 1999).

#### **Mobile Pastoralism**

Mongolia's unique environmental regime has further influenced health by constraining the population's subsistence activities. Several aspects of the climatic regime—low precipitation, poor water supplies, and short summers—render crop agriculture a risky venture, while salty soils and an abundance of good feed grasses make most of the country ideal for sustained livestock production. The general reluctance of Mongolians to "cut" or disturb the earth, to fence the earth into agricultural plots, or to eat "grass" likely also contributes to the reliance on pastoral production (Williams, 1996). Although fewer than half of Mongolians now engage in herding (NSO, 2000; Shombodon, 1996), the lifestyle continues to affect the health of a sizeable portion of the population (Foggin et al., 1997).

Mongolians who maintain a rural lifestyle breed and raise different proportions of the traditional five domesticated animals (*tavan hoshuu mal,* horses, cattle and yak, sheep, goats, and camels). One of the greatest health concerns for herding populations is the threat of losing herd animals, either to poaching, to natural predators, to severe weather, or to infectious disease. Perhaps the most serious threat to Mongolian herds is extremes in winter weather, or *dzud.* In response to the extreme climate, herd animals are adapted to foraging in snow, surviving long periods of famine, and raising young in the severe weather conditions. Mongolian horses, for example, are adapted to the climate, with a short stocky build. They can survive solely on grass and can dig through the snow in winter to find grass. Despite these adaptations, severe *dzuds* can devastate herds with two consecutive *dzud*s in 1999 and 2000 killing over 4,000,000 heads of livestock (more than 10% of all livestock). Although little is known about the human health impact of losing substantial portions of a herd in Mongolia, a study of child nutritional status after the 1999–2000 *dzud,* suggests that herd loss has a deleterious effect on child growth (CDC, 2002).

In addition to affecting well-being indirectly through herd loss, several zoonotic diseases are capable of infecting human populations. Most notably, tuberculosis and brucellosis, which comprise 20% of all reported infections in the MPR (NSO, 2000), can be contracted from herd animals via contact with animals or ingestion of animal products (Foggin et al., 1997).

The traditional Mongolian *ger* also structures health risks. In 1990, 60% of Mongolians still lived in traditional *gers*, including 20% of the urban population (Mongolian Ministry of Health, 1992). Although a *ger*'s outer felt layer and circular design provide an insulated environment even in the coldest months, the close quarters, hot and arid air, and smoke from the central fire may explain the increased deaths from respiratory illness among infants living in *gers* (versus apartments) (Neupert, 1995).

### **Diet**

Early Chinese chroniclers confirm that the Mongolian diet has for centuries consisted of meat and dairy products, with rice, grain, and wine either traded or captured from agricultural areas in China (Cheney, 1968; Jagchid & Hyer, 1979). Fat is accorded special value, with sheep bred for their fatty rumps and honored guests given the first portion of solid white fat from a cooked sheep's tail.

Mongolians prepare numerous milk derivatives (*tsagaan idee*)—cream from boiled milk (*orom*), yogurt (*tarag*), fermented milk (*airag*), raw milk (*suu*), varieties of dried milk curd (*aaruul*), butter (*tos*), cream (*tsotsgii*), dried cheese (*eetsgii*), and distilled sour milk (*nermel*). Salted milk tea is a mainstay. Mongolians consume a limited range of vegetables (potatoes, carrots, turnips, cabbage, onions, and garlic), a restriction that is due

#### **The Context of Health 853**

partly to availability, and partly to an ethic that "Grass (which can mean any plant food) is for cattle and meat is the food for man." Mongolians consider rice and grain flour as staples and most dishes involve some use of rice, noodles, or flour dumplings.

The diet follows an annual cycle that rural residents adhere to by necessity and urban residents by habit: meat is the staple for most of the year, while dairy products predominate in the summer months (Foggin et al., 1997). Mongolians traditionally slaughter animals in large numbers in December to prepare dried meat (*borts*) for the coming winter (Foggin et al., 1997; Jagchid & Hyer, 1979; Seidenberg, 1991). Dairy replaces meat in the summer due to ample supplies of milk products and the high spoilage rate for meat. Although there is geographical and individual variation in this cycle, it is recognizable throughout Mongolia (Foggin et al., 1997). *Tsagaan sar* (the Mongolian new year) and *Naadam* (a national holiday in July) are the exceptions to the rule. During *Tsagaan sar* frozen milk products are thawed for consumption. Conversely, in the summer heat of Naadam, large amounts of meat are consumed.

The country's cold climate and high altitude (average elevation 1,580 m) exact significant metabolic requirements on organisms. A high-energy diet, as well as relatively high rates of excess fat and central fat deposition, may serve as buffers against these environmental challenges (Beall & Goldstein, 1992). However, this consumption combined with relatively high salt intake may also put Mongolians at risk for later cardiovascular disease. Although cardiovascular disease currently accounts for over 30% of deaths (WHO, 1999), it is difficult to place responsibility for these high rates on the diet, since these rates have increased dramatically in the last decade with few equally dramatic changes in eating habits.

#### **Infrastructure**

The central challenge for all health systems in Mongolia has been to equitably distribute medical knowledge and health resources to a thin mobile population ranging over huge areas. One grass roots solution to this problem has been a distribution of medical knowledge whereby households maintain moderate levels of know-how concerning local medicines and illnesses, with more experienced traditional practitioners dispersed but common enough to be accessible in times of need (Hruschka, 1998). Both Tibetian and socialist medicine also employed some form of dispersed care (Academy of Sciences, 1990; Roerich, 1933). Today rural and urban populations differ most significantly in reproductive health, with maternal mortality twice as high in rural as in urban areas (WHO, 1999), and infant and child mortality also elevated in rural areas in the 1990s (Tserendulam, 1999).

#### **Alcohol and Tobacco Use**

Many Mongolian and foreign observers have noted an increase in alcohol consumption during the social transformations of the 1990s. Unemployment, poverty, lowered living standards, and a visibly widening gap between rich and poor have all been posited as reasons for the trend. The availability of alcohol has also changed considerably, with lax state regulations facilitating an influx of cheap foreign alcohol, an increase in domestic production, and a rise in the number of public drinking establishments. In addition to recent social pressures and increases in availability, Mongolians' cultural attitudes toward alcohol have likely also played a role in the increase in alcohol use. Although Russians are often blamed for the introduction of heavy alcohol consumption, Mongolians had developed a culture around drinking alcohol well before the introduction of Russian practices. For centuries, Mongolians have produced *airag*, or fermented mare's milk (2–5% alcohol) (Montell, 1937), and a brandy distilled from sour milk (Underdown, 1977).

Alcohol has long been a central part of gatherings, with an emphasis on compelling others to drink as much as possible that was established prior to extensive Russian influence (Montell, 1937). However, the speed with which such liquor spoiled (2 to 3 days in summer) and natural limits on the production of milk (Cheney, 1968; Montell, 1937) likely inhibited chronic alcoholism. Mongolians writing from previous centuries noted the drink's destructive side. Indeed a number of laws and proverbs discouraged excessive alcohol consumption (Bawden, 1976; Underdown, 1977). What likely changed with the socialist regime was the introduction of highly alcoholic mass-produced distilled spirits. Controlled during communism by ideological indoctrination, strict cell discipline, and limitation of sales, alcohol became a rare and treasured item and common means of transaction in the underground economy (Bulag, 1998). Although no longer controlled, alcohol still retains a precious image that may also drive its current consumption.

A public health concern which will likely come to the forefront in coming years is the high prevalence of smoking among Mongolians—both youth and adults. In 2001, 68% of adult males and 26% of adult females smoked regularly (Kirby et al., 2001). A more recent study of children (9–17 years old) in 17 East Asia and the Pacific countries and territories indicates that Mongolian children have the highest prevalence of smoking (- 55%), with 50% of Mongolian children listing that they had friends who wanted to quit, but could not (UNICEF, 2001).

# **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

The majority of medical practitioners in Mongolia belong to one of three major traditions—modern Russian medicine, Tibetan Buddhist medicine, and pre-Buddhist traditional medicine.

### **Pre-Buddhist Traditional Health Specialists**

Healers, trained neither at government medical schools nor from Tibetan Buddhist sutras, have dominated much of Mongolia's medical history and continue to participate in healthcare today. These traditional healers specialize in distinct, but overlapping, arenas of knowledge rather than comprising a homogenous set of practices and theories (Hruschka, 1998; Humphrey & Onon, 1996). *Bariach* (*barishi*) generally perform massage and musculoskeletal manipulation to treat maladies including concussions, broken bones, headaches, and bone or organ displacements (Hruschka, 1998). *Boo* (male) and *udagan (idughan, yadgan)* (female) employ ecstatic trance to master spirits with power over maladies and misfortunes (Humphrey & Onon, 1996). *Ekh barigch (bariyachi)* hold knowledge of female birth-giving and are comparable with traditional birth attendants. *Otoch (otoshi)* have had different roles in different Mongolian contexts. Among the Dagur Mongols of Manchuria, *otoshi* were charged with female fertility and child development (Humphrey & Onon, 1996), while in other contexts the term has signaled a general medical specialist (Kriegel, 1997; Jagchid & Hyer, 1979) or someone skilled with medicinal plants (Lessing, 1982). Each of these specialists is believed to possess the power of spirits and forces related to his or her field of knowledge, much as blacksmiths (*darkhan*) in the same areas are believed to have access to spirits controlling metal-smithing (Hruschka, 1998; Humphrey & Onon, 1996).

Mongolians generally feel that traditional practitioners whether they are *boo, bariach,* or *eck barigch* do not choose to become healers, but rather are chosen by deceased ancestors (*ug*) who once practiced the specialty. An individual is usually "called by the ancestors" in the form of an untreatable illness, and the only way to cure the illness is to ritually take the ancestral talent *(udam)* and begin healing (Hruschka, 1998; Humphrey & Onon, 1996). These healers were persecuted under both Tibetan Buddhist and socialist regimes, and only since 1990 have they begun to experience a resurgence in public practice (Hruschka, 1998).

#### **Buddhist Medicine**

With the destruction of monasteries and the mass purging of monks in the 1930s and 1940s, the socialist regime effectively erased Tibetan Buddhist medicine as an institution (Bawden, 1989). Before that time, however, prominent Tibetan Buddhist monasteries in Mongolia often maintained a college of medicine (*mampa datsan*) where future physicians (*maaramba, emch*, or *otoch*) trained in the diagnosis and treatment of illness (Jagchid & Hyer, 1979). The Tibetan Buddhist medical canon in Mongolia was a vast collection of sutras, theoretical commentaries, and case studies compiled and revised over centuries of practice. To become skilled in this field of knowledge, a student was obliged to study at least 20 years in the *datsan* before becoming a physician (Cheney, 1968). In recent decades, Tibetan medicine has returned as a legal form of healing.

#### **Russian Modernist Traditions**

Although Russian-trained doctors and paramedics are the most recent addition to the Mongolian medical landscape, they quickly came to dominate healing under the 20th century socialist regime. Within two decades of the revolution in 1924, the MPR had established a school of modern Russian medicine to train nurses and paramedics, and by 1961, a central medical school was training physicians to staff the growing network of clinics throughout the country. During the first years after the revolution when doctors and clinics were still in short supply, Tibetan-trained *emch* and other healing specialists were allowed to continue practicing. This soon changed, however, when in 1938 the government extended a universal ban on non-modern forms of medicine. Coincident with a set of purges, this ban ensured that most medical care took place within Soviet-styled clinics and hospitals staffed by paramedic feldshers (*baga emch*) and doctors *(ikh emch)* (Academy of Science, 1990; Bawden, 1989).

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

The theories and treatment of illness in Mongolia derive primarily from three medical traditions—pre-Buddhist traditional, Tibetan Buddhist, and Russian modern. Mongolians do not generally envision these predominant modes of health care as mutually exclusive, coherent wholes. Rather, individuals synthesize the basic tenets and classificatory systems of each tradition into frameworks that fit their past and current illness experience. Although it is impossible to completely disentangle the "original" theories and treatments from these traditions, this section will attempt to identify aspects particular to each tradition.

#### **Pre-Buddhist Traditions**

The pre-Buddhist, or shamanic, medical tradition deals with a broad range of misfortune ranging from inconveniences as benign as losing things to maladies as deadly as the plague (Bawden, 1960; Humphrey & Onon, 1996). Misfortune in its many forms (truck accidents, depression, miscarriages) is explained by recourse to a field of powers personified as malignant humans, animals, or ancestors (e.g., *ongon, lus savdag, elriye, chidkun, tuidker, ada, eliye* [Bawden, 1960; Heissig, 1980; Humphrey & Onon, 1996]). These forces can be set in motion by external actions, such as a curse, or by an individual's own actions, such as the breach of a taboo.

Treatments under this system usually invoke the powers of specific spirits. *Tsagaan ovgon* (the white old man), for example, was known among the Buriats to protect humans from poxes and various feverish illnesses (Heissig, 1980). The task of a healer is to prevent misfortune by appealing to specific spirits or to correct (*zasa*-) a misfortune or malady by severing the oppression (*dara*-) of specific forces. Different spirits require different ritual activity such as ecstatic trance induction (Humphrey, 1996), manipulation of a patient's bones and muscles (Hruschka, 1998), or more material forms of treatment (Cleaves, 1954). The workhorses of this ritual repertoire are effigies that absorb an individual's illness or misfortune (Heissig, 1986; Humphrey & Onon, 1996). Another force that has been especially consistent across space and time has been the purifying fire, which cleanses all forms of polluted individuals and items (Bulag, 1998). Although the practices and theories associated with this collection of forces maintain some theoretical consistency, the orientation is foremost pragmatic, incorporating those practices and concepts that work and eschewing those that do not (Heissig, 1980; Humphrey & Onon, 1996).

#### **Tibetan Medicine**

Tibetan medicine in Mongolia, although predominantly influenced by traditional Tibetan/Ayurvedic thought, has some unique facets related to Mongolia's prior theories of illness. The three humors of Tibetan medicine—*khii* (wind/air), *badgan* (phlegm), and *shar* (bile)—constitute the categorical backbone of the medical theory (Kohrt et al., 2003a; Kriegel, 1997; Matignon, 1895). Diseases are classified according to the interruption of flow or imbalance of these three humors (Cheney, 1968). In the Mongolian context, these humors map onto concepts that may have pre-dated the influx of Tibetan Buddhism. *Badgan* (derived from Tibetan *bad-kan*) and *shar* (the Mongolian word for yellow and jaundice) are opposed according to a cold-hot (*seruun-khaluun*) set of dichotomies (moon-sun, slow-fast, female-male, waterfire, and *arga-bilig* which is often described as yin-yang) (Kriegel, 1997). *Khii*, resembling both the Tibetan humor "wind" and the Chinese concept of *chi*, dominates the humoral triad, and is responsible for neurological and local idioms of distress, such as *yadargaa* (Kohrt et al., 2003).

Initial diagnosis involves taking a history, reading a person's pulse, and examining the patient's urine. A combination of pulse attributes reveals type of illness, location of pathology, personal temperament, and childhood history of disease. Urine, illuminates humoral constitution when assessed by smell, taste, temperature, color, and foaming potential (Cheney, 1968; Kriegel, 1997; Matignon, 1895).

Treatment depends upon the type of illness. Plant and mineral compounds (*tan*) are often taken in hot water or tea. Since the humors are strongly affected by climate, behavior, and state of mind, patients are often told to change their lifestyle for improved health (Cheney, 1968). Visits to the countryside, spending less time outside in cold weather, cessation of drinking or smoking, and mental relaxation are often encouraged. Illnesses related to karmic offenses in a previous life require the reading of sutras and *tarin* (short sutras). Treatments could include acupuncture (*zuu*), bleeding (*khanuur*), moxibustion (*toonuur*), and cupping (*bumba*) (Kriegel, 1997; Matignon, 1895). Dietary practices have both preventative and curative impacts. Foods possess different humoral and cold/hot properties and are consumed to adjust a person's constitutional imbalance (Kriegel, 1997). Seasonal dietary shifts accommodate climactic changes, for example "hot" foods, such as mutton, warm the constitution in winter, while "cold" foods, such as fermented mare's milk, cool the body's constitution and eliminate toxins taken from "hot" foods during the summer (Bulag, 1998).

#### **Russian Medicine**

The biomedical approach employed in Mongolia derives from the Soviet model. Physicians currently diagnose and treat according to the International Classification of Disease-10 (ICD-10). Mongolian biomedicine also emphasizes lifestyle and integrates therapies such as cupping, acupuncture, massage, and various forms of naturopathy. Injections (glucose, vitamin complexes, calcium chloride, and saline) are a popular form of treatment for myriad health problems (Kohrt et al., 2002).

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

#### **Sexuality**

Pre-socialist Mongolia is stereotyped as having promiscuous sexual norms, and consequently high rates of venereal disease (Bawden 1989; Cheney, 1968; Rupen, 1964; Jagchid & Hyer 1979). During socialism sexual activity outside of marriage was discouraged, and sex is not normally an acceptable topic in public discourse. Most education about sex and sexuality occurs through peers and via the media. Sexual or gender forms different from a standard heterosexual dichotomy are little understood and treated with either confusion or disdain. Consequently little information is available on the subject. Post-socialist changes, such as increased freedom of movement, less strict partner tracing, new attitudes about sexual behavior, and increases in sex workers, have been implicated in a marked rise in sexually transmitted diseases (syphilis, gonorrhea, and trichomonas) since 1990 (Purevdawa et al., 1997; WHO, 1999).

### **The Fertility Boom**

For the last half century, Mongolia has witnessed a dramatic demographic transition. With decreased mortality and increased fertility achieved during the socialist period, the country witnessed a growth spurt that more than tripled the population in 60 years (Neupert, 1995; Randall 1993). Consequently, Mongolians are relatively young, with 32% of the population under the age of 15 years, and only 4% over 65 in 1999 (NSO, 2000). In 1970, however, Mongolia began to see fertility rates decline (Neupert, 1995; Randall, 1993), and it is likely that the population structure will include a much larger proportion of older individuals in the coming decades. Although the fertility boom has been linked with pronatalist policies of the MPR, Randall argues that improved medical treatment, especially for sexually transmitted diseases, provides a more consistent explanation for the sudden burst in fertility (Randall, 1993).

The strict pronatalist policy under socialism included strict control of abortions and contraceptive technologies. Since 1989, however, both abortion and contraception have become legal forms of fertility control. Since that time, nearly 2/3 of women with an unwanted pregnancy take steps to stop pregnancy, with one of every six pregnancies ending with an abortion. The termination of pregnancy is much more common among urban and educated women, with only 1/3 of rural women and uneducated women with unwanted pregnancies terminating the pregnancy (Chagnaadorj, 1999; Panday, 2002). The trend in abortions has been paralleled by changes in contraception. By 1995–1998, 60% of women aged 15–49 (compared to less than 15% in the 1980s) were using some form of contraception, with IUD the most common form (32%), followed by periodic abstinence (13%) (Mongolian Ministry of Health, 1993; Luvsantseren, 1999).

#### **Ideal Household**

The ideal Mongolian household, which is captured in socialist art and contemporary movies, is a heterosexual

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 857**

couple living in either a city apartment or traditional *ger.* It includes several children and potentially the couple's parents. The ideal number of children has changed over the years, with younger women wanting on average fewer than 3 children, compared with older women (- 35) who state a preference of around 4. These ideals are surprisingly uniform across region, education, and sex (Dashtseren & Marckhvardt, 1999). Despite the ideal of a couple participating in the production of a household, about 10–20% of households are headed by single women (NSO, 2000), and out of wedlock births seem to be accommodated well (Randall, 1993). Cohabitation is common with 48% of registered couples living 2 or more years together before marriage (NSO, 1999). Such cohabitation often occurs within the *ger* or apartment of other family members.

#### **Reproduction and Risk**

Due to the socialist emphasis on reproductive health, 98% of women were receiving prenatal care and 87% of one-year-olds full immunizations by the mid-1980s (Griffin, 1995). However, although maternal mortality in Mongolia has decreased considerably in the last century, pregnant women, especially in rural areas, have a significant risk of dying with rates hovering around 120–240 per 100,000 live births over the last two decades (Randall, 1993).

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

The course of pregnancy for Mongolian women has changed dramatically in the last century. Prior to the establishment of maternal clinics in the mid-20th century, births occurred at home, usually with the aid of a traditional birth attendant (*ekh barigch, kuisutu eej*, or *udghan*) (Jagchid & Hyer, 1979). With the advent of universal socialist health coverage and countryside birth clinics, the incidence of home births delivered by midwives declined. In the 1990s, only 0.1% of births were attended by traditional mid-wives (Lhagvasuren et al., 1999). In addition to providing free antenatal and postnatal care, the state also allowed at least a month of leave both before and after birth (Goldstein & Beall, 1994).

#### **Infancy**

Infancy (*balchir nas*) in Mongolia, as in many other regions of the world, is an especially risky period of the life span. Even with the expansion of a socialist medical system that made child health one of its primary concerns, infant mortality rates are still high, with 50–60 of every 1000 live births not surviving past the first year of life (NSO, 2000). At this sensitive period of development, efforts are made to protect children from all kinds of disturbances, including states of fright or "soul loss." Among the Buriats, for example, black ash is smudged on a child's forehead before leaving a *ger* at night in order to protect the child from being frightened by wandering spirits. This protects the child from "loss of soul," a disorder accompanied by listlessness or recurrent illness, and if untreated, potentially death (Humphrey, 1996).

Breast-feeding is nearly universal, with over 96% of children born in the 1990s fed with breast milk. Mongolian mothers continue breast-feeding their infants far longer than world standards, with a median age of cessation at 25 months. One fifth of children receive breastmilk up to three years. The median duration (8 months) of postpartum amenorrhea is consequently quite long. This pattern of sustained breast-feeding does not differ by education or by residence (rural vs urban) (Dashtseren, 1999). Supplementation generally included animal milks and boiled mutton soup (*bantan*) (Randall, 1993).

Rickets is widely reported in Mongolian children. Due to concerns about cold weather, infants are rarely taken outside in winter, and even then only when heavily swaddled. The consequent lack of exposure to sunlight during winter combined with depleted maternal supplies of calcium may contribute to this problem (Randall, 1993). Respiratory illnesses are by far the largest cause of death in both infants and children (see Environment section).

#### **Childhood**

Childhood generally begins when a child reaches 3 "Asian" years of age, which overestimates years from birth by an average of 18 months (Beall & Goldstein, 1992). In Ulaanbaatar, children (*okhin* refers to girls and *khuu* to boys) are generally cared for by their mother (57%) and/or grandmother (31%); fathers are caregivers in 26% of homes (Kohrt et al., 2003b). A big step in rural enculturation is reached when children (at about age 5) begin to ride a horse alone with the parent galloping alongside, holding the reins (Jagchid & Hyer, 1979). The post-socialism privatization of herds has led some families to keep children, especially boys, at home to help with herding, instead of attending school (Humphrey & Sneath, 1996; World Bank, 2000). Parents do not generally condone physical force as a means of enculturation (Kohrt et al., 2003b). Survival for children is much better than it was prior to socialism, when frequent smallpox and influenza epidemics could lead to the death of half of all children before the age of 4 (Cheney, 1968).

#### **Adolescence**

Today Mongolians enter school at around the age of 8, a time when children are beginning to have a sense of the world around them, and when they would traditionally begin to ride horseback independently and to assist in herding large animals (horses, oxes and camels) (Cheney, 1968). Little data exists on sexual maturation among Mongolians, but a recent study in the rural West recorded a median age of menarche at 14 years of age (Beall & Goldstein, 1992). There is no clear rite of passage related to sexual maturation, but once children begin looking and acting more like adults, they take on a set of gendered terms different then those assigned to children (*hovguun* for boys and *busgui* for girls).

Knowledge of sexual behavior most often comes from friends, with surprising homogeneity of attitudes given this horizontal mode of transmission. A number of these attitudes engender behaviors that increase the chance of sexually transmitted infection (STI) (Hruschka, 2001), which could partly explain the high rates of STIs among youth aged 15–25 (Purevdawa et al., 1997).

#### **Adulthood**

A number of criteria are associated with "someone who has come of age" (*Nasan hursend hun*). In the past, these criteria were related to the establishment of a household—finding a spouse, having children, and developing a herd. Today, they can also be associated with getting a job. Women normally marry around 20–24, and marriage is nearly universal for women, with only 1% of women at age 49 unmarried (Tsendjav & Marckvardt, 1999). Men marry a few years later than women (NSO, 2001). Most women report the end of menses around 45–48 years old (Tsendjav & Marckvardt, 1999).

#### **858 Mongolia**

#### **The Aged**

Ancient Chinese chronicles noted with condescension that the nomads to the north "honor the strong and despise the old" (Jagchid & Hyer, 1979). Upon closer inspection, however, Mongolians maintain entrenched cultural patterns devoted to the aged. Those individuals who live a long life (*nastai khun*) are treated with great respect and often referred to with honorifics (*guai, ahai, avgai*). This deference to the aged is perhaps most apparent during the Mongolian new year, *Tsagaan sar*, when younger members of families and communities visit their elders and present them with gifts. During the socialist regime, the state provided generous pensions and state services to the elderly. Since 1989, however, pensions have not kept up with inflation, and the elderly must depend on family members for support (Briller, 2000).

### **Dying and Death**

Death is treated delicately in the Mongolian language. Although there is a word for the death of animals or unhonored individuals (*ukhekh*), when discussing the death of a close individual, Mongolians use euphemisms—*ongorokh* or *burkhan bolokh* (to become a spirit) or *nasu bolokh* (to come of age) (Humphrey & Onon, 1996; Jagchid & Hyer, 1979). Great concern is taken to ensure that the essence of the dead person departs appropriately. A lama may be called in to chant sutras while the spirit of the dying person leaves. Lama or other ritual specialists decide whether the body should be cremated, interred, or abandoned in the steppe (Kler, 1938; Jagchid & Hyer, 1979).

# **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

#### **Tibetan Buddhist Medicine**

Little epidemiological data exists for Mongolians before regular health censuses were begun in the 20th century. It is difficult to judge, therefore, where the Tibetan Buddhist medical system succeeded or failed in terms of public health. Bawden has suggested that the services of Buddhist lamas were beyond the reach of most people (Bawden, 1989). Considering, however, that the population

#### **Changing Health Patterns 859**

of Outer Mongolia was about 500,000 people (NSO, 2000) at the turn of the century and assuming conservatively that one lama at each monastery was medically trained (Roerich, 1933), there would have been about 14 Tibetan trained doctors per 10,000 inhabitants. Contrary to Bawden's judgment, this ratio compares favorably with physician-to-population ratios during much of the later socialist period (Academy of Science, 1990). Indeed, several scholars have hypothesized that the success of Tibetan Buddhism in Mongolia was due in part to the ability of Tibetan doctors to treat or prevent illnesses, including smallpox (Fisher, 1988).

Despite the hypothesized health benefits of Tibetan medicine, the accounts of foreign travelers, researchers, and medical missions in the 19th and early 20th century often noted the poor health of the Mongolian people (Cheney, 1968; Rupen, 1964). The most common theme in these accounts was the high prevalence of venereal and skin diseases, especially syphilis, among the general population (Bawden, 1989; Cheney, 1968). Reports indicate that prior to the revolution, smallpox and influenza periodically rose to epidemic proportions (Cheney, 1968; Rupen, 1964). Official statistics further suggest that at the eve of the revolution the mortality rate totaled 25–30 person per 1,000 year, and half of newborn babies died before the age of 1 (Academy of Sciences, 1990). These statistics, however, must be considered as the estimates of a regime that had a vested interest in painting a bleak portrait of pre-socialist times.

#### **Socialism**

Given official statistics, the development of socialism beginning in the 1920s seems to have improved the health of Mongolians in profound ways. The socialist goal was to spread the benefits of modern medical technology to all citizens of Mongolia free of charge—a plan that mirrored the larger socialist platform of equitable distribution of economic, social, and cultural fruits of modern development (Academy of Sciences, 1990; Farkas, 1993). Based on a rational Soviet model of strong central planning, the system grew rapidly after World War II to form a comprehensive hierarchy of health care. Ideally, medical outposts staffed by a nurse practitioner catered to residents within a 35 km radius, county clinics with 1– 3 doctors (general practitioners and maternal/child health specialists) provided primary and maternal care, and more specialized hospitals in cities treated referrals from more diffuse clinics. To staff these new posts, the system made extensive use of *baga emch* (equivalent to Russian feldshers) as paramedical personnel for scattered rural populations, complemented by more specialized practitioners located in central settlements (Academy of Sciences, 1990).

The expansion of socialist medicine is partly responsible for the dramatic changes in health profiles observed during the 60 years of socialist rule. Immunization programs and a comprehensive system of maternal child health played a role in the reportedly 8-fold decrease in infant mortality from the early 20th century to 1990 (Academy of Sciences, 1990). Overall, mortality rates dropped 3-fold, and average life expectancy at birth rose steadily from 38 in the early 20th Century to 65 years by 1991, in large part due to a reduction in child mortality (Academy of Sciences, 1990). The introduction of penicillin in the postwar era combined with the establishment of venereal disease clinics in the late 1940s dramatically reduced rates of syphilis and other infections diseases (Bawden, 1989; Randall, 1993; Rupen, 1964).

#### **Post-Socialism**

By 1990, in step with other post-socialist countries, Mongolia had begun a series of social and political transitions toward multi-party governance and a decentralized economy. The initial years of the transition were difficult for Mongolians. With the subsequent loss of Soviet subsidies (30% of its GDP prior to 1990), the state was not able to continue funding its massive social support system (Smith & Lannert, 1995). Inflation skyrocketed from near zero during the socialist period to 325% in 1992 (NSO, 2000). Unemployment rose as collectives and public corporations were privatized or simply ceased operations (Griffin, 1995). GDP per capita dropped 1/5 from 1990 to 1998 (UNDP, 2000). At the end of the 1990s, however, many of the same indicators now suggest that Mongolians have weathered the transitional storm (NSO, 2000). On the other hand, several disturbing trends have continued their course. With reductions in state expenditures in Mongolia, education and health infrastructure continues to deteriorate (Humphrey & Sneath, 1999; World Bank 2001), while a clearly visible gap continues to grow between the rich and the poor (Griffin, 1995).

Reductions in state funding have had serious consequences for the medical delivery system (Medvedeva, 1996). Between 1989 and 1992, most of the MPR's maternitywaiting homes were closed, while the referral system that had relied on jeep ambulances and planes for critical emergencies went into disuse (Randall, 1993). There is evidence that increased dependence on women's work coupled with decreased state control is further leading pastoralist women to have home births and return to work quickly (Mongolian Ministry of Health, 1999). Rural feldsher's posts, which cost about 3 to 4 times as much per bed as any other health unit were discontinued in 1990 (Center for Health Statistics, 1993).

Disruption of health services in the first years of the transition has been implicated with the increase in maternal mortality from 120–175 per 100,000 live births (1985–1990) to a peak of 240 in 1993. With a stabilization of the health system, this rate has subsequently declined to around 150 in 1997 and 1998 (WHO, 1999). Nonetheless, the difference between maternal mortality in Ulaanbaatar and the rest of the country has increased in the last few years (WHO, 1999), suggesting increasing disparity in access to perinatal care. An opposing trend is that of infant and child mortality, with estimates of infant mortality actually decreasing (NSO, 2000; Tserendulam, 1999).

In contrast to infant and child mortality, adult mortality rose dramatically after the end of socialism with a 25% increase for all age groups between 15– 44 years (1990–1993) (WHO, 1999). This increase in mortality disproportionately effected young males (15–34). Indeed the mortality of young men continued to increase throughout the 1990s, while that for young women experienced a slight decline after an initial increase (WHO, 1999). These gender differences in mortality rate changes are reflected in life expectancy trends, with male life expectancy at birth having stayed around 64 since the 1980s, and female life expectancy increasing from 64 in the 1980s to 68 years from birth in 1997 (WHO 1999). The incidence of several infectious diseases has also increased in the last decade. Perhaps related to the collapse of veterinary services, brucellosis and tuberculosis incidences have both doubled (NSO, 2000; WHO, 1999), while transitions in sexual behavior are likely implicated in the recent increases in sexually transmitted diseases (Purevdawa et al., 1997).

The stress of the socio-economic transition has also had a marked impact on the mental health of many Mongolians. For example, Mongolians who self-reported more changes in the past decade suffered from more depressive symptoms and higher rates of one indigenous idiom of distress—*yadargaa* (Kohrt et al., 2003). In tandem with social changes in the early 1980s, the prevalence of psychiatric disorders more than tripled, (Center for Health Statistics, 1993), while rates of suicide have increased dramatically with a rate in 1997 (17 per 100,000 per year) reaching nearly double the global average (WHO, 1999). Not all health transitions began abruptly in 1990s, however. In the early 1980s, for example, the mortality profile began a profound transformation, as the proportion of deaths due to respiratory illness decreased steadily from 50% to less than 15%, while deaths due to cardiovascular diseases increased steadily from 6% in 1980 to more than 30% of total mortality. In the same period, the proportion of the deaths due to cancers increased from one in 20 to one in five of all deaths (WHO, 1999).

### **Post-Socialist Medical Pluralism**

Although the socialist regime suppressed the open practice of non-modern or religious forms of healing, Tibetan-trained physicians as well as non-Buddhist healing specialists continued to practice behind closed doors. Many practitioners received modern Russian medical training and transformed their practice into suitably modern forms, such as one *bariach* who trained as a nurse and was known for practicing "strengthening massage" (Hruschka, 1998; Kriegel, 1997). With the change of political climate since 1989, Mongolians have gained a renewed interest in "traditional" forms of healing (Hruschka, 1998; Humphrey & Sneath, 1999; Kriegel, 1997; Medvedeva, 1996). The Buddhist medical traditions have returned most strongly, with the renovation of traditional Buddhist monasteries and the re-establishment of several Tibetan medical colleges (Kriegel, 1997). Although many Mongolians show an aversion to pre-Buddhist practitioners, much as they did prior to socialism (Jagchid & Hyer, 1979), the growing number of pre-Buddhist traditional specialists suggests that Mongolians are beginning to view these traditions as viable forms of healing. Within this pluralistic environment, it is also becoming more difficult to discern to which traditions practitioners belong. Traditional specialists may take pulses similar to the Tibetan methods, while Tibetantrained healers send individuals to sites an academic would likely classify as "shamanic" (Humphrey, 1993). Similarly, private clinics now prescribe combinations of