# 10

# **The Judiciary: Supreme Court**

*Vinod Sethi*

**J** ustice is the basic human law for any civilized society to ideally function. Upholding the law is, in fact, the first essential, the first guidepost. Neither a nation nor a state can survive unless it provides an efficient justice delivery system capable of alleviating the concerns of the people within reasonable time frame.<sup>1</sup>

The judiciary has assumed only such roles as would enable it to fulfill the ideals of the constitution. The role of Courts is not just to interpret laws, but to safeguard the rights that legitimately belong to the people. It must be independent, efficient and active if democracy has to have a meaning for the people of India.<sup>2</sup>

In a modern nation state, judiciary plays an important role of interpreting and applying the law. In a country with a written constitution, the judiciary upholds the supremacy of constitutional provisions. In India, within the framework of supremacy of the constitution, parliamentary democracy and a quasi-federal set-up, the judicial system is unitary in nature with the highest court being the Supreme Court of India.

From the very beginning of national movement, in the late 19th century, there was a demand for independent Supreme Court with considerable jurisdiction, which was to be an important ingredient of the machinery of state of independent India. This demand continued with Hari Singh Gaur's attempt to establish a Supreme Court in Governor's Councils in the 1920s. This demand found its expression in the Nehru Report of 1928, which proposed important additions to the existing judicial system.

The White Paper of 1933 proposed a Supreme Court parallel to that of the Federal Court which was to hear appeals from provincial courts, provided that appeal did not lie in the Federal Court. This proposal was rejected by the Joint Committee and subsequently abandoned by the colonial rulers. Under the Act of 1935, an All India Court, named, the Federal Court was set up. It consisted of one chief justice and a number of other judges as Her Majesty's government deem necessary. From 1937-50, constitutional questions were dealt with by the Federal Court while ordinary civil and criminal appeals went to the Privy Council.

When the question of Supreme Court came to be discussed in the Constituent Assembly, it was clear that the powers of both Federal Court and Privy Council were to be vested in one court. After independence, the new constitution substituted the Federal Court by Supreme Court. The framers of the Indian constitution wanted judiciary to correspond with the broad political philosophy of the country. They were mindful of the implications of a written constitution and conceived of judicial independence within the parameters of such a constitution.<sup>3</sup>

The framing of draft provision establishing the Supreme Court was done by an *ad hoc* committee of five members including B.N. Rau, K.M. Munshi, M.L. Mitter, Varadacharian and Alladi Krishnaswamy Ayyar. This report was later submitted to the Union constitution Committee.<sup>4</sup> It was accepted by the Constituent Assembly with an exception of the rule applicable for choosing the judges of the Court.

The Supreme Court was idealized by the Constituent Assembly because the Court was seen as an extension of the rights; it was to be an arm of the social revolution; and as the guardian of the constitution, it would be the expression of the new law created by Indians for Indians.<sup>5</sup> In other words, the Supreme Court is envisaged with widespread functions as an apex court in judicial hierarchy and at the same time interprets the constitution. It is a guardian of Fundamental Rights (Article 32), adjudicates upon the controversies between the states and centre-state(s) (Article 131) and is the ultimate court of appeal having constitutional (Article 132), civil (Article 133), and criminal jurisdiction (Article 134). It has the power to supervise the working of the entire judicial system and maintains uniformity of law ensuring high standards set by the framers of the constitution.

"The Supreme Court", wrote Bryce saying of the U.S. constitution, 'it the living voice of the constitution, that is the will of the people expressed in the fundamental law they have enacted. It is, therefore, the conscience of the people, who have resolved to restrain themselves for hasty and unjust actions by placing their representatives under the restriction of a permanent law. It is the guarantee of minority who when threatened by the impatient vehemence of a majority, can appeal to this permanent law, finding the interpreter and enforcer thereof in the court set high above the assaults of factions'.<sup>6</sup> This view was endorsed by many leaders of the Constituent Assembly.

# **Organization of the Court**

The members of the Constituent Assembly wanted to keep the judicial system strong and independent. Austin has rightly observed, "The subject that loomed largest in the minds of Assembly members when framing the judicial provisions, was the independence of the court and two closely related issues, the powers of the Supreme Court and judicial review. The Assembly went to great lengths to ensure that the courts would be independent, devoting more hours to debate to this subject then to almost any other aspect of provision. If the beacon of the judiciary was to remain bright, the courts must be above reproach, free from coercion and from political influence".<sup>7</sup>

Further, many judges have observed that independence of judiciary is a necessary element for efficient functioning of the judiciary. Justice Khanna went on to say, 'since persons who are to decide disputes should not susceptible to pressures of the citizens and of the state, independence of the judges has come to be accepted as an essential trait of the democratic society."<sup>8</sup>

The constitution has made due provisions for ensuring independent judiciary by providing security of tenure and fixed remuneration. At the same time, the Parliament has been given the power to make laws regulating the constitution, organization, jurisdiction, and powers of the Supreme Court.<sup>9</sup> The original constitution provided for seven judges besides the chief justice but, with progress of time, due to increase of workload, he made the Parliament to amend the constitution Article 124(1). The Parliamentary Acts have been raising over the years, and in terms of the Supreme Court (number of Judges) Amendments Act, 2008, it now stands at 30.

To ensure fair appointment of the judges, the constitution in Article 124(2) provided for the judges to be appointed by the President in consultation with such judges of the Supreme Court and High Court as he may deem necessary. Further, consultation with the chief justice of India by the President has been made obligatory.<sup>10</sup> While appointing judges, emphasis has been made on experienced judges.<sup>11</sup> The 80th Law Commission Report recognized the influence of politics in Supreme Court, and it stated, 'any revelation of any tendency or inclination to hobnob with ministers and political personages should not be considered for the post of a Supreme Court judge.'<sup>12</sup>

The constitution has not provided for any procedure for the appointment of Chief Justice of India. An unbroken convention of appointing the seniormost judge of the Supreme Court as Chief Justice of India was followed till the 1970s. The Law Commission criticized this procedure for appointment. It later set down some criterion for the appointment of Chief Justice. It stated, 'For the performance of the duties of Chief Justice of India, there is needed not only a judge of ability and experience, but also a competent administrator capable of handling complex matters that may arise from time to time, a shrewd judge of men and personalities above all, a person of sturdy independence, and towering personality who would on the occasion arising, be a watchdog of the independence of judiciary. It is well accepted that the qualification needed for a successful Chief Justice are very different from the qualifications which go to make an erudite and able judge. The considerations which must, therefore, prevail in making the selection to this office must be basically different from those that would govern the appointment of other judges of the Supreme Court.'<sup>13</sup>

The government acted on the recommendations of the 14th Law Commission Report only in 1973, and for the first time the appointment of chief justice entered into controversy. Justice A.N. Ray was appointed as the chief justice of India superseding three senior judges of the court, Justices J.M. Shelat, K.S. Hedge, and A.N. Grover, all of whom resigned. This sparked off controversy in the political circles, Bar Associations, and some ex-judges. The then Union Law Minister Mohan Kumaramangalam, who was responsible for this appointment, later wrote in utmost candour: 'It is entirely within the discretion of government of the day to appoint a person considered in its eyes as most suitable to occupy the highest judicial office in the country and to take into consideration his philosophy, his outlook in life.'<sup>14</sup>

H.M. Seervai, an eminent constitutional export remarked that, our judiciary was, and was intended to be, a non-political judiciary on the English model and the American view of judges for their known political views was foreign to the judicial traditions which we have inherited.'<sup>15</sup>

The act of supersession of judges was repeated by the government in January 1977. Justice Khanna was denied the right to become the Chief Justice of India stating that his tenure would be short-lived as he would retire soon. To many, his suppression was due to his opinion in *habeas corpus* case (1976). Justice H.M. Beg was appointed the Chief Justice of India. This controversy surfaced during the Emergency period, and it died down because of the announcement of general election and resignation of Justice Khanna.

Once again in 1978, eminent lawyers from the Bombay Bar Association stood up against the appointment of Justice Y.Y. Chandrachud as the Chief Justice of India. This eroded the principle of seniormost judge becoming the Chief justice of India. The Janata Dal government defended its action and took the view that violation of the principle of seniority in the appointment of Chief Justice would be undermining the independence of judiciary. This controversy led the jurists to look into this problem more seriously.

Justice Bhagwati, in the historic judge's case remarked, 'Appointment of judges is a serious process where judicial expertise, legal learning, life experience, and high integrity are components. If the appointment of Judges is made with these considerations weighing predominantly with the appointing authority, then we have a truly independent judiciary committed only to the constitution and to the people of India.'<sup>16</sup>

It is believed that the Chief Justice should be appointed through a due process where sitting judges form a committee to recommend the name of the Chief Justice to the executive authority which can end political interference. Upendra Baxi has suggested a collegium consisting of the Chief Justice and eminent jurists who should recommend the name of the successor.

In response to the long-standing demand for a National Judicial Commission, the Union Cabinet in 2003 decided to set up a National Judicial Commission for the appointment of judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. The Commission will be chaired by the Chief Justice of India and would comprise of two senior-most judges of the Supreme Court, the Union Law Minister and eminent citizens.<sup>17</sup>

Article 124(3) deals with the constitutional provision for qualification of appointment of judges. No person shall be qualified for appointment as a judge of the supreme court unless he is a citizen of India, and: (1) has been for at least five years a judge of High Court or two or more such courts in succession; or (2) has been for at least ten years as an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such courts in succession; or (3) in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist. It is, thus, possible to appoint an eminent non-practising academic lawyer as a judge in the Supreme Court. This provision has been inspired by the American example, where distinguished law teachers have often been appointed to the Supreme Court and they have proved to be successful judges.<sup>18</sup> Till date, nobody has been appointed as per clause (c), though, for appointment, it has given wider choice to the President.

# **POST SCRIPT**

*The process of appointment of Supreme Court and High Court Judges as provided for in Articles 124 and 217 of the constitution has undergone some changes under the case law yielded by the Supreme Court judgment in the Supreme Court Advocates on Record, for the Union of India (1993) and its advisory opinion in re-Presidential Reference (1999. According to these rulings, the advice of the collegiums of judges chained by the Chief Justice of India (CJI) has become binding on the President of India for appointment of judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. The Union Executive has expressed the intention of bringing about some changes in this procedure to give the executive representations in the process of deciding who are to be appointed. A National Judicial Commission with consisting of the CJI as the chain and two senior must judges of the Supreme Court, the Union Minister of Law and Justice and one eminent person nominated by the President of India after consulting the CJI has been proposed by the Nation; Commission to Review the Working of the constitution on in its Report (2002). But, so far it has not been implemented.*

*The framers of the Indian constitution attached much significance to the provisions relating to the tenure of the judges for protection of the independence of judiciary. Article 124(2) states that the judges of the Supreme Court hold office until they attain the age of 65 years. There were proposals during Chief Justice P.N. Bhagwati's and Chief Justice Ranganath Misra's term that retirement age should be increased to 70 years. This ensures bringing new talent from time to time, and to act according to contemporary socioeconomic needs.* 

*A Supreme Court judge can resign from office by writing to the President. He can be removed from the office by a procedure provided in clauses 4 and 5. Article 124(4) provides for the President to remove a judge by way of an address to the effect, being proved for misbehavour and incapacity. The order must be supported by a majority of the total membership of both the Houses and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting. The address should be presented to the Parliament only after the alleged charges of misbehaviour and incapacity has been investigated by an impartial tribunal.* 

*In 1993, a case against Supreme Court Justice Ramaswamy was investigated for financial regulations during his tenure as the Chief Justice of Punjab and Haryana High Court. Though the investigation*<sup>19</sup> *proved to a very large extent, his impeachment failed to get through in the Parliament. This had also instigated a spate of litigations against the Government of India.*<sup>20</sup> *Till date, no other Supreme Court judge had to go through such indictment.* 

*There have been incidences of protest against appointment of Chief Justices. Questions raised in some quarters when Justice M.N. Punchi, one of the senior most judges, was to become the Chief Justice of India.It was said that he had sought favour from Haryana Chief Minister in a land allotment case for his family.* 

*Justice A.S. Anand, the Chief Justice of India, was accused of misrepresenting his age and was asked to step down, failing which a case under sections 420, 406 and 471 of IPC would be filed, along with a writ of quo warranto directing him to deposit* `*3 crore for usurping the office of the Chief Justice even after attaining the age of superannuation.*<sup>21</sup>

*He was also accused of using his position to get a favourable order from a subordinate judge, for his wife and mother-in-law in a suit that had been barred by limitation. Justice J.S. Verma was also in a controversy, as a newspaper alleged that some money was paid to his daughter in England by a Hawala accused. However, all such reports were dismissed as scandalous.* 

*The complete independence of the judiciary is possible when their remuneration is guaranteed by the constitution. Article 125 and five second schedules deal with remuneration of the judges including their allowances and privileges. In addition to residential accommodation, the judges draw a salary of* `*30,000 p.m., and the chief justice draws* `*33,000 p.m.*<sup>22</sup> *None of these can be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment to the Court. These matters are now regulated by the Supreme Court Judges (Condition of Service) Act 1958. But, these allowances and salaries of the judges can be reduced in times of grave financial emergency.* 

*As a matter of fact, the exchequer is burdened with substantial expenditure on each judge. The privileges of the judges include a free furnished residential accommodation in VIP areas with round the clock security. They are also provided with free medical and library allowances and an air-conditioned car. Their personal staff includes a personal assistant, stenographer, and attendants. Their other privileges include an office at their*  *residence with a free telephone. These privileges are provided to protect the independence of judiciary.* 

*To maintain the dignity of the apex court and to secure its independence, the judges have been disqualified from action or pleading in any court within the territory of India (Article 124, clause 7) after retirement. But the retired judges have been appointed as chairmen of different commissions, which the government constitutes from time to time. Though the Law Commission has criticized such appointments, the members and chairman of the Law Commission itself are appointed from among the retired judges. However, many judges have roaring practice of arbitrators, and their earnings surpass even some of the leading members of the Bar.* 

*Article 126 provides for acting Chief Justice. Article 127 talks for appointment of ad hoc judges in the Supreme Court with the prior consent of the President. While attending the Supreme Court, the ad hoc enjoys the power and privileges equal to a Supreme Court judge. Till date, no such appointments have been made. Article 128 provides that an ex-judge can be appointed as the judge of the Supreme Court by the Chief Justice with prior consent of the President.* 

*Though the framers of the constitution made all possible efforts to ensure an independent and strong judiciary, it could not escaped controversy. The controversies regarding appointments, court's power to veto legislative and executive acts, and judicial activism have shown signs of stress and strain. However, it has still maintained its independent nature.* 

*The Supreme Court is a court of record under Article 129. The court of record is one where the judicial proceedings are kept for further testimony, having evidentiary value. They are not to be questioned when produced before any court. The court has the power to punish those who are guilty of contempt of court.*<sup>23</sup> *A legitimate criticism of the judiciary or the judge in his capacity as a judge is permissible. Contempt of court is, when there is undue interference in the proceedings or administration of the court. The court can punish the contempt by fine or imprisonment.*<sup>24</sup>

*In Arundhati Roy's case*<sup>25</sup> *the court felt that judiciary is under constant threat and is being undermined from within and without. It observed that the confidence of citizens should not be undermined. The criticism that undermines the court unfairly could not go unpunished under clock of freedom of speech.* 

*Article 130 of the constitution allows the Supreme Court to have its seat in Delhi.* 

*It also allows the Chief Justice to seek permission from the President to change its seat to some other place.* 

# **Jurisdiction of the Court**

The Supreme Court of India enjoys a commendable position with its wide jurisdiction and powers which no apex court of any other country enjoys. Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar remarked in the Constituent Assembly: "The Supreme Court of India under the constitution has wide powers, more than the highest court, in any other federation. The criticism, if at all, can only be that the powers of the Supreme Court are not wide enough, but that they are too wide."<sup>26</sup> The decisions of this court are binding on all the courts within the territory of India as stated in Article 141. The Supreme Court is assigned with original, appellate, and advisory jurisdiction by the constitution.

# **Original Jurisdiction**

This refers to the cases that directly originate in the Supreme Court. The court, in its original jurisdiction, is not entitled to entertain any suit where both the parties are not units of the federation. If any suit is brought either against the state or the Government of India by a citizen, that will not lie within the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, but will be brought in the ordinary courts under the ordinary law.

Article 131 of the constitution explains the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The courts has the power to decide on dispute arising between: (1) the Government of India and one or more states on the other hand; (2) the Government of India and one or more states on the one hand; and (3) between two or more states *inter se,* insofar as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends.

This jurisdiction does not extend to treaties signed before the commencement of the constitution, and its scope does not extend to: (1) complaints as to interference with inter-state water supplies referred to statutory tribunal mentioned in Article 262 with Inter-state Water Disputes Act, 1956, S. 11 (XXXXIII); (2) matters referred to the Finance Commission (Article 280); (3) adjustment of finances between the union and states (Article 290); and (4) a reference to the Supreme Court under Article 131 read with Article 363(1).

The first suit brought before the Supreme Court was between *West Bengal vs. Union of India* (1963)<sup>27</sup> to declare the unconstitutionality of the Coal Bearing Areas Act 1957. It was dismissed by the Court. In *State of Bihar vs. the Union of India,*<sup>28</sup> in 1970 the court held that dispute must arise in the context of constitutional and legal right and not of political character. This was further upheld by Justice Y.Y. Chandrachud, saying, 'It is competent for the state governments to bring suits of the present nature under Article 131 and by this, state governments are raising a legal and not political issue.'<sup>29</sup> In the *State of Karnataka vs.* the *Union of India,*<sup>30</sup> Karnataka challenged the Union Government's power of appointing inquiry commission where the Court considered the scope of Article 131 and interpreted the article magnanimously.<sup>31</sup>

In *State of Karnataka vs. State of Andhara Pradesh,*<sup>32</sup> the Supreme Court was asked to adjudicate the issue of raising the height of Amatti dam to 512 m. The Court examined the provisions of Inter-state Water Dispute Act, 1956, to determine whether the issue would fall under Article 131 or is barred by Article 262. Dispute between riparian states located in interstate river basin relating to no implementation of the binding award of the Water Dispute Tribunal has nothing to do with rising of fresh water dispute. This is a question of execution and implementation of already adjudicated dispute.

In *State of Haryana vs. State of Punjab and Others*<sup>33</sup> the issue was not of inter-state water dispute, but of claim of Haryana that the State of Punjab should construct the Sutlez Yamuna Link Canal. It is not a water dispute, hence not barred by Article 262.

As per Article 71(1) of the constitution the Supreme Court exercises original jurisdiction on matters relating to election of President and Vice-President where its decision is final.<sup>34</sup> The election of V.V. Giri as President and G.S. Pathak as Vice-President of India, in 1969, was challenged in the Supreme Court. Justice S.M. Sikri upheld the election of V.V. Giri and G.S. Pathak.

# **Appellate Jurisdiction**

As a court of appeal, the Supreme Court is a final appellate tribunal of the land. The power of reviewing and revising the orders of lower courts and tribunals by the Supreme Court is called as the appellate jurisdiction.

Article 132 provides that all appeals from High Court will lie with the Supreme Court. Also, it involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the constitution, and also, if the Court certifies that substantial question of law is involved. The procedure for grant of certificate is laid down in Article 134(A) which has been inserted by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978. Further, in *Election Commission vs. Venkata Rao,*<sup>35</sup> the Court held that even if a single Judge delivers a judgement, on the issue of a certificate, an *appeal* can *lie* in the Supreme Court.

Article 133 provides for civil appeals in the Supreme Court if it involves substantial question of law or in the opinion of High Court the subject matter involved in the dispute was valued to `20,000 or more, the matter can be entertained by the Court. This was deplored by the 44th Law Commission Report<sup>36</sup> which stated 'the article should be amended with the object to remove discrimination based merely on value of the property and equal chance be given to both rich and poor litigant to appeal in the Supreme Court'. Accordingly, this article was amended in 1973,<sup>37</sup> by the Thirtieth Amendment Act.

Article 134 provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court from the decision of High Court if the High Court: (1) has on appeal reversed the order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death; or (2) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death; and (3) certifies that the case is fit for an appeal to Supreme Court. Once again it was maintained that certificate should be granted only in exceptional cases.<sup>38</sup>

#### **192** ✽ CHAPTER 10

Besides the jurisdiction as noted above, the constitution provides for appeal by special leave under Article 136. This appeal is entertained by the court only when special circumstances are shown to exist. In *Dhakeshwari Cotton Mills Case*<sup>39</sup> principles were laid down for granting appeal by special leave. The then Chief Justice Mahajan observed: 'It being an exceptional and overriding power naturally it has to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only in special and extraordinary situations. The constitution having trusted the wisdom and good sense of the judges is itself a sufficient safeguard and guarantee that the power will only be used to advance the cause of all justice. When the court reaches the conclusion that a person has been dealt with arbitrarily and has not been given a fair deal to a litigant, then no technical hurdles of any kind like the finality of finding of facts or otherwise can stand in the way of exercise of this power because the whole intent and purpose of this article is that it is the duty of this court to see that injustice is not perpetuated or perpetrated by decisions of courts and tribunals because certain laws have made the decisions of these courts and tribunals final and conclusive.'<sup>40</sup>

However, in matters related to criminal appeal unless special circumstances are shown to exist or when substantial and grave injustice has been done, leave to appeal is not granted.<sup>41</sup> The jurisdiction extends to all judgements from any court of tribunal as and when it feels the interference of the court is necessary.

Seven judge bench in *Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. vs.* Ms *Rani Construction Private Limited*<sup>42</sup> discussed the scope of SLP. Justice S.P. Barucha held that for an order properly to be a subject matter of Special Leave to Appeal under Article 136 must be an adjudicatory order, an order that adjudicates upon rival contentions of parties, and it must be passed by an authority constituted by the State by law for the purpose in discharge of state's obligation to secure justice to its people.

If SLP is summarily dismissed such dismissal does not bar other parties from filing special leave petition against the judgement.<sup>43</sup>

The Supreme Court under Article 137 has the power to review any judgements pronounced by the court. It can be done on the ground that there is error or the court's attention has not been drawn as a particular statutory provision. The normal principle that judgements pronounced are binding unless substantial and compelling character make it necessary to review and revise its decisions. The court can also override its decisions for compelling reasons as fresh horizons<sup>44</sup> may reveal as a result of new ideas and developments. The court, while reviewing its decisions, should uphold the changing ideas of the society.

# **Advisory Jurisdiction**

The power of consulting the Supreme Court by the President, on a matter affecting the nation is termed as advisory jurisdiction.

Article 143 of the constitution explains that the advisory jurisdiction and states: If the President at any time feels that a question of law or fact of public importance has arisen such that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court. H.M. Seervai has said 'although the advisory opinion given by the Supreme Court has high persuasive authority, it is not law declared by it within the meaning of Article 141.'<sup>45</sup> The Supreme Court in *U.P. Legislative Assembly vs. State High Court* expressed its view that advisory opinions are not binding on the President or the courts. But eminent jurists including Justice Y.R. Krishna Iyer and Lawyer Soli Sorabjee hold the view that advisory opinion is binding on the President.<sup>46</sup> Till date, nine cases have been sent by the President for advisory opinion.<sup>47</sup>

Major constitutional crisis was witnessed when the Election Commission was attacked for it decision not to conduct elections in Gujarat. The Gujarat Assembly, which was constituted in March 1998, was to end by February 2003. On 19th July 2002, the Chief Minister recommended the Governor to dissolve the Assembly. The Election Commission started the election process, but due to unrest in the State it felt that conducting the elections was not possible before 3rd October 2002. The Presidential reference was made as the last session of the Assembly took place on 3rd April 2002, and Article 174 provides that six months should not elapse between the two sessions. Hence, mandatory provisions of the constitution were not followed by the Election Commission. The Supreme Court held that Article 174 does not apply where the house is dissolved under Article 356.<sup>48</sup>

The Supreme Court is the guardian of Fundamental Rights under Article 32.

Article 139 provides that Parliament by law can confer on the Supreme Court powers to issue directions, orders, or writs including the writs mentioned in Article 32(2), for any purpose other than Fundamental Rights.

The power of issuing constitutional writs is regarded as original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court as petition can be directly filed in the apex court.<sup>49</sup> Moreover, under Article 32, the Court confines itself to the question of infringement of Fundamental Rights, and once it is established, the court is duty-bound to give him relief.<sup>50</sup>

The Supreme Court has also been assigned some extra-judicial functions. In the absence of the President and the Vice-President of India, the Chief Justice and in his absence the seniormost judge acts as the President. In 1968, Justice M. Hidyatullah was the acting President of India when V.V. Giri and Chief Justice Subba Rao contested the presidential election.

Judicial review is the power of judiciary to review any act or orders of the Legislative and Executive wings and to pronounce upon the constitutional validity when challenged by the affected person. This power is based upon a simple rationale that the constitution is the supreme law of land and any authority, if it ventures to go beyond the limitation laid down by the constitution, it will be curbed.

#### **194** ✽ CHAPTER 10

The doctrine of judicial review is a contribution of American constitutional system. This was acquired by the American Supreme Court in *Marbury vs. Madison* case of 1803 when Chief Justice Marshall announcing the verdict remarked that any law violating the constitutional provision is null and void. Since then it got strongly embedded in the constitution, and judicial supremacy got established.

In India, the Government of India Act, 1935, gave the power of judicial review to the Federal Court, but its scope was limited to the extent that it could review only the provisions of the act which provided for distribution of powers between the Union and Provinces. The constitution provides for distribution of power among states and the centre, separation of power among the governmental organs, and Fundamental Rights, which has widened the scope of judicial review.

The constitution does not refer to the concept of judicial review because the framers realized that there were inherent drawbacks of this doctrine. In the first place, it may set at naught the will of the people expressed through the Parliament. Secondly, judicial review inevitably opens the floodgates of litigation involving huge expenditure and loss of time and consequent delay in the implementation of government programmes, and, thirdly, the judiciary is responsible to none and is not answerable for consequences of its decisions.<sup>51</sup>

Justice Patanjali Shastri states, 'Our constitution contains express provision for judicial review of legislation as to its conformity with the constitution, unlike in America, where the Supreme Court has assumed extensive powers of reviewing legislative acts under 'due process' clause in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.'<sup>51</sup> This is, especially true as regards the Fundamental Rights as to which this court has been assigned the role of sentinel; while the out naturally attaches great weight to the legislative judgement, it cannot desert its own duty to determine finally the constitutionality of an impugned statute.<sup>52</sup>

There are specific provisions in the constitution which provide for judicial review, though the Supreme Court has enumerated certain rules for applying this doctrine. According to H.M. Seervai:<sup>53</sup>

- 1. There is a presumption is favour of constitutionality. A law will not be declared unconstitutional unless the case is free from all doubts and onus to prove that it is unconstitutional lies with the petitioner who has challenged it.
- 2. When the validity of law is questioned, it should be upheld to protect parliamentary sovereignty.
- 3. The Court will not raise constitutional questions if a case is capable of being decided on other grounds.
- 4. The Court will not decide a larger constitutional question when is required by the case before it.
- 5. The Court will not hear an objection as to the constitutionality of a law by a person whose rights are not affected by it.

- 6. A statute cannot be declared unconstitutional merely because it is not consistent with the spirit of the constitution.
- 7. In assessing the constitutionality of a statute, the court is not concerned with the motives-*bonafides* or of the legislature, but the law must be upheld whatever a court may think of it.
- 8. Courts should not pronounce on the validity of an Act or part of an Act which has not been brought into force, because till then the question of validity would be merely academic.

The independent India had to go through many controversies leading to institutional rivalry between the legislature and judiciary. Though the power of judicial review had its limitations, it was viewed as a challenge to the supremacy of legislature leading to many constitutional amendments. Dr. Ambedkar had earlier remarked, 'The Constituent Assembly in making the constitution has no partisan motive. Beyond securing a good and workable constitution, it has no axe to grind. In considering the articles of the constitution, it has an eye on getting through a particular measure. The future Parliament, if it met as a Constituent Assembly, its members will be acting as partisans seeking to carry amendments to the constitution to facilitate the passing of party measures which they have failed to get through in the Parliament by reason of some article of the constitution which has acted as an obstacle in their way. The Parliament will have an axe to grind while the Constituent Assembly has none.'<sup>54</sup>

But Pandit Nehru, a staunch supporter of Parliamentary sovereignty, has remarked with a different tone,'No Supreme Court and no judiciary can stand in judgement over the sovereign will of Parliament, representing the will of the entire community. Ultimately, the whole constitution is a creation of the Parliament.'<sup>55</sup>

By interpretation and amendment, the constitution underwent many vital changes. The process began with the First Amendment Act, 1951,<sup>56</sup> which abolished the *zamindari* system. This act was challenged in the *Shankari Prasad* case<sup>57</sup> on the ground that this has infringed Fundamental Rights. The Court rejected the petition and stated that the Parliament is authorized to amend any part of the constitution including the chapter on Fundamental Rights. This was upheld by a majority judgement in the *Sajjan Singh* case<sup>58</sup> where the 17th Amendment Act 1964 was challenged on the ground that it violated Fundamental Right under Article 31A. The landmark judgement professing judicial activism came in 1967, when the 1st, 4th and, amendments were challenged in the *Golak Nath* case*.* <sup>59</sup> The court by majority of 6-5 held that the Parliament does not possess the authority to amend the chapter on Fundamental Rights with respect to Article 13(2) embedding the doctrine of judicial review and giving way to due process of law.

In fear of non-implementation of its social legislations, the Parliament through an ordinance in 1969 nationalized 14 banks under Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance. This Act was challenged by R.C. Cooper<sup>60</sup> on the ground that it violated Articles 14 and 3i(2). Once again in 1970, the President by an executive order abolished the institution of ruler's privy purses. This was challenged by Madhav Rao Scindia.<sup>61</sup> Both these ordinances were declared unconstitutional by the court.

In response to these setbacks, the Parliament framed the constitution (24th) Amendment Act, 1971, and due amendments were made in Articles 13 and 368 to provide the authority to the Parliament to amend any part of the constitution. By the (25th) Amendment Act, 1971, Article 31 was amended to remove obstacles laid down by the court in the Bank Nationalization case. Further, the 26th Amendment Act, 1971, was made to abolish the institution of rulers' privy purses. The government defended its action by stating that these were necessary amendments which would transform socio-economic structures of the society.

In the *Keshvanand Bharati* case,<sup>62</sup> the constitutional validity of the twenty-fourth, twenty-fifth, and twenty-ninth amendments came up for judicial review. The court, by limiting the power of amendment, held that the Parliament does not possess the authority to amend the basic structure of the constitution though the concept of basic structure was not explained. The Supreme Court was moved to review its decision, but the bench was abruptly dissolved by the chief justice. In 1975, the 39th Amendment Act, relating to electoral matter, was challenged in the historic election case.<sup>63</sup> The Court dismissed the petition, and it was held that they had adhered to the theory of basic structure.

The 42nd amendment of the constitution placed limitations upon the exercise of the power of judicial review. They were:

- 1. The power of the centre was increased by transferring certain provisions from the State List to the Concurrent List.
- 2. The power of the Supreme Court and High Courts were curtailed. With respect to Articles 14, 19, and 31, Parliament can make any law to implement Directive Principles of State policy.
- 3. The powers of the Supreme Court was further curtailed by stating that 'no amendment of this constitution made or purporting to have been made under this article shall be called in question in any court on any ground.'
- 4. The validity of central law was to be decided by the Supreme Court (Article 141A) and not by High Courts (Article 228A) and subsequently the validity of the state law could be decided only by High Courts.
- 5. The power of issuing writs for implementation of Fundamental Rights were curtailed to the effect that these writs will not be issued unless substantial injury has taken place and also if alternative remedy is provided under any law.
- 6. Minimum seven judges of the Supreme Court should sit for the purposes of determining constitutional validity of central law. It cannot be declared unconstitutional unless two-thirds majority of judges decide and for the High Court there had to be five judges to determine the constitutional validity of a law.

- 7. Further, the appointment procedure of High Court was dealt extensively.
- 8. It was also stated that the decisions of any administrative tribunals can be questioned or challenged only in the Supreme Court under Article 323B.

The subsequent amendments, the 43rd and 44th amendments, did restore the lost glory of judiciary and the threat of judicial supremacy was reduced, the judiciary was forced to look into the democratic values of the constitution and interpret them more generously. The 44th amendment:

- 1. Deleted Right to Property from the chapter as Fundamental Rights and placed it under Article 300A.
- 2. Fundamental Rights were to be duly protected.
- 3. The powers of judiciary were partially restored by repealing Articles 131A and 226A. The power of judicial review to the courts was restored.

In the *Minerva Mills* case,<sup>64</sup>the Court struck a balance between Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy by placing Article 39B and C above the chapter on Fundamental Rights. It was further held by Justice Bhagwati, 'It is for the judiciary to uphold the constitutional values and to enforce constitutional limitations.'

The Court has also been called upon to exercise its power of judicial review in cases relating to Presidential rejection of clemency for death sentence.<sup>65</sup> The Court has upheld the decisions of the President.

Justice Krishna Iyer, spoke of judicial review in the following words: "No power in the republic is irresponsible or irresponsive, the people in the last resort being the repositories and beneficiaries of public power. But two constitutional limitations exist in our constitutional system. The court cannot intervene everywhere as an omniscient, omnipotent or omnipresent being. And when the constitution has empowered the nation's executive, excluding by implication judicial review it is presumptuous this court to be a super power unlimited. The second limitation conditions all public power, whether a court oversees it or not. That trust consists in the plurality of public authorities. All power, howsoever majestic and dignified wielding it, shall be exercised in good faith with intelligent and informed care and honestly for public well being.<sup>66</sup> Further he held that "the magnificent concept of judicial review is at its best when kept within the framework of broad principles of public policy and tested by the intentionality of the statute."<sup>67</sup>

The working of the Supreme Court during the first three decades can be described as an arena of struggle between the legislature and the judiciary in relation to Fundamental Rights<sup>68</sup> and power of amendment. *The Maneka Gandhi* case<sup>69</sup> gave new impetus to the concept of liberty. During this period, the Court adopted a strategy of coordination enhancing the glory of the institution and practised self-restraint. Many political observers and jurists have held that judiciary will always avoid a confrontation between popular sovereignty and independent judiciary.<sup>70</sup>

The institutional rivalry dominated the Indian political process and judiciary till the 1980s. The advocates of parliamentary sovereignty blamed the judiciary for non-implementation of their programmes aimed at the weaker sections, i.e., the poor and distressed people, of the society. This led to the outflow of new ideas and dimensions in the minds of the socially progressive judges, like Justice Krishna Iyer<sup>71</sup> and Justice P.N. Bhagwati.<sup>72</sup> They led the movement to protect the socially oppressed classes with programmes, like legal aid, as provided in Article 39A of the constitution inserted by the 42nd amendment and institutions including Lok Adalat and public interest litigation. This added a new dimension in thealready existing jurisdiction and power of the judiciary.

The role of the Supreme Court in enforcement of fundamental rights is internationally recognized. In the first constitutional case before the Supreme Court, *A.K. Gopalan vs. State of Madras,*<sup>73</sup>Mr. Justice Fazal Ali and Justice Mukherjee, while interpreting Article 21 of the constitution in their dissenting opinion, felt that natural justice is a part of the procedure established by law. In *Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India,*<sup>74</sup> Gopalan was reversed. It was held that procedure under Article 21 must be reasonable and fair. In *Madhav Hoskot vs. State of Mahrashtra,*<sup>75</sup> the Court said, "free legal aid service to the poor was an essential element of any just and fair procedure".

In *Hussainara Khatoon vs. Home Secretary State of Bihar,*<sup>76</sup> the Court held that a procedure that kept under trails in custody for long periods of time was not warranted by Article 21. In *State of Maharashtra vs. Ravikant Patil,*<sup>77</sup> the Court liberally interpreting Article 21, held that handcuffing and parading an undertrail was prohibited. Justice Sujatha Manohar felt, 'Although torture is not expressly countermanded by the constitution, Article 21 clearly provide protection against it'.<sup>78</sup>In *Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs. Union of India,*<sup>79</sup> the Supreme Court directed the union government to release the bonded labourers giving a wide meaning to right to life and personal liberty under Article 21. In *Unni Krishnan vs. State of Andhra Pradesh*, <sup>80</sup>the Court held that right to life and liberty included right to receive free education up to the age of 14 years. In *Ranganath Mishra vs. Union of India*<sup>81</sup>*,* the Court treated a letter written by the former Chief Justice as a writ petition directing the State to educate its citizens as a matter of fundamental duties so that a right balance may emerge between rights and duties. In *State of Gujarat vs. Pravin Manghabhai,*<sup>82</sup> the Court directed the State to make proper security arrangements in courts and for judicial officers.

The Supreme Court, while interpreting Article 21, has held that it does not merely include traditional procedural due process, but would also include whole gamut of economic rights such as food, housing, health and education.<sup>83</sup> In *State of Bihar vs. L.K. Advani,*<sup>84</sup> the Court held that reputation of an individual is a part of one's life. A good reputation is an element of personal security, and is protected by the constitution equally with the right to enjoyment of life and liberty.

In *S.K. Mastana Bee vs. Supreme Courts G.M. South Central Rail,*<sup>85</sup> the Supreme Court went to the extent of saying that denial of pension to a helpless, poor and illiterate widow of petty employee was violation of Article 21 when she did not know about the family pension.

Justice R.C. Lahoti in *Javed vs. State of Haryana,*<sup>86</sup> said, "it is well established that right to life and personal liberty includes right to enjoy all materialistic pleasures and procreate as many children as one pleases." But Fundamental Rights are not to be read in isolation. They have to be read with the Directive Principles in Part IV and Article 51A where in it is a duty to keep population within reasonable bonds.

Protecting the right to healthcare under Article 21, the Supreme Court took *suo motu* notice of gruesome tragedy in which 25 mentally challenged patients were chained and housed in an Asylum House at Eravidi in Ramanathapuram district of Tamil Nadu.<sup>87</sup>

There have been several cases where the Supreme Court has upheld the right to clean environment as an integral part of right to life and personal liberty.<sup>88</sup>

Whether the evidence collected by video conferencing is within the ambit of procedure established by law. This was the subject matter of a debate in *State of Maharashtra vs. Dr. Praful B.Desai.*<sup>89</sup> Let's take more recent examples of SMS/MMS through mobile phones. Do they violate right to privacy? Or, are they admissible as evidence (e.g., the DPS MMS case, and the case of Anara Gupta, which was raked by media of obscene CD of beauty pageant Miss Jammu). Article 21 includes right to livelihood and to live with human dignity. Livelihood means, which are not illegal, immoral or opposed to public policy, are protected by Article 21.<sup>90</sup>

In *PUCL vs. Union of India,*<sup>91</sup> the Court held that 'Fundamental Rights are dynamic concepts and have no fixed contents. Most of them are empty vessels into which each generation must pour its content in the light of its experience. The constitution is required to be kept young, energetic and alive. Accordingly, the attempt of the Court should be to expand the reach and ambit of fundamental rights rather than accentuate their meaning and content by the process of judicial construction. Interpreting Article 19(1)(a), the Court said, "right to information is an integral part of freedom of speech and expression. This includes voter's right to know the antecedents/assets of the candidates contesting elections of Parliament and Legislative Assemblies".

In *T.R. Rangarajan vs. Government of Tamil Nadu,*<sup>92</sup> the Court held that right to strike is not a fundamental right or a statutory right. Similar opinion was expressed by the Delhi High Court in *Delhi Public School vs. DPS Karamchari Union*<sup>93</sup> that employees have no right to protest within the school premises and if they wish to protest, they should do outside the school. The Supreme Court upheld the principle of gender justice in *Vijay Lakshmi vs. Punjab University* (2003) 8 *SCC* 440),<sup>93</sup>Punjab University rules which provided for reservation for appointment of women candidates in a women college, a woman superintendent of a women's hostel and a woman doctor for a women's college, were challenged as violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the constitution. The Court held that the classification was reasonable, and it has a nexus with the object sought to be achieved which is precautionary, preventive and protective measure based on public morals and particularly in view of the young girl students to be taught. The Court set aside the majority, judgement of the Punjab and Haryana High Court which had struck down the rule as violative of Article 14 in *M.C. Sharma vs. Punjab University.*<sup>95</sup>

In different cases the Supreme Court has held that the classification is reasonable if it is found on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes or things that are grouped together from others left out in the group; and secondly, such differentia has a rational relation with the object sought to be achieved.<sup>96</sup>

The Supreme Court in *Onkar Lal Bajaj vs. Union of India*<sup>97</sup> held that enmass cancellation of allotment of retail outlets, dealership, distributorships of petroleum products on the basis of newspaper reports that the allotments were on the basis of political affiliations was not correct. The Court said that such decisions must stand test of judiciousness and impartiality and must avoid arbitrariness and capriciousness. Enmass cancellation without application of mind was arbitrary and, hence, violative of Article 14.

In *TMA Pai vs.State of Karnataka,*<sup>98</sup> it was held that the Fundamental Right of a citizen to establish an educational institution and in particular a professional institution is not absolute. They are subject to regulations and reasonable restrictions. The right to establish is guaranteed, but not right to get recognition and affiliation. In *Government of Maharashtra vs. Deokar's Distillary,*<sup>99</sup> the Court held that citizens have no fundamental right to carryon trade and business in liquor.

The role of judiciary to merely interpret and declare the law was the concept of a bygone age. It is no more open to debate as it is fairly settled that the Courts can so mould and lay down law formulating principles and guidelines; as to adopt and adjust to the changing conditions of society with the ultimate objective being to dispense justice.<sup>100</sup>

# **Lok Adalat**

Lok Adalat is a voluntary agency. It settles disputes between the parties outside the courts with the help of public-spirited lawyers and like-minded citizens. It was established by Legal Services and Authorities Act, 1987. It has been given the widest possible jurisdiction, and it can take up any matter, pending in any court including the apex court. The Lok Adalat is guided by legal principles including principles of justice, equality, and fairplay. The judicial officers of the area and other such members possessing such qualifications conduct the affairs of Lok Adalat. It is being urged by many that Lok Adalat has therapeutic role to fulfill in aid of justice. So, the legal system must encourage the government and voluntary agencies should reach out to aid them, and the parties must trust them so that it can share the burden of accumulated litigation of the courts.

Seeing the popularity of the 10k *adalats* the Government introduced the Legal Services Authorities (Amendment) Act 2002<sup>101</sup> which provided for setting up of permanent Lok Adalats with pecuniary jurisdiction upto `10 lakhs as a part of compulsory pre litigative mechanism for conciliation and settlement of cases relating to public utility services.

Rules were framed under Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 which deal with the remuneration and mattes regarding fee and other allowances to be paid to the Chairman and other staff members of the permanent 10k Adalat, terms and conditions of their service, resignation and removal and procedure to be followed in case of their removal from office.<sup>102</sup>

# **Public Interest Litigation**

Public Interest Litigation (PIL), or Social Action Litigation (SIL) as termed by Upendra Baxi, is an offshoot of liberalized rule of *locus standi.* The traditional rule of *locus standi* was based on the fact that judicial remedy can be sought only by those who have suffered an injury on account of violation of a legal right by some public authority. The PIL chose to liberalize this rule by making it clear that any person who suffers an injury, but is unable to reach the court is helped by public-minded citizens to reach the court to seek justice.

The institution of PIL originated in the U.S. in mid-1960s. Legal aid to these litigations were provided by private foundations. The PIL cases centred around issues relating to civil rights, liberties, and problems of the distressed. This provided representation to those previously unrepresented groups.

The PIL is considered to be an offshoot of social forces where freedom suffered in the cruel hands and public participation was required to check the system. It was an opportunity for like-minded citizens to participate and reaffirm their faith in the legal process. The petition can be filed by any voluntary agency or a member of the public. However, the court must satisfy itself while accepting the petition and see that the person is acting *bona fide*  and not for personal gain or profit.

The PIL involves issues connected with environmental protection, and a set of evolved fundamental rights including right to free legal aid, right against torture, right to humane treatment in prison, etc., reflecting the human dimension of the PIL. Further, it extended its domain in a delicate task of mediating between social actualities and social change. Issues, like degraded bonded labour, humiliated inmates of protective homes, women prisoners, custodial violence, and other victimized groups are attracting remedial attention of the courts. For this, Article 32 emerged as a forum of PIL in the recent years, and it has become a byword for judicial involvement in social, political, and economic affairs of the society.

The movement of liberalization of *locus standi* started with the *Bar Council of Maharashtra vs. M.V. Dabholkar,*<sup>103</sup>where the Bar Council was stated to be an aggrieved party. Further, the judiciary directed to government agencies to be responsive to public grievances. In the *Fertilizer Corporation* 

*Case,*<sup>104</sup>it was held that in a society where freedom suffers from atrophy activism is essential for participative public justice. Some risks have to be taken and more opportunities opened for the public-minded citizen to rely on the legal process and not be repelled from it by narrow pedantry now surrounding *locaus standi.* 

As litigations became very expensive, the affected persons joined together to fight for a common cause. Justice Krishna Iyer has observed in the *Akhil Bhartiya Shoshit Karmachari Sangh* (*Railway*)<sup>105</sup> case, 'Our current procedural jurisprudence is not of individualistic Anglo-Indian mould. It is people-oriented and envisions access to justice through class actions, PIL, and representative proceedings. Indeed, little Indians, in large numbers, seeking remedies in courts through collective proceedings instead of being driven to an expensive plurality of litigations is an affirmation of participative justice in our democracy. We have no hesitation in holding that the narrow concept of cause of action and person aggrieved and individual litigation is becoming obsolescent in some jurisdiction.'

The PIL received the required recognition in the *S.P. Gupta*<sup>106</sup> case who was not an aggrieved person. The court observed that the basis of judicial redressal was personal injury caused by an act or omission of the state or a public authority which is contrary to the constitution or the law, any member of the public acting *bona fide* and having sufficient interest can maintain an action for redressal of such public wrong or public injury.

The *Asiad workers*<sup>107</sup> case further strengthened the rule of *locus standi*  in the PIL.

The PUDR was an organization for the protection of human rights which sought to enforce labour laws for the unorganized construction workers of projects concerning the Asian Games. Justice Bhagwati held that strategy has to be evolved for relaxing the traditional rule of *locus standi*  so that justice becomes easily available to the lowly and the lost. Judicial activism has become the root of PIL and this was reflected in various other cases.

PIL has limitless field. Every PIL case is not propelled by any urge for vindication of the rights of the disadvantaged, exploited or victimised groups. It is intruding into areas previously immune from judicial intervention. In its early career, PIL was used as a struggle against domination and abuse of power for vindicating human rights of the deprived and the depressed sections of community. Today, PIL is considered as a legal action initiated in a court of law, for empowerment of public interest or general interest. In a PIL, public or a class of the community has pecuniary interest or some interest by which their legal rights are affected.<sup>108</sup>

The PIL is no more limited to enforcement of human rights of the oppressed or victimised groups who cannot on their own move the court for redressal of their grievances. One can file a PIL for better conditions of work for subordinate judiciary,<sup>109</sup> enforcing a ban on smoking at public places,<sup>110</sup> controlling noise pollution during festivals,<sup>111</sup> checking ragging in universities,<sup>112</sup> electoral reforms,<sup>113</sup> suggesting irregular allotment of petrol pumps etc.<sup>114</sup> Lawyers have challenged commercial transactions of public sector institution,<sup>115</sup> judicial review of appointments of government counsels,<sup>116</sup> challenging bail to certain persons,<sup>117</sup> or to misuse of public property.

Justice B.N. Kripal in *BALCO Employees Union vs. Union of India*<sup>119</sup> said, "There is in recent years, a feeling which is not without foundation that PIL is now tending to become 'publicity interest litigation' and has tendency to become counter-productive". He also said, "PIL is not a panacea for all wrongs".

In a recent case, the Supreme Court said with anguish that the PIL was being misused by a lawyer in Maharashtra to blackmail someone. This has been a sad reflection on members of the legal profession and is almost the black spot on the noble profession.<sup>120</sup> There have been instances of publicity interest litigations or private interest litigations all pushed by vested interests for their own motives.

PIL has done enormous good. In addition, the benefits of the system are also worthy of consideration. Access locus is highly liberalized, in fact almost eliminated; cost is minimal to the point of being zero; speed is much faster than any other normal litigation; procedural thicket is avoided altogether; disposal is more mass as opposed to individual and lateral; and awareness is greater because of a multiplier effect.<sup>121</sup>

The Supreme Court with its wide jurisdiction and powers reflects the concern with providing social equality and rule of law. In India, the apex court has acted judiciously in changing socio-economic structure and the progress of a nation has depended on its decisions. The existence of this court gives a feeling of security among the citizens. It acts as an independent authority which puts check on extreme actions and upholds the constitutional values. It has adhered to values enshrined in the minds of the framers of the constitution.

Unfortunately, the apex court has not escaped controversy because of various reasons. Lately, the contempt of court cases have shown the sensitivity or the high handedness of the judges. The court has at last woken up to the repeated charges of human rights violations by law-enforcing agencies. Further, loads of cases and delays in judgement have reflected the loopholes of the judicial system.<sup>122</sup>

As a democratic institution, the judiciary is answerable to the people. As Justice Krishna Iyer observed,<sup>123</sup>"all public power is people's trust and so even judicial power has a fiduciary component. Executive power is accountable to the Parliament and the Parliament to the people, judicial power is neither accountable to the executive nor to the Parliament in any direct sense. The judiciary by deriving its power from the constitution, its accountability to people cannot be negated. Unfortunately, these ethnics have not been adhered to by judiciary and, therefore, whenever natural calamities struck the different parts of the nation, it remained a spectator and could not reach the people at the grassroots level, be it the Bhopal tragedy or the Narmada *Andolan.*"

Many areas of the court need to be reformed, like the code of conduct of judges, transfer of judges, and rigidity of the system to ensure and preserve its position as the guardian of the constitution and the protector of the basic rights of the individual and society at large.

There is a great need to revamp the judicial system so that people can get access to justice and speedy justice. The experiment of Lok Adalat has met only with a limited success. Most cases referred to Lok Adalat are those where the state has to pay and it agrees to pay for an early settlement.

The Supreme Court of India should inspire alternate dispute settlement machinery, where public can redress its grievances and not burden it with special leave petitions. The judges should write brief judgements and give early decisions. In a few cases, judgements are pronounced only when a judge is to retire; otherwise, they remain reserved for unlimited period. Quality of judges and ability to handle cases with speed and honesty should be the criterion in selection. Unfortunately, politics has entered even in appointments. One finds that judges, like ministers, also come from different High Courts representing different castes, class, or religious backgrounds. It would be worthwhile to restrict the time for arguments. It need not be stressed that a lot of time is wasted by a few senior lawyers who keep arguing for days and many other cases suffer.

There is a need to reform even the legal profession, which has made access to Supreme Court virtually impossible for millions in this country. Long and tardy procedure with further uncertainty, whether the matter would be taken up or not on a particular day, keeps the poor away from approaching the Supreme Court. Time has come when either we reduce the cases that can come up before the Supreme Court or have its benches in different regions. The sitting judges should not be appointed for commissions of inquiry.

There has been a feeling in a section of legal luminaries that judiciary is interfering in things which are actually in the domain of executive or the legislature. On the other hand, Dr. Sri Ram Khanna points out 'when people stand helpless and watch their elected representatives bargain their interests for personal gains, they have no option but to look at the judiciary to step in those matters that concern the public as a whole. At this stage, they will go to anyone who listens to them and that is the environment in which PIL system actually started'.<sup>124</sup>( *Judicial Governance and PIL supra notes 121*). According to Chief Justice Lahoti, one of the main reasons why the hopes of the common man has high vis-a-vis the Indian Judiciary, is because the judiciary is perhaps the only remaining wing of governance that still continues to perform its functions with integrity without fumbling. "When other pillars of the building crumble the remaining pillar has to bear the additional burden and must be willing and alert enough to shoulder this responsibility efficiently."<sup>125</sup>

The large number of cases in courts and large number of cases being filed everyday are suggestive of the people's confidence in the judiciary. They have the faith that the justice will be done. Unlike other institutions of governance, judiciary stands apart because of certain unique features. First, it is also accessible; it is receptive and responsive to the seekers of justice. Second it listens to everyone. The Courts do not take a decision until both sides of a case have been heard. Third, each decision taken by the judge is accompanied by reasons, which in itself provides for a very high level of accountability. These reasons are guarantees against the possible whims of arbitrariness of judges.<sup>126</sup>

Why judiciary has not been able to live up to people's expectation is on account of doubts about the capability of the judiciary. These doubts are because of delays in deciding cases, and also because of instances of corruption that have started occurring in judiciary (though they are rare). Finally, accusations have been made about the credibility of the courts. Justice Lahoti feels that any system of justice, to be effective, needs to have a proper procedure to follow and the reasonableness of the procedure take its toll in terms of time. According to the 120th Report of the Law Commission, we need 10 times the existing strength of judges to clear the backlog in the Supreme Court, High Courts, and subordinate court the sanctioned strength judges is 26, 704 and 13, 204, respectively. In contrast, the actual numbers are 22, 496 and 11, 103 in that order. The gap is glaring. As far as pending cases are concerned, there are 26,750 in the Supreme Court 31,88,000 in High Courts and 2.28 crore in subordinate courts. The system begs for alteratives, innovation and severe analysis and reform.

At the end, the fact remains that for the success of Indian democracy people still have their faith and hope in an independent judiciary and our Supreme Court has not entirely disappointed them.

# **Notes and References**

- 1*.* Chief Justice R.C. Lahoti 'Can the Judiciary Meet the Expectations of the People' Dr Kailash Nath Kunjru Memorial Lecture, *India Habitat Centre Newsletter*, August 2004, p. 9.
- 2. *Ibid.*
- 3. D.S. Claire, 'Judiciary: An Estimate', in Sunder Raman (ed.), *Indian Government and Politics*, Delhi, Allied Publishers, p. 151.
- 4. Report of the *ad hoc* Committee of the Supreme Court, dated 21st March 1947, was attached to as an appendix to the Union constitution Committee.
- 5. Granville Austin, *The Indian constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation,* Bombay, Oxford University Press, 1972, p. 164.
- 6. Quoted in M. Imam, *The Indian Supreme Court and the constitution,* Delhi, Eastern Book Company, 1968, p. 16.
- 7. Austin, *op. cit.,* p. 164.
- 8. H.R. Khanna, *Judiciary in India and Judicial Functions* (Calcutta: Ajoy Law House, 1985), p. 16.
- 9. D.O. Basu, *Introduction to the constitution of India* (Delhi: Prentice-Hall of India: 1992, 14 ed.), p. 267.