## History of Somnath temple; why Nehru opposed President inaugurating it

## bol of Islam's excesses on<br>Hindus by the British<br>Governor General Lord<br>Ellenborough. In 1842,<br>the British Army suffered<br>heavy losses in Afgha-<br>nistan. A retaliatory strike<br>was carried out, and it is<br>during this time that t holy place of the First Aadi lyotirling Shree<br>Somnath Mahadev and the sacred soil where<br>Lord Shri Krishna took his last journey.<br>The temple faced several attacks from<br>raiders, with the most damaging one by<br>Mahmud of Ghazni After independence torious army bears the After Independence, the Nawab of<br>unagadh, where Somnath was located, ac-<br>ceded to Pakistan. He soon had to filee in the<br>ace of rebellion, and on November 12, 1947,<br>Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, then Home done by you or anyone else, but rather partic-<br>ipating in a significant function which unfor-<br>tunately has a number of implications."<br>Prasad, however, maintained that he<br>saw nothing wrong in attending the event.<br>When newsp gates of the temple of<br>Somnauth in triumph<br>from Afghanistan...That<br>insult of eight hundred VASHEE NEW DELHI, JANUARY 18 PRIME MINISTER Narendra Modi will inau-PRIME MINISTER Narendra Modi will inau-<br>gurate the Ram temple in Ayodhya on<br>January 22. Seventy-three years ago, an-<br>other temple was inaugurated in a grand<br>ceremony by the President of<br>India, even as the PM opposed<br>the go years is at last avenged."<br>He added: "I have ever Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, then Home <br>Minister of India, visited Junagadh. At a huge <br>public gathering, he announced the decision <br>to reconstruct the Somnath temple. <br>This was endorsed by the Union Cabinet <br>headed by Nehru. the Saurashtra government contribu However, not all Muslim rulers were<br>equally brutal. Romila Thapar, in her book<br>Somanatha: The Many Voices<br>AINED of History, wrote that "in the<br>sixteenth century. Akbar per-<br>mitted the worship of the relied with confidence 5 lakh, Nehru again wrote to Prasad, upon your attachment to<br>the British Government.<br>You see how worthy it<br>proves itself of your love, RAM MANDIR air of sandalwood gate iga in the Somanatha ten when, regarding your ho-<br>nour as its own, it exerts While the story of Jawaha-<br>rial Nehru expressing his reservations about<br>Rajendra Prasad's participation in the cere-<br>mony is well-known, often missed out in<br>popular accounts are the reasons Nehru<br>gave for this. Also ignore rom Ghazni, claiming<br>hey were the original<br>tates of Somnath taken<br>tates of Somnath taken<br>by the invader. The gates<br>eventually turned out not AYODHYA nour as its own, it exerts<br>the power of its arms to<br>restore to you the gates of<br>the temple of<br>Somnauth..."<br>This narrative per-THE INAUGURATION Three generations after Akbar, howeve<br>urangzeb gave orders for the destruction<br>the temple. He subsequently issued "<br>in the rand later order for its destruction was set up for the purpose under Munshi<br>By the time the temple was ready. Patel<br>had passed away. Munshi approached<br>President Prasad for the inauguration. Nehru 3 DAYS TO GO to Chief a be connected to the "It should be clearly und Instruct a nata taset of order for IIS destruction<br>and its conversion into a mosque in 1706<br>just before he died", Thapar wrote.<br>Gradually, the temple fell into disuse and<br>disrepair. In 1782, the Maratha queen Ahilya-<br>ba sted, and as the communal divide wors made no secret of his opposition to this. In a his function is not governmental and th sisted, and as the communal divide wors-<br>ened in the run-up to Independence, many<br>started regarding the restoration of<br>Somnath as essential to Hindu pride,<br>Among the more vocal proponents of the<br>idea was Congress leader KM made no secret of his opposition to this. In,<br>letter to Prasad in March 1951, he wrote,<sup>1</sup><br>confess that I do not like the idea of your as<br>sociating yourself with a spectacular openin<br>of the Somnath Temple. This is not mere borough framed this exercise as the Ē ol has noth Somnath, until 1947 enging of an insult.<br>On November 16, 1842, he issued a<br>oclamation "to all the Princes and Chiefs, a Located in Prabhas Patan in Gujarat, Som-<br>nath is an important Hindu pilgrimage centre,<br>According to the temple's website, it is "the di LONGER VERSION express.com/expla