- Wallace, A. F. (1956). *Tornado in "Worcester": An exploratory study of individual and community behavior in an extreme situation* (Committee on Disaster Studies Study No. 3 Publication 392). Washington, DC: National Academy of Science/National Research Council.
- Watanabe, J. (1992). *Maya saints & souls in a changing world*. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Wolfenstein, M. (1957). *Disaster: A Psychologial essay*. New York: Routledge.
- Zaman, M. Q. (1999). Vulnerability, disaster, and survival in Bangladesh: Three case studies. In A. Oliver-Smith & S. Hoffman (Eds.), *The angry earth* (pp. 192–212). New York: Routledge.

# **Health and Economic Development**

#### **Arachu Castro and Paul Farmer**

### **WHAT IS ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT?**

*Development*

*A bridge with no river. A tall facade with no building. A sprinkler on a plastic lawn. An escalator to nowhere. A highway to the places the highway destroyed. An image on TV of a TV showing another TV on which there is yet another TV.*

Eduardo Galeano

Most development paradigms are evolutionist and rest on a belief in the inseparability of a number of processes. As societies "evolve" toward higher degrees of technical, economic, demographic, and political complexity, improvements in health and education necessarily follow for the majority of the population.

The roots of modern theories of economic development can be traced to European social theory of the 18th century. In the early part of the century, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, Comte de Saint-Simon, set forth an organicist theory of social order. Blending scientific naturalism and the rationalism of the Enlightenment, this theory introduces the concept of an orderly progression of civilizations toward increasing levels of technological and economic advancement. Later in the century, a number of economists and philosophers—including Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus, Friedrich Hegel, and Jeremy Bentham—further promoted the idea of the

teleological evolution of societies. They were followed in the 19th century by figures such as Auguste Comte (1830), Herbert Spencer (1852), Karl Marx (1857/1964), Lewis Henry Morgan (1864/1965), and Fredrick Engels (1884/1902), who classified societies into different stages of development: evolution from one level to the next was considered a necessary step toward progress. This concept of evolutionary determinism was further developed by Darwin (1859/1964) in the biological sciences.

Development, originally grounded in these ideas of progress and social evolution, could be achieved through technological achievements that could bring poverty which was often termed "underdevelopment"—to an end. The management of poverty, as Escobar has noted, "called for interventions in education, health, hygiene, morality, and employment and the instilment of good habits of association, savings, child rearing, and so on" (Escobar, 1995, p. 23). In Europe, Asia, and in parts of the Americas, this new domain of social intervention (often at the national level) laid the groundwork for the developmentalist projects of an emerging social field: "international development."

International development endeavors have deep roots in the colonial projects of several European societies, but many such endeavors had an internal logic of their own. In Europe and the United States, only a few private institutions (such as the International Red Cross) had begun foreign assistance programs by the 19th century. The early 20th century saw the emergence of a number of philanthropic institutions, including the

#### **What is Economic Development? 165**

Rockefeller Foundation, the Near East Foundation, and the Institute of Inter-American Affairs, with the express goal of promoting development (Cueto, 1994; Pillsbury, 1986, p. 21).

The real proliferation of international development programs began in the aftermath of World War II (Foster, 1962, p. 177). As the 20th century proceeded, a number of events and processes reshaped the foreign-policy objectives of wealthy countries: the rapid industrialization of Europe and North America, the reconfiguration of world powers and the dissolution of colonial empires in the aftermath of World War II, and the changing economic and political relations between newly independent nations and former colonizers. International assistance programs to promote economic development in poor countries became a common mechanism through which industrial powers were able to maintain strong ties with their former colonies. These ties of dependency enabled wealthy countries to continue exerting geopolitical leverage over, extracting natural resources from, and securing favorable trade ties with formerly colonized poor countries.

Today, tens of thousands of economic development programs operate in countries throughout the world. These include programs created and funded by international agencies or non-governmental organizations (NGOs); programs initiated, paid for, and implemented by a single country donor or private foundations; and internally funded domestic programs. A large number of community-based organizations and solidarity projects also engage in health and development efforts.

The United Nations, created in 1945, established the Economic and Social Council as the chief institution to promote

higher standards of living, full employment, and conditions of economic and social progress, and development; solutions of international economic, social, health, and related problems; and international cultural and educational cooperation; and universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion. (ECOSOC, 1945)

Since its inception, the United Nations has officially recognized the link between health and economic development in pragmatic terms. However, this link is not always made explicit, nor are the goals of major health and development organizations always compatible. Institutions affiliated to the United Nations, such as the World Bank, the World Health Organization (WHO), or the United Nations Development Program, operate independently and often with discordant aims.

The World Bank, although originally established to help rebuild Europe after World War II, began focusing its efforts in the 1960s on economic development in low-income countries. With developmentalist ideologies rooted in evolutionary notions of progress, such as those proposed by Rostow (1960), the World Bank's principal indicators of economic development and well-being became annual per capita income and gross domestic product (GDP). The assumption was that improving the GDP of poor countries would lead directly to improvements in health and education. Addressing social inequalities within and between nations—redistribution of resources—was not part of the equation.

Other UN agencies looked at the problem of economic development from different perspectives. In 1978, WHO and UNICEF organized an international conference on Primary Health Care with the stated aim of placing health indices, rather than GDP, at the center of the development process. The primary health care (PHC) movement sought to promote community-based responses to common health problems, especially maternal and child health, nutrition, family planning, water and sanitation, control of infectious diseases, and health planning. By the 1980s, primary health care became one of the primary recipients of funding from donors in North America and Europe.

In part as a reaction to the World Bank's uncritical promotion of economic growth—measured in terms of GDP—as the solution to poverty, and drawing on Amartya Sen's economic theory (Sen, 1975, 1981, 1984, 1985), the UN Development Program (UNDP) launched, in 1990, the *Human Development Report*. The report suggests that social and health measures, including literacy and life expectancy, must be considered in conjunction with GDP, since that latter index tells little about the health and well-being of the poor or about the distribution of wealth within a given society or nation. The report demonstrated that, in some settings, GDP might rise even as did the percentage of people living in poverty. In 1993, the World Bank's *World Development Report* acknowledged that economic growth per se did not necessarily improve health indicators; instead, good health was identified as a prerequisite to economic development. This understanding has gained ground in recent years. The WHO's landmark study *Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for* *Economic Development* spells out the consequences of skimpy investments in public health:

as with the economic well-being of individual households, good population health is a critical input into poverty reduction, economic growth, and long-term economic development at the scale of whole societies. This point is widely acknowledged by analysts and policy makers, but is greatly underestimated in its qualitative and quantitative significance, and in the investment allocations of many developingcountry and donor governments. (WHO, 2001, pp. 21–22)

The British Development Act of the 1940s, created to restructure relations between colonial powers and newly formed nations, was a precursor to the international assistance programs developed after World War II. The French government established the *Agence Française de Développement* at the same time, and focused initially on their colonies, which were soon to declare independence but remain recipients of such aid. As Japan recovered from World War II, it too began using international aid to maintain political and economic influence in former colonies or administered territories. Gradually, Japan has expanded its aid beyond Asia to become, since 1989, a major bilateral donor. In 1957, the European Community launched its international assistance programs to sub-Saharan Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific. Shortly thereafter, the United States and the Soviet Union began using development assistance as foreign-policy instruments with the geopolitical goals of gaining increased international power and fostering "capitalist" and "socialist" spheres of influence, respectively. In 1964, the U.S. government launched the International Cooperation Administration, the predecessor of the Agency for International Development (USAID).

Several countries now provide aid earmarked specifically for the health sector. Ranked by annual average commitments in health for the period 1996–98, these include Japan, the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, France, Denmark, Sweden, Australia, Belgium, Norway, Canada, Switzerland, Italy, Austria, Finland, and the United States (OECD, 2000, p. 6). For the same period, the top 10 recipients of health-specific aid were India, Bangladesh, Vietnam, China, Ethiopia, Egypt, Tanzania, Indonesia, Uganda, and Kenya (OECD, 2000, p. 9). Of the 22 countries on the OECD's Development Assistance Committee, 17 give less than 0.5% of their gross national product (GNP) in foreign aid, and 11 give less than 0.3%—and most gave less in 2000 than in 1990 (UNDP, 2002, p. 30).

Currently, the private foundations most influential in the area of international health are the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Wellcome Trust, the Open Society Institute, the Rockefeller Foundation, and the Ford Foundation. In addition, although it operates almost exclusively in Asia and East Africa, the Aga Khan Foundation, established in 1967, is another influential international development agency seeking to promote social development by concentrating on health, education, and rural development.

The shortcomings of basing development solely on economic growth became most evident in the 1980s, particularly in Latin America and Africa. During this "lost decade," economic growth in many countries in Latin America decreased (Escobar, 1995). Structural adjustment programs (SAPs), imposed by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, led to sharp cuts in social spending, including health outlays. Consequently, many countries in Latin America and many in Africa underwent "health sector reform, including a revamping of the resources, actors and institutions related to the financing, regulation, and provision of health and other activities whose primary intent is to improve or maintain health" (Murray & Frenk, 2000, p. 718). These reforms, distinct in each country, were often influenced by neoliberal ideologies, which tended to depict health services as a private good. These ideologies justify their focus on the cost-containment of public health spending and the promotion of increased private sector involvement in the provision of health services (Castro et al., 2003; Iriart, Merhy, & Waitzkin, 2001; Laurell, 2001). Instead of helping to improve the health of populations, these health privatization efforts often increased social inequalities and worsened health outcomes, especially among the poorest (Kim, Millen, Irwin, & Gershman, 2000). At the same time, economic crises in much of the developing world exacerbated social inequalities and increased the demand for health care services, especially among the newly impoverished lower-middle classes. Displaced by this group, the poorest of the poor were, in many instances, denied access to basic health services. Nonetheless, many developing governments increased spending in services that met the demand of higher income groups (Vinocur, 1997, p. 12), partly through U.S.-based health care corporations that are exporting managed care as they come under increased scrutiny at home (Waitzkin & Iriart, 2001, p. 497, cited in Rylko-Bauer & Farmer, 2002).

# **ANTHROPOLOGISTS IN HEALTH AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT**

During the 1930s, many anthropologists worked in educational and medical welfare programs within colonial administrations (Montgomery & Bennett, 1979, p. 128; see also Asad, 1973) in Africa and Asia. Their express goal was, often enough, to protect the health of English and French colonial administrators. In the 1940s, these early projects were expanded into development assistance programs linked to the idea that technology would solve the economic underdevelopment of poor countries. Public health professionals expected that people in poor countries would accept the medical interventions of the colonial powers. When such efforts failed to yield results, many European health experts began seeking the assistance of anthropologists in order to comprehend native cosmologies and local understandings of health and healing. The stated goal was to understand why biomedical ideas and therapies were not readily accepted (Moore, Van Arsdale, Glittenberg, & Aldrich, 1987, p. 9; see also Paul, 1955).

In the 1950s, applied medical anthropologists were engaged in international public health to examine "cultural barriers" to health promotion and health campaigns and to design health programs that would be deemed culturally appropriate by local populations ("the natives"). Their role was to interpret community structures and help foreign or foreign-trained health technicians to implement top–down development programs (Farmer & Good, 1991, p. 137). There was, at the time, little critical reflection on the purpose of such programs or on the perceived needs of the populations the programs sought to serve. Studies of traditional healers, including birth attendants, proliferated at this time. Later, the anthropologists who produced such work were criticized as being "handmaidens" of biomedicine and cheerleaders of the Western "medical industrial complex."

By the 1960s, it was acknowledged that development work involved social processes so complex that technology alone was insufficient to solve the "underdevelopment" of poor countries (Foster, 1962). Soon, macro-economic growth became the professed solution, and the urban and industrial sectors became the focus of many development programs. Because anthropologists had been working largely on rural and community development programs, few of them remained involved in development work, although the field of medical anthropology was growing rapidly, especially in the United States (Pillsbury, 1986, p. 12).

During the 1970s, an exclusive emphasis on economic growth revealed itself to have its own limitations. Many actors—from policy-makers to researchers to peasant populations—argued that increasing social inequalities often followed increases of GDP. Some medical anthropologists were very critical of development programs, and directed their critiques at both the technical and the economic growth "solutions" to development.

A second strain of criticism of the "economic growth solution" came from dependency theory (Cardoso & Faletto, 1969/1978; Dos Santos, 1970; Prebisch, 1949) and world systems theory (Wallerstein, 1974). Both models allowed that the end of colonialism changed the political structures of relations between citizens of former colonies and administrators. However, the structure of economic relations, based on "free trade" and limited governmental involvement, was maintained and contributed to persisting inequalities between and within countries. Critics argued that the "economic growth solution" relied on several mistaken assumptions. One of the symptoms of growing economic inequalities was the persistence or "reemergence" of diseases that had been previously slated for eradication.

At the same time, the primary health care movement, based on community involvement and upon the concept of rights, opened the door for participation on the part of anthropologists in the design, implementation, and evaluation of PHC (Pillsbury, 1991, p. 66). George Foster encouraged the involvement of anthropologists in the health-policy arena by studying the bureaucratic structures and personnel of the development agencies themselves (see Foster, 1977; Tendler, 1975). The contributions of anthropologists to the development field were enhanced by improvements in the theory and methodology of anthropology, mainly the emergence of subfields devoted to problem solving in the areas of health, education, or agriculture. Studies of the impact on poor or otherwise marginalized groups of central decisions about health and social policies were also initiated.

In the 1980s, the participatory approach, enhanced by the primary health care movement, became a cornerstone of many development programs designed to be equitable. It was based on the idea that the lived experience of people ("putting people first"), and not GDP indicators, needed to be central to the conduct and evaluation of development programs (Cernea, 1985; Justice, 1989). People-centered development became one anthropological approach to economic development (Pillsbury, 1986, p. 22), a heterogeneous social process often informed by an interest in human rights (Bennett, 1996, p. S32) or in redressing gender inequalities (see Boserup, 1986).

By that time it had become increasingly clear that many of the health and social problems facing the world's poor populations were not in fact due to endogenous cultural factors but rather a complex series of push–pull forces that were undermining rural and small-scale economies, leading to urbanization and a decline in health status even as poor people took up wage labor. Furthermore, it also became clear that integration of poor communities into national and international economies does not necessarily improve their living conditions, and that economic prosperity and the ability to become consumers in a global market are not universal human goals. Finally, the growing social inequalities between and within countries have, in the absence of a social justice agenda, proven to be formidable barriers to the promotion of modern sanitation and health care. At the close of the last century, there was often more interest in studying inequalities of access to technologies than in remediating them.

In the 1990s, critical medical anthropologists started to explore current and past socioeconomic and political processes, to examine "how illness representations serve to represent and misrepresent power relations within a society" (Farmer & Good, 1991, p. 144), and to identify and expose structural forces that undermine the health of poor and marginalized groups. Anthropologists also began to study the role of international health institutions "managing inequality" rather than addressing the growing gap between rich and poor and the "outcome gap" necessarily associated with growing inequality (see Baer, Singer, & Susser, 1997; Donahue, 1989, 1990; Farmer, 1992, 1994, 1999; Farmer & Castro, 2002; Farmer, Connors, & Simmons, 1996; Farmer et al., 2001; Kim et al., 2000; Morgan, 1993, 1998; Singer, 1997; Stebbins, 1993; Whiteford, 1992, 1993, 1998; Whiteford & Manderson, 2000).

**WHERE TO GO FROM HERE?**

Many models of economic development rest on unexamined colonial and neocolonial assumptions and should be interrogated by research able to link local social processes to large-scale structures long in the making. Alternative models of transformation based on social justice with cooperative, collaborative approaches have been advanced. In such models, success is measured in terms of health and education outcomes as well as equitable distribution of and access to resources. The health of the poor is given priority, and the language of social and economic rights is central to this model.

With deep knowledge of local health effects of many economic development endeavors and approaches, as well as local systems of meaning, medical anthropologists are in a position to encourage novel ways of promoting just, equitable development. The dimensions of the global AIDS pandemic, which has in the course of the past two decades become the leading single infectious cause of young adult death in much of the world, brings the shortcomings of past approaches into sharp relief.

## **REFERENCES**

- Asad, T. (Ed.). (1973). *Anthropology and the colonial encounter*. London and New York: Ithaca Press and Humanities Press.
- Baer, H. A., Singer, M., & Susser, I. (1997). *Medical anthropology and the world system*. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Bennett, J. W. (1996). Applied and action anthropology: Ideological and conceptual aspects. *Current Anthropology, 36*, S23–S53.
- Boserup, E. (1986). *Woman's role in economic development*. Brookfield, VT: Gower.
- Cardoso, F. H., & Faletto, E. (1969). *Dependencia y Desarrollo en América Latina*. Mexico: Siglo XXI; First English translation, 1978, *Dependency and development in Latin America*. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Castro, A., Farmer, P., Gusmão, R., Guzmán, M. G., Kourí, G., Levcovitz, E. et al. (2003). *Infectious Diseases in Latin America and the Caribbean: The Impact of Health Systems Reform on its Control and Prevention*. Washington, DC: Pan American Health Organization.
- Cernea, M. M. (1985). *Putting people first: Sociological variables in rural development*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Comte, A. (1830). [1998]. *Cours de philosophie positive*. Paris: Hermann.
- Cueto, M. (1994). *Missionaries of science: The Rockefeller Foundation and Latin America*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Darwin, C. (1964). *On the origin of species*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (Original work published 1859.)
- Donahue, J. M. (1989). Rural health efforts in the urban dominated political economy: Three Third World examples. *Medical Anthropology, 11*, 109–125.
- Donahue, J. M. (1990). The role of anthropologists in primary health care: Reconciling advocacy and research. In J. Coriel & J. D. Mull (Eds.), *Anthropology and health care* (pp. 79–97). Boulder, CO: Westview.

#### **168 Health and Economic Development**