# **Fulani**

#### **Kate R. Hampshire**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

*Fulani* is a Hausa term, which is also commonly used in English to describe this ethnic category. With the exception of Nigeria, most Fulani live in Francophone West Africa, where they are widely known by the French (and Wolof) terms *Peul* or *Peulh*. Fulani living in the westernmost parts of the Sahel (Senegal, Gambia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea) are usually referred to by the Manding word, *Fula*. The Fulfulde term *FulBe* (sing. *Pullo*) is often equated with Fulani, although it actually refers only to high status, pastoral Fulani.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Fulani are distributed over a very large geographical area, essentially spanning the West African Sahel, from Senegal and the Gambia, as far east as Chad and the Sudan. There are Fulani in every West African state, but in each country they constitute a minority of the population (Dupire, 1970; Riesman, 1992). Because of this wide geographical dispersion, it should be borne in mind that some beliefs and practice vary from place to place, and generalization is thus problematic.

Estimates of Fulani population size are problematic for several reasons. First, national censuses are often inadequate data sources because they frequently underenumerate nomadic and semi-nomadic groups, and not all censuses include questions on ethnic identity. Second, and very importantly, the Fulani ethnic category is fluid and its boundaries are fuzzy (e.g., Burnham, 1996). That said, estimates range from 6 million in the early 1960s (Dupire, 1963) to 9 or 10 million today (Riesman, 1992). The largest national group of Fulani is in Nigeria (some 4.8 million) (Riesman, 1992).

The main Fulani language is *Fulfulde* (known in some parts of Senegal and surrounding areas as *Pular* or *Fula*). Because of the wide geographical dispersion of Fulani, the Fulfulde of different regions varies, often incorporating words of other local languages. However, Fulfulde is still more or less mutually comprehensible by speakers from nearly all areas, implying that geographical expansion was relatively recent. It should be noted that some non-Fulani groups have adopted the Fulfulde language (Burnham, 1996), and that some Fulani speak other languages, such as Hausa in Nigeria (Riesman, 1992).

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

## **Pastoralism and the Importance of Cattle**

The Fulani are the major cattle-herding group in West Africa. Much of the Fulani tradition is tied up with nomadic pastoralism, and the importance of cattle features prominently in most portrayals of Fulani society (Bonfiglioli, 1988; Hopen, 1958; Stenning, 1959). Cattle are seen not only as economically important, but as a social necessity, upon which much social organization is based (Hopen, 1958; Riesman, 1977; Stenning, 1958). Cattle are also considered to be inextricably bound up with FulBe identity, such that their loss represents something far more serious than economic or social insecurity.

However, by no means are all Fulani today are pastoralists. Particularly since the serious droughts of the 1970s and 1980s, many Fulani now combine pastoralism with other economic activities, and some have forsaken pastoralism altogether and live in cities (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Maliki, White, Loutan, & Swift, 1984). Neither is this necessarily a new phenomenon: historically many Fulani may have moved in and out of pastoralism (Raynault, 1997).

### **Social Organization**

Fulani society is hierarchically organized into "castes" associated with social status and occupation. The main categories are *FulBe*: free-born, pastoralist Fulani, and their

#### **The Context of Health 657**

erstwhile slaves or serfs: *RiimaaiBe* or *MaccuBe*. In most areas the system of slavery has been formally abolished, but the hiearchical relationships remain. In addition, there are other castes associated with particular trades, such as blacksmiths, merchants, bards, etc.

Fulani operate an essentially patrilineal descent system, with patrilocal residence. On marriage, a woman moves to her husband's family, and their children become part of his lineage. However, this is interpreted flexibly, and women typically retain important rights in their natal homes, and in their own patrilineages (*suudu baaba*) and matrilineages (*suudu yaaya*). Divorce is common (e.g., Hampshire & Randall, 2000; Stenning, 1959), and divorced women return to, and are generally accepted by, their *suudu baaba*.

### **Religion**

Most Fulani are Muslim, and a strong identification between being Fulani and being Muslim has been noted in many areas (Burnham, 1996). Islam has been used as a vehicle of conquest, and Fulani became the rulers of large stretches of the Sahel in the 18th and 19th centuries through Holy War (*jihad*). However, the versions of Islam practiced by Fulani incorporate many aspects of pre-Islam cosmology. This is apparent in the way illnesses are conceptualized and treated. A minority of Fulani (e.g., the *WoDaaBe* groups in Niger) are not Muslim, but practice traditional religions.

#### **Fulani Identity: Pulaaku**

The sense of identity—what it means to be Fulani (specifically *FulBe*)—is strongly and explicitly expressed in the concept *Pulaaku. Pulaaku* is principally about control and restraint, linked with a strong sense of shame (*semteende*). This includes being in complete control of one's emotional and physical needs, and is often defined in opposition to assumed *RiimaaiBe* traits of lack of selfcontrol. Another important aspect of *pulaaku* is cattleownership.

Despite the essentialist nature of this Fulani discourse on their culture, it would be wrong to see *pulaaku* as being uniform, unchanging, and representing all Fulani behavior. Individual Fulani construct and interpret *pulaaku* variously at different times and under different circumstances (Burnham, 1996; De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). This is important in understanding people's responses to illness.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Good quality demographic and epidemiological data for the Fulani are scarce, owing to the inadequacy of many national censuses and surveys. However, various indicators suggest that Fulani populations suffer as a whole from relatively poor health status and poor access to health services. The Fulani live in many of the world's poorest states, where health status is generally poor and health services under-developed (Table 1).

However, even *within* those countries, Fulani in rural areas may be particularly disadvantaged because of their nomadic or semi-nomadic status. Various pieces of research have pointed to barriers of access to health services experienced by mobile pastoralists (Foggin, Farhas, Shiirev-Adiya, & Chinabat, 1997; Loutan, 1989; Meir, 1987; Sandford, 1978; Swift, Toulmin, & Chatting, 1990; Zinsstag, Bidjeh, & Idriss, 1998). Pastoralists tend to live in sparsely populated, geographically marginal areas, while health services are typically concentrated in more densely populated areas of permanent settlement. Mobility in itself may restrict access, particularly where extended courses of treatment are indicated. Other barriers include political marginalization, cultural, ethnic, and linguistic differences with service providers, and very low levels of literacy.

Data collected among a sample of 9,000 Fulani in northern Burkina Faso suggest a high infant mortality rate, even compared with the rest of the country: 140 infant deaths per 1,000 live births (Hampshire & Randall, 1995). Maternal mortality is also extremely high among the Burkinabè Fulani, with a lifetime risk for women of

**Table 1.** Health Indicators and Services in Selected Countries Inhabited by Fulani

| Country      | Infant mortality<br>rate (per 1,000<br>live births) | Life<br>expectancy at<br>birth (years) | Doctors<br>per 100,000<br>people |
|--------------|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Burkina Faso | 106                                                 | 46                                     | 3                                |
| Chad         | 92                                                  | 47                                     | 3                                |
| Mali         | 134                                                 | 47                                     | 5                                |
| Niger        | 191                                                 | 48                                     | 2                                |
| Sources      | UNICEF 1998                                         | UNDP 1997                              | UNDP 1997                        |

dying of maternal causes estimated to be around 1 in 17 (Hampshire, 2001, 2002b).

On the positive side, pastoralist Fulani may have better nutritional status than non-pastoralists, because of the availability of milk and meat. Again, while not shown specifically for the Fulani, this has been demonstrated for other nomadic pastoralists, such as the Turkana (Barkey, Campbell, & Leslie, 2001; Shell-Duncan & Obiero, 2000).

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

For many common ailments, and for prevention of illness, everyone becomes a medical practitioner. For example, Riesman (1992) describes how all Fulani mothers in northern Burkina Faso prepare *basi*, an infusion of herbs and tree barks, which they give young babies to protect them from various ailments. Women learn the secrets of *basi* preparation from their mothers and grandmothers; these include both the ingredients and the method of preparation. In Chad, many common ailments are selftreated by Fulani using remedies made from ingredients found around the home, such as milk, butter, spices, and animals' urine (Hampshire, 2002a, in press).

For more serious conditions, the range of medical practitioners used by the Fulani reflects the variation in perceived cause of illnesses. Most illnesses are perceived to have their origins in malevolent external powers: spirits or djinns, witches, or non-human animals (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). Such illnesses can only be treated by confronting and defeating those forces, and are thus amenable only to intervention by those with power in the supernatural realm. *MooDiBaaBe* (sing. *mooDiBo*), Islamic learned men, are frequently called upon in these cases. *MooDiBaaBe* may use herbal medicine or Koranic texts in their practice, or a combination of both (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, 2002a; Riesman, 1992). An example of the use of Koranic texts is given by Riesman (1992, p. 92). As a cure for madness, a *mooDiBo* wrote Koranic verses on a wooden tablet in ink. The ink was then washed off, and the solution drunk by the afflicted person.

Today, the healing of *mooDiBaaBe* often goes hand in hand with the use of "modern" medicine. Because of the remoteness and poverty of many areas inhabited by Fulani, many of the modern health facilities to which they have access are fairly limited and basic health posts. In addition to formal provision of modern medicines, in several areas, informal dealers of non-registered drugs provide another means of access to medicines in some areas (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, 2002a).

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Most illness is thought by the Fulani to originate from external malevolent forces. It may be caused by nonhuman animals, particularly birds (*pooli*), spirits or djinns (*jinnaaji*), or by "witches" (*sukunyaaBe*) (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995).

*Jinnaaji* may be anywhere in the bush, and the risk of encountering one makes many people fearful of going out at night. An encounter with malevolent spirits, *seedaani*, will almost certainly result in illness. The illnesses associated with *seedaani* are *henndu* (wind) and *haandi* (madness) (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). One who has come into contact with *henndu* is called *jom-henndu* (possessor of the wind). *Henndu* can attack the body, causing fever and wasting, or the mind, causing a person to lose their wits (*hakkile dillii*) (De Bruiju & Van Dijk, 1995). *Haandi*, or madness, is described by Riesman (1977) as being caused by the extreme fear a person experiences upon seeing a spirit. A crazy person (*kaanaDo*) is, by definition, someone who has encountered a djinn. The fear-induced craziness then drives the person to behave in ways opposite to that expected from normal people: tearing off his clothes, screaming, fleeing into the bush, etc.

*SukunyaaBe* ("witches") are another cause of illness. They are transformations of human beings that seek to suck the life-force/soul out of their victims. De Bruijn and Van Dijk (1995), from their work in Mali, describe them as being visible at night, appearing as white spots. Among some Fulani groups in northern Burkina Faso, *sukunyaaBe* are believed to be humans that transform themselves into birds of various kinds, who eat the souls of their victims by pecking at their chests. Unless a *mooDiBo* can effect a cure, the soulless victim is destined to die shortly afterwards (Hampshire, unpublished fieldnotes). *SukunyaaBe* are found mostly among outsiders and non-Fulani who live close to Fulani settlements.

A very different kin of witchcraft, which is also a common cause of illness, concerns the use of *dabare.*

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 659**

*SukunyaaBe*, while evil, are generally believed to have no choice: as *sukunyaaBe*, they have to feed off human souls in order to survive. *Dabare*, by contrast, is the conscious practice of black magic against a particular person, and is usually related to jealousy (*haasidare*) (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). It is often used between co-wives, among whom jealousy might easily arise. Only *mooDiBaaBe* or non-Islamic practitioners of black magic (*bonngoBi*) can make *dabare*, which they do when commissioned and paid to do so by an aggrieved person. *Dabare* may be used to cause illness, or other evil (i.e., death), causing a person to act against his/her will, driving someone away, etc. (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, unpublished fieldnotes).

A third common set of causes of illness are nonhuman animals, particularly birds (*pooli*) (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, unpublished fieldnotes). *Pooli* are a particular danger for young children left unattended. Particularly feared is the owl, whose spirit may invade and attack a young child. Children taken by the *pooli* often have clenched fists, and they may have a fever and be restless (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). Mothers suspecting that their children are in danger may try to frighten the *pooli* away by making lots of noise (Hampshire, unpublished fieldnotes).

Finally, there are many illnesses that may be described as inconveniences rather than dangers, and which people expect to experience on and off, for much of the time. These include minor aches and pains, particularly headaches (*naoora hoore*), fever (*jonte*), stomach pains (*nyao reedu*), and diarrhea (*doggu reedu*) (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, unpublished fieldnotes). The causes of these generally are believed to be to do with relatively simple, physical causes: tiredness, lack of food, lack of tea. The remedies for such conditions are self-evident and straightforward, unlike the more serious conditions described above, where effective treatment can only come from a *mooDiBo*, skilled in interacting with external malevolent forces.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Having children is essential for Fulani men and women. Children are seen as conferring status in their own right, and are an important source of economic wealth and security (Hampshire & Randall, 1999, 2000). To have no children is seen as being a social disaster since, without children, it is very difficult for a Fulani to become a full social being and to set up his or her own household (Riesman, 1977; Stenning, 1959).

Child-bearing for the Fulani should ideally happen within marriage. Indeed, child-bearing is such an integral part of marriage that a marriage is often not seen as being formally completed until a child is born. Among the *WoDaaBe* of Niger, newly married couples do not initially have their own domestic space or hut in which to sleep. On becoming pregnant, the young wife returns to her own family. There she stays until the birth and often for an extended period afterwards (up to a year or more). Only when the woman returns to her husband's family with her year-old child is the marriage considered formally complete, and are the couple permitted to occupy their own domestic space (Dupire, 1970; Stenning, 1958, 1959).

Because of the central place of child-bearing as part of marriage, pre-marital fertility is generally regarded as extremely bad, and carries strong sanctions. In one case described by Hampshire (2001), the family of an unmarried young woman was driven out of their village when she became pregnant. Extra-marital fertility (for example, during the absence of a husband) and inter-marital fertility (following divorce or widowhood, and before re-marriage), though frowned upon, are more often tolerated, and are frequently the subject of joking. Hampshire (2001) describes how one young Fulani woman in Burkina Faso whose husband was working away said: "While the men are away, they go with other women. Why should we keep our legs closed?"

The wide geographical dispersion of the Fulani makes it impossible to generalize fully about factors influencing fertility and fecundity. A study carried out among Burkinabè Fulani in 1994–96 suggests a strong desire for very large families, for reasons of status, wealth, and security (Hampshire, 2001; Hampshire & Randall, 2000). For many Fulani informants, family size did not enter into the realm of conscious choice. It is, therefore, no surprise that contraceptive use in this population was virtually zero. Similarly, induced abortion was almost unheard of, although some old women claimed to know of very powerful herbs that could be used for this purpose. Demographic and Health Survey data of other countries with significant Fulani populations also indicate contraceptive prevalence rates among the lowest in the world, so it is likely that conscious birth control is not an important determinant of fertility in many Fulani societies.

Among the Burkinabè Fulani, the major proximate determinant of fertility is post-partum infecundity due to extended periods of breast-feeding—typically for around two years (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). Extended breast-feeding has been documented among other Fulani populations by Riesman (1992) and Dupire (1963). Other factors constraining fertility to a lesser extent among the Burkinabè Fulani were spousal separation following births and during migration and, more importantly, secondary sterility, probably acquired through sexuallytransmitted diseases (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). Secondary sterility acquired through sexually-transmitted diseases was found by David and Voas (1981) to have a major impact on the fertility of Fulani living in Cameroon. Over half the women in their study were apparently sterile, due in particular to the high prevalence of gonorrhoea and syphilis.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Childbirth**

Pregnancy and childbirth among the Fulani occupy ambiguous positions. On the one hand, the birth of a child is greeted with joy and celebration. In particular, the birth of a first child is essential in cementing a marriage and giving the parents their new status in life (Dupire, 1963). On the other hand, pregnancy and childbirth are times of danger, and are surrounded by feelings of secrecy and shame, associated with *pulaaku*.

A pregnant woman can be the focus of much jealousy, particularly from any co-wives she may have, and other young wives in her husband's extended family. As such, she is at particular risk from *dabare* (black magic), which might be used to cause any number of serious misfortunes: miscarriage, death in childbirth, deformity of the child, etc. Pregnancy is, therefore, concealed for as long as possible. When it is no longer possible to continue concealment, a pregnant woman often returns to her natal home (*suudu baaba*), where fewer people will wish her harm.

Childbirth, therefore, particularly for younger women, usually takes place in the *suudu baaba* rather than the marital home. For first births, it is usual practice for the woman's mother to assist. For subsequent births, the ideal is for childbirth to be alone and unassisted (Hampshire, in press; Riesman, 1992). Adherence to the *pulaaku* ideal means that a woman should be able to face childbirth, and all its dangers, alone and without fear. It is important not to cry out, or to show any sign of succumbing to physical pain. Of course, it would be a mistake to assume that all women interpret *pulaaku* in the same way, and accounts of practice show considerable variation in childbirth experience (Hampshire, in preparation). That said, unassisted childbirth remains an important ideal.

Childbirth, therefore, represents a time of danger for women on many levels. Not least is the physical danger of death or serious incapacity. As stated above, lifetime risks of maternal death among the Burkinabè Fulani are in the order of 1 in 17 (Hampshire, 2001), and Demographic and Health Survey data from other regions inhabited by Fulani suggest that this risk may be similar elsewhere. Second, there is a risk of *dabare* (black magic) associated with jealousy, which may cause serious, long-term harm to mother and baby. Third, there is the fear of shame, through not being able to live up to the *pulaaku* ideal of stoicism in the face of pain and danger. It is little wonder, therefore, that a first pregnancy can be greeted with very mixed emotions by young Fulani women.

Among the DjelgoBe Fulani of Burkina Faso, Riesman (1992) describes how, when a Fulani baby is born, it is important that it comes out on the ground. This contact with the earth helps establish a connection between the child and the place of birth. The placenta, which is widely believed to have great power, is usually buried in the earth at the spot where the baby first touched it. In the following days and weeks, hot water is poured on the spot where the placenta is buried in order to prevent it from rotting (Reisman, 1992).

#### **Infancy**

**Post-Partum Practices.** From the day of the birth until the naming ceremony 8 days later, the mother is confined to her hut or tent (Riesman, 1992). She leaves only to urinate or defecate in the bush and, even for this, she is always accompanied by someone. A fire is lit when the baby is born, and this fire burns continuously for the first week of the child's life, until the naming ceremony. The fire is used to heat water for bathing and preparing infusions.

On the eighth day after birth, the naming ceremony (*indeeri*) takes place (Riesman, 1977, 1992). The infant is washed and its head is shaved. It is carried back and forth between the hut and the outside three times for a boy, four times for a girl. A goat is sacrificed and the name of the

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 661**

child pronounced. This represents the first stage of becoming a social being.

**Protection of Newborn Infants.** Newborn infants are thought to be vulnerable to many forms of harm and, as such, are protected in multiple ways. Every day for the first few days of life the infant is washed with hot water containing a medicinal herbal infusion. *Basi*, another medicinal infusion of herbs and tree barks, prepared by the mother, is given to the infant to drink. Various talismen or charms, often provided by *mooDiBaaBe*, are worn by the child from a very young age to offer protection against malevolent external powers (Riesman, 1992).

Because children are very highly valued, people are fearful that others may become jealous and wish harm on the child. To this end, it is regarded as being very dangerous to praise a young child by saying (s)he is goodlooking, healthy, or fat (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, unpublished fieldnotes; Riesman, 1992). To make such a remark is interpreted as an intention to cause harm. Instead, visitors often make derogatory comments, remarking on the ugliness of the child. Another strategy used by some parents is to cover the child in dirt or dung, or to give it nicknames such as "cow dung" to make it appear unattractive.

**Infant Feeding Practices.** Fulani women typically breastfeed for extended periods of time. In northern Burkina Faso, this typically extends to the two years proscribed by the Koran (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). In cases where the child is weak or sickly, this may be extended further, and it is not unknown for mothers to nurse until 30 months or more (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). Early weaning occurs if the mother becomes pregnant again, because the milk in the breasts of a pregnant women is believed to "belong" to the new baby and is thought to be harmful to the breast-feeding child (Hampshire, 1998; Riesman, 1992). Accounts of other Fulani groups also point to extended periods of breast-feeding (Dupire, 1963; Riesman, 1992).

During the period of nursing, the breast is offered on demand, and is seen as a panacea to be offered whenever the child appears distressed. Co-sleeping of mothers and infants allows infants to feed on demand through the night too. Other women may also offer a breast to an infant, particularly grandmothers (Hampshire, 1998; Riesman, 1992) although, among the *WoBaaBe*, this may be extended to all nursing mothers in the camp (Dupire, 1963).

In addition to breast milk, Fulani infants are typically given supplementary foods from quite a young age. Butter and cow's or goat's milk may be given as early as the first week of life, and thin millet gruel may be tried after a few months (Dupire, 1963; Riesman, 1992). This is in addition to the medicinal *basi*, given from birth (Riesman, 1992).

Cessation of breast-feeding typically happens abruptly (Hampshire, 1998), although mothers may vary in how strictly this is enforced (Riesman, 1992). Because, until this point, feeding has been on demand, weaning is a difficult period for young children. To aid the process, the child may be physically removed from its mother by, for example, being taken by its grandmother until it has "forgotten" the breast (Hampshire, 1998).

**Caretakers.** While a mother is primarily responsible for the care of her infant, in practice this is often shared with many other women, since childcare happens as a part of women's ongoing life, while they cook, fetch water, wash, weave mats, and do each other's hair (Riesman, 1992). Consequently, all first-time mothers will have had years of experience watching and helping other mothers take care of their children. In turn, they will also be watched, criticized, and helped. Help may include anything from offering advice or carrying the baby to offering a breast. For the first few years of life, fathers are relatively uninvolved with the care of their children and in decisions relating to their health, welfare, and feeding.

### **Childhood**

Between the ages of 5 and 7, children are thought to begin to develop *haYYillo* (a social sense) and are given their first responsibilities (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Riesman, 1992). These responsibilities may include helping mothers with food preparation, or beginning to look after small animals. Until that time, children are not expected to know how to behave socially, or indeed to comply with the demands of their caretakers. From ages 5–7 onwards, children are thought to be more responsible for their actions, and are thus more likely to be reprimanded and corrected for behaving in inappropriate ways.

A particular danger to the health of children is *pooli* (described above), and mothers take precautions, such as making a loud noise, to try to prevent this (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). Other health risks to childhood include the belief that it is dangerous for a child to have contact with its mother, and particularly with her milk, for the last months of her pregnancy with her next child, and continuing after the birth of that child. To protect against this, an older child may be given an egg to eat, cooked directly in the coals, from a chicken that has not had any offspring (Riesman, 1992).

For very young children, the main responsibility for healthcare lies with the mother (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). It is she who decides when treatment for illness should be sought, and she who must find the means to pay for it, which are typically very limited. If very young children die, grief tends to be borne privately by mothers, rather than being a public matter. For older children (over age 5 or so), the responsibilities shift, with fathers beginning to take a more active role in the well-being of their offspring, and contributing financially to their healthcare (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995).

#### **Adolescence**

Childhood ends quite early, for Fulani girls in particular. Marriage takes place typically at an early age—mean age at first marriage for Fulani women in Burkina Faso was found to be around 16 years, with a high proportion of marriages happening considerably earlier (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). For some time prior to marriage, girls are expected to take on roles appropriate to adult women, and much of the freedom associated with early childhood is lost. In Burkina Faso, some Fulani girls from the age of about 12 are sent to live with their future mothers-in-law, as part of preparation for married life (Hampshire, 1998).

Fulani men marry later than women: among the Burkinabè Fulani, mean age at first marriage for men was 24–25 years (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). Fulani men, therefore, enjoy a more extended period of adolescence during which they are free from many of the responsibilities of having their own family and herd. Among some Burkinabè Fulani men, it is common to begin to travel during this period, in particular to cities for temporary work (Hampshire, 2002b; Hampshire & Randall, 1999).

### **Adulthood**

Until old age, Fulani are married for most of their adult lives. Marriage is effectively universal and re-marriage is typically rapid following divorce or widowhood (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). Polygamous marriage is practiced, although most marriages are monogamous: among the Burkinabè Fulani, for example, 7.6% of married men and 13.5% of married women were in polygamous unions (Hampshire & Randall, 2000).

For adult Fulani women, the most pressing health issues are pregnancy and reproductive health, and unequal access to health services. The health risks associated with pregnancy and childbirth have been discussed above. Maternal mortality ratios are typically high (e.g., 850 deaths per 100,000 live births among the Burkinabè Fulani, which corresponds to a 1 in 17 lifetime risk (Hampshire, 2001).

The reasons for such high risks of maternal death or injury relate in part to the lack of facilities for dealing with obstetric emergencies in particular (also ante-natal and post-natal care) in many of the areas inhabited by rural Fulani. They may also relate to a mismatch of services currently provided with the felt needs of Fulani women. Many of the beliefs and practices associated with pregnancy among the Fulani make use of standard maternity services problematic for many. Ante-natal care is difficult where women conceal pregnancy, and delivery in hospital or maternity units runs counter to the ideal of unassisted childbirth. Issues such as the disposal of the placenta in hospital are also areas of concern for many Fulani women (Hampshire, in preparation).

Gender inequalities in access to health services also exist in many Fulani populations, such as those in central Chad (Hampshire, 2002a). Because of both resource constraints and various cultural and institutional factors, Fulani women often have to rely on male affines and kin to gain access to particular health services and practitioners. Hampshire (2002a) found considerable variation in the ability of married women to mobilize their husbands' support in times of illness. Particularly vulnerable were childless wives, those least well established in the marital households, and those in polygamous marriages and/or in large, extended marital households. A woman's own kin network is important in terms of her access to health resources, particularly for unmarried women, or where husbands and other affines are unprepared to help (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, 2002a).

## **The Aged**

Old people are generally treated with deference and respect in Fulani society (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Riesman, 1992). According to De Bruijn and Van Dijk (1995), there are established ideas about help for old people in cases of illness or hardship. An old, widowed woman may receive

#### **Changing Health Patterns 663**

help from her brothers, her own children, members of her *suudu yaaya* (mother's lineage), and neighbors. However, such support is not always forthcoming, and depends on the willingness and ability of such relatives to help out (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995; Hampshire, 2002a).

The respect accorded to the elderly is not without ambiguity (Riesman, 1992). Important aspects of being a Fulani adult include being useful/able (*waawude*), and being in control of physical needs or wants—qualities that diminish in old age. Riesman (1992) discusses the sense of irony surrounding old age, in which the elderly are, on the one hand, respected, and yet, on the other hand, the objects of ridicule or joking, since they may no longer be capable of exercising that power in any meaningful way. Riesman even quotes elderly informants who describe themselves as being "dead," since they are no longer able to fulfil their social or productive roles.

### **Death and Dying**

Reactions to death and dying in Fulani society are characterized by the restraint shown in other aspects of life. De Bruijn and Van Dijk (1995) describe how, for very young children (under about 5 years), death and mourning are private affairs, with no public expression of grief. For older children and adults, public mourning is typically very short. Burial happens very shortly after death, without an elaborate ceremony (De Bruijn & Van Dijk, 1995). Condolences are offered to the bereaved family but, thereafter, the grief becomes private, with no collective ceremony or remembrance at a later stage. Riesman (1977) points out that one should not mistake a lack of public mourning with lack of emotion or sensitivity. Fulani are expected to have strong emotional feelings surrounding death and other sadnesses. However, they are also expected to master those feelings, to control them, and not to display them publicly. This is particularly true for men; it is expected that women may shed tears over a death, particularly of a close family member, while men should be able to control and master their emotions.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

It is important to remember that the information presented here refers to particular groups of Fulani, documented by particular ethnographers at particular moments in time. It is now widely accepted within the field of anthropology that "culture" is neither static, nor rigid, nor is it interpreted by everyone in the same way. Within a Fulani camp or village, individuals will think about and interpret situations differently, with substantial variation in practice and action. This applies to beliefs and practice associated with health as much as any other element of life.

The variation is increased by the fact that the Fulani are a vast and fluid ethnic category, spanning the breadth of Sahelian Africa. In addition to the variation in healthrelated beliefs and practices within villages, there are also substantial variations between Fulani groups living in different areas. I have tried, throughout this entry, to draw the reader's attention to such differences and similarities. However, existing ethnographies of Fulani groups do not cover the whole range of Fulani life in every area. It is probable, therefore, that there is more regional variation in Fulani health patterns, beliefs, and practices than is documented here.

It must also be remembered that the various ethnographies of the Fulani drawn on in this entry are situated in particular moments in time. Health patterns, beliefs, and practices, like all other aspects of life, are not static, nor can they be properly understood ahistorically. Many Fulani societies have undergone substantial social and economic change over the period covered by the ethnographies, with important implications for health patterns, beliefs, and practices. Most of the states in which Fulani live achieved independence from colonial rule in the years around 1960, which precipitated, among other things, changing social and economic relations between the FulBe and slave groups. This, in combination with climatic and ecological changes, has meant that many Fulani have left behind agropastoral subsistence to pursue economic strategies that draw them increasingly into a national and global economic framework (Hampshire & Randall, 1999).

Modernity has brought about different changes for different groups of Fulani. Some of these changes can be illustrated by considering the case of Fulani groups in northern Burkina Faso. On the one hand, increased contact with health services has resulted in improving infant and child health for many, as indicated by falling infant and child mortality rates over recent decades (Hampshire & Randall, 1995). On the other hand, modernity brings with it new health challenges. Young Fulani men migrating temporarily to cities to find work are increasingly exposed to sexually-transmitted diseases, including HIV and conditions that result in sterility, such as gonorrhea and chlamydia (Hampshire & Randall, 2000). It is likely that these are being transferred back to Fulani villages, with possibly devastating future consequences.