#### **Overview of the Culture 883**

*North America* (pp. 159–176). Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press.

- Spencer, Katherine. (1957). *Mythology and values: An analysis of Navaho Chantway myths*. Memoirs of the American Folklore Society, 48. Philadelphia: American Folklore Society.
- Spickard, J. V. (1991). Experiencing religious rituals: A Schutzian analysis of Navajo ceremonies. *Sociological Analysis, 52*, 191–204.
- Steinhart, J. R., Sugarman, J. R., & Connell, F. A. (1997). Gestational diabetes is a herald of NIDDM in Navajo Women. *Diabetes Care, 20*, 943–947.
- Sugarman, J. R., White, L. L., & Gilbert, T. J. (1990). Evidence for a secular change in obesity, height, and weight among Navajo Indian schoolchildren. *American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52*, 960–966.
- Topper, M. D. (1987). The traditional Navajo medicine man: Therapist, counselor, and community leader. *The Journal of Psychoanalytic Anthropology: A Quarterly Journal of Culture and Personality, 10*, 217–249.
- Trennert, Robert A. (1998). *White Man's medicine: Government doctors and the Navajo, 1863–1955.* Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Will, J. C., Strauss, K. F., Mendlein, J. M., Ballew, C., White, L. L., & Peter, D. G. (1997). Diabetes mellitus among Navajo Indians:

Findings from the Navajo health and nutrition survey. *The Journal of Nutrition, 127*, 2106S–2113S.

- Willging, C. E. (2002). Clanship and K'é: The relatedness of clinicians and patients in a Navajo counseling center. *Transcultural Psychiatry, 39*, 5–32.
- Witherspoon, G. (1983). Navajo social organization. In Alfonso Ortiz (Ed.), *Southwest* (pp. 524–535). Vol. 10, *Handbook of North American Indians*. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
- Wright, A. L., Bauer, M., Clark C., Morgan, F., & Begishe, K. (1993). Cultural interpretations and intracultural variability in Navajo beliefs about breastfeeding. *American Ethnologist, 20*, 781–796.
- Wyman, L. C. (1983). Navajo ceremonial system. In Alfonso Ortiz (Ed.), *Southwest* (pp. 536–577). Vol. 10, *Handbook of North American Indians*. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
- Wyman, L. C., & Clyde Kluckhohn. (1938). *Navajo classification of their song ceremonials*. Memoirs, 50. Menasha, Wisconsin: American Anthropological Association.
- Young, R. W. (1961). *The Navajo yearbook: 1951–1961, A Decade of Progress*. Window Rock, Arizona: Navajo Agency, Bureau of Indian Affairs.

# **Nepal**

#### **Gregory G. Maskarinec**

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Himalayan constitutional monarchy of Nepal is a small landlocked country located in South Asia between India and the Tibetan Autonomous Region of China. Nepal is roughly shaped as a rectangle that extends approximately 500 miles (800 km) from southeast to northwest with an average width ranging from 90 to 150 miles (140 to 240 km) from north to south. Nepal is home to seven of the world's highest mountains, including the highest, Everest, known in Nepal as Sagarmatha. In 2000 Nepal's population was estimated to be 24 million. Nepal's significant cultural and linguistic diversity is indicated by the 120 distinct languages that have been recorded in the country, of which at least 60 are still

used as the primary language of a local community. Most inhabitants understand the national language, Nepali, an Indo-Aryan language derived from Prakrit resembling Bengali and Gujarati but with an increasing number of loan words via Hindi of Persian or Arabic origin. Other Indo-Aryan languages of Nepal include Maithili, Rajbansi, and Bhojpuri. Major Tibeto-Burman languages in Nepal include Newari, Tamang, Gurung, Magar, Sherpa, Thakali, Tharu, and various Kiranti languages.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The modern state of Nepal emerged in the late 18th century as the king of one local hill principality, Gorkha, began a successful campaign of conquest, conquering the sophisticated Newari city-states of the Kathmandu Valley in 1769. Military interventions by the British established the present borders of the kingdom but preserved Nepal's nominal independence, an autonomy that was strengthened by Nepal's strong support of the British during the Indian sepoy mutiny of 1857. Democratic government was introduced in 1991 after years of absolute monarchy, but the contemporary political system is extremely factionalized, with frequent changes of government. Since 1996, an increasingly violent Maoist insurgency has spread throughout the country.

Never having been colonized and rigorously outlawing all missionary proselytizing, whether by Christians or Muslims, Nepal has preserved vibrantly its diverse cultural traditions, which includes many varieties of shamans, oracles, and spirit mediums. In keeping with Nepal's self-proclaimed identity as "the world's only Hindu state," more than nine tenths of the population is classified as Hindu, a designation that officially includes Buddhists as well as the many local variations of ritual practice, so long as they observe in some way the Hindu caste system. Outside of this system, there are also very small groups of Muslims and an even smaller scattering of Christians, mostly repatriates from elsewhere in South Asia.

As a result of its geographical inaccessibility and a repressive political system sustained by inequitable land distribution and exploitive methods of agricultural taxation, Nepal is one of the least developed countries of the world, with an extremely low standard of living. Nepal's per capita annual income remains less than U.S.\$200, with more than half of the population living below the absolute poverty level. Average life expectancy is around 55 for both males and females. No more than half of the population is literate. (All statistics regarding Nepal are only reasonable guesses; no accurate demographic data exists.)

The climate of Nepal ranges from subtropical monsoon conditions in the Tarai (the Gangetic plains in the south of the country) to alpine conditions in the Great Himalayas. Throughout the country, subsistence agriculture and animal husbandry are the most common economic activities, employing most of the work force. Productivity is low, leading to chronic food shortages and periodic famines in parts of the country. Rice is the leading staple, but is a luxury in more remote parts of the country, where corn (maize), wheat, or millet are the staple crops. Most houses are small, two storied buildings made of mud-bricks, without electricity or running water. Wood and dried dung are the standard fuels for cooking. The Nepalese economy, such as it is, is sustained by foreign aid and tourism; trade is dominated by India.

Despite a relatively high death rate along with migration to India, Nepal's population continues to grow rapidly, with 40% of the population younger than 15 years of age. Except for the urban concentration of the capital, Kathmandu, and a scattering of provincial towns, nearly all the population remains in small rural villages. Complicating its economy as well as its foreign policy, Nepal provides refuge to nearly 100,000 recent refugees from Bhutan, as well as to more settled communities of Tibetan refugees, who began arriving after the Dalai Lama fled Tibet in 1959.

Family structure in Nepal remains very traditional; most marriages are arranged and are caste-endogamous but frequently village-exogamous. Girls tend to be married by age 16, boys slightly older. In some groups, however, such as the Newars of the Kathmandu Valley, both men and women tend to be married at later ages. Newari girls are ritually married at a young age to a *bel* fruit (*Aegle marmelos*), a ceremony that de-emphasizes both the urgency and the solemnity of later marriages. Most Brahman girls, in contrast, are married by age 10, since Brahmans obtain religious merit by giving away very young daughters—according to tradition, the preferred age for a Brahman girl to marry is six, although modern families no longer follow this custom. In groups with Sanskritic influenced cultures, girls are expected to be virgins at marriage, but this stricture is ignored in most Tibeto-Burman communities. The status of Hindu wives may be inferred from a rite within the marriage ceremony during which the bride must wash her husband's feet (considered the most impure part of the human body) and sip the water. In traditional families, a wife always greets her husband by touching his feet.

The estimated average number of births per woman for the country is six. Most families are patrilocal and patrilineal. Depending on the ethnic group, both polygyny and polyandry are found in Nepal; variations on dowry or bride-price are also found in different communities. Divorce remains uncommon, as does widow remarriage, although some groups, including Kiranti populations and low caste groups, practice marriage by levirate.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Given the widespread poverty, poor nutrition, overpopulation, unfair land tenure systems, exploitive wage labor, political corruption, poor sanitation, and lack of clean drinking water, the overall health situation in Nepal is extremely poor. Overall infant mortality is at least 100 per 1,000. There are widely varying estimates of this and all other health-related statistics, all unreliable and all concealing enormous disparities between the relatively rich and the desperately poor. Personal observation over the past 25 years suggests that in some of the poorest villages of the western hills, the mortality of children under five is as high as 400 per 1,000.

While it is officially reported that there are 150 hospitals in Nepal (two of them ayurvedic, one homeopathic), only a few of these have sufficient staff, equipment, or stocks of medicines to provide a reasonable standard of care. Outside urban areas, the 1,000 health posts established throughout the country are poorly managed, corrupt, and sensibly avoided by much of the population until all other options have failed.

The prevalence of tuberculosis in Nepal is estimated at 15 per 1,000, with some 50,000 new cases a year and 20,000 annual deaths. Nepal has the second highest incidence of iodine deficiency disorders in the world with cretinism rates as high as 10% in some remote areas, where goiter rates can reach 80%. After substantial declines in the 1960s, malaria is resurgent and increasingly resistant to treatment. There are some 30,000 registered cases of leprosy in the country. There are periodic outbreaks of typhoid. The most recent cholera outbreak was in 1995. Plague may have occurred as recently as August 1994, when there was an outbreak in India; the most recent well documented outbreak in Nepal was in 1967/1968. Other severe diseases that are common include encephalitis, meningitis, hepatitis, and gastrointestinal disorders. It has been estimated that all of the adult population suffers from intestinal parasites. Partial blindness as a result of vitamin A deficiency affects at least half a million people. Half of females of childbearing age are anemic.

His Majesty's Government of Nepal (HMG) officially acknowledges four systems of medicine: allopathy, Ayurveda, homeopathy, and Unami as being practiced in Nepal, although the latter two are not widespread. Ayurvedic practices tend to be localized in Kathmandu or the areas adjacent to India. Locally, Ayurveda is considered most efficacious in the treatment of hepatitis. HMG reports that there is one biomedically trained physician for approximately 19,000 persons and one nurse per 5,000 persons, but these numbers, bad as they are, are severely misleading unless it is concurrently noted that nearly all physicians and nurses are to be found in urban areas, leaving the rest of the country either to poorly trained health workers or to traditional practitioners. Nepal has one 40-bed acute care hospital for the mentally ill, and 13 trained psychiatrists, all in Kathmandu. Even in urban areas, health care delivery is systematically biased in favor of the wealthy and the middle class, while the poor are denied services both because of the cost and the structure of the traditional society. Although Nepal is a signatory to the 1978 Alma Ata Declaration and despite the rhetorical commitment of successive governments toward committing resources for better health, improved health care remains a low priority in Nepal, as it would necessarily require a more equitable social system.

Outside the Kathmandu Valley, drug therapy is almost inevitably mismanaged. Nevertheless, injections and capsules have acquired a nearly magical status, so that villagers who do consult a "modern" medical practitioner, even if it is only the lowest paid health post peon who may lack even a high school education let alone any medical training, expect their treatment to include these. Unrealistic expectations of biomedical efficacy coupled with poor patient education contributes to many villagers' disillusionment with the government's promotion of Western medicine. Self medication is common, as "medical halls" (drug stores) that lack trained pharmacists supply pharmaceuticals on demand. In rural areas, these medications are often expired stock from India.

Traditional practitioners, a diverse group including oracles, shamans, spirit mediums, Buddhist lamas, Tantrics, astrologers, wandering ascetics, and herbal healers, all remain more familiar, less frightening and less intrusive than is Western-style medicine. Traditional practitioners are less condescending and far easier to understand than are allopathic physicians, and their success rates appear no worse than those of their competitors. The variety of "traditional healers" is considerable. Defining the category of "shaman" fairly strictly as ritual intercessors whose divination, exorcism, and healing practices incorporate command over well-defined groups of spirits, who use elaborate paraphernalia, and who often enter trance states to conduct ritual journeys, one finds Gurung *poju* and *hlewri*, Tamang *lambu* and *bonpo*, Yolmo *bonpo*, Tharu *gurau*, Rai *bijuju*, *padem*, and *lambu*, Limbu *yeb*, Sunuwar *puimbo* and *ngiami*, Chepang *pande*, Sherpa *lhapa* and *mindung*, Magar *ramma*, and the low caste *jhangri* throughout the country. While each of these terms can be translated as "shaman," each has distinct characteristics, including different ritual practices, different costumes and paraphernalia, and different oral texts. Still, some generalizations are possible. Most shamans are male, although highly motivated women occasionally overcome the biases of patrilineality and gender discrimination to become shamans. Many future shamans undergo possession crises as adolescents that prompt their interest in the profession. For most groups, preparation of new shamans concentrates on their learning oral texts. Most important is to memorize the secret mantras that control the spirits that shamans must manipulate in their rituals, since, unlike other circumstances that involve involuntary or spontaneous spirit possession, shamans must control the spirits that they summon to their ceremonies, rather than be controlled by them. For the shamans of western Nepal, the variety of spirits that they use include local gods and goddesses, spirits of animals and inanimate forces, souls of human suicides (particularly vengeance spirits—men or women who were unable to find justice in their lifetime and committed suicide to become such a spirit), souls of other dead humans, especially those who died untimely deaths, and the souls of other shamans. Some of these groups are protective and therapeutic, others are malicious, oppressive, and threatening. Nearly all demand blood sacrifices, a key element of every major shamanic ritual. Communicating with these spirits allows shamans to diagnose problems, treat afflictions, and restore order and balance to the lives of their clients and their communities.

Distinct from shamans are the oracular spirit mediums found throughout the greater Karnali drainage area of western Nepal. Each oracle is associated with one particular spirit located at one particular shrine to that spirit. The oracle is regarded as the passive mouthpiece of the spirit, in contrast to the control over a wide variety of spirits expected of shamans. Only upon the death of one oracle does a new one emerge to take the position, as distinct from shamans, who study with a teacher to learn the profession. Oracles most often treat poorly differentiated misfortune, often for entire families. Such cases may also be taken to less well-established spirit mediums, who sometimes emerge without a well defined social position, often women who become spontaneously possessed and who temporarily exhibit healing powers, whose popularity rapidly waxes and then equally rapidly wanes.

Many villagers use herbal remedies for a wide variety of somatic complaints, and many may also informally consult other villagers about such treatments, although there are not well defined "herbalists" as such. Many herbal treatments are used in conjunction with mantras, knowledge of which is also widely diffused. Nepal has a significant source of medicinal herbs from its higher altitudes, which are exported to India for use in ayurvedic preparations.

Astrologers and various fortune tellers are also frequently consulted for a wide range of problems, including medical conditions. They offer both diagnosis and advice, but do not perform healing roles.

In the Tibetan refugee community, and to a small extent among the Tibeto-Burman groups within Nepal, classic Tibetan medicine is practiced, which is based to a considerable extent on the use of herbs and natural substances within a theory of Buddhist religious teachings, and is considered most effective for chronic conditions.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Nepalis tend to be extremely fatalistic, observing that in this Age of Darkness (Kali Yuga), inevitable deterioration of the world, at all levels, personal, social, and cosmic, is all that can be expected. All concepts of life, death, and suffering are permeated by the theory of Karma, with its cycles of rebirth that connect morality with retribution and reward. One's caste and gender, for example, are generally recognized as reaping what has been sown in one's previous lives. Karma, then, is ultimately responsible for all illness and affliction. Nevertheless, Nepalis distinguish proximate causes to their illnesses, and most accept

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 887**

a classification of their problems into either *rog* (illness) or *dokh* (spiritual affliction/misfortune). Illness has many natural causes, including imbalances of hot and cold foods, violation of the laws of purity and pollution, or unpredictable accidents loosely connected to one's Karma.

One of the most elaborate local etiologies is found among the shamans of western Nepal. Shamans diagnose their patients' afflictions as commonly involving some combination of seven possible causes: (1) curses, and spells, particularly those of witches and other shamans; (2) misfortunate astrological configurations, foremost of which are dangerous planetary configurations called star obstructions; (3) the intrusion of alien substances into the body, whether by acts of sorcery, by violation of sacred space, or by violating rules of ritual purity, such as coming in contact with a woman's menstrual blood; (4) weakened life forces, including soul loss, lost wits, dullness, and several recognized forms of madness; (5) social disorder, especially disputes within families and communities; (6) fevers of autonomous origin; (7) the activities of spirits, ghosts, or demons, provoked by acts of neglect, pollution, or disrespect. When spirits are involved, the most common types are patrilineal family gods, recently deceased relatives, or the numerous minor local spirits who inhabit particular hilltops, trees, waterfalls, springs, and rivers. At other times, major local gods, minor deities of non-human origin, quasi-spirits thought to have a one-dimensional degree of corporeality, or even shaman tutelary spirits may be diagnosed as causing affliction (Maskarinec, 1995).

Much of the treatment for these conditions is through logotherapy, using ritual language, with each intervention involving a distinctive ritual. Most interventions can be described as either propitiatory or symbolic. Propitiatory rituals include sacrifices and offerings, while symbolic ones include rituals of binding and burying, sucking or blowing, raising the patient toward the heavens, and diverse acts of divination.

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Large families are seen as insurance in old age, and as a guarantee of sufficient agricultural labor for the future. Many families wish to have as many children as possible, in hopes that some, at least, will survive to adulthood. Sons are expected to maintain the family's lineage, inherit property, and provide support to parents when they are old. For Hindu families, a son is necessary to complete the proper funeral rites for his parents, without which they are condemned to become restless spirits. "Ideal" family size (first reported by Worth and Narayan, 1969) remains in the range of four or five children, which is slightly higher than the number of children who survive to adulthood in most rural families. Daughters, who leave the family when they marry, tend to be seen as liabilities. However, there is no evidence that female infants are less likely to survive than are males, since Nepalis regard all children as divine gifts, but girls are certainly less likely to be sent to school, and are given more household chores, at an earlier age.

Knowledge of family planning is widespread, having been promoted by the government for decades with extensive media campaigns. Family planning itself is slowly spreading, primarily among the educated urban population but with some impact at the village level. The 1996 Nepal Family Health Survey (Pradhan, Ajit et al., 1997) found that sterilization accounted for more than half of current contraceptive use. Abortion is considered sinful; a woman who has an abortion will be reborn, it is widely believed, as a dog. There have been recent efforts to decriminalize abortion, but as of March 2002 these have so far been unsuccessful. Nepal's abortion law only permits abortions to be performed on the ground of "benevolence," but does not indicate which abortions are covered by this term, and few, if any, pregnancies have been terminated on this ground. A three-year study conducted in the early 1980s revealed that two thirds of all female inmates in Nepal were imprisoned on charges related to abortion and infanticide. (Population Policy Data Bank; Department for Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations Secretariat); it is estimated that illegal abortions cause the death of hundreds of women every year. Miscarriages are regarded as shameful; women try to conceal them.

Inability to have children, to have miscarriages or stillbirths, or for children to die in infancy are all blamed on a wife's Karma. All are extremely damaging to her status, and may lead to the husband marrying a second wife. Appeal to spirits held responsible or who may intervene against witchcraft are the most common attempted remedies. One oracle, that of Bijuli Masta in Jajarkot District, is considered particularly effective, with many families that have long been childless returning to dedicate their firstborn sons in the temple.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

There are no traditional prenatal ceremonies, nor do most pregnant women receive medical care. Pregnancy is socially recognized by the fifth or sixth month, when it is held that the life-breath has entered the embryo. From this point, the woman, regarded as being two individuals, may not participate in religious ceremonies.

Traditional midwives assist in many deliveries in Nepal, but it remains common for a woman to deliver alone or with only a close relative or female neighbor assisting. There have been government efforts dating back to the 1920s to provide midwife training, though resources are limited. Most deliveries take place in the husband's home. The umbilical cord is usually cut on the same day that birth takes place, but it may be tied and the cutting postponed to avoid astrologically determined complications, or to allow a scheduled ritual or wedding within the immediate family to take place, as these must otherwise be postponed for 11 days. The placenta of a male child is buried under the kitchen floor near the hearth, that of a female child outside. A section of the umbilical cord may be dried to be used to treat colic. The newborn is washed and rubbed with mustard oil, regarded as essential to "warm" the infant. Women remain in seclusion after giving birth, with both mother and child treated as untouchable until the eleventh day. Female relatives do massage and oil both baby and mother, but they must bathe to purify themselves afterward. Breast-feeding begins as soon as milk is available. No other foods are ordinarily given to infants.

Medical risks associated with birth include, predictably, low birth weights, premature deliveries, neonatal tetanus, sepsis, and other infections. Multiple births and birth defects are regarded as inauspicious, and may lead to the infants being neglected or, in rare cases, abandoned.

### **Infancy**

As soon as possible after a birth, an astrologer is consulted, to calculate the child's future and to choose an auspicious name, which is based on the time of birth. The most serious of astrological disturbances is that of *mul*, which occurs when certain planets of both the child and either of its parents occupy the *mul nakshatra*, one of 27 subdivisions of the lunar elliptic. *Mul* is a crisis that lasts for a finite, calculable length, sometimes a lifetime, sometimes for just a few moments. The parent who shares the configuration is fated to die quickly if he/she sees the child within *mul*'s duration, so that a *mul* birth may have to be placed outside the family to be raised as an orphan. Only after an astrologer has been consulted does the baby's father see the child.

On the sixth night after birth Bhabi, Goddess of Fortune, comes to write a child's fate on its forehead. Parents traditionally leave a light burning all night in the room with the baby so that she makes no mistakes, sometimes supplying a pen and inkpot.

Among many groups a first rice feeding ceremony is held six months after birth, though this is not to be confused with weaning. Breast-feeding often continues for two or three years. This is regarded as a natural contraceptive measure. Male children tend to be breast-fed longer than are female children, sometimes for five or six years if no sibling is born. Special consideration is given to the mother's diet when she is breast-feeding, with foods regarded as having "cooling" properties most often avoided.

## **Childhood**

Nepal's last major smallpox epidemic was in 1963–64. Official eradication of smallpox by 1974 is concrete evidence of what a well-focused public health campaign might do for the six vaccine preventable diseases of childhood—diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, poliomyelitis, tuberculosis, and measles—all of which contribute significantly to childhood morbidity and mortality.

For high caste, "twice-born," males, the most important childhood ceremony is to receive the sacred thread. Brahman boys usually receive this at age seven or nine, while Chetris may wait until their teens. Once invested with a thread, a boy has many new ritual responsibilities and privileges, such as now being allowed to eat in the company of adults. There is no parallel ceremony for girls.

Children are, in general, treated with considerable affection and are rarely disciplined. They are gradually integrated into the family's daily chores. Older children assume responsibility for caring for their younger siblings.

#### **Changing Health Patterns 889**

### **Adolescence**

As most Nepalis are married by their mid-teens, there is no real "adolescence" in Nepal, just a quick transition from childhood to adulthood.

### **Adulthood**

First menstruation marks the beginning of adulthood for women. No special ceremonies are performed, but in some communities the woman is secluded for 15 days, during which time she may not be seen by males. Menstruation is considered ritually unclean, and there are many rules that a menstruating woman must follow. She is treated as an untouchable, even for other women, and should maintain physical isolation for the first four days of her period; she must not cook nor fetch water; she may not perform any religious rite.

### **The Aged**

In all cultures of Nepal, to reach an old age is a guarantee of respect. A special ceremony is held to honor a person who reaches the age of 84. Elderly persons continue to contribute to household labor and childcare, to the extent of their abilities, and take major roles in family decision-making. Care for the elderly is regarded as a responsibility of the extended family.

The major medical problems of the elderly in Nepal are not significantly different than those found throughout the world.

### **Dying and Death**

All Nepalis prefer to die at home, though some indigent elderly are cared for in hospices maintained by charitable organizations, primarily in the Kathmandu Valley.

A coin is placed under the tongue of a dying person; if not spat out, death is considered immanent. A drop of water purified by having had gold immersed in it is poured through the dying person's lips. After death, the body must be handled properly, touched only by persons of equal or higher caste, or the deceased may later trouble his family. Immediately following the last breath, a body is wrapped in a white or saffron shroud and tied to two bamboo poles to be carried to the cremation or burial site. Cremation on a riverbank is the preferred method for funerals, although both earth and "sky" burials are practiced in some communities, the latter found in some Tibeto-Burman communities who expose the body on an elevated platform to be consumed by vultures, graphically "paying back" to nature the debts incurred in a lifetime of dependence on the world.

For Hindu funerals, the eldest male circumambulates the pyre and is responsible for lighting it. Mourners remain in attendance until the skull splits, releasing the soul. Ashes are scattered in the river. If a family can afford it, a piece of bone is preserved, taken to Benaras in India, and cast into the sacred Ganges River there.

Those who suffered from leprosy may not be cremated, as the disease is traditionally regarded as a curse that denies human rebirth. Smallpox victims were also buried, a practice explained by their having been possessed by the smallpox goddess, Sitala. Children under the age of five are ordinarily buried, with little ceremony, as are those too poor to afford cremation. Muslims and Christians in Nepal also bury their dead, in graveyards.

Mourning by the immediate family is marked by fasting, including abstinence from salt, oil, and meat for 13 days. More distant relatives observe one day of fasting. Males have their head shaved as a sign of mourning, while women dress in white, without jewelry, and leave their hair uncombed. The death of progenitors is commemorated by annual *sraddha* rituals, in which they are symbolically fed balls of rice offered by all male descendants.

In Nepal, the Hindu custom of "sati," the immolation of widows with the husband's body, was never common except among the royal families. It was firmly abolished by Prime Minister Chandra Shumsher Rana on June 28, 1920 AD, at which time it became illegal and punishable as culpable homicide. The "sati" gate of Pashupati temple, the holiest site in Nepal, through which widows had been taken to their husband's pyres, was bricked shut at that time.

# **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

Screening for HIV was begun in Nepal in 1986; the first case of HIV/AIDS was identified in June 1988. By September 1998 a total of 1,132 HIV positive cases and 108 deaths from AIDS had been recorded. Given the increasing number of young Nepalis who seek work