23

## Communalism

## Bibekbrata Sarkar

ore than fifty-seven years after independence, communalism continues to divide the Indian people and waste their human potential, defying all potential and administrative measures, and scholarly concern and analyses. As in the case of several other problems of Indian polity, any attempt to understand the complexity of communalism and its hold on the Indian psyche require taking a look into the politics of nationalism during the preindependence days. Two theories were frequently offered as explanation of communalism in pre-independence India: (1) the British policy of divide and rule, and (2) deliberate economic underdevelopment. These theories have not lost their currency completely even today.<sup>1</sup> Uneven capitalist growth can offer only part of the explanation of the existence of communal mentality and communal violence today as well as in the past. Communalism has always been too complex a phenomenon to be explained solely in terms of an economic situation. If uneven economic and social development prepared the ground for communalism, as Asghar Ali contends, then the Sikhs who are economically well off than other communities of India, would not have succumbed to it as they did in the eighties. The colonial policy of divide and rule became effective in India and elsewhere, not so much by creating divisions among the people by accentuating the cleavages that already existed. The British colonial government provided monetary incentives and a variety of other forms of encouragement to nurture the growth of any potentially divisive factor could be developed to drive a wedge into the solidarity of the nationalist forces, including religion, caste, and tribal lovalties. In this connection, this is important to remember that every state is interested in keeping the forces opposed to it divided as an overall strategy of survival, though it need not, however, amount to encouragement of communalism.

At this point, it is necessary to clarify certain issues. Much of the confusion associated with the discussion of communalism arises from the initial assumption that communalism is a given (or natural) category of thought

and action in India. Communalism as one of the stereotypes of Indian reality was abstracted from the local history and politics of strife between communities<sup>2</sup> by colonial historians and creators of its justifying discourse. Religion is one of the elements in the make-up of a community, not necessarily its qualifying characteristics. But colonial stereotypes made it appear so. The colonial reading of India's past as one of perpetual disharmony between 'religious' communities was, thus, an amalgam of colonial political necessity and deliberate misinterpretations of India's history and political tradition.

The colonial authorities were, indeed, quick to resort to the strategy of dividing the political opposition to its rule. As long as such opposition was sporadic, spontaneous, and was limited to small areas, they could use strong arm tactics. But sustained political opposition, like the nationalist movement, required a longer term strategy. To this end, they turned their attention soon enough, that is, much before the onset of mass movements. In the early phase of British rule, they followed a policy of systematic enfeeblement of the Muslims as they were the ruling authority in North India. The revenue system brought about by the British authorities accorded a lot of prominence to the money-lenders, who were overwhelmingly Hindus. The expropriation of Muslim peasantry in Punjab and Bengal reached serious proportions. The Muslims were excluded from the army and government service. The introduction of English as official language compounded the difficulties for the Muslims and further restricted their opportunities. A hundred years of British rule almost completely emasculated the Muslims, identified by the British as a religious community hostile to the British.<sup>3</sup>

As Indians, mostly Hindus in this case, began to set up associations to express political, economic or social demands in different parts of India in the 1870s, followed soon by a move to establish an all-India organization, the British strategy changed. The overt attitude of hostility to Muslims was changed to one of patronage. In 1877, Sir Syed Ahmed Khan founded the Mohammedan College at Aligarh for the purpose of introducing English education among the Muslims. Under the influence of British teachers of the college, Sir Syed finally turned away from cooperation with the nationalist movement which was slowly developing with the establishment of the Congress in 1885. At this stage, the British authorities were trying their best to direct the growth of consciousness among the Muslims along the line of district and suspicion towards the Congress, identifying the latter as a Hindu organization. True, at this time only a small number of Hindu leaders and fewer Muslim leaders were involved in this exercise. The majority of people were away from the scene of action: Syed Ahmed Khan started the Muslim Education Conference which had its annual sessions at the same time as the sessions of the Congress. Surendranath Banerjee regretted: "We were straining every nerve to secure the cooperation of our Mohammedan fellow countrymen...".<sup>4</sup> In 1893, the Mohammedan Anglo-Oriental Defence Association was started with British encouragement. One of its objectives was to "protect the political rights of the Muslims."<sup>5</sup>

The reforms of 1909 introduced separate electorate for the Muslims. But the ground was prepared by the colonial bureaucracy with meticulous care. Following Lord Curzon's idea of Council of Princes to checkmate the Congress, Minto suggested the idea to Morley, the Secretary of State for India. Morley replied,"Be sure that before long, the Mohammedans will throw in their lot with the Congressman against you…."<sup>6</sup>Minto took the hint and proceeded to put it into effect. Col. Dunlop Smith, Private Secretary to the Viceroy, wrote to the Principal of the Aligarh College intimating the readiness on the part of the Viceroy to receive a deputation of the Muslims.<sup>7</sup> Under the prodding of the Principal, the Secretary of the college Nawab Mohsin-ul-Mulk constituted a 35-member strong deputation led by Aga Khan, which met the Viceroy on 1 October 1906, and claimed special representation for the Muslim community.<sup>8</sup> The Viceroy agreed to the demand and said, "You justly claim that your position should be estimated not only on your numerical strength, but in respect to the political importance of your community…."<sup>9</sup>

It is not surprising that the Viceroy regarded it as a "very eventful day", and an "epoch in the Indian history."<sup>10</sup>Perhaps, more to the point were the words of an official who communicated with Morley, the Secretary of State, in the following manner:

"I must send Your Excellency a line to say that a very, very big thing has happened to-day. A work of statesmanship that will affect India and Indian history for many a long year. It is nothing less than the pulling back of sixty-two millions of people from joining the ranks of the seditious opposition."<sup>11</sup>

The All India Muslim League was established in 1906. The Morley-Minto Reforms (1909) put the seal of official approval on the doctrine of minority representation on the basis of the concept of religious communities. It was a pernicious doctrine, and Mohammad Ali admitted as much when he said, " … certain Anglo-Indian officials sowed discord between the Hindu and Mohammedan communities by showing special favours to the Muslims."<sup>12</sup>

Thus, the stage was set by the British for a number of Muslim leaders having substantial economic standing to advance the politics of separate interests, separate representation on grounds of being a 'minority religious' community, thereby seeking to legitimize non-cooperation with the Congress and the nationalist movement led by it. To be sure, the masses of Muslims were yet unaffected by such ideas. For, these Muslim leaders with no mass following worth the name could not possibly bring the Muslim people to their side unless there were opportunities in the shape of conducive situations to influence Muslim public opinion in the desired direction. The Congress, however, laid itself bare, perhaps unwittingly to the charges of presenting precisely such opportunities in the thirties and forties. Not that the Muslim League was not intransigent. But evidently it was the Congress which wanted to secure the cooperation of the Muslims in the nationalist struggle. And so, by implication the responsibility for ensuring Muslim cooperation devolved on the Congress. This is not to say that British "divide and rule" policy was responsible for the communal problem and the partition of India. Such stratagem is to be expected, and the strategy to counter it should have been carefully thought out be the nationalist leadership. This is what appeared to be absent in the early phase of the nationalist movement when contrary developments within and outside the movement were not adequately censured. Despite strongly criticizing the Morley-Minto Reforms at the Lahore session of 1909 for making 'unjust' distinction between Muslims and non-Muslims, the Congress, in effect, accepted the concept of minorities and separate electorate. This became evident, later, when the Congress entered into agreements and pacts with the League.

Towards the end of the nineteenth century, Tilak used religious appeal for political mobilization. In the early years of the twentieth century, religious language and imagery were extensively used by extremist Congressmen, revolutionary terrorists and the leaders of the Swadeshi movement in Bengal, where the anti-partition agitation was gathering momentum. It is very likely that such widespread use of religion for political purposes prompted Muslim leaders to feel that Muslim interests would suffer unless the same is done to boost Muslim identity.

The Congress strategy for securing cooperation and participation of the Muslims in the nationalist movement was one of unity from above, that is, pacts and agreements with the leaders. The discussion between the leaders almost invariably focussed not on "protection" and "safeguards", but on guarantee of jobs for the "lower-middle class and the urban intelligentsia."<sup>13</sup> The inability of the Congress to approach the Muslim masses to develop their consciousness along secular, democratic, and anti-imperialist lines<sup>14</sup> was the most glaring deficiency in the Congress strategy. The momentous years between 1927-29 offered unusual opportunities for arriving at a creative understanding between the two communities. In the Muslim League session at Calcutta in 1927, Jinnah offered to negotiate with the Congress on the question of framing a constitution for India on certain conditions "under which the League might forego" its claim to separate electorates.<sup>15</sup> The demand for parity of status was one of these conditions which was atleast worth a discussion. Another opportunity came next year (1928) when the Nehru Report was discussed. Jinnah asked for 33 per cent of the seats to be reserved for Muslims at the centre (instead of the 25 per cent given) and statutory majority in Punjab and Bengal. The latter was not easy to accept, but 33 per cent of seats could have been accommodated as part of a deal. The Round Table conferences were a disappointment for Gandhi, and for Jinnah as well who wanted a friendly atmosphere for discussion. The end of the eventful decade of the thirties witnessed another important opportunity slip by. In the 1937 elections, the Congress made a better showing than the League for which the results were pathetic. In spite of feelers from the League, the Congress quite firmly refused to give reasonable accommodation to the League in ministry-making. Such a decision appeared rational, but completely lacked foresight. In retrospect, it proved to be a serious mistake. For, that was the real parting of ways between the League and the Congress. Why is it that so many moves to solve the communal problem at the political level failed in the pre-independence period. Several questions comes up when one examines the sequence of events, the formal or informal remarks and statements by important leaders on both sides. The League was not a mass organization at the time. The Congress formed ministries, but some gestures could have been made to avoid antagonizing the League in U.P. where it was tied up with *Zamindari* interests. Alternatively, 'socially radical measures' and Muslim mass-contact programmes should have been vigorously pursued. It will be true to say that for the Congress in the late thirties it could have been a counsel of despair. The search for a political community was given up in the quest for political power.<sup>16</sup>

Partition and communal holocaust connected with it left a deep dent in people's mind on both sides of the border and belied all hopes of a peaceful co-existence of the two major communities. A variety of developments in the post-independence period added to the proliferation and diversity to the communal problem. The political system in India has rapidly undergone several important changes, especially after the mid-sixties. These are systematic devaluation of institutional functioning and increasing centralization of state power and social intervention. Politics appear to be almost entirely devoid of ideals and values, and has instead become a question of elections squabbles regarding sharing of seats, coalitions, compromises and facile rationalization. Communication links between civil society and the political society have worn themselves thin, as growing inequality, conspicuous consumption, and the inability to the state to even soften the blows of poverty, unemployment, and falling standards of living have prompted more and more groups, communities and individuals to take to a variety of forms of protest. In such a situation, communalism of different forms is bound to thrive. Communalism is not so much an ideology as a device, an escape, a means of attaining almost invariably non-secular goals,<sup>17</sup> a form of propaganda and control. It could equally be an exercise in 'authoritarian populism'. Scholars have commented on the spurt in popular religiosity in the form of festivals which sometimes last for many days, something that hardly even happened before.<sup>18</sup> Popular religiosity has lately received a big boost in the concept of *Hindutva* and the massive propaganda it received in the politico-religious campaigns of the Bharatiya Janata Party. A dedicated secular activist has pointed out that communalism is a 'universal phenomenon' though he has not told us when the assertion of communal identity becomes dangerous. Among some of the most disturbing and problematic aspects of communalism and communal violence are the involvement of large number of people who do not fall into the category of the deprived or the wounded, and the typical pattern of response that they exhibit. It is as though frequent repetition has created a structure of though and action in the minds of men which takes care to cause such incidents repeatedly over time.

Today communal violence has become more widespread and complex than ever before. Close to six decades after independence, we do not seem to have progressed far in the direction of controlling incidents of communal violence. It has assumed new forms, become larger in scale and brutal in character. Communalism has become part of organized, modern politics. Communalism has twin aspects of being exclusive in outlook and full of antagonism for others who do not share the same religious beliefs. A person with communal consciousness is one who attempts to present his own religious community as the only relevant category for understanding the world around it and acting to safeguard or advance interests projected by him and those who share his perceptions. Politics and other social relations will naturally come within the ambit of such perceptions. Rasheeduddin Khan says that "communalism is a perversion of religion from a moral order to a temporal arrangement of contemporary convenience from a faith into a constituency, from a strategy of living into a tactics of politics".<sup>19</sup>

Communal outlook gains ground among co-religionists when an exaggerated or imaginary fear of other communities is promoted.

Today communalism has become more widespread and complex than ever before. More than half-a-century after independence, it seems, as though, we have given up all hopes of bringing about a solution to this intractable problem.

The attainment of freedom solved none of those problems, the roots of which lay in the pre-independence period. Communalism is one of them. An analysis of communalism, under colonial administration, shows it up as a predominantly political and economic maneuver. It was not the clash of religion or culture that provided the motive force behind communal politics, but protection of the material interests of the landholder rich, lower-middle class, and urban intelligentsia. As Moin Sharir put it, "Thus, certain classes within a community, and not the whole community, had a vested interest in communalism".<sup>20</sup> The Muslim League had no mass following worth the name until 1937. The Congress approach to national unity was also flawed. It preferred unity from the top, and whenever Muslim mass contact was considered more desirable, the effort put behind it was not vigorous as there were communal elements within the Congress and there were pressures from Hindu communal parties, like the Hindu Mahasabha.

Communalism continued to thrive in independent India. The state declared itself as secular, but society was not secular. Wherever secularism has worked successfully, it has done so because society is secular. The state has provided constitutional safeguards, political parties have made promises and public discourse has been full of rhetorical exhortations, but the incidence of communal violence has not diminished. The reasons are many and varied. One of the sections of population consisting rural and urban small capitalists, traders, and businessmen is prone to communal thinking. A large chunk of money and electoral support for communal parties come from this section. These people have little hope of graduating to big-time capitalists; they are inconvenienced by governmental regulations, price-control, labourlegislation, trade unionism, human rights and child labour restrictions, and interventions by the judicial decisions. Many of them were refugees who suffered as a result of partition and the riots that followed. Their political priorities are a government and a party that is particularly sympathetic to their economic interests and gives them a more or less free-hand in running their business. A significant portion of the Indian middle-class also has similar background, and support communal parties. Together, they along with a sizable number of the economically depressed sections (including the urban underclass and those grown-up people who have come to the cities and towns in search of a living) are situated in a grey area where tradition and modernity meet in a curious, complex amalgam.

Political parties and the so-called non-political 'cultural' organizations promote communal sentiments or deliberately pursue a communal strategy as part of build-up for elections or for consolidation and creation of an effective social base. For this purpose, false propaganda, communal interpretations of actions, and engineering of situations that could lead to a communal flare-up are often resorted to by political parties. There are parties and organizations which are almost openly communal or present veiled version of it. Whenever communalism is resorted to as part of a political strategy, the goal is creation of a constituency and capture of political power, at any level, local or national. But, there is another purpose for which sometimes communal politics is resorted to mostly in a covert way. The larger framework to which this kind of communal incitement belongs is 'authoritarian populism'. Since the latter half of the seventies as sections of population began losing faith in government intentions and ability to remove poverty or to redistribute income in any meaningful way, a variety of groups and organizations sprung up representing disillusionment, discontent as well as a search for new ways of exerting pressure, and spreading a more broad-based awareness of the human situation. It is in these directions that new political theory is moving. But socio-economic mobilization of organized or not-so-organized kinds which took to protesting and demonstrating met with not only ruthless suppression by state authority, but also the phenomenon of authoritarian populism. A feature of this style of politics is the widespread use of rhetoric by the state for popular mobilization, usually the economically marginal and poor, for the purposes of gaining their support and at the same time controlling them. Sometimes communal fracas of different degrees form part of this politics, more so when society is multi-ethnic, multi-religious as in India. This can always go with selective suppression of protest demonstrations and flare-ups within the society. Authoritarian populism not only helps a certain kind of capitalist development particularly where indigenous capitalism is weak, but also encourages authoritarian decision-making by the state. The upsurge in Hindu nationalism since 1980 was a case in point, although much of its fruits, in terms of electoral gains, were later cornered by the Bharatiya Janata Party.

Muslims face a different set of problems. M.R.A. Baig points out, "partition left the Muslims without their acknowledged leadership, the Muslim League, separate electorate, and leading professional men."<sup>21</sup> The gap is filled by communally-oriented leadership who are more keen on keeping their hold on the masses than in clarifying matters or leading them towards acquiring modern education and skills for significant improvement of their economic position. As long as Muslims stay away from modernization, they will continue to be dominated by traditional elites among them, whereas the modern Muslim elites will find it extremely difficult to exercise influence or build a following among them. The traditional or revivalist leadership keep the poor Muslims in "mental mohallas"<sup>22</sup> from which they have to get out and take advantage of the many opportunities that exist. Education, including training in particular vocations, setting up of business enterprise, the habit of thrift and, generally, cultivating a desire to do well and go forward rather than staying put in a medieval ambience. Zafar Imam writes, "... Within the present limitations of the socio-economic and political structure of contemporary India, there is hardly any social base existing for such modernization of the Indian Muslim Society."<sup>23</sup> This was perhaps true for the Muslims seen as a community in 1970. But opportunities, and to an extent social awareness, have increased since then. If necessary reforms cannot be agreed upon by the community, individual enterprise also can be effective. This will help a more useful modern approach to replace the medieval outlook within which a large number of poor Muslim peasants and urban workers are confined. Abad Ahmad emphasizes, "educational and economic upliftment, and an environment of security and trust" to be provided for paving the way to modernization.<sup>24</sup> Liberal Muslims in politics, education or in other occupations would, hopefully, show more initiative, and earn acceptance within the community to be able to influence others. This can be done by social service and participating in, competitive democratic politics more vigorously.

At the same time, Hindus can take the initiative to change the image of the 'other community' held by them, and liberal Muslims can reciprocate. To a considerable extent, it is this image that tends to generate communal thinking when the incitement is present. But Hindus and Muslims will have to generate the thrust from within themselves.

There is little doubt that communal sentiments are propagated in a variety of forms. Religious ideas are packaged for mass consumption, and religion is being commercialized.<sup>25</sup> Festivals, television serials, some apparently innocuous state ceremonies, and above all, political discourse do by intent and, sometimes, inadvertently create suspicion and distrust which foster communal thinking. Democratic citizens' organizations should exert

## **440** ✽ CHAPTER 23

pressure on the government and political parties, while national debates, inducement to modernization and political participation can also act as long-term correctives.

## **Notes and References**

- 1. Moin Shakir, *State and Politics in Contemporary India,* Delhi, 1986, p. 164. Also, Asghar Ali Engineer, *Communalism and Communal Violence in India,* New Delhi, 1989.
- 2. Cf. Gyanendra Pandey, *The Construction of Communalism in Colonial North India,*  Delhi, 1992.
- 3. V.P.S. Raghuvanshi, *Indian Nationalist Movement and Thought,* Agra, 1959, pp. 60–61.
- 4. Surendranath Banerjee, *A Nation in Making,* cited in Raghuvanshi, *op. cit.,* p. 63.
- 5. Mehta and Patwardhan, *The Communal Triangle in India,* cited in Raghuvanshi, *op. cit.,* p. 64.
- 6. Mary, Countess of Minto, *India: Minto and Morley, 1905-10,* cited in Raghuvanshi, *op. cit.,* p. 106.
- 7. Mehta and Patwardhan, *op. cit.,* cited in Raghuvanshi, *op. cit.,* p. 107.
- 8. Raghuvanshi, *op. cit.,* p. 107.
- 9. *Ibid.,* p. 107.
- 10. *Ibid.,* p. 107.
- 11. *Ibid.,* pp. 107–8.
- 12. *Ibid.,* p. 108.
- 13. Moin Shakir, *op. cit.,* p. 164. Also, Bipan Chandra, *Nationalism and Colonialism in Modern India,* New Delhi, 1979, pp. 253--54.
- 14. Bipan Chandra, *op. cit.,* p. 255.
- 15. Hiren Mukherjee, *Recalling India's Struggle for Freedom,* Delhi, 1983, p. 118.
- 16. B.B. Sarkar, *Nationalism and Marxism in India: Quest for People and Power, 1920-40,* Delhi, 1990, p. 129.
- 17. Moin Shakir, *op. cit.;* Asghar Ali Engineer, *op. cit.*
- 18. See Bipan Chandra, *op. cit.;* Rajni Kothari, *State Against Democracy,* Delhi, 1988.
- 19. Rasheeduddin Khan, 'Communalism and Secularism in Indian Polity', *Mail1stream,*  28 February 1987.
- 20. Moin Shakir, *State and Politics in Contemporary India, op. cit.*
- 21*.* M.R.A. Baig, 'Enlightened Communalism', *Seminar,* No. 125, January 1970, p. 13.
- 22. *Ibid.,* p. 14.
- 23. ZafarImam, 'Modernization', *Seminar,* No. 125, January 1970, p. 17.
- 24. Abid Ahmad, 'Economic Participation', *Seminar,* No. 125, January 1970, p. 28.
- 25. Rajni Kothari, *State Against Democracy: In Search of Humane Governance,* Delhi, 1988, p. 250.