#### **The Impact of Global Aging on Population Health Status 311**

- Whiteford, L., & Coreil, J. (1997). The household ecology of disease transmission: Dengue fever in the Dominican Republic. In M. Inhorn & P. Brown (Eds.), *The anthropology and infectious disease: International health perspectives* (pp. 145–172). Amsterdam: Gordon & Breach.
- Whiteford, L., Laspina, C., & Torres, M. (1996). Cholera control in Ecuador: Behavior-based control activities (Environmental Health

Project, CDM). Technical Report published by Camp, Dresser and McKee, Arlington, VA:

- World Health Organization (2001, January 1). Geneva. Retrieved from http://www.who.int.
- Yoder, S. (1995). Examining ethno-medical diagnoses and treatment choices for diarrheal disorders in Lubumbashi Swahili. *Medical Anthropology, 16*, 211–247.

# **Chronic Diseases of Aging**

### **Catherine Hagan Hennessy**

## **THE AGING PROCESS AND DISEASE**

Chronic diseases of aging are the result of pathogenic changes in physiological systems and physical structures that manifest during senescence (Solomon, 1999). Decline in elasticity of the large arteries, for example, predisposes the aging individual to systolic hypertension, while increased insulin resistance is the basis for the development of adult-onset diabetes. A wide range of conditions may be categorized as chronic degenerative diseases including many, such as sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis, that have an onset earlier in life. Those conditions recognized as aging-related include the leading causes of mortality among older adults in developed countries—cardiovascular disease, cancer, and type II diabetes–as well as other non-fatal conditions with a high prevalence and burden of morbidity and disability in late life—osteoarthritis, Alzheimer's disease, osteoporosis, hearing and visual impairment, and urinary incontinence (Crews & Gerber, 1994; Solomon, 1999). Older adults also frequently experience comorbidity or multiple coexisting chronic conditions (Thorpe, Widman, Wallin, Beiswanger, & Blumenthal, 1994; Yancik et al., 1996).

Risk factors for these chronic diseases include a host of genetic, behavioral, and environmental influences acting throughout the life course to contribute to disease outcomes in old age (Kuh & Ben-Shlomo, 1997). There is growing evidence that many chronic diseases of aging may be "programmed" in utero and in infancy, and that preadult influences are further modified by exposures in adulthood to produce eventual disease (Leon & Ben-Shlomo, 1997). From an evolutionary perspective, many of the chronic diseases of aging are considered to represent gene–environment interactions that were previously adaptive in human and hominid populations but are maladaptive in present ecocultural contexts (Crews & Gerber, 1994). Type II diabetes, for example, occurs more frequently in populations where, historically, fluctuating food supplies might have genetically favored individuals with a more efficient calorie metabolism, that is, a "thrifty genotype" (Neel, 1962, 1982). In contemporary environments under conditions of high caloric intake and reduced physical activity with lower energy expenditure, however, individuals with these genotypes are prone to obesity, hyperinsulinemia, and diabetes.

# **THE IMPACT OF GLOBAL AGING ON POPULATION HEALTH STATUS**

The prevalence of chronic conditions is expected to increase dramatically as a result of global population aging over the next several decades. It is estimated that the number of persons aged 60 and over worldwide will increase from 550 million in 1996 to 1.2 billion in 2025 (National Institute on Aging, 1996). In at least 50 industrialized countries in Europe, North America, and Asia, 15% or more of the population is in this age group, and in most countries, the rate of growth of the elderly population exceeds that of the population as a whole (National Institute on Aging, 1996). Moreover, the number of elderly persons in developing countries is increasing more rapidly than in developed countries, and by 2020 will account for 70% of the world's population aged 60 and over (Roca & Amaducci, 1991). Worldwide prevalence projections for diabetes illustrate the impact of population aging on the burden of chronic diseases. The number of persons aged 65 and over with diabetes is estimated to increase from about 54 million in the year 2000 to 105 million by 2025. This latter figure represents 35% of all cases among adults aged 20 and over, and the majority (58%) of older adults with diabetes in 2025 will be in developing countries (King, Aubert, & Herman, 1998).

The extension in life expectancy underlying population aging has been the result of decreased infant and maternal mortality and delayed mortality among persons aged 65 and over due to improvements in nutrition, sanitation, control of communicable diseases, and medical services (Miles & Brody, 1994). Developing countries are currently undergoing various stages of the "epidemiologic transition," that is, the shift in the major causes of morbidity and mortality from infectious and parasitic diseases to chronic diseases (Omram, 1971) that typically occurred in industrialized countries from the 19th century onward (Levison, Hastings, & Harrison, 1981; Rogers & Hackenberg, 1987; Wolleswinkel-Van den Bosch, Looman, Poppel, & Mackenbach, 1997). Modernization has also spread risk factors for many chronic diseases of aging through the "nutrition transition" to a Westernized high-fat, low-fiber diet (Popkin, 1994), increased sedentarism, obesity, and smoking, that contribute to the growing epidemics of these diseases in developing regions of the world (Bovet, 1995; Pearson, 1996, 1999).

# **ANTHROPOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES ON CHRONIC DISEASES OF AGING**

Age-related chronic diseases have been the subject of investigations by both biological and cultural anthropologists. Research within biological anthropology has focused on the population burden and distribution of chronic diseases including related genetic and environmental risk factors, and the occurrence of these diseases in paleopopulations and in non-human primates (Crews, 1990; Crews & Gerber, 1994; DeRousseau, 1994). Studies from a sociocultural framework, on the other hand, have examined older individuals' perceptions and meanings of the experience of chronic disease (e.g., Kaufmann, 1988; Silverman, Musa, Kirsch, & Siminoff, 1999; Silverman, Smola, & Musa, 2000), their psychological and behavioral strategies for self-management of a chronic condition (e.g., Mitteness, 1987), and cultural values and activities related to the care of chronically ill aged persons (e.g., Gubrium & Sankar, 1994; Henderson, 1990). Because a detailed description of the range of chronic diseases of aging is not possible here, this review focuses on two prototypical diseases of aging—osteoporosis and Alzheimer's disease.

# **TWO PROTOTYPICAL DISEASES OF AGING**

### **Osteoporosis**

Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by loss in bone mass and degeneration of bone microarchitecture resulting in increased bone fragility and vulnerability to fracture (Consensus Development Conference, 1993). Bone tissue is dynamic and is produced through a continuous "remodeling" process of formation and resorption throughout life. Growth and development during childhood and adolescence involve large increases in bone size and volume (Plato, Fox, & Tobin, 1994), and peak bone mass is achieved by approximately age 30. Age-related loss of bone begins in both men and women about ages 40 to 45 as bone resorption starts to exceed formation, and significant bone loss continues into the ninth decade (Murray, Luckey, & Meier, 1996). In women this loss occurs most rapidly for 5–10 years following menopause when bone mass can decrease at a rate up to 2% per year primarily due to decreased estrogen levels (Eisman, 1999).

**Diagnosis.** Osteoporosis is generally asymptomatic until fractures occur and, in the case of vertebral fractures, may go undiagnosed if medical attention is not sought for pain. Diagnosis of osteoporosis is based on bone mineral density (BMD) which is the most accurate measurable risk factor for fracture in the elderly (Murray et al., 1996). Existing technologies for determining BMD are based on bone scanning with gamma-ray or X-ray densitometry and ultrasound (Gunby & Morley, 1994), and include singlephoton and single X-ray absorptiometry (SPA/SXA), dual photon and dual X-ray absorptiometry (DPA/DXA), quantitative computed tomography (QCT), quantitative ultrasound (QUS), and radiographic absorptiometry (RA). Of these, DXA is the most widely used method for spine and hip measurements, while SXA/SPA are the most frequently used techniques for determining BMD in the limbs (Center & Eisman, 1997).

### **Cross-Cultural Distribution and Risk Factors.**

The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed a definition of osteoporosis based on a BMD measurement of greater than 2.5 standard deviations below the young adult mean (WHO Study Group, 1994). Normative values for BMD are based on Caucasian women, and their validity for other racial groups and for men remains to be determined (Melton, 1997; Samsioe, 1997). However, there is a growing number of cross-cultural studies on the population distribution of BMD among older adults in Asia (Hashimoto, Sakata, & Yoshimura, 1997; Lau, 1997; Lau et al., 1999; Liu, Zhao, Ding, & Zhou, 1997; Rowe, Jung, & Lee, 1997; Taechakraichana, Angkawanich, Panyakhamlerd, & Limpaphayom, 1998; Tsai & Tai, 1997; Yoshimura et al., 1998), South America (Mautalen & Pumarino, 1997), and Africa (Daniels, Pettifor, Schnitzler, Moodley, & Zachen, 1997) which, in combination with fracture incidence data, can be used to set population-specific cutoff values for diagnosing osteoporosis.

In the absence of large-scale population studies of BMD, incidence rates of hip fracture have been used as proxy indicators for the population distribution of osteoporosis. In general, this research suggests that osteoporosis is most common in Caucasians, followed by Asians, and populations of African ancestry, respectively (Samsioe, 1997). Fractures of the hip, vertebrae, and distal forearm (wrist) are the most prevalent types of osteoporotic fractures, with hip fractures having the highest associated mortality, morbidity, and costs (Melton, 1995). Worldwide, there were an estimated 1.7 million incident hip fractures in 1990, with almost half of these occurring in Europe and North America. This number is expected to reach 6.3 million by the year 2050 (Cooper, Campion, & Melton, 1992), and consistent with the aging of populations in less-developed countries, over 70% of these hip fractures will be in Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, and Africa.

Risk factors for the development of osteoporosis include genetic, hormonal, and environmental and lifestyle causes (Khoury, 1998; Nguyen, Howard, Kelly, & Eisman, 1998; Salamone et al., 1996) although the relative contributions of these influences have yet to be quantified (Center & Eisman, 1997; Samsioe, 1997). A number of genetic factors have been implicated in determining peak bone mass and possibly in bone turnover. These include genes for the receptors for vitamin D and estrogen, the transforming growth factor-B, type I collagen, and the regulation of cytokines involved in bone turnover. Leanness and other features of body composition are other genetically mediated influences on bone mass (Daniels et al., 1997; Nelson, Feingold, Bolin, & Parfitt, 1991; Yoshimura et al., 1998). Differences in bone metabolism have been demonstrated, for example, between Blacks and Whites in the United States with Blacks having lower bone turnover and higher bone mass (Weinstein & Bell, 1988). Overall, hereditary factors are estimated to account for up to 80% of population variability in peak bone mass (Center & Eisman, 1997).

Other known risk factors for low BMD include late onset of menarche, a diet low in calcium and Vitamin D, sedentary lifestyle, excessive consumption of alcohol and caffeine, smoking, and the use of certain medications, that is, corticosteriods (Gamble, 1995). From a historical perspective, archeological evidence indicates that a reduction in bone density accompanied the shift from hunter–gathering to agriculture, presumably from a reduction in levels of physical activity and a change in diet that may have reduced the absorption of calcium (Agerwal & Grynpas, 1996). Age-related bone loss is also evident in the paleopathological record (Plato et al., 1994), although various examples of excessive bone rarefaction in pre-menopausal women point to factors such as multiple pregnancies and prolonged lactation combined with chronic dietary deficiency as possible etiologic factors (MacLennan, 1999). Findings on agedependent bone loss in female skeletons from two more recent historical populations in Britain indicate that their rate of bone loss was less than in their contemporary counterparts, presumably due to their higher levels of physical activity (MacLennan, 1999).

**Prevention and Treatment.** Strategies for the prevention of osteoporosis include maximizing the attainment of peak bone mass beginning in childhood and adolescence through adequate consumption of dietary calcium and regular, weight-bearing physical activity, and slowing the rate of age-related bone loss (Scott & Hochberg, 1998). Bone density measurement is recommended for persons with risk factors for osteoporosis, and treatment is indicated for those meeting the WHO criteria for osteoporosis (Juby, 1999). The principal treatment for osteoporosis is the use of agents that retard bone resorption, including calcium, estrogen, calcitonin, and biphosphonates. Hormone replacement therapy (estrogen and estrogen/progestogen combinations) has been shown to be effective for both the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis with a demonstrated decrease in the risk of fractures (Murray et al., 1995).

**Sociocultural Studies of Osteoporosis.** Despite the frequent disability and physical disfigurement associated with this condition, little attention has been given to osteoporosis from a sociocultural viewpoint (Gold & Drezner, 1995). Seanne (2000) has examined behavioral and psychological strategies used by elderly women with osteoporosis to negotiate and protect their sense of self in the face of meanings associated with aging and with the disease. Other qualitative research (Paier, 1996) has documented the negative psychosocial impact of vertebral osteoporotic fractures on older women's selfperceived physical functioning, appearance, and social connectedness.

### **Alzheimer's Disease**

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common adult onset neurodegenerative disorder and accounts for up to 60% of all age-related cases of dementia in Western societies (Woodruff-Pak & Papka, 1999). The disease is characterized by a progressive decline in cognitive abilities, personality, and psychomotor functioning over a period averaging from 8 to 10 years (Filley, 1995; Morris, 1994). Memory impairment is the principal feature of AD and several distinct stages of the disease, often classified as mild, moderate, and severe, are recognized (Morris, 1994). Early manifestations of the disease include the inability to recall recent events, difficulties with wordfinding, and geographic or temporal disorientation. As memory loss grows over the course of the disease, the individual's ability to carry out even simple routine activities is affected, language output and comprehension decline, and behavioral problems, such as wandering and restlessness, aggression, and suspiciousness appear. In advanced AD, the affected individual is totally functionally dependent due to severe dementia, and is typically mute and incontinent.

**Diagnosis.** Definitive diagnosis of AD requires cerebral biopsy or postmortem examination. Neuropathological changes associated with AD include loss of neurons in the medial temporal and frontal cortices, neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, and B-amyloid deposits (Franklin & Nelson, 1998). A decrease in the neurotransmitter acetylcholine has also been correlated with decline in memory and cognition in AD. Clinical criteria for the differential diagnosis of probable AD include progressive deficits in memory and other cognitive functions or personality that are sufficient to interfere with the person's ability to conduct usual daily activities in the absence of any other systemic or brain diseases (Morris, 1994). These deficits are identified through neurologic examination, brain imaging, and neuropsychological testing (Filley, 1995). Considerable methodologic work has been done on the development of culturally appropriate diagnostic instruments for AD (e.g., Chandra, Ganguli, Ratcliff et al., 1998).

**Cross-Cultural Distribution and Risk Factors.** Research on AD suggests a complex etiology involving interactions of biological and genetic variables with a range of environmental and lifestyle exposures (Radebaugh, Buckholtz, & Khachaturian 1996). Age is the most widely recognized risk factor for AD: the prevalence and incidence of AD increase with age in all populations in which it has been investigated. Varying prevalence rates for dementia among older adults have been reported for North American, European, and Asian populations with estimates ranging from 2% to 11% in persons aged 65 and over and 30%–50% in those aged 85 and over (Larson & Imai, 1996). These populations differ, moreover, in the relative proportions of AD and vascular dementia. Among the Western, predominantly Caucasian study populations, between 50% and 70% of the rate in attributed to AD and 12%–20% to vascular disease (Graves et al., 1996). Most studies of Asian populations, on the other hand, have ascribed between 30% and 60% of dementia cases to vascular disease, and approximately 15%–30% to AD (Graves et al., 1996). Information about the incidence of AD worldwide is generally limited (Roca, 1994).

A confirmed genetic risk factor for AD in some populations is the E-4 allelle of the gene for apolipoprotein E (APOE), a serum cholesterol carrier protein which has been associated with increased B-amyloid deposition. APOE4 has been associated with early-onset AD and with both sporadic and familial forms of late-onset AD.

#### **Conclusion 315**

The distribution of the APOE4 allelle has been shown to vary both within and among populations (Kalaria et al., 1997; Pericak-Vance et al., 1996). A comparison of APOE4 frequencies in various developed and African countries showed relatively high frequencies in African populations (up to 37% in South African Bushmen) compared with Caucasian American, European, and Asian populations (Kalaria et al., 1997). In addition, the effect of the allelle may vary across environments. Relatively high frequencies of APOE4 were found among elderly non-demented East Africans, for example (Kalaria et al., 1997). A number of cross-cultural epidemiologic studies aimed at disentangling genetic and environmental risk factors for AD are currently underway (Chandra, Ganguli, Pandav et al., 1998; Hendrie et al., 1995; White et al., 1996). A study of the incidence of AD in persons aged 65 and over of common genetic heritage—African Americans in Indiana and Africans in Ibadan, Nigeria (Hendrie et al., 2001) revealed higher rates of dementia, including AD, among the former than the latter. In addition, there was only a marginally significant association between AD and APOE4 among the African Americans, and no significant association between the gene and the disease among the Africans.

Other possible risk factors that have been evaluated for their association with AD include head trauma with a loss of consciousness, history of depression, family history of certain disorders (dementia, Down's syndrome, Parkinson's disease), low level of education, late maternal age, hypothyroidism, and environmental exposure to toxins (Roca, 1994). A definitive list of risk factors for AD remains to be established, however, and the relationship of many of these risk factors with AD in non-Western populations has yet to be investigated.

**Prevention and Treatment.** Currently, curative treatment is not available for AD. A number of drugs designed to enhance cholenergic function, however, have been successful in producing a temporary slowing in cognitive decline with an improvement of behavioral symptoms in some patients with early AD (Giacobini, 2000). Three of these cholinesterase inhibitors, tacrine, rivastigmine, and donepezil, are currently registered for use in the United States and Europe. Estrogen, which also affects several neurotransmitter systems, is thought to improve cognitive function in women with AD, although findings on its ability to prevent or delay AD are still inconclusive (Hirai, 2000). Based on the observation that patients with rheumatoid arthritis have a very low prevalence of AD, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are being evaluated for their effectiveness against AD in which areas of the brain most affected by neurodegenerative changes also show evidence of inflammation (Hirai, 2000). Various antioxidants, such as Vitamin E and ginkgo biloba, a herbal extract with effects on cholinergic function, are used as complementary medical treatments for memory problems, and have been shown to have modest efficacy in slowing the progression of cognitive symptoms (LeBars, Kieser, & Itil, 2000; Mix & Crews, 2000; Wettstein, 2000). Future treatment modalities for AD will likely involve combining several of these pharmacotherapies (Giacobini, 2000).

**Sociocultural Studies of Alzheimer's Disease.** The sociocultural context of AD has been investigated from several perspectives. A social constructionist framework has been used in a number of studies (Chatterji, 1998; Gubrium, 1986, 1987, 1991; Saunders, 1998; Vittoria, 1999) to examine the processes of identity maintenance in older adults with dementia by the patients themselves, by health care providers, and by family caregivers. Variations in ethnomedical beliefs about the causation of AD have also been documented among different groups within the United States (Elliott, DiMinno, Lam, & Tu, 1996; Henderson, 1989; Olson, 1999). Beliefs about dementia prevalent among traditionally oriented Chinese Americans, for example, include the interpretation of dementia as retribution for the sins of one's ancestors, spirit possession, fate, an imbalance of energy within the body, or the lack of proper orientation of important physical sites and objects with the forces of nature (Elliott et al., 1996). Henderson (1987) has also considered how the sociocultural environment in which AD exists in contemporary America acts to generate or exacerbate illness problems and how these problems are culturally managed. He discusses AD support groups as fictive kinship forms that have emerged to provide assistance to members faced with an acute care medical care system and a nuclear family kinship system that are unable to meet the needs of elders with a chronic, debilitating brain disease.

## **CONCLUSION**

With the global aging of populations, the worldwide impact of age-related chronic diseases on quality of life and societal resources will continue to grow throughout the 21st century. The holistic and cross-cultural perspective of anthropology, including biological and sociocultural research, has much to offer in terms of identifying genetic and environmental risk factors for these diseases and examining the cultural patterning of values, meanings, and activities related to older adults with these conditions and their care.

## **REFERENCES**

- Agerwal, S. C., & Grynpas, M. D. (1996). Bone quantity and quality in past populations. *Anatomical Record, 246*, 423–432.
- Bovet, P. (1995). The epidemiologic transition to chronic diseases in developing countries: Cardiovascular mortality, morbidity, and risk factors in Seychelles (Indian Ocean). *Sozial- und Preventivmedizin, 40*, 35–43.
- Center, J., & Eisman, J. (1997). The epidemiology and pathogenesis of osteoporosis. *Baillieres Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 11*, 23–62.
- Chandra, V., Ganguli, M., Pandav, R., Johnston, J., Belle, S., & DeKosky, S. T. (1998). Prevalence of Alzheimer's disease and other dementias in rural India: The Indo-U.S. study. *Neurology, 51*, 1000–1008.
- Chandra, V., Ganguli, M., Ratcliff, G., Pandav, R., Sharma, S. et al. (1998). Practical issues in cognitive screening of elderly illiterate populations in developing countries. The Indo-U.S. Cross-National Dementia Epidemiology Study. *Aging (Milano), 10*, 349–357.
- Chatterji, R. (1998). An ethnography of dementia: A case study of an Alzheimer's disease patient in the Netherlands. *Culture, Medicine, & Psychiatry, 22*, 355–382.
- Consensus Development Conference (1993). Diagnosis, prophylaxis, and treatment of osteoporosis. *American Journal of Medicine, 94*, 646–650.
- Cooper, C., Campion, C., & Melton, L. J., III (1992). Hip fractures in the elderly: A world-wide projection. *Osteoporosis International, 2*, 285–298.
- Crews, D. (1990). Anthropological issues in biological gerontology. In R. L. Rubinstein (Ed.), *Anthropology and aging* (pp. 11–38). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
- Crews, D. E., & Gerber, L. M. (1994). Chronic degenerative diseases and aging. In D. E. Crews & R. M. Garruto (Eds.), *Biological anthropology and aging* (pp. 154–181). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Daniels, E. D., Pettifor, J. M., Schnitzler, C. M., Moodley, G. P., & Zachen, D. (1997). Differences in mineral homeostasis, volumetric bone mass and femoral neck axis length in black and white South African women. *Osteoporosis International, 7*, 105–112.
- DeRousseau, C. J. (1994). Primate gerontology: An emerging discipline. In D. E. Crews & R. M. Garruto (Eds.), *Biological anthropology and aging* (pp. 127–153). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Eisman, J. A. (1999). Genetic determinants of peak bone mass. In J. Bonjour & R. C. Tsang (Eds.), *Nutrition and bone development*

(pp. 165–176) [Nestle Nutrition Workshop Series, Vol. 41]. Nestec, PA: Vevey/Lippincott-Raven.

- Elliott, K. S., DiMinno, M., Lam, D., & Tu, A. M. (1996). Working with Chinese families in the context of dementia. In G. Yeo & D. Gallagher-Thompson (Eds.), *Ethnicity and the dementias* (pp. 89–108). Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.
- Filley, C. M. (1995). Alzheimer's disease: It's irreversible but not untreatable. *Geriatrics, 50*, 18–23.
- Franklin, G. M., & Nelson, L. M. (1998). Chronic neurologic disorders. In R. C. Brownson, P. L. Remington, & J. R. Davis (Eds.), *Chronic disease epidemiology and control* (pp. 491–527). Washington, DC: American Public Health Association.
- Gamble, C. L. (1995). Osteoporosis: Making the diagnosis in patients at risk for fracture. *Geriatrics, 50*, 24–33.
- Giacobini, E. (2000). Cholinesterase inhibitor therapy stabilizes symptoms of Alzheimer disease. *Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, 14* (Suppl. 1), S3–S10.
- Gold, D. T., & Drezner, M. K. (1995). Quality of life. In B. L. Riggs & L. J. Melton, III (Eds.), *Osteoporosis* (pp. 475–486). Philadephia, PA: Lippincott-Raven.
- Graves, A. B., Larson, E. B., Edland, S. D., Bowen, J. D., McCormick, W. C., McCurry, S. M. et al. (1996). Prevalence of dementia and its subtypes in the Japanese American population of King County, Washington state. The Kame Project. *American Journal of Epidemiology, 144*, 760–771.
- Gubrium, J. F. (1986). *Oldtimers and Alzheimer's: The descriptive organization of senility* [Contemporary Ethnographic Studies]. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
- Gubrium, J. F. (1987). Structuring and destructuring the course of illness: The Alzheimer's disease experience. *Sociology of Health and Illness, 9*, 1–24.
- Gubrium, J. F. (1991). The social preservation of mind: The Alzheimer's disease experience. In B. B. Hess & E. W. Markson (Eds.), *Growing old in America* (4th ed., pp. 151–168). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
- Gubrium, J. F., & Sankar, A. (1994). *The home care experience*. Newbury Park, PA: Sage.
- Gunby, M. C., & Morley, J. E. (1994). Epidemiology of bone loss with aging. *Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 10*, 557–574.
- Hashimoto, T., Sakata, K., & Yoshimura, N. (1997). Epidemiology of osteoporosis in Japan. *Osteoporosis International, 7* (Suppl. 3), S99–S102.
- Henderson, J. N. (1987). Mental disorders among the elderly: Dementia and its sociocultural correlates. In P. Silverman (Ed.), *The elderly as modern pioneers* (pp. 357–374). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Henderson, J. N. (1989). Alzheimer's disease in cultural context. In J. Sokolovsky (Ed.), *Cultural context of aging* (pp. 315–330). South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey.
- Henderson, J. N. (1990). Anthropology, health, and aging. In R. L. Rubinstein (Ed.), *Anthropology and aging* (pp. 39–68). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
- Hendrie, H. C., Ogunniyi, A., Hall, K. S., Baiyewu, O., Unversagt, F. W., Gureje, O. et al. (2001). Incidence of dementia and Alzheimer disease in 2 communities: Yoruba residing in Ibadan, Nigeria, and African Americans residing in Indianapolis, Indiana. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 285*, 739–747.