# Chapter 2

# The Transformation of Tribes: The Terms of Discourse

There are more than 400 groups in Indian society officially designated as scheduled tribes. All these groups have been undergoing changes, observed and described by various people for nearly a century. The consequences and implications of these changes, however, have been seriously misconstrued. The conventional wisdom among anthropologists has been that when a tribe undergoes change resulting from the end of its isolation and its integration with the larger society, sooner or later, and with unfailing regularity, it becomes a caste. While this may have been true to a greater or lesser extent until the 1930s and 1940s, the argument is no longer valid. Yet anthropologists have continued making such a generalization. Moreover, this generalization is based on an inadequacy of data, concepts, and arguments. While tribes continue to undergo changes—and these changes are of many kinds—these no longer transform the tribes into castes. For example, the Oraons today practice various religions and speak more than one language; they earn their livelihoods from a variety of occupations, both agricultural and non-agricultural. Yet, despite this enormous differentiation, they are still Oraons in some socially significant sense. They have not become a caste with any definite standing in the social hierarchy of the caste system. This argument has implications not only for an understanding of tribes but also for an understanding of Indian society as a whole. The most important implication is that new castes are no longer being formed, whether by the transformation of tribes into castes or by any other means. Tribes have, of course, become peasants and they have also been socially differentiated, but, contrary to conventional wisdom, this process has occurred without any loss of their own distinct identities.

Caste and Tribe

[The hallmark of Indian society has been described as diversity or heterogeneity. Of the distinguishing characteristics of Indian society, religion, language, region, caste, and tribe have been considered the most important. However, none of these categories has been as contentious, conceptually and theoretically, as the category of tribe.] It has generally been said that the categories of religion, language, region, and caste in India have been rooted in the consciousness and the social relations of the people at large. They have also existed in history over large swathes of time. Such has not been the case with the category of tribe. The latter was added to the list mentioned above by the British in the nineteenth century. The category of tribe is hence seen as a colonial construction (Béteille 1995; Singh 1993). In an attempt to understand Indian social reality, the category of tribe has nevertheless come to be used extensively in social science literature in general, and in sociological and anthropological literature in particular.

At the time when the British began to write on Indian society, the term tribe was used in more than one sense in general parlance. In one sense, it was used to refer to a group of people claiming descent from a common ancestor. In another sense, it was used to refer to a group of people living in primitive or barbarous conditions; this latter sense emerged during the colonial period. The usage in the former sense has a longer history than the usage in the latter sense, when the term came to be associated with the colonial encounter. Yet the sense of tribe that developed later (namely the primitive or barbarous living conditions) has come to dominate anthropological writings. The concept of tribe has thus undergone changes in the course of history. Early British writings on India did not study groups or communities from the perspective of the caste/tribe category, which was a later development. The Asiatic Society of Bengal, which is credited with piloting the studies of Indian society, defined the scope of its mission as the study of 'nature' and 'man'. Hence, the sense in which British ethnographers used the term tribe in India, especially in the early phase, is not very clear. The impression one gets is that the usage of the term in the sense of common ancestry may have been more common than the usage in the sense of primitive or barbarous living conditions. The usage of terms such as Rajput, Ahir, or Jat tribes, as well as the synonymous use of the terms tribe and caste in eighteenth-century writings on India, tend to

support such a view. The two terms were also used in a cognate manner, as one can see in Risley's use of the phrase 'tribes and castes of India'. This shows that ethnographers had difficulty differentiating one from the other, at least in the initial stage. Perhaps there was little empirical evidence that could be of help in this regard. Anthropologists may also have lacked conceptual clarity in their minds as to the categories of caste and tribe.

That the latter was also the case is obvious from the way in which administrative-cumcensus officials handled the two categories in the census reports of 1881, when the first 'proper' all-India census was undertaken. The term used there was not 'tribe' but 'forest tribe', and that too as a subheading within the broader category of agricultural and pastoral castes. A somewhat more serious effort at drawing a distinction is reflected in the later censuses. Risley and Gait, who were in charge of the 1901 and 1911 censuses respectively, added the category of 'so-called animists' to the list of caste and others, and included against each the number of people professing to follow Hinduism and animism. Marten followed the same pattern in the 1921 census, except that he changed the heading from 'animism' to 'tribal religion'. Hutton continued with the distinction between tribes and others in terms of religion. Tribes were distinguished from others by the type of religion they practiced, such as Hinduism, Christianity, Islam, etc. It is interesting to note that tribes were distinguished from others not on the basis of caste, or caste-like features, but religion. For Hutton, then, the tribe–caste distinction can be maintained only on the basis of religion. Tribes were thus defined as those that practiced 'animism'. Of course, officials in charge of the census operation were not satisfied with this basis for the demarcation of tribes. They were of the view that it was difficult to distinguish the religion of the tribes from the religion of the lower strata of Hindu society. Keeping in mind these observations, Ghurye (1963: 205) went to the extent of describing the tribes as 'Backward Hindus'. He writes that so-called aboriginals who form the bulk of the scheduled tribes, and who have been designated in the censuses as Animists, are best described as Backward Hindus. The criteria worked out for making such a distinction were thus far from satisfactory.

In the post-independence period, there was a greater concern about, and more systematic efforts aimed at, distinguishing tribe from caste. Yet even

today, scholars have not arrived at a systematically worked out criterion. In general, they have tried to distinguish one from the other on the basis of many criteria. It has generally been assumed that the two represent two different forms of social organizations. Caste has been treated as a system regulated by the hereditary division of labour, hierarchy, the principles of purity and pollution, and civic and religious disabilities. On the other hand, tribes have been characterized by the absence of features attributed to the caste system. The two types of social organizations are also seen as being governed by different sets of principles. It is said that kinship bonds govern tribal societies. Hence, all individuals are considered to be equal. Lineage and clan tend to be the chief units of ownership as well as of production and consumption. In contrast, inequality, dependency, and subordination are seen as integral features of caste society. It is also said that tribes do not differentiate between the utilitarian and the non-utilitarian functions of religion as sharply as caste groups do. Caste groups tend to maintain different forms, practices, and behaviour patterns for each of these two functions of religion. In contrast, tribes maintain similar forms, practices, and behaviour patterns for both these functions of religion. Tribes and castes are also shown to be different in respect of the psychological disposition of their members. Tribes are said to take a direct, unalloyed satisfaction in the pleasures of the senses, whether in food, drink, sex, dance, or song. As against this, people in caste-based societies are seen as having ambivalent attitudes towards such pleasures. Further, in jati society, the village is expected to be culturally heterogeneous, with each jati following a unique combination of customary practices. Tribes, on the other hand, expect their society to be homogeneous, or at least not necessarily heterogeneous (Mandelbaum 1970: 577). Based on these descriptions, certain images and propositions have been put forward with respect to the concept of tribe in India. These include the absence of exploitative classes and organized state structures; multifunctionality of kinship bonds; allpervasive religion; segmentary character of socioeconomic units; frequent cooperation in the pursuit of common goals; shallow history; distinct taboos, customs, and moral codes; youth dormitory; low level of technology; common name, territory, descent, language, culture, etc. (Pathy 1992: 50).

Paradoxically, however, these sets of denominators on the basis of which tribes are differentiated from non-tribes (that is, castes) are not subscribed to by a large number of groups identified as tribes in India. Even groups that do subscribe to these attributes do not stand in the same or similar relation to each other with respect to these attributes. At one end, are groups that subscribe to these features in toto; at the other, are those groups that hardly exhibit these attributes. The large majority, however, stand somewhere in between the groups subscribing to the attributes referred to above to a greater or lesser degree. Hence, assumptions relating to tribes have frequently proved to be misleading and fallacious. Disregarding the differences among groups in relation to the subscription to such attributes, they have all been identified as tribes. The only thing that they seem to share in common is, as Béteille puts it, that they all stand more or less outside of Hindu civilization. Since the identification of tribes has political and administrative implications, little effort has been made to examine it critically. Rather, the category of tribes generally has been accepted uncritically by social scientists.

### Transformation of Tribes into Castes

In colonial ethnography, the concern shown by British administrator– scholars about marking off tribe from caste also led to the rise of a particular conception of tribe. That is, tribes were groups that lived in isolation, and hence had no interaction with the larger population. In contrast, the main concern in postcolonial ethnography has been to show the close interaction of tribes with the larger society or civilization. The relation has, of course, been conceptualized in different ways. Sinha (1958) views tribes as a dimension of the Little Tradition, which cannot be understood adequately unless it is seen in relation to the Great Tradition. In contrast, Béteille (1986: 316) sees tribes as remaining outside of the state and civilization in those contexts where tribe and civilization coexist, as in India and the Islamic world. Thus, though the distinction is maintained, the two are treated not as being isolated but in interaction with each other. Even when tribes have been conceived of as remaining outside the state, which has been the case most often, they have not been treated as falling outside the influence of civilization. Hence, tribes have been viewed as being in

constant interaction with civilization. Consequently, tribal society has not been seen as static, but as engaged processes of change.

One of the dominant ways in which the transformation of tribal society has been conceived is in terms of tribes moving in the direction of becoming a part of civilization by being absorbed into the society that represents civilization. Historians and anthropologists have made such an observation in the context of the past. Kosambi (1975) has referred to tribal elements being fused into the general society. Similarly, Bose (1941) has referred to tribes being absorbed into Hindu society. Such a claim has not gone unchallenged. Many anthropological works of the post-independence period still point to phenomena such as tribes being absorbed or assimilated into Hindu society or tribes becoming castes. Tribes are said to have accepted the ethos of the caste structure and to have become absorbed within it. They are treated as being hardly differentiable from the neighbouring Hindu peasantry. Some well-known tribes in this category are said to be the Bhils, the Bhumijs, the Majhis, the Khasas, and the Raj-Gonds. In fact, much of the social anthropological discourse on tribes has been couched primarily in terms of tribes being transformed into castes. Nowhere is this better reflected than in the classification of tribes provided by eminent anthropologists. The classification has been made differently by different scholars, but all invariably refer to a stage of incorporation into Hindu society. Roy Burman (1972) in his earlier work classified tribes as (1) those incorporated into Hindu society; (2) those positively oriented towards Hindu society; (3) those negatively oriented towards Hindu society; and (4) those indifferent to Hindu society. Vidyarthi and Rai (1977) talked of tribes as (1) those living in forests; (2) those living in rural areas; (3) those who were semi-acculturated; (4) those who were acculturated; and (5) those who were assimilated. The criteria for classification used by Vidyarthi and Rai suffer from a lack of logical consistency since some categories in the classification are based on ecological consideration and others on level of acculturation. Elwin (1944) divided tribes into four categories. These were (1) the purest of the pure tribal groups; (2) those in contact with the plains and therefore undergoing changes but still retaining the tribal mode of living; (3) those constituting the lower rung of Hindu society; (4) those adopting the Hindu faith completely and living in a modern style. Elwin

even went to the extent of arguing that the whole aboriginal problem was one of how to enable the tribesmen of the first and the second classes to advance directly into the fourth class without having to suffer the despair and degradation of the third. Dube (1977) also classifies tribes along almost the same lines as those described by Elwin. Many others, including Bose (1941, 1971) and Fuchs (1973) have not made specific classifications *of tribal population* but do state that tribes occupy either the lower or the higher rungs of the caste hierarchy by being absorbed into Hindu society.

Some scholars caution us about such a conception of tribal transformation. Roy Burman (1983, 1994) in his later writings argues that if the transformation of tribe into peasant is not to be taken for granted, then the transformation of tribe into caste in the Indian context can also hardly be taken for granted. This he does by providing a critique of the Bose and Srinivas models. He points to a lack of protection from the system of caste for Hinduized tribes, the rationale for the transformation of tribe into caste in Bose's model, and the empirical reality of contra-Sanskritic movements against Srinivas's model of Sanskritization. Pathy (1992: 50–51) questions the dominant trend of understanding the transformation of tribe into caste on account of a lack of historical and contextual evidence. Yet he endorses Kosambi's observation that the entire course of Indian history shows the fusion of tribal elements into the general society.

The transformation of tribes into castes is seen to occur through certain methods, which have been conceptualized in different ways. Kosambi (1975) considers the adoption of the technology of Hindu society by tribes as the main method of integration into Hindu society. Bose (1941) talks of the Hindu method of absorption that takes place under the mode of production. He says that tribes are drawn into the system because they find protection within it, the system being non-competitive. Sanskritization is also seen as a method of absorption. The other significant method of tribal absorption into Hindu society is what Sinha (1962, 1987) calls state formation. He states that the processes of acculturation, Hinduization, and social stratification in village society cannot be understood properly unless the data are examined in the broader context of the formation of principalities. He argues that state formation provided the definitive sociopolitical framework for the transformation of the tribal system into the regional caste system.

#### Sanskritization

As noted earlier, it has generally been held that tribes in contact with nontribes have been undergoing change, and that this change has been in the direction of absorption into Hindu society through complex social processes. Scholars have conceptualized the processes at work in various ways. This is evident from the range of terms used to describe these processes, the most common terms being Sanskritization and Hinduization. Anthropologists have also used such specific terms as 'Kshatriyaization' and 'Rajputization' in place of Sanskritization. These terms describe different social processes at work, though in reality these processes coincide and overlap. Despite this, there has been a tendency among social scientists to use them interchangeably or synonymously. Often the difficulties arising from the use of such terms are overcome by the use of such generic terms as acculturation, assimilation, and absorption. However, the main processes through which the transformation of tribe into caste is understood are Hinduization and Sanskritization.

Do processes such as Hinduization and Sanskritization that occur in tribal society lead to its dislocation and pave the way for its absorption into Hindu society? Does tribe by virtue of becoming acculturated cease to be tribe and become caste? Almost all the scholars referred to earlier tend to agree that this is the case. To these scholars, tribes eventually cease to exist as entities independent of the caste society from which they were earlier differentiated. While this may have been the case in the past, it is no longer true of India in the post-independence period.

Since the acculturation of tribes to Hindu society, or the transformation of tribes into castes, is attributed to the processes of Sanskritization and Hinduization, it is important at the outset to examine the appropriateness of these terms and concepts, especially Sanskritization. Sanskritization is seen as a process whereby the communities placed lower on the caste hierarchy emulate the way of life of the dominant caste of the region. Through this process of emulation, they are able to move up the caste hierarchy. At times, more specific terms such as Kshatriyaization and Rajputization have been

used to describe this process. This process was used to understand and describe the dynamics of social change in caste society. Sociologists and social anthropologists have extended this term and concept to also describe a certain process of change taking place in tribal society. Is it valid to extend the meaning of the term and concept to describe the transformations being witnessed in tribal society? In my view, the extension, in the sense in which it is being used, is far from appropriate in the context of tribal society. It is inappropriate because it assumes that tribes are, first of all, part of Hindu society, and, second, that they are part of caste society. Tribes have, however, been conceived of as tribes precisely because they are outside Hindu society as well as outside caste society. Can there be a process of Sanskritization as it has been conceived without a tribe first becoming part of caste Hindu society? The question that arises is whether Hinduization is the same as Sanskritization. The two are, of course, interrelated, but it may be more appropriate to describe the process involved in the context of tribes as Hinduization rather than Sanskritization. This is so because climbing up the caste hierarchy is not the overriding concern among tribes. Of course, it is not possible to conceive of the Hindu faith and practices outside the caste structure. Hinduization thus invariably entails the assumption of a caste status. But the caste status that is accorded to tribes is said to be a low-caste status. If this is the case, where is the process of social mobility in the case of tribes? What is it that the tribes gain through this process? They have not made a claim to or a demand for a higher caste status (Hardiman 1987: 158–59).

Rather, it is outsiders who impose such a status on tribes. In fact, even after undergoing Hinduization, tribes by and large remain outside the hierarchical structure of Hindu society. If at all there have been such claims, these have been made, as we shall see, only after the tribes have been drawn into the larger social structure of the neighbouring Hindu and linguistic community. The case of the Meteis and the Koch-Rajbongshis may be taken as points of reference. Unlike others, the two communities had taken to Hinduism as a whole. Yet it was not clear what caste status and caste name they assumed after the adoption of Hinduism. They claimed Kshatriya status, but this claim was made long after their adoption of the Hindu way of life. Moreover, the claim was made for the entire community, and not for

a segment of it. Elaborate caste differentiation did not exist among them. If at all there were Brahmins, they were immigrants. In Manipur, they were not from among the Meteis, but belonged to other ethnic communities and were not considered part of Metei society. The latter too saw themselves as different from the Meteis. This has also been the case with the Koch-Rajbongshis, who had not only embraced Hinduism but had also adopted the Bengali and Assamese languages. Yet their integration into the dominant regional community had been far from complete. In fact, they were addressed and identified more by their ethnic names than by their caste name. Indeed, it is not certain that they have any caste name at all. That they have been making claims to Kshatriya status is an entirely different story.

The problem with the concept of Sanskritization in the case of tribes does not end here. There is also a problem of the reference group. It is far from clear from the literature as to which caste groups the tribes (barring those with a royal lineage) emulated in their respective regions. The royal lineage has invariably emulated the Rajputs in the Hindu caste structure and has entered into matrimonial alliances with them. Thus, whereas the upper strata of tribal society became integrated into Hindu caste society, the subjects under their kingdom continued to live outside Hindu society, though the process of Hinduization may have taken place among them. Climbing the ladder of caste hierarchy was not their main concern. Given this, it would perhaps be more appropriate to speak of Hinduization rather than Sanskritization in the context of tribes in India. Further, if at all tribes consider some castes as superior, this is not because of their caste status but because they happen to be jagirdars, thicadars, lambadars, etc. The question that may be asked then is why tribes Hinduize themselves even though they attain no higher status. Do they want to be absorbed into the larger society? This may have been the case in the past, but it is no longer the case today. Today, the process of acculturation to the ideas, values, and practices of the dominant community is more a matter of being like the dominant community than a matter of being part of that society by assuming some kind of caste status within it.

Hinduization

It is thus apparent that tribes have been described as castes more in reference to Hinduization than Sanskritization. Indeed, this seems to be more often than not the basis for describing tribes as castes in the social anthropological literature. And yet can they be described as castes just because they have become Hinduized? Is the process of Hinduization sufficient for designating a group as a caste? Is it not possible for a tribe to be Hinduized and yet remain outside the caste system, namely to be governed by the social organizational principles of a tribe rather than those of a caste? Questions such as these have either not been given sufficient attention or have been overlooked in studies in which tribes have been modelled on the caste system or incorporated into the civilizational framework. If Hindu society cannot be understood outside caste society, then the transformation of tribe into caste or Hindu society, as scholars have been arguing, is problematic. Indeed, the whole argument for the transformation of tribe into caste seems to be misplaced, and even erroneous.

Theoretically, it is possible to become Hindu in the sense of embracing a form of the Hindu faith and practices without becoming part of Hindu society in the sense of accepting Hindu social organization, namely caste. If, on the other hand, Hindu society and caste organization are inseparable, then Hinduization alone cannot account for the transformation of tribe into caste. In fact, there are other aspects to which sociologists and social anthropologists need to pay attention. Do tribes actually become a part of the structure of caste society after they have taken to the process of Hinduization/Sanskritization? What caste name do they bear? What position do they occupy in the caste hierarchy? It is also not clear whether the groups involved in the process occupy the same position, or whether there is a hierarchical arrangement among them as has been the case with the untouchables. Also, what caste roles do they assume, say, in villages where both tribes and castes live, as in most villages of Chhotanagpur, where caste groups like the Banias, the Brahmans, and the Rajputs live in the same village as the tribals? In fact, the nature of the interaction between tribes and castes is governed more by market forces and the force of economic interdependence than the purity–pollution principles. Further, their life in the village continues to be grounded on the principle of kinship

and on the absence of hierarchical ordering. In short, tribes do not enter into any kind of social, cultural, and ritual dependence within the caste structure of Hindu society even after their acculturation to the Hindu belief system and practices. It is doubtful, then, if it is appropriate to study people described as tribes from the perspective of the caste structure. This is precisely, however, what anthropologists have done. They have tried to find caste where it does not exist.

It should also be noted that tribes have not moved into processes like Hinduization or Sanskritization as entire groups. The general pattern among them is that only a section adopts a new pattern of life provided either by Christianity or Hinduism or Islam. If this is the case more often than not, can we describe some people of the same group as a caste and others as a tribe? Can one and the same group be caste and tribe at the same time? The social situation of a village where tribes form a minority and where they are absorbed into Hindu society is extended to villages and regions where they may not be a minority and where, even if the process of Hinduization is taking place, they may not abandon their old affinities and identities. However, where tribes have taken to Hinduization as a whole, they have, to a great extent, moulded themselves along caste lines. They have even identified themselves as castes, and others too have addressed them as castes rather than as tribes. The Koch-Rajbongshis of Assam and West Bengal, referred to above, may be taken as a case in point. But the phenomenon of the group as a whole adapting to a different value system is rather rare. Even where such a thing has happened, it has not given rise to a hierarchical caste structure. The group as a whole tends in general to belong to the same stratum. Nor is the group adequately integrated into the caste structure of the neighbouring regional community.

In examining the question of the transformation of tribe into caste, it is not enough to limit the discussion only to the relationship between tribes and caste society. There is also a need to look into the question of how tribes themselves perceive, identify with, and relate to caste society. How did tribes perceive themselves after they had taken to certain aspects of Hindu beliefs and practices? Did they perceive and identify themselves as tribes or as castes? The important ways through which tribes took recourse to the process of Hinduization or Sanskritization are what anthropologists

have described as a 'religious/cultural movement'. This movement has been described more popularly as the Bhagat movement among tribes. In fact, despite the process, of Hinduization or Sanskritization, tribes do not set aside a section of themselves as caste and another as tribe. The Hinduized tribes are not treated as having moved away from the status of tribe. Rather, tribes are categorized into different groups depending on the type of religious values they have chosen to adopt. They are, therefore, variously described as Christians, Bhagats, Sarnas, etc. It is interesting to note that tribes, even when they have been Hinduized, do not describe themselves as Hindus but as Bhagats. It is outsiders, census officials, and anthropologists who have tended to describe them as 'Hindus'. Anthropologists have even been prone to describing them as castes. Tribes, however, do not identify and designate themselves as belonging to different castes in the sense used and understood by outsiders and social scientists. Nowhere is this aspect of distinctive identity more evident than in the movements launched by tribes, especially those pertaining to autonomy, land, forest, and employment. In these movements, the divide between caste and tribe has been relatively sharp. And yet tribes that have been Hinduized have shown solidarity with groups described as tribes as against those belonging to the caste category. In short, the process of Hinduization is necessary but not sufficient for tribes to be integrated into the structure of Hindu society, namely caste society. To be integrated, tribes must be drawn into the social organization of the caste. However, this is generally not an empirical reality.

## Language

The foregoing discussion points to the fact that it is not possible to become a caste without first being integrated into the structure of Hindu society. Where such integration does occur, a very important process is the acculturation of tribes to the language of the regional community.

It is interesting to note that castes as a form of social organization are operative only within a linguistic community. Hence, it is possible for tribe to become caste only after it has been assimilated into the regional linguistic community, such as the Bengali or the Oriya or the Assamese communities. This process of acculturation—which is central to the integration of tribe into the regional community, and therefore into caste

society—has unfortunately been glossed over by sociologists and social anthropologists. In fact, it is not possible to become integrated into caste society without first becoming integrated into the linguistic community. Correspondingly, tribes were not only differentiated in opposition to castes but also in opposition to the dominant community of the region. The dominant community was invariably a linguistic community. Besides representing a different language, it also represented a different religion, customs, social organization, and way of life. This raises an interesting question, namely whether tribes after they have become Hinduized, and even 'caste-like', should be treated either as castes or as tribes if they continue to maintain their language. After all, as noted earlier, tribes have also been seen in opposition to language or the dominant linguistic community. Can they be both tribes and castes at the same time? This seems far from tenable, as the two not only constitute different linguistic communities but also contrasting types of social organizations. Are tribes, then, to be treated as castes just because there has been a process of Hinduization at work among them? Do tribes by Hinduizing and Sanskritizing themselves become castes while retaining their language, culture, customs, social practices, and so on?

What is important to note here is the influence of Hinduism or Hindus on tribes. This, however, does not make them Hindus. To be Hindus, they need to be drawn into the structure of Hindu society, which is possible only by being drawn into the structure of the regional linguistic community. Tribes are differentiated from non-tribes not on the basis of religion alone. That is what colonial ethnographers argued. Anthropologists have differentiated tribes from others, however, on the basis of more than one criterion. Of these criteria, the most important have been language and social organization. Tribes have thus been treated as tribes precisely because they have been outside the dominant regional community, and thereby outside the complex of civilization. However, even with changes at the level of culture, including religion and language, one is still not sure if tribes could be said to have become castes. Of course, much was dependent on the nature of their linkage with the social structure of the regional linguistic and Hindu society. Indeed, what seems to me to be the most crucial prerequisites for the integration of tribes into the structure of the regional

community are not only religion and language but also the organizational structure of the regional community. Of all the aspects of acculturation, acculturation to language is, to my mind, more important than acculturation to religion, though the latter is not altogether unimportant. Unfortunately, sociologists and anthropologists have never given language the place it deserves in understanding the process of the transformation of tribe into caste. And yet without going into these questions, anthropologists have jumped to the conclusion that tribes are becoming castes or are becoming integrated into Hindu society. It is also to be noted that being drawn into a larger society does not mean that tribes cease to exist as a society. Do they, then, by virtue of cultural change occurring within society cease to be a society? Does Bengali society cease to be a society in the wake of the processes of westernization and modernization occurring within it? The paradox is that nobody ever denies the existence and identity of Bengali society, but if the same process occurs within tribal society, the general trend is to negate its existence. The reality that tribes exist as a society as much as other societies exist is, unfortunately, denied to tribal society when it undergoes change in the context of its encounter with the larger society. Anthropologists have been quick to incorporate them into the larger society at the slightest sign of change among them. In their zeal to emphasize change or the acculturation process, the aspect of continuity—about which anthropologists talk so fondly in the context of the larger Indian reality has been completely overlooked in the context of tribal social reality.

This discussion shows that the conclusions reached by sociologists and social anthropologists are based on an inadequacy of ethnographic data, concept, and even logic. There is hardly any inquiry into the ways in which the Hinduized tribes are linked with castes and the ways in which they relate with in their own group. In addition, no effort whatsoever has been made to ascertain if the acculturated tribes were regulated by the principle of caste organization or by the principle of tribal organization. Issues such as these, central to the argument in support of the transformation of tribe into caste have, unfortunately, not been adequately examined. In addition, even concepts such as Sanskritization and Hinduization used for understanding the transformation of tribe into caste are inadequate for advancing an argument in support of such a claim.

### Tribe and Peasants

Tribes in India have not only been studied in relation to caste but also in relation to peasants and peasant society. Peasants and peasant society in social anthropological literature have, however, invariably been conceptualized as being in contrast to tribal society. A distinction is thus maintained not only between tribe and peasant but the two are also seen as different types of societies. Tribes in anthropological literature generally have been defined as communities that are more or less homogeneous, having a common government, a common dialect, and a common culture. It is, however, as Béteille (1960) puts it, one thing to show boundaries between tribes and non-tribes, or between different tribes, and quite another thing to specify the characteristics of tribal societies as such. An attempt has, therefore, been made to pay attention to the latter. Accordingly, tribes have come to be defined by the features of a segmentary system. This means that tribes are not only conceived as being small in scale but also as being representative of a definite structural type that is quite different from the more complex social system in which the peasantry and the gentry coexist. Ideally, then, tribal societies are small in scale, are restricted in the spatial and temporal ranges of their social, legal, and political relations, and possess a morality, religion, and world view of a corresponding order. In short, tribal societies are self-contained units. In contrast, peasants and peasant society are not seen as a whole society, but as a part society with a part culture. Redfield (1956), for example, uses the term peasant for any society of small producers who produce for their own consumption through the cultivation of land and who form a segment of a town-centred economy and society. Similarly, Shanin (1973) defines peasants as small agricultural producers who, with the help of simple equipment and the labour of their families, produce mainly for their own consumption and for the fulfilment of obligations to the holders of political and economic power. Foster (1953) too views folk culture and folk society not as a whole society, or as an isolate, but as a 'half society', a part of the larger unit. The 'half society', he says, has a symbiotic spatial–temporal relationship with the larger cultures of which it is a part. He views folk culture as a common way of life that characterizes some or all the people of many villages, towns, and cities within a given area. Folk and urban are thus not polar opposites, but rather

both form integral parts of certain types of socio-cultural units. This being the case, reference is made to three types of societies in the Indian context, namely tribal, peasant, and urban.

There has been much inquiry in anthropology into the extent to which tribal people in India can be regarded as peasants. The inquiry arises from the fact that of the peoples or communities described as tribes, not all stand at the same level of development. Accordingly, they have been classified into various categories depending on their characteristic mode of livelihood. Bose (1971: 4–5), for example, divides tribal people into five categories. These are: (1) hunters, fishers, and gatherers; (2) shifting cultivators; (3) settled agriculturists using the plough and plough cattle; (4) nomadic cattle keepers, artisans, and agricultural labourers; and (5) plantation and industrial workers. Of these, some are considered to be no different from the non-tribal population, which has been described mainly as a peasant population. The process of peasantization among the tribes in Indian history is attributed largely to cultural contact with the non-tribal world. The process has also been attributed to the development strategy of the Indian state, especially in the post-independence period. Tribal societies are, therefore, no longer seen as static but as being in the process of change.

The case for the transformation of tribes into peasants has, of course, been made keeping in mind different considerations by different scholars. Some have done so keeping in mind the fact that tribes have moved away from hunting and/or fishing or shifting agriculture to terraced or settled agriculture, and some have done so on the ground that tribes have moved to plough agriculture. In fact, more often than not, tribes have been described as peasants without even adequately applying the criteria used for defining peasants. Others describe them as peasants because they see little difference between the way in which tribes make their living and the way in which the larger non-tribal community makes its living. There are, of course, scholars who have tried to look into the problem by systematically applying the criteria evolved in anthropological writings. Thus, keeping in mind the segmentary system in terms of which tribes have been defined generally, Bailey (1961) differentiates tribes from castes or peasants. It is worth noting here that Bailey was more interested in differentiating tribe from caste rather than in differentiating tribe from peasant. He characterizes caste

society as predominantly hierarchical and organic, and tribal society as basically segmental. Sinha (1965) points to the inadequacy of such a characterization. He says that there are some parts of India where peasants, particularly those belonging to the Rajput and the Jat castes, approximate more closely to the characteristics of tribes. He even goes to the extent, as noted earlier, of viewing tribes as a special case of the Little Tradition in the civilization of India. Béteille (1974: 61) relates the concept of peasant as formalized in Shanin's definition to the empirical realities of the tribes in Chhotanagpur, and shows that the realities there more closely approximate the concept of peasant than the realities obtaining elsewhere among communities that generally have been described as peasants.

With a shift in focus from tribe to peasant, there has also been a shift in the study of tribes. The study of tribes as communities has given way to 'village studies'. Indeed, village studies are seen as being different from, or as an alternative to, tribal studies. There is little doubt that this way of contrasting tribal studies with village studies is a direct consequence of the false opposition posed between tribe and peasant in anthropological writings. It is important to note that the dichotomy posed between caste and tribe in the study of Indian society has also led to a dichotomy between tribe and peasant. It is interesting to note that Indian society has not only been seen as a caste society but also as a peasant society. The two, in fact, have been seen as coterminus. Conversely, communities identified as tribes are not treated as peasant societies and are assumed to make a living in ways that are different from those of the larger caste society. Correspondingly, tribes in India are not only contrasted with the caste dimension of Indian society but also with the peasant dimension. Hence, any tribal community that has been making a living in the same way as that of the larger community is said to be either in the process of becoming or as having already become a peasant society. This means that the tribal community is either in the process of ceasing to be a tribal society or it has already ceased to be one. Does this mean that there is nothing left of the attributes associated with a tribe in the changed situation of the peasantization process? Now one is confronted with such a problem because of the dichotomy posed between tribe and peasant. The dichotomy is indeed false. Tribe can still move in the direction of the peasantry without

losing the attributes of tribe as a society. Social scientists have, therefore, not been quite at ease when they talk of the transformation of tribe into peasantry. Oommen (1995: 21–37), for example, points out that with the advent of settled agriculture among tribes, they have become increasingly specialized as peasants, but even the settled agriculturists among them are not yet peasants in several respects, and certainly do not share the folk version of the elite culture. It has further been stated that while there is a common economic and political denominator, the culture is distinct. The culture of the rural Hindu is the folk version of the elite culture; they are not the same, though they are interrelated. There is no such mutual dependence between tribes, on the one hand, and the folk and the urban, on the other hand. Thus, the problem encountered with caste also appears in the case of peasants.

### Social Differentiation

There is a third framework of reference in terms of which tribes in India have been addressed and studied, and this is social differentiation. Sometimes this has also been couched in terms of class or social stratification. Tribal society has never been static, but change has never been as unprecedented and dramatic as in the last fifty years. As a result, tribal society has moved from homogeneity, the hallmark of tribal society, to considerable heterogeneity. To begin with, there is occupational differentiation in tribal society. One can find in the same society people who are engaged in agriculture (shifting or settled) or in trade and commerce or even business. Others work as landless agricultural labourers, quarry or mine workers, stone crushers, and plantation and industrial workers. Still others make their living by joining a profession, such as lawyers, doctors, teachers, government servants, politicians, etc. Along with occupational differentiation, there are also differences in wealth and income, giving rise to social stratification in the form of class, not only in the quantitative but also in the qualitative sense. There have also been differences of religion, ideology, values, political orientation, way of life, etc. among members of the tribal community. In view of this, it is generally held that a given tribal society has become like any other component of

Indian society, and hence that the society is no longer a tribal society and its members no longer tribes.

#### Basis for Misconstruction

The concepts of caste, peasant, and social differentiation against which tribes have been studied have invariably led scholars, as noted above, to state or conclude that tribes are becoming castes, or peasants, or socially differentiated groups. What this in effect means is that tribes have become like other sections of Indian society, and as such have ceased to be tribes; they have lost the traits and features that made them tribes in the first place. This thinking has led to the conclusion that tribes and tribal societies by becoming castes, or peasants, or socially differentiated groups cease to be tribes or tribal societies. There is, then, something teleological involved in the study of tribes and tribal societies in the Indian context.

We already know the direction in which tribal society is moving. Nowhere is this more obvious than the background against which tribal society has been studied. Elsewhere in the world where tribes are not linked with the civilization at complex, such conceptual problems do not arise as tribes there are studied in their own right and against the backdrop of the processes at work in those societies. They are not studied against the end point represented by the communities that are part of civilization, as has been the case with tribes in India. Hence, whereas elsewhere the focus has been on how tribes are changing and how they are becoming nationalities or nations, the focus in India has been on how tribes are becoming castes, peasants, and socially stratified groups. It is a corollary, then, that tribes cease to be tribes or tribal societies. And since these are the features that supposedly characterize general Indian society, tribes are viewed as having been absorbed into general Indian society. What follows is that tribes, through these processes, cease to be tribes, and thereby cease to constitute and maintain a separate society and identity. Tribes are being studied primarily from the perspective of how they are being drawn into the mainstream of civilization. The end result is that the reality of caste remains intact but that of tribe disappears, and this process will increasingly spread as tribal societies come into intensive contact with the outside world. Such an empirical and conceptual scenario in the study of tribes exists in India

precisely because of the way in which (1) tribes have been conceptualized in anthropological literature; and (2) the frame of reference in terms of which they have been investigated. In a nutshell, tribes have not been studied in their own right but only in relation to general Indian society, which was marked by the features of caste, peasant, and social differentiation.

Now in the conceptualization of tribes in anthropology, three distinct but interrelated elements are seen. First, tribes in anthropology are invariably seen as societies. They are societies like all other societies. That is, a tribe is made up of people; it has boundaries (people either belonging or not belonging to it); people belong to society by virtue of certain rules, which they accept and which impose on them regular and determinate ways of acting towards one another. A tribe as a society is defined on the basis of its boundaries, which set certain limits on the legal, political, economic, and social relations of its members. These boundaries have been defined linguistically, culturally, and politically by anthropologists.

Second, tribes are also seen as a type of distinct society. Godelier (1977: 30), for example, sees tribal societies as being characterized by certain positive and negative features. The negative features are marked by the absence of the positive traits of modern society, namely non-literate, uncivilized, non-industrialized, non-specialized, etc. The positive features are those that are absent from modern society, namely social relations based on kinship bonds, all-pervasive religion, frequency of cooperation for the achievement of common goals, etc.

Third, tribes are also seen as representing a particular stage in sociopolitical evolution. It is assumed that with the passage of time they will move to a new stage, such as nationhood or nationality.

While these three distinct aspects have gone into the making of the concept, the last two have overshadowed the first to which tribes owe their separate and independent existence. In the process, tribes have been seen primarily as a stage and a type of society. They are seen as representing a society that lacks the positive traits of modern society. To put it differently, they are seen as constituting primitive, simple, illiterate, and backward societies. As the specific features that distinguish tribes change under the influence of education, specialization, modern occupations, new

technologies, etc., tribal society is no longer considered tribal society. If the transformation is in the direction of caste, then it is described as having become a caste society. If the transformation is in the direction of peasantization, then it is posited as a peasant society. If the general direction of transformation is towards social differentiation, then it is described as a socially differentiated society. The end result is that tribal society is no longer considered a tribal society, and rightly so, if it is thought of in terms of stages and specific features. But if a tribe is also a society, it is similar to any other kind of society. However, even this reality comes to be denied with the denial of tribal society as such on account of the changed situation.

With this denial, the very existence of tribe as an independent and separate living entity is jeopardized. In the process, anthropologists and other social scientists have overlooked the context in which the term tribe came to be used in Indian society. In the Indian context, tribes were identified and described primarily in terms of being outside civilization. There is, then, something clumsy about the use of the concept of 'tribe' to describe Indian social reality. Such problems may not arise when tribes do not coexist with non-tribal societies. Indeed, problems of the type referred to above could be overcome by the use of the term 'indigenous' people, but not without giving rise to problems of a different kind. Such problems are rooted in the conceptual framework used for understanding the process of transformation in tribal society in India. There is, then, something clumsy and basically wrong about the use of the term tribe in the Indian context.

# Tribe as Community

In view of this, it is suggested that the terms of reference for the study of tribes in India should be the same terms used by the tribal people to identify themselves and by which they are known and addressed by other people. It is well known that groups and communities classified as tribes do not identify themselves in these terms (except by the educated), but call themselves by the names of their own tribes, such as the Santhals, the Oraons, the Khasis, and the Garos. This was how the groups now identified as tribes were identified and addressed throughout history. Ray (1972: 8– 10) points to this in his introductory essay in *Tribal Situation in India*. He writes that we know that there were janas or communities of people like the

Savaras, the Kullutas, the Kollas, the Bhillas, the Khasas, the Kinnaras, and many others whom today we know as 'tribes', bearing names that are recognizable as almost the same even today. Yet the term by which they were known to others was not tribe but jana, meaning 'community of people'. Hence the plea being made here is to study tribes in India in reference to the actual communities to which they belong and which they represent, that is, as Santhals, Khasis, Gonds, etc. If tribes are studied as such, we can overcome the kinds of problems with which we are confronted when we use the term tribe. The transformation occurring in tribal society, whether in the direction of caste, peasant, social differentiation, or religion, becomes meaningful without in any way affecting the identity of the group concerned. The transformation becomes meaningful precisely because tribes, besides being a type of society also constitute a society as such This means that the terms of reference or description in tribal studies should not be caste, peasant, or social heterogeneity, but rather groups or communities, such as regional communities, for example, Bengalis, Assamese, and Gujaratis. The counterparts of tribes are not castes or peasants, as has been the case so far in tribal studies, but communities or societies incorporating castes and peasants, for the latter are not the whole society but only an element of the whole. A tribe, on the other hand, is a whole society like any other society, with their own language, territory, culture, customs, and so on. Hence, as societies, tribes must be compared with other societies and not with castes, as has been the case in sociological and anthropological writings.

#### References

Bailey, F. G. 1961. '''Tribe" and "Caste" in India.' *Contributions to Indian Sociology* 5: 7–19. Béteille, Andrè. 1995. 'Construction of Tribe.' *Times of India*, 19 June.

———. 1986. 'The Concept of Tribe with Special Reference to India.' *Journal of European Sociology* 27 (2): 297–318.

- ———. 1974. *Six Essays in Comparative Sociology.* New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- ———. 1960. 'The Definition of Tribe', *Seminar* 14: 15–18.

Bose, Nirmal Kumar. 1971. *Tribal Life in India*. New Delhi: National Book Trust.

———. 1941. 'The Hindu Method of Tribal Absorption.' *Science and Culture* 77: 188–94.

Dube, S. C. (ed.). 1977. *Tribal Heritage in India*. Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.

Elwin, Verrier. 1944. *The Aboriginals*. Bombay: Oxford University Press.

Foster, George McClelland. 1953. 'What is Folk Culture?' *American Anthropologist* 55 (2): 159–73.