# **Efficient Markets Theory: Historical Perspectives**

Without any doubt, it can be said that efficient market hypothesis (EMH) was crucial in the emergence of financial economics as a proper subfield of economics. But this was not its original goal: EMH was initially created to give a theoretical explanation of the random character of stock market prices.

The historical roots of EMH can be traced back to the nineteenth century and the early twentieth century in the work of Regnault and Bachelier, but their work was isolated and not embedded in a scientific community interested in finance. More immediate roots of the EMH lie in the empirical work of Cowles, Working, and Kendall from 1933 to 1959, which laid the foundation for the key works published in the period from 1959 (Roberts) to 1976 (Fama's reply to LeRoy). More than any other single contributor, it was Fama [7] in his 1965 dissertation, building on the work of Roberts, Cowles, and Cootner, who formulated the EMH, suggesting that stock prices reflect all available information, and that, consequently, the actual value of a security is equal to its price. In addition, because new information arrives randomly, stock prices fluctuate randomly.

The idea that stock prices fluctuate randomly was not new: in 1863, a French broker, Jules Regnault [20], had already suggested it. Regnault was the first author to put forward this hypothesis, to validate it empirically, and to give it a theoretical interpretation. In 1900, Louis Bachelier [1], a French mathematician, used Regnault's hypothesis and framework to develop the first mathematical model of Brownian motion, and tested the model by using it to price futures and options. In retrospect, we can recognize that Bachelier's doctoral dissertation constitutes the first work in mathematical finance. Unfortunately for him, however, financial economics did not then exist as a scientific field, and there was no organized scientific community interested in his research. Consequently, both Regnault and Bachelier were ignored by economists until the 1960s.

Although these early authors did suggest modeling stock prices as a stochastic process, they did not formulate the EMH as it is known today. EMH was genuinely born in linking three elements that originally existed independently of each other: (i) the mathematical model of a stochastic process (random walk, Brownian motion, or martingale); (ii) the concept of economic equilibrium; and (iii) the statistical results about the unpredictability of stock market prices. EMH's creation took place only between 1959 and 1976, when a large number of economists became familiar with these three features. Between the time of Bachelier and the development of EMH, there were no theoretical preoccupations *per se* about the random character of stock prices, and research was only empirical.

## **Empirical Research between 1933 and 1959**

Between 1933 and the end of the 1950s, only three authors dealt with the random character of stock market prices: Cowles [3, 4], Working [24, 25], and Kendall [13]. They compared stock price fluctuations with random simulations and found similarities. One point must be underlined: these works were strictly statistical, and no theory explained these empirical results.

The situation changed at the end of the 1950s and during the 1960s because of three particular events. First, the Koopmans–Vining controversy at the end of 1940s led to a decline of descriptive approaches and to the increased use of modeling based on theoretical foundations. Second, modern probability theory, and consequently also the theory of stochastic processes, became usable for nonmathematicians. Significantly, economists were attracted to the new formalisms by some features that were already familiar consequences of economic equilibrium. Most important, the zero expected profit when prices follow a Brownian motion reminded economists of the zero marginal profit in the equilibrium of a perfectly competitive market. Third, research on the stock market became more and more popular among scholars: groups of researchers and seminars in financial economics became organized; scientific journals such as the *Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis* were created and a community of scholars was born. This context raised awareness about the need for theoretical investigations, and these investigations, in turn, allowed the creation of the EMH.

#### **Theoretical Investigations during the 1960s**

Financial economists did not speak immediately of EMH; they talked about "random walk theory". Following his empirical results, Working [26] was the first author to suggest a theoretical explanation; he established an explicit link between the unpredictable arrival of information and the random character of stock market price changes. However, this paper made no link with economic equilibrium and, probably for this reason, it was not widely diffused. Instead, it was Roberts [21], a professor at the University of Chicago, who first suggested a link between economic concepts and the random walk model by using the "arbitrage proof" argument that had been popularized by Modigliani and Miller [19]. Then, Cowles [5] made an important step by identifying a link between financial econometric results and economic equilibrium. Finally, two years later, Cootner [2] linked the random walk model, information, and economic equilibrium, and exposed the idea of EMH, although he did not use that expression.

Cootner [2] had the essential idea of EMH, but he did not make the crucial empirical link because he considered that real-world stock price variations were not purely random. This point of view was defended by economists from MIT (such as Samuelson) and Stanford University (such as Working). By contrast, economists from the University of Chicago claimed that real stock markets were perfect, and so were more inclined to characterize them as efficient. Thus, it was a scholar from the University of Chicago, Eugene Fama, who formulated the EMH.

In his 1965 PhD thesis, Fama gave the first theoretical account of EMH. In that account, the key assumption is the existence of "sophisticated traders" who, due to their skills, make a better estimate of intrinsic valuation than do other agents by using all available information. Provided that such traders have predominant access to financial resources, their activity of buying underpriced assets and selling overpriced assets will tend to make prices equal the intrinsic values about which they have a shared assessment and also to eliminate any expectation of profit from trading. Linking these consequences with the random walk model, Fama added that because information arrives randomly, stock prices have to fluctuate randomly. Fama thus offered the first clear link between empirical results about stock price variations, the random walk model, and economic equilibrium. EMH was born.

## **Evolution of Fama's Definition during the 1970s**

Five years after his PhD dissertation, Fama [8] offered a mathematical demonstration of the EMH. He simplified his first definition by making the implicit assumption of a representative agent. He also used another stochastic process: the martingale model, which had been introduced to model the random character of stock market prices by Samuelson [22] and Mandelbrot [17]. The martingale model is less restrictive than the random walk model: the martingale model requires only independence of the conditional expectation of price changes, whereas the random walk model requires also independence involving the higher conditional moments (i.e., variance, skewness, and kurtosis) of the probability distribution of price changes. For Fama's [8] purposes, the most important attraction of the martingale formalism was its explicit reference to a set of information, *t* ,

$$E(P_{t+1}|\Phi_t) - P_t = 0 \tag{1}$$

As such, the martingale model could be used to test the implication of EMH that, if all available information is used, the expected profit is null. This idea led to the definition of an efficient market that is generally used nowadays: "a market in which prices always 'fully reflect' available information is called 'efficient' " [8].

However, in 1976, LeRoy [15] showed that Fama's demonstration is tautological and that his theory is not testable. Fama answered by modifying his definition and he also admitted that any test of the EMH is a test of both market efficiency and the model of equilibrium used by investors. In addition, it is striking to note that the test suggested by Fama [9] (i.e., markets are efficient if stock prices are equal to the prediction provided by the model of equilibrium used) does not imply any clear causality between the random character of stock market prices and the EMH; it is mostly a plausible correlation valid only for some cases.

## **The Proliferation of Definitions since the 1970s**

Fama's modification of his definition proved to be a fateful admission. In retrospect, it is clear that the theoretical content of EMH comprised its suggestion of a link between some mathematical model, some empirical results, and some concept of economic equilibrium. The precise linkage proposed by Fama was, however, only one of many possible linkages, as subsequent literature would demonstrate. Just so, LeRoy [14] and Lucas [16] provided theoretical proofs that efficient markets and the martingale hypothesis are two distinct ideas: martingale is neither necessary nor sufficient for an efficient market. In a similar way, Samuelson [23], who gave a mathematical proof that prices may be permanently equal to the intrinsic value and fluctuate randomly, explained that it cannot be excluded that some agents make profits, contrary to the original definition of EMH. De Meyer and Saley [6] show that stock market prices follow a martingale even if all available information is not contained in stock market prices.

This proliferation at the level of theory has been matched by proliferation at the level of empirical testing, as the definition of EMH has changed depending on the emphasis placed by each author on one particular feature. For instance, Fama *et al.* [10] defined an efficient market as "a market that adjusts rapidly to new information"; Jensen [12] considered that "a market is efficient with respect to information set *θt* if it is impossible to make economic profit by trading on the basis of information set *θt* "; according to Malkiel [18] "the market is said to be efficient with respect to some information set [*...*] if security prices would be unaffected by revealing that information to all participants. Moreover, efficiency with respect to an information set [*...*] implies that it is impossible to make economic profits by trading on the basis of [that information set]".

The situation is similar regarding the tests: the type of test used depends on the definition used by the authors and on the data used (for instance, most of the tests are done with low frequency or daily data, while statistical arbitrage opportunities are discernible and exploitable at high frequency using algorithmic trading). Moreover, some authors have used the weakness of the definitions to criticize the very relevance of efficient markets. For instance, Grossman and Stiglitz [11] argued that because information is costly, prices cannot perfectly reflect all available information. Consequently, they considered that perfectly information-efficient markets are impossible.

The history of EMH shows that the definition of this theory is plural, and the initial project of EMH (the creation of a link between a mathematical model, the concept of economic equilibrium, and statistical results about the unpredictability of stock market prices) has not been fully achieved. Moreover, this theory is not empirically refutable (since a test of the random character of stock prices does not imply a test on efficiency). Nevertheless, financial economists have considered EMH as one of the pillars of financial economics because it played a key role in the creation and history of financial economics by linking financial results with standard economics. This link is the main contribution of EMH.

#### **References**

- [1] Bachelier, L. (1900). Theorie de la sp ´ eculation repro- ´ duced in Annales de l'Ecole Normale Superieure, 3 ´ eme ` serie 17, in ´ *Random Character of Stock Market Prices* (English Translation: P.H. Cootner, ed, (1964)), M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 21–86.
- [2] Cootner, P.H. (1962). Stock prices: random vs. systematic changes, *Industrial Management Review* **3**(2), 24–45.
- [3] Cowles, A. (1933). Can stock market forecasters forecast? *Econometrica* **1**(3), 309–324.
- [4] Cowles, A. (1944). Stock market forecasting, *Econometrica* **12**(3/4), 206–214.
- [5] Cowles, A. (1960). A revision of previous conclusions regarding stock price behavior, *Econometrica* **28**(4), 909–915.
- [6] De Meyer, B. & Saley, H.M. (2003). On the strategic origin of Brownian motion in finance, *International Journal of Game Theory* **31**, 285–319.
- [7] Fama, E.F. (1965). The behavior of stock-market prices, *Journal of Business* **38**(1), 34–105.
- [8] Fama, E.F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: a review of theory and empirical work, *Journal of Finance* **25**(2), 383–417.
- [9] Fama, E.F. (1976). Efficient capital markets: reply, *Journal of Finance* **31**(1), 143–145.
- [10] Fama, E.F., Fisher, L., Jensen, M.C. & Roll, R. (1969). The adjustment of stock prices to new information, *International Economic Review* **10**(1), 1–21.
- [11] Grossman, S.J. & Stiglitz, J.E. (1980). The impossibility of informationally efficient markets, *American Economic Review* **70**(3), 393–407.
- [12] Jensen, M.C. (1978). Some anomalous evidence regarding market efficiency, *Journal of Financial Economics* **6**, 95–101.