37

## India Since 1947

## Bipan Chandra

he leaders of India's struggle for freedom and the founders of the Indian Republic were moved by the vision of an independent national economy based on modern technology and social justice and equity. Indian economy was, moreover, to be built within a world-wide perspective. It was not to be autarchic. It was to be an integral part of world economy. But the question was what type of integration?

From Naoroji and Ranade to Jawarharlal Nehru, national leaders realized that Indian underdevelopment was the result of a particular type, *i.e.*, the colonial type, of integration with the world capitalist economy. India was incorporated into the world economy as a supplier of low-technology, low-wage produced raw materials and as a market for high-technology, high-wage produced manufactures. Independence from colonial rule was desired, above all, with a view to reverse this colonial economic relationship with the metropolis and put an end to the colonial structure of Indian economy.

What we in India have attempted after independence was guided by our perception of India's weaknesses during the colonial period. India was a typical dependent economy. For nearly two centuries it had been subservient to the needs of the British economy. Its surplus had been drained or expatriated in various forms ranging from direct appropriation through taxation and plunder to an unequal exchange of commodities and investment of foreign capital, all of which was, in reality, a small part of the capital which was being drained out of India.

Indian agriculture had been stagnating for decades both in production and productivity. While overall agricultural production per head fell by 14 per cent between 1901 and 1941, the fall in per capita production of food grains was over 24 per cent. While yield per acre of all crops remained stagnant, the yield of foodgrains declined by 0.18 per cent per year between 1891-1941. Nor was this accidental. In 1949, only 19.1 per cent of area sown was irrigated, and less than 8 per cent was under improved seeds.

The industrial base of Indian economy was very weak. In 1950, industry and other constituents of secondary sector contributed only 16.1 per cent of the national income. Within the industry, the emphasis was on labourintensive, low-technology, low-skill, low-wage products. There was near complete absence of capital goods and machine industries and total dependence on imports of machine tools and machinery. Of the total industrial output, the engineering, electrical, metallurgical, and chemical industries contributed only 13.5 per cent. Thus, the entire industrial structure was based on a light industry which was in turn based on imported machinery. Moreover, foreign capital had a stranglehold over Indian economy. As late as 1951, it controlled nearly 50 per cent of the modern industrial and banking structure. Thus, it controlled more than 50 per cent of the capital invested in petroleum, jute, tea, coal and other mines and rubber factories and more than 30 per cent of capital invested in banking, electrical industries, engineering industries, food industry and coffee plantations. It had more than 20 per cent share even in cotton-textiles and sugar industries. Indian capital had, of course, been struggling against this stranglehold and, taking advantage of the weakening of links with the metropolis during the two world wars and the Great Depression during the 1930s, had grown to sizeable proportions. Unlike the situation in other colonies and semi-colonies, Indian capital had not only grown but grown as independent capital and not as comprador capital.

The net result of colonial rule was the prevalence of abysmal poverty and degraded quality of life, for the vast majority of the Indian people. Famines and epidemics carried away millions.

Independent India set out to overcome its colonial under-development on the basis of modern industry and technology and scientific agriculture. India was still to develop as an integral part of the world economy but the basis of this integration was to be different—it was to be based on the needs of India's autonomous development, free of subordination to the metropolitan interests or of domination by foreign capital. This could not be accomplished through the unhampered working of the market forces and private enterprise. It required planning and massive reliance upon the public sector. Simultaneously, poverty was to be banished and equity and social justice promoted.

Let us be very clear on what India tried to achieve, especially after 1955. India set out to achieve an integrated national economy based on a national industry catering primarily to its domestic market. Socialism was also an objective. It inspired the people and the leadership. But the heart of India's effort was not socialism but the structural transformation of Indian economy leading to an independent national economy. And this effort at self-reliance had to be on a significantly large scale. Any small-scale effort would be aborted by population growth and the pressures of the metropolitan economy for perpetuating India's colonial integration with the world economy.

The technological and productivity levels of Indian agriculture and industry had to be constantly and rapidly raised to the levels of the most advanced sectors of world capitalist economy. Merely to increase production on the basis of existing, low-level technologies might represent economic growth, as had occurred in India in many earlier periods including the Mughal period, but it would not represent economic development or self-sustained economic growth.

What was the result of our 55-year long effort and where did we go from there?

The post-1947 agrarian legislation marked a basic transformation of agrarian relations, though from above, and with the active involvement of the peasantry. In this respect the path followed has been similar to that followed in Britain, Germany, Italy, and Meiji Japan. In fact, India has been in the mainstream of the capitalist mode of transforming agriculture, only France providing a partial exception. The erstwhile *zamindars* were permitted to resume large chunks of land for self-cultivation. This led to large-scale eviction of small tenants. In parts of the country, landlordism, semi-feudal tenancy and share-cropping continued for a long time and were only gradually eroded.

However, while the post-independence agrarian legislation hardly benefited the mass of poor peasants and agricultural labourers, it did not amount to preserving semi-feudalism; it marked, over time, a structural change in agriculture. *Zamindari* abolition put large chunks of land in the hands of the old occupancy tenants, many of whom became substantial owners of land who gradually took to capitalist agriculture as rich peasants or large-scale capitalist farmers. Their ranks were also strengthened when many of the erstwhile *zamindars* and landlords took to capitalist agriculture on the lands they had resumed for self-cultivation. Tenancy and *anti-zamindari* legislation also augmented the ranks of small and middlelandowner cultivators who already constituted over one-third of the Indian peasantry during the colonial period. India always had a large class of nonlandowning agricultural workers. Their number increased sharply due to the colonialization of the Indian economy. Large-scale evictions as a result of *anti-zamindari* and tenancy legislation and the rapid rise in population have now made it the largest social class in the country.

Thus, while semi-feudal landlordism has survived, though on diminishing scale, in some parts of the country-agrarian structure today basically consists of a class of capitalist farmers and rich peasants at the top, a large number of middle peasants in the middle and the mass of small peasants and agricultural Iabourers at the bottom.

Unlike the colonial state, the post-independence state has put massive resources into the development of agriculture in the form of irrigation, rural roads, electrification, scientific research, price-support, and fertilizer production. The result has been a more or less satisfactory agricultural growth-2.54 per cent from 1950-51 to 1984-85 and nearly 3.5 per cent form 1985-86 to 1989-90. This has made India self-sufficient in food grains and agricultural raw materials, though oil seeds and pulses have remained work points. All the same cereal availability per head per day has gone up from 334.2 gm in 1951 to 456.2 gm in 1989 and food availability, including pulses, from 394.9 gm in 1951 to 496.6 gm in 1989.

Indian industry has grown physically as well as undergone basic structural transformation. Industrial production is today ten times of that in 1951. The rate of industrial growth during the Seventh Plan (1985-86 to 1989- 90) and subsequently has been more than 8.5 per cent per year. A major reversal has occurred in terms of the growth of basic and capital goods and increased their share in total industrial production. While the annual rate of growth of consumer goods from 1950-51 to 1981-82 has been 6.6 per cent for basic goods and 8.45 per cent for capital goods. This structural change is also reflected in changes in the shares of major industry groups in the industrial sector. Between 1956-57 and 1980-81, the share of consumer goods has come down from 48.37 per cent to 23.65 per cent, but that of basic goods and capital goods has gone up from 22.13 per cent and 4.71 per cent to 39.42 per cent and 16.43 per cent respectively.

A major weakness of Indian industrial effort is the technological dependence on the metropolis, especially where advanced technology is concerned. Among the Indian economists, A.K. Bagchi has been stressing this aspect for several years now. The struggle of independent technology today is the most important part of the struggle for independent development. But even in this respect, some progress has been attempted. An effort to develop independent technology has been made over the years. National expenditure on research and development has been rising year after year. It has been, moreover, several times more than the expenditure on the purchase of imported technology through royalty and technical fees, the relevant figures of 1979-80 being `324.5 crore and 39.6 crore respectively. A major achievement in this respect has been the rearing of a large cadre of scientific and technical manpower. For example, in 1986-87, the number of students enrolled in engineering and technology colleges was 184,421 and in engineering and technology schools 506,821.

Of course, today there can be no economic autarchy or self-sufficiency, and least of all in the field of technology. A large part of advanced technology has to be borrowed. The nature of technological dependence depends on what is borrowed on what terms and to what use it is put. This is a rather large question, and not an easy one to deal with. But it can be pointed out that in India most of the imported technology is bought outright without equity participation. And, as pointed out earlier, the net outflow on the purchase of imported technology has so for been kept at rather low levels, being 9.9 crore rupees in 1965-66 and 39.6 crore rupees in 1979-80.

The growth in agriculture, industry, and services gets summed up in Net National Product or National Income. At fixed prices, it has grown more than four times since 1950-51. Per capita national income has grown by about 90 per cent. This growth has been unsatisfactory from the point of view of the needs of the Indian people. But this does show that India has broken through colonial economic stagnation. Moreover, it compares favourable with the growth of Western Europe and the United States, both during the comparative period of their development and their overall period of development. For example, in Britain, the rate of growth of national income from 1855-64 to 1963-67 was 22.8 per cent per decade, per capita income growth rate is 13.4 per cent per decade. For France, the two figures for 1861-71 to 1963-66 were 20.5 and 17.0; for Germany from 1950-59 to 1963-67, they were 31.0 and 19.3; for the USA from 1934-43 to 1963-67, they were 42.4 and 17.5.

By any reckoning, India had to weaken the stranglehold of foreign capital on the Indian economy, if it was to develop an independent national economy. There could be no economic independence and little political independence if giant foreign companies, industrial and finance, were to control they key economic positions in the country.

What has been independent India's record in this respect? But before we try to answer this question, let us focus on two features in the Indian situation which are not to be found in other non-socialist, post-colonial societies and states. For one, already in the colonial period, a considerable indigenous capitalist class had been formed which was basically independent and not comprador, *i.e.*, it was not an intermediary between British capital and the Indian market or a junior partner of the British capital. In the main, it did not develop an organic link with British capitalism; it was not, as a class, integrated with foreign capital in a subordinate position even when the Indian economy as a whole was. Its dominant sections had no noticeable alliances or partnerships with British or international finance capital or the emerging giant international corporations.

Second, from 1880 onwards, the Indian national movement opposed the entry of foreign capital into trade, industry and finance. Foreign capital, the nationalists argued, did not develop but exploit and dominate the country. One way of keeping out foreign capital, it was believed, was to develop a strong state or public sector as a protective wall against the much stronger international capital. The government should pioneer those industries which indigenous capital could not. And if foreign capital was needed, the state should borrow capital abroad on the security of its revenues and either employ it to undertake industrial development on its own or lend it to local capitalists. Thus, the conception of the public sector as an instrument for avoiding domination by foreign capital was strongly entrenched by 1947.

The result is that Indian economy has so far developed as an independent economy. Foreign capital no longer has a stranglehold on it. Neither foreign industrial capital nor finance capital plays dominating or an increasing role in it. Import-substitution industrialization strategy has not led, as has been the case in Latin America, to a more incisive penetration by multinational corporations. Instead, it has promoted Indian capital-owned and controlled industries. This is borne out by the following statistics: Foreigncontrolled firms contributed only 10.8 per cent of the total value added in the factory sector of mining and manufacturing in 1983-84. If non-factory manufacturing is also taken into consideration, this figure would be 7.7 per cent. In terms of total volume, the total accumulated foreign private investment in India until 1974 was `1,943 crore. This was less than 20 per cent of the net domestic capital formation of only 1974. The Foreign private capital inflow was expected to constitute only about four per cent of the total corporate investment in the Seventh Plan. In 1985, total foreign investment approved was only about `122 crore. Around 1981, of the top 25 industrial units of India in terms of sales, including public sector units, only four were foreign, and they occupied 13th, 14th, 21st, and 24th positions. In 1981, of the top 20 industrial (private) houses (conglomerates), only two were foreign, occupying 4th and 14th positions. In 1985, of the first ten industrial houses, not even one was foreign; and not one of the foreign-controlled units would figure in the first 25 in terms of total capital employed. In 1983- 84, total assets of the branches and subsidiaries of foreign companies were `5136.7 crore, while in 1985 the assets of Birla's and Tata's alone came to `4,112 crore and 3,699 crore respectively.

What is equally important, not a single major or economically strategic sector of the Indian economy is under the control or domination of foreign capital. This applies to iron and steel, other metals, coal, cement, engineering, heavy machinery and electricals, chemicals, defence industries, petroleum production and refining, textiles, jute, tea, coffee, cycles, fans, sewing machines, radios, scooters, automobiles, tractors, and refrigerators. Foreign capital has a large presence in drugs and pharmaceuticals, tobacco, rubber goods, typewriters, batteries, bulb, and explosives. Its domination over soap and detergents has been eroded in the last few years. This process is also taking place in the other industries, except drugs, mentioned above.

Foreign capital plays hardly a role in banking and insurance. As early as 1970, public sector banks controlled 84.7 per cent of total deposits while foreign banks controlled only 8.9 per cent. No foreign insurance companies have operated in India since 1973 when the general insurance business was nationalized. The branches of Indian banks have gone up from 4,239 in 1950 to 54,600 in 1987; the branches of foreign banks have increased from 66 in 1950 to 136 in 1987.

The size of foreign aid, including grants and concessional loans, has also been declining since the mid-sixties and was in 1988-89 about 1.5 per cent of India's national income and 9.5 per cent of its plan outlay.

It is at the level of social justice, equality and equity that India's record has been very poor. Even though the extreme poverty and starvation of the colonial period no longer prevail, there has been the failure to effect in a meaningful manner the life and standard of living of the bottom 40 per cent to 50 per cent of the people. Their social needs have not been met even at a minimum desired level. There has been some progress in some of the indices of quality of life. For example, expectation of life at birth has gone up from 32 years in 1941 to over 58 years in 1986-91; literacy from 13.9 per cent in 1941 to 36.2 per cent in 1981; and infant mortality has come down from 227 per thousand births in 1941 to 95 in 1985 and death rate from 31 per thousand in 1941 to 10.9 per thousand in 1987-88; the number of registered medical practitioners has increased from 1.7 per 10,000 of population in 1950-51 to 4.3 in 1986-87. But, as is evident, all this is utterly inadequate. Illiteracy in India is one of the highest in the World. National Sample Survey, 42nd round, covering the period July 1986-June 1987, reveals some interesting statistics. In rural areas, the public distribution system gives full coverage to only 14 per cent of the population in rice, 26.5 per cent in wheat, 4.5 per cent in oil, 36 per cent in sugar and 44 per cent in kerosene. Only 25 per cent of the rural population got treated through the public health system. For urban areas, this figure was nearly 27 per cent. Only 20.6 per cent of rural children took polio vaccine and 15.5 per cent the Triple-antigen vaccine. Even for urban children, these figures were only 46.3 and 37.1 in rural India 80.5 per cent of births took place within the houses, that is, not in a hospital. Of these, less than 10 per cent were attended to by a doctor or government midwife. About 33.4 per cent had no attendance and 29.16 per cent were attended to only by family members, neighbours, etc.

In this respect, it is important to remember that effective poverty removal programmes were initiated only in 1975 and have been vigorously, though inadequately, pursued only since 1984-85. Even so, nearly 30 per cent of Indian people are still living below the poverty line.

What of the future? Certainly, India is faced with certain major problems of the short-run variety, *e.g.*, the situation of the external and internal debt trap, the fiscal crisis of the state and balance of payment crunch. But we are also faced with certain long-teams issues; our approach towards them will have far greater consequences for our social, economic and political development.

The makers of modern India, especially Jawaharlal Nehru, rightly made an attempt to catch up in the economic realm with what we had missed out during the long two-centuries of colonial rule. Based on economic thinking of the 1930s and 1940s, this meant transforming Indian economy on the basis of capital goods industry, planning and public sector. Nehru was right in his basic thrust, and whatever we have achieved so far is the result of the foresight of the Nehru generation. But just as it will be a folly to abandon the Nehru spirit and approach, it will also be a folly to try to stick to the specific prescriptions of the Nehru era. For as the world changes, so must our efforts to adapt to those changes even when keeping the earlier vision and broad objectives intact. The thinking of the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s would prevent any real consideration of the emerging political and economic reality. And the lack of innovative thinking would prove very costly at this juncture because of the sudden weakness of political and class structures and institutions that have supported and been responsible for India's independent national development. The inspiration and ideological-political structuring provided by the national liberation struggle are increasingly receding; the Congress party is directionless and in shambles; the secular opposition parties and groups are unable to cohere; the left is dissipated and bereft of any fresh idea; communal parties and groups are growing and becoming respectable; the bureaucracy is demoralized and politicized, *i.e.*, it caters to whosoever is in power; the intelligentsia has defaulted and abdicated its social role, nor is it anymore trusted by the people—it is increasingly becoming irrelevant; the bourgeoisie has grown rapidly but has lost cohesion—this is signified by the absence of a dominant leadership of the class; the working class is fragmented by a multiplicity of trade union centres as also by the pattern of industrial development so that there is a small well-paid section in technologically advanced industries, a medium-paid section in traditional industries such as cotton-textiles, jute, sugar, and tea and of free plantations; and a vast mass of tender-paid, unorganized workers in the informal, small-scale sector, the rich peasant is fighting for hegemony over non-social development; the vast mass of agricultural labourers and poor peasants are completely disorganized and atomized; and the middle classes, gripped by consumerism, are losing their ideological edge and have abandoned all pretence of being guardians of social values and societal welfare, being increasingly engulfed by individual greed and social pessimism.

India, in this situation, needs fresh and rigorous thinking in all fields, but above all in the economic field. We are at the beginning of a new momentous phase in world history. The First Industrial Revolution was based on technical innovations, particularly in textile-production and Watt's steam-engine. Second Industrial Revolution, from 1815 to 1850s, was based on machine-making or capital-goods industry when machines to manufacture machinery and locomotives were invented. During the third stage of the Industrial Revolution in the last quarter of the 19th century, science was joined with technology and electricity, petroleum, the internal combustion engine and steel became the engines of economic growth. The post-First World War period witnessed the development of petrochemicals, electronics and nuclear energy. In recent years, the thrust areas are those of the microchip, biotechnology and new sources of energy. Throughout these four phases India and other parts of the colonial world went on under-development which meant above all that the technological gap between them and the advanced capitalist, metropolitan countries went on increasing.

India under Jawaharlal Nehru tried to bridge the gap by combining the second and third stages of the Industrial Revolution by manufacturing machines to produce machines and by developing steel, cement, and electricity production. This was a necessary task, for we had to compress in a decade or two what Europe had achieved in 150 years. But this was not enough of a task. For while we run to catch up with the past, the present in the advanced world is moving into the future.

The current phase of development has been described by Andre Gunder Frank as that of "the production of technology by technology of the production of productive techniques". Giovanni Arrighi has put it equally well. The advanced sector of the world economy now deals with and has a monopoly over "strategic (economic) decision-making control and administration, research and development, and other 'brain' activities." Execution, including the production of consumer and producers' goods, can be shared with the Second and Third World. In other words, the brain activities are to be concentrated in the core or advanced European countries, U.S.A. and Japan and the Second and the Third Worlds are to concentrate on "muscle and nerves activities." However much the multinational corporations take their productive activities to other countries, they concentrate the 'brain activities' or production of 'productive' techniques in the core countries.

It is this new situation we have to face and conform to. This means that the vision and the objective of the Nehru era—that of 'catching up with the West' and on that basis to build a more egalitarian and just society—must continue on inspiring us, but the means and the goals of technological transformation must undergo a change. The real option before all of us are as Immanuel Wallerstein put it as early as 1980, "For the 1990s the basic policy issue is who will gain the competitive edge in the new technologies of microelectronics, biotechnology, and energy resources. Success will be determined by an interlocking triplet of research and development innovations; reduction of real costs of production; and increased access to markets for the older sectors of production—formerly high-profit sectors, now medium-profit sectors such as electronics, automobiles, and even computers."

Once the objective and the path to reaching it are clear, the quick mastery of the new leading sectors of economic activity—several contemporary economic issues beginning to become clear. First, planning and active state role in economic development, including role of public sector in production, still retain their primacy, for without them no Third World country can hope to compete in the new technology sectors. Second, if the new phase of Industrial Revolution is based on brain-activity, then education, especially higher education, acquires a critical significance. Moreover, not only quantity but the quality of education must also be treated as urgent tasks. Any populist effort, in its many guises, to neglect the quality of education must be opposed, for the cost of neglect here is as great as the neglect of machine-making and other capitalist goods industries in he earlier periods.

Third, the drain of capital and resources, which is a case of India is, in any case not significant, is bad but worse is the brain-drain to which the country has been subjected in recent years. The ways and means must be found to prevent and reverse the brain-drain to the USA and Europe. More than NRI capital we need the physical presence of the present NRIs in India and the checking of others becoming NRIs in a continuous flow. India also suffers from internal brain-drain. One, there is the continuous non-utilization of the brains of crores of rural and urban poor children and youth who are given such poor education in the schools that their further mental and intellectual development is scotched in the very beginning. Two, there is the growing reservation in schools, colleges and technological institutions and in jobs which will keep out a major segment of our brain-power and force it to migrate. Three, even those who stay to work in our universities, research organizations, and factories are rapidly frustrated in their efforts to grow or contribute to technological and industrial production because of the hierarchical and bureaucratic organization of these institutions.

Fourth, it becomes clear that those who oppose, with whatever argument, the development of modern science and technology are contributing to India's underdevelopment and recolonization in real terms no less than those who helped the company of merchants conquer India in the 18th century, leading to India missing out the first four phases of the Industrial Revolution.

Our analysis also shows the US demand on Super 301 in its true light. For, with the emphasis on control and administration, R&D, financial and investment decision-making, *i.e.,* on brain activities in general, in the latest phase of Industrial Revolution the role of the service sector, research and innovation and patents acquires not only increasesing importance but systemic significance from the point of view of independent capitalist development.

Fifth, the role of foreign capital and multi-national corporations has to be seen in the broad context discussed above. On the one hand, India has to, and has no choice but to, participate actively in the world capitalist economy. On the other hand, its own economic development has not reached a stage where its incorporation in or integration with world capitalist economy no longer faces the danger of subordination and subservience to metropolitan capital. So long as what Marxists describe as the stage of primitive capital accumulation and Rostow as the pre-take-off stage is not fully transcended and the process of autonomous capital accumulation fully established, the danger of renewed subordination will continue. Today there is no doubt that this danger still takes the form of domination through the investment of foreign capital.

But it is also obvious that not all foreign capital investment poses this danger. Indian economy, Indian capitalist class, and the Indian state have reached a stage where they can certainly absorb a certain degree of foreign capital especially to serve the dual purposes of absorption of technology and organizational structures and skills and provide a degree of competition to indigenous entrepreneurs, private or state. What we have to avoid is the pattern of Latin American style dependent development where the multinational corporation control key economic positions and determine the predominant patterns of international exchange. There is the great danger that, though foreign capital investment would result in industrial development, it should simultaneously perpetuate technological backwardness relative to the advanced capitalist countries. While some industries of the second, third, and fourth phases of Industrial Revolution would be transferred to India, the advanced brain-activities would continue to be kept out of it and would remain the monopoly of the First World. In other words, while our former hostility to foreign capital should be moderate, our policy of controlling its direction and role has to be continued.

What about equity and social justice? Jawaharlal Nehru was absolutely correct in linking development and rapid industrialization with equity and social justice. Removal of poverty and reduction of social inequality depend upon increasing supply of mass consumption goods and creation of employment through industrialization. But the opposite is also true. Creation of a mass market for products of modern industry, including recent-most durables which ease the burdens of household running or bring entertainment to the door, depends upon reduction of social inequality via better distributions of income.

This means, above all that a high rate of economic growth and removal of poverty should not be counterpoised, the two are interlinked and interdependent. It is not accidental that the socialist and humanist Nehru was not able to take any concrete steps towards poverty-removal or devoted any substantial resources to the task; while the much more financial resources could be devoted by Manmohan government to such poverty-removal programmes as the Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP). The difference lies in the availability of greater social surplus in Rajiv Gandhi's India made possible by Nehru-led planning and development.

In the absence of any short-term prospects of a socialist system coming into being, what is today needed is to rapidly increase the rate of economic growth on the basis of latest technology, but not depend on the already exploded trickle-down theory that the poor will be also somehow benefitted. Active steps should be taken to devote a part of the increasing social surplus to programmes such as the Employment Guarantee Scheme. But this also will not happen on its own. It will require immense pressure by the organized and mobilized poor. Hence the significance of the maintenance and deepening of democracy and civil liberties. The other side of the medal is the need to avoid populism by unscrupulous or heedless political forces which would emphasize the immediate needs and demands of the masses at the cost of long-range economic development. For the basic needs of the masses may not be fulfilled by economic development, but they cannot be fulfilled without economic development either. The social need is to combine maximization of the rate of capital accumulation, both social and individual, and therefore of economic growth with increasing welfare of the masses which means, in our conditions, the lower 50 per cent of the population. This perspective should also determine the mix of modern industry-based on the latest technology and small-scale and rural industry, and of brain-activities and mass welfare. And in no case can we accept the World Bank recipe that we should confine our economic policies to the satisfaction of basic needs while leaving the latest technology and its development to the First World, for that is a sure recipe for keeping India a permanent part of the Third World, of the periphery, of the neo-colonial world, whatever nomenclature one may use.