#### **References 391**

- Ewald, P. W. (1994). *Evolution of infectious disease*. London: Oxford University Press.
- Farmer, P. (1992). *AIDS and accusation: Haiti and the geography of blame*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Farmer, P. (1999). *Infections and inequalities: The modern plagues*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Ford, J. (1971). *The role of the trypanosomiases in African ecology: A study of the tse-tse fly problem*. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
- Frank, C., Mohamed, M. K., Strickland, G. T., Lavanchy, D., Arthur, R. R., Magder, L. S. et al. (2000). The role of parenteral antischistosomial therapy in the spread of Hepatitis C virus in Egypt. *The Lancet*, *355* (9207), 887.
- Hardin, A., with P. Auzel. Wildlife Utilization and the emergence of viral diseases. In *Hunting and Bushmeat Utilization in the African Rainforest*. Advances in Applied Biodiversity Sciences (2): 85–92. Washington, DC.: Center for Applied Biodiversity Science at Conservation International.
- Hooper, E. (1999). *The river: A journey to the origins of HIV and AIDS*. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
- Hours, B. (1985). *L'État sorcier: Santé publique et société au Cameroun*. Paris: l'Harmattan.

Hous, (1999). Stalking a killer in Russia's prisons. *Science*, *286*, 1670.

- Inhorn, M. C., & Brown, P. J. (Eds.). (1997). *The anthropology of infectious disease: International health perspectives*. Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach.
- Institute of Medicine. (1992). *Emerging infections: Microbial threats to health in the United States*. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- Karlen, A. (1996). *Man and microbes: Disease and plagues in history and modern times*. New York: Touchstone Books.
- Kim, J. Y., Irwen, A., Millen, J., & Young, J. (Eds.). (2000). *Dying for growth: Global inequality and the health of the poor*. Boston: Common Courage Press.
- Kimmerling, M. (2000). The Russian equation: An evolving paradigm in tuberculosis control. *International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease*, *4*(12), S160–S167.

- Kiple, K. F. (1993). *The Cambridge world history of human disease*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Krause, R. M. (Ed.). (1998). *Emerging infections: Biomedical research reports*. New York: Academic Press.
- Lindenbaum, S. (1979). *Kuru sorcery: Disease and danger in the New Guinea highlands*. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Lock, M. (1993). *Encounters with ageing: Mythologies of menopause in North America and Japan*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lupton, D. (1994). *Medicine as culture: Illness, disease and the body in western societies*. London: Sage.
- McCormick, J. B., & Fischer-Hoch, S. (1996). *The virus hunters: Dispatches from the frontline*. London: Bloomsbury.
- Nichter, M. (1989). *Anthropology and international health: South Asian case studies*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
- Ranger, T., & Slack, P. (1992). *Epidemics and ideas: Essays on the historical perception of pestilence*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Rosenberg, C. (1992). *Explaining epidemics and other studies in the history of medicine*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Ruffié, J., & Sournia, J. C. (1984). *Les épidémies dans l'histoire de l'homme: Essai d'anthropologie médicale*. Paris: Flammarion.
- Shilova, M. V., & Dye, C. (2001). The resurgence of tuberculosis in Russia. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B356*, 1069–1075.
- Thompson, R. C. A. (2000). *Molecular epidemiology of infectious diseases*. London: Arnold.
- Weindling, P. (Ed.). (1995). *International health organisations and movement, 918–1939*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Whitman, J. (2000). Political processes and infectious diseases. In J. Whitman, (Ed.), *The politics of emerging and resurgent infectious diseases* (pp. 1–14). London: Macmillan.
- Woolhouse, M. E. J., & Dye, C. (Eds.). (2001). Biology [Special issue]. *Philosphical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 356*.

# **Genetic Disease I: History and Mechanisms**

#### **Larry Leon Mai**

A genetic disease may be defined as any condition caused or influenced by a malfunctioning gene or cytogenetic (chromosome) error that affects an organism's capacity for adaptation. Excepting lethal defects and sterility, genetic diseases display certain familial modes of inheritance and exhibit morbidity and mortality patterns that may compromise direct fitness. Genetic diseases have been called "inborn errors of metabolism," molecular defects, hereditary diseases, and familial diseases (Mai, Young Owl, & Kersting, 2004). Synonyms for "disease" in this context include anomaly, condition, morbid effect or defect, deficiency, disorder, and syndrome.

Some sources restrict discussions of genetic disease to defects of single genes; others include polygenic disorders and the cytogenetic defects as well (Habener & Williams, 2001; King, Rotter, & Morulsky, 1992).<sup>1</sup> This entry touches on all three manifestations of mutation.

Worldwide, more than half of all conceptions, and about 7% of all live-born children, are affected by some form of genetic disease.

Many folk taxonomies of "disease" classify affected individuals with due consideration to exceptional phenotypic signs (including non-visual signals), whether selfreported or externally diagnosed (Atran, 1998). Western nosology<sup>2</sup> also considers phenotypic signs and manifestations, but differs significantly from folk medical systems in the ascription of meanings to those signs—to the etiologies, or causes of phenotypic morbidity (Marks, 2001, pp. 62–64; McKee, 1987). As Western medicine diverged in recent centuries from its folk-based roots, its etiologies incorporated at first histological, then cellular, and finally, sub-cellular and molecular aspects. Each of these diagnostic levels has been progressively dependent upon an evolving and sometimes invasive technology. Consequently, the Western process of clinical diagnosis has become, in large part, a taxonomy of inferred mechanisms and nanomechanisms appended to classic phenotypic descriptions.

Among the most esoteric and counter-intuitive aspects of Western medical subsystems is the ascription of "genetic" causes to phenotypic morbidity. A genetic etiology has three facets: the exceptional phenotype, a familial mode of transmission (when reproduction is possible), and a cryptic mode of defect (mutation). Historically, the realization of these facets proceeded in that order, as well. Although most traditional medical systems acknowledge abnormal phenotypes, exact knowledge of transmission modes is sometimes problematic, and full knowledge of the mechanisms of mutation is for the most part recent and specifically Western.

## **A BRIEF HISTORY OF GENETIC DISEASE**

## **Antiquity**

**Herodotus to Maupertuis.** The Greek historian and geographer Herodotus in the 4th century BCE became the first scholar to produce an attributable description of a genetic condition in humans: "The goddess [Aphrodite] afflicted the Scythians … and all their descendants forever with *hermaphroditism*3…" (*Historiae*, book I: 105). According to myth, the original Hermaphroditus was first a son of the Greek god Hermes and goddess Aphrodite; Hermaphroditus later fused with the nymph Salamacis to produce a single individual with both female and male characters. Conversely, Mittwoch has interpreted the Hebraic version of Eve's creation to mean that Adam was first a hermaphrodite who was then bisected into a male and a female. Other hermaphroditic gods, such as Ardhanarisvara (the fusion of Siva and Sakti), can be found the literatures of India and Persia (Mittwoch, 1986).

In the *Corpus Hippocraticum* of the Greek physician Hippocrates of Cos (460–377 bce) are found anecdotal comments on familial *epilepsy*, and also descriptions of people from the Caucasus who possessed congenital skull deformations that he termed macrocephalia (probably *Proteus syndrome*). Aristotle of Stagira (384–322 bce) described several familial conditions that "skipped generations." *Dwarfism, albinism*, and *hemophilia* were all described as far back as the 1st century of the Christian Era. Speculations abound that Old Testament writings imply that Noah himself may have been affected with albinism. The biblical giant Goliath may have been afflicted with *acromegaly*.

As these early examples show, stories exist in many cultures to explain the existence of exceptional humans. In order to explain their presence, their etiologies (at least in the Western view) have been confounded within a fabric of mythology and evolving local medical knowledge. *Sickle cell disease (SCD)*, for example, is a classic genetic disease (see Table 2) that for centuries prior to Western knowledge of its existence had been known to run in Nigerian families in either a "not-so-severe" or a "severe" form (Konotey-Ahulu, 1991). Until recently, this clinical entity was also caught up in an indigenous belief that a second child born with SCD to a family was almost certainly a reincarnation of the previous sibling who had already died of the disease (Nzewi, 2001; Onwubalili, 1983).

It was, however, the French naturalist Pierre Louis Moreau de Maupertuis (1698–1759), who, in *Venus Physique* (1746), provided a dissertation on the origin of skin color which contained statements that were antecedents to the modern genetic concepts of epigenesis, mutation, and particulate inheritance. Maupertuis also analyzed pedigrees of families with *polydactyly*, and although his work was non-experimental, he provided the first truly modern understanding of the heritable nature of certain diseases, antedating Mendel by over a century (Glass, 1968).

X-linked inheritance, because of its peculiar pattern, was reported early, by M. Lort in 1779, when he described *color blindness* in humans. Forty years later, in 1820, C. F. Nasse proposed that *hemophilia* occurred only in males, and could be transmitted by unaffected females. In 1761, Joseph Kölreuter observed segregation of autosomal

#### **A Brief History of Genetic Disease 393**

recessive traits in the pea plant, as did John Goss in 1822, and Thomas Knight in 1823. Other familial diseases in humans—such as *Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy*, described in 1871—were documented in the 19th century, but the nature of the familial patterns was not then generally understood.

### **The Recent Historical Period**

**Mendel, Darwin, Weissmann.** In 1865 Gregor Mendel (1822–1884), conducted now classic experiments with the common garden pea *Pisum sativum*, and defined several basic genetic principles, such as trait segregation and the notion of recessive inheritance, in his explanation of discontinuous variation. Mendel demonstrated that what he called "factors" (*elementen*, today's genes) are discrete, particulate units that segregate in predictable patterns, even though they may skip generations. Two papers (1866, 1870) and a few letters are all that remain of his scientific experiments, a body of work that was misunderstood and thus infrequently cited during his lifetime. When Mendel's work on discrete variation was rediscovered in 1900, it became the foundation of modern genetics (Dunn, 1991).

The biological explanation of discontinuous variation was, along with transmutation (evolution), one of the intractable biological problems of its day: neither Herbert Spencer's "living units" (1864) nor the hydraulic "gemmules" in Charles Darwin's pangenesis (1868) contained adequate explanations of inheritance. Indeed, Mendel's formulation of particulate "factors" and recessive inheritance is such a profoundly non-intuitive insight that even today's genetic counselors have difficulty explaining these concepts to patients. Embedded within the metaphor of sanguine transmission is an inherent perception that traits that "run in the family" (in the blood) cannot skip generations. Genetic transmission is especially difficult to understand when conditions such as *breast cancer* can be passed down through unaffected males, or when the kinship system of the family in question conflicts with the pattern of genetic transmission offered by the counselor (Richards, 1997).

It was in *The Germ-Plasm: A Theory of Heredity* (1893) by the German cytologist and physician August Weismann (1834–1914), that the first accurate (i.e., non-Lamarckian) description of the separation of germ cells from body cells was achieved. Weismann proposed that the germ-plasm is continuous from one generation to the next and is isolated from the soma ("Weismann's barrier"). Weismann's barrier between the germ-plasm and the soma was one of a set of three great eponymous ideas that coalesced at the beginning of the 20th century: the others were Mendelism (segregation and recessive inheritance) and Darwinism (natural selection). This triad of fundamental concepts is prerequisite to any accurate formulation that a disease could be "genetic."

### **The Modern Era**

**The Foundation of Genetics.** The traditional foundation of genetics, and therefore of medical genetics, dates from the 1900 "rediscovery" of Mendel's papers (Dunn, 1965). Between the years 1902 and 1909, several additional, clarifying terms were defined by the "founder of genetics" William Bateson (1861–1926) and his colleagues; these included cornerstone concepts such as genetics, segregation, P1, F1 and F2, allelomorph (allele), homozygosity and heterozygosity, epistasis, and indeed Mendelism itself.

Working with R. C. Punnett in 1906, Bateson reported the first exceptions to Mendel's second principle (independent assortment), and thus demonstrated the first case of trait linkage (in the sweet pea).

American geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan (1866–1945) and his students discovered chromosomal rearrangements such as inversions and translocations, mapped the first genes to chromosomes, and deduced the earliest linkage groups. Members of this research group both discovered and caused new (*de novo*) morbid mutations in the *Drosophila* genome.

**"Inborn Errors of Metabolism."** The English physician Archibald Edward Garrod (1857–1935), in collaboration with Bateson, first applied Mendel's principles to a human condition, *alkaptonuria* (see Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II). They concluded that alkaptonuria was a monogenic heritable genetic disease, and that it was a classic example of Mendel's autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Garrod was later to show that *albinism* and other genetic conditions behaved in a similarly predictable manner. Garrod's famous phrase, "inborn errors of metabolism" was the title of both a 1902 paper in the *Lancet*, and of a landmark 1909 book.

**The Rise and Fall of Eugenics.** British statistician (and cousin of Charles Darwin) Francis Galton (1822–1911) believed that complex or "continuous" physical traits (in contrast to Mendel's discrete, discontinuous traits) were also heritable and could be quantified. Stature and total fingerprint ridge count are well-documented examples of such traits. Galton was one of the inventors of the "twin method" of heritability estimation (see *multiple births* in Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II). Galton was the first, in 1889, to describe degrees of genetic similarity, then known as Galton's law, which states that in bisexual lineages (such as in humans) each individual receives, on average, one half of his or her inherited characteristics from each parent, one quarter from each grandparent, one eighth from each great grandparent, and so on.

In addition to these productive discoveries, Galton was also an outspoken advocate of the application of useful scientific information to human affairs, and to this end he coined the term *eugenics*. Eugenics is the controversial study of cultural mechanisms that may improve (or impair) the hereditary physical or mental qualities of future generations of human populations. One of its earliest advocates was geneticist Charles Benedict Davenport (1866–1944), an outspoken leader of the American eugenics movement. Although well intended it sought to remove all forms of genetic disease from society—this international movement suffered from a choice of traits with complex inheritance, including some with large environmental factors (e.g., "feeblemindedness"), and from controversial legal and political applications (compulsory sterilization, genocide). Thus its influence in America was fleeting, and much of its conceptual vocabulary and rationale has been ignored.

**Molecular Genetics.** Molecular geneticists study heritable systems at the chemical level, and attempt to understand the control of metabolic processes, including regulatory processes, by genes and gene products (Collins & Gelehrter, 1992). One of the first major steps in this endeavor occurred in 1949 when Linus Pauling and colleagues showed that structural changes ("sickling") occurred to the red blood cells of individuals with *SCD*. Subsequent to the crucial work of Rosalind Franklin, and of the follow-on description of the structure of DNA by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, Pauling was able to describe the first substitutional mutation in humans. In 1964 Pauling reported the displacement of one amino acid (glutamic acid) by another (valine) at sequential position six in the beta chain of adult hemoglobin—the exact substitutional mutation responsible for the sickle cell allele. Pauling coined the term "molecular disease" to stand for this new level of etiological description.

## **MECHANISMS OF GENETIC DISEASE**

There are two major classes of genetic disease: cytogenetic conditions (caused by chromosomal mutations), and molecular genetic conditions (caused by mutations to DNA).

### **Cytogenetic Conditions**

During the 20th century it became apparent to geneticists that chromosomes (the structures that package the genes) could be mutated independently of the genes themselves. Any cytogenetic condition, that is, a genetic disease caused solely by the rearrangement of whole or parts of chromosomes, came to be called a *major chromosome anomaly* (MCA). Among the better-known examples of MCAs are *Down syndrome (trisomy 21), Turner syndrome (monosomy X), Klinefelter syndrome (XXY aneuploidy)*, and *Cri-du-chat syndrome (5del)* (see Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II).

**Chromosomal Mutations.** These include changes in chromosomes that are either numerical (too many or too few chromosomes, causing aneuploidy) or structural (the translocation or repatterning of portions of chromosomes). A standard karyotype for each species, including humans, is used for comparison. Among the more common modes of chromosome mutations are deletions, fusions, dissociations (fissions), inversions, and translocations. Many MCAs can profoundly influence phenotypic features. In the 1860s, Dr. John Langdon Haydon Down identified a striking phenotype that he called Mongolism, later renamed *Down syndrome*. 4

The causal mechanism of Down syndrome was characterized in 1959 as a failure of homologous chromatids to separate normally during meiosis (non-disjunction), resulting in a fetus with three copies of a chromosome, now termed trisomy (in this case, trisomy-21).

The probability of experiencing certain chromosome mutations such as Down syndrome can be a function of maternal age. This change in probability is known in general as an advanced parental age effect, and is significant for some chromosome mutations that cause congenital genetic diseases after the mother reaches

#### **Mendelian Modes of Inheritance or Transmission 395**

about age 35. The probability of having *dizygotic twins* also increases in frequency with advancing maternal age.

Researchers soon described other *MCA*s that involve whole or large portions of chromosomes: the *Philadelphia chromosome* (a balanced translocation), *Edward syndrome* (trisomy 18), *Patau syndrome* (trisomy 13), *triplo-X syndrome* (XXX aneuploidy), and *double-Y syndrome* (XYY aneuploidy). As cytogenetic techniques improved, many additional MCAs were identified in humans, involving mechanisms such as Robertsonsonian translocations, inversions, duplications, and deletions.

Cytogenetic irregularities are responsible for roughly one half of all naturally terminated pregnancies.<sup>5</sup> Nature thus seems to eliminate most cytogenetic mutations; still, 1% of all live-born children possess a congenital cytogenetic disease.

### **Molecular Genetic Conditions**

In contrast to cytogenetic conditions, which involve large packages of genes, molecular diseases are usually monogenic (involve only one gene) and are often due to a single point mutation in DNA, such as that in hemoglobin described by Pauling. Among some better known examples of genetic disease due to molecular changes in DNA are *sickle cell disease, Tay–Sachs disease*, and *achondroplasia* (see Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II).

Subsequent to the discovery of vitamins by Funk in 1911—as the result of dietary deficiencies described in animal models—the etiology of several human "nutritional diseases," such as scurvy, was better understood. Some humans, however, fail to respond to vitamin therapy, and have been found to possess errors in the biochemical pathways that involve vitamin metabolism. These deficiencies tend to be rare, and are due usually to a point mutation in the DNA that codes for the proteins in the pathways involved. Examples of such molecular genetic diseases include *maple syrup urine disease* and *familial hypophosphatemia* (see Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II).

**Mutations to DNA: "Point" Mutations.** These are changes in single base pairs within a linear DNA sequence. Point mutations are rare, unpredictable, and permanent changes that result in a small, localized alteration to the chemical structure of DNA. Mutation is one of the mechanisms or forces of evolution, and

the ultimate source of all new genetic variation in populations. When a point mutation occurs in a coding portion of DNA (as in a gene) it sometimes, but not always, results in a change in a protein with deleterious effects to the phenotype, and the event may affect the fitness of the individual who possesses it.

Not all mutations to DNA are point mutations, however. Many recently described mechanisms, such as those that are the cause of the nucleotide triplet repeat expansion disorders, involve more than single base pairs (see the discussion of *anticipation* below).

Although unpredictable, mutations to DNA exhibit spatial clustering near causal agencies such as, for example, regional sources of radiation. Interestingly, the probability of experiencing certain mutations is also a function of advancing parental age, usually after about age 50. The incidence of *achondroplastic dwarfism*, for example, increases with advancing paternal age. Paternal age effects have also been confirmed for *Marfan syndrome* and for the *progerias* (see table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II).

About 6% of all live-born children possess a molecular genetic defect,6 although not all such defects manifest at birth.

Some molecular genetic defects manifest during later stages of life. Examples of late-onset molecular conditions include *Marfan syndrome* (in the second decade), *hereditary hemochromatosis* (third decade), *Huntington disease* (fourth decade), *amyotrophic lateral sclerosis* (fifth decade), and many forms of *cancer* (variable onset, e.g., *breast cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis*, and *malignant melanoma*).

# **MENDELIAN MODES OF INHERITANCE OR TRANSMISSION**

Mendel described only one pattern of inheritance, namely the monogenic recessive mode of inheritance. Five additional monogenic modes of inheritance unknown to Mendel have since come to be known by convention as Mendelian. These modes are summarized in Table 1.

### **Autosomal Inheritance**

**Autosomal Recessive Inheritance.** The key feature of the recessive mode is that a new mutation does not result in a new phenotype, so that only two

| YL   | Y only      | chromosome cannot<br>hemizygous, SNPs<br>Because males are<br>be evaluated for<br>dominance or<br>recessivity<br>on the Y                                                                             | XYa                                   | N/A         | Males only      | Father transmits trait<br>to all sons, but not to<br>daughters                                                                                                                                                                                                  | region of the Y, zinc<br>Sex-determining<br>finger protein                                                                                            |
|------|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| XD   | X only      | AA,<br>fitness (or AA, AY are<br>inviable if A is lethal),<br>exposed in female aA<br>often have lowered<br>AY), the latter pair<br>Two phenotypes<br>(aa, aY) and (aA<br>new mutation<br>and male AY | : Xaa, XaA, XAA<br>: XaY, XAY<br>     | A<br>→<br>a | :1<br>Both: 2   | transmit the trait to all<br>and females; affected<br>children, both males<br>females transmit the<br>carriers transmit the<br>trait to half of their<br>trait to all children<br>daughters; female<br>Affected males                                           | hypertrichosis, Rett<br>generalized<br>Congenital<br>syndrome                                                                                         |
| XR   | X only      | Aa, AY) and (aa,<br>fitness, new mutation<br>hidden in female Aa<br>but exposed in male<br>often have lowered<br>aY), the latter pair<br>Two phenotypes<br>(AA<br>aY                                  | : XAA, XAa, Xaa<br>Y<br>: XAY, Xa<br> | →a<br>A     | Primarily males | carriers (or affected);<br>affected sons, but all<br>can skip generations<br>50% of her sons are<br>Female carriers are<br>usually normal and<br>affected; affected<br>males never have<br>daughters are                                                        | dystrophy, X-linked<br>mental retardation<br>G6PD deficiency,<br>colorblindness,<br>insensitivity<br>hemophilia,<br>syndrome,<br>Androgen<br>muscular |
| AD   | Pairs 1–22  | mutation is exposed in<br>aA, AA often inviable<br>Two phenotypes, new                                                                                                                                | aa, aA, AA                            | →A<br>a     | Both, equally   | 50% affected offspring;<br>aA mating has<br>Affected person has<br>unaffected children<br>an affected parent;<br>have unaffected<br>grandchildren<br>children and<br>aa                                                                                         | intolerance, long-QT<br>amyotrophic lateral<br>neurofibromatosis,<br>sclerosis, lactose<br>Achondroplasia,<br>porphyries<br>syndrome,                 |
| AC/I | Pairs 1–22  | Three phenotypes, new<br>mutation is exposed in<br>AB, heterozygote<br>phenotype is<br>intermediate                                                                                                   | AA, AB, BB                            | →B<br>A     | Both, equally   | between heterozygotes<br>heterozygotes; mating<br>50% AB, and 15% BB<br>phenotypes, 25% AA,<br>produce all three<br>Both alleles are<br>phenotypes of<br>expressed in                                                                                           | hypercholesterolemia,<br>alpha thalassemia<br>Familial                                                                                                |
| AR   | Pairs 1–22  | heterozygote Aa, aa often<br>mutation is hidden in the<br>Two phenotypes, new<br>has lowered fitness                                                                                                  | AA, Aa, aa                            | →a<br>A     | Both, equally   | all children of two affected<br>aa) produce<br>affected offspring; mating<br>unaffected heterozygotes;<br>Matings between carriers<br>trait can skip generations<br>Aa) produce 25%<br>people will be affected;<br>between an affected<br>person (AA<br><br>(Aa | pseudohermaphroditism,<br>albinism, cystic fibrosis,<br>neurosensory deafness,<br>hyperlipoproteinemia,<br>Oculocutaneous<br>situs inversus           |
|      | Chromosomes | Attribute(s)                                                                                                                                                                                          | Genotypes                             | Direction   | Sex affected    | Pedigree<br>features                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Example(s)                                                                                                                                            |

**Table 1.** Mendelian Modes of Inheritance*a*

*a*The major modes of monogenic inheritance in humans, also known as the Mendelian modes. Abbreviations used include AD for autosomal dominant, AR for autosomal recessive, AC/I for autosomal codominant (or incomplete dominance), XR for X-linked recessive, XD for X-linked dominant, YL for Y-linked. The direction of mutation is shown in the row labeled "Direction", with the normal or "wild-type" allele shown on the left, and the new mutant allele to the right.

#### **Non-Mendelian Modes of Inheritance 397**

phenotypes exist, one containing at least one dominant allele, and the other containing two copies of the recessive allele. An original example of the autosomal recessive mode is pea shape in Mendel's common garden peas.

**Incomplete Dominance ("Co-dominance").** The key features of the dominant mode are that a new mutation results in a new phenotype in the heterozygote, and its phenotype is intermediate between the two homozygotes. A familiar human example is the wavy-haired heterozygous offspring of straight- and curly-haired homozygous parents. The A and B alleles in the ABO blood groups interact in a co-dominant fashion.

**Complete Dominance.** The key feature of the dominant mode is that a new mutation results immediately in a new phenotype in the heterozygote. In many cases the subsequent homozygote (AA) is inviable.

### **Sex-linked Inheritance**

**X-linked Inheritance.** The key feature of the X-linked mode is that males and females are affected disproportionately. X-linked genes are transmitted in either a monogenic dominant or recessive mode of inheritance. Females can be either homozygous or heterozygous for X-linked traits, whereas normal males are always hemizygous for loci located on the X chromosome.

**Y-linked Inheritance.** The key feature of the Y-linked mode is that only males carry the gene. Y-linked inheritance is displayed by genes located on the non-recombinant region of the Y chromosome. Normal females never possess a Y chromosome, and normal males are always hemizygous for the Y chromosome. Absence of the *SRY gene* on a Y chromosome, through either mutation or crossing-over (to an X chromosome), results in a condition known as the *XY female syndrome*.

# **NON-MENDELIAN MODES OF INHERITANCE**

Non-Mendelian modes of inheritance have received increased attention during the past few decades. Several lines of evidence, such as twin studies and animal models, had long suggested that certain human conditions were likely inherited; however, classic Mendelian models failed to explain their observed patterns of inheritance. While yet controversial, some of these modes—especially certain epigenetic<sup>7</sup> modes such as *genomic imprinting* and *anticipation*—are promising.

### **Monogenic Factors**

**Mitochondrial Inheritance.** Mitochondria are cytoplasmic organelles that contain extranuclear DNA (mtDNA). Mitochondria are responsible for certain oxidative metabolic functions that store and release energy. Children (both males and females) inherit mtDNA from their mothers only. Since the father's mtDNA is located in the sperm midpiece (the mitochondrial sheath), which is lost at fertilization, all children of the same mother are hemizygous for maternal mtDNA and are thus identical to each other and to their mother. Because of its cytoplasmic location in eukaryotes, mtDNA does not undergo meiosis and there is normally no crossing-over, hence there is no opportunity for introgression of the father's mtDNA. All mtDNA is thus inherited maternally; mtDNA has been used to infer the pedigree of the well-known "mitochondrial Eve." In mammals, the mtDNA ring contains some 16,000 base pairs and codes for 13 proteins, 22 tRNAs, and two rRNAs. Mutations in mtDNA can result in maternallytransmitted conditions that compromise cell respiration, such as *mitochondrial encephalopathy lactic acidosis syndrome (MELAS)* and other *mitochondrial myopathies*.

**Penetrance and Expressivity.** Penetrance is the frequency of expression of a certain phenotype; some alleles, even when present, are expressed less than 100% of the time, and thus are said to have a lowered penetrance. Examples of variable penetrance conditions include *asthma, diabetes, dyslexia*, and *PTC tasting*. Expressivity is the range of phenotypes exhibited by a certain specific genotype as a variant from the normal. Examples of variable expression include *familial adenomatous polyposis* and *long-QT syndrome*.

These ambiguous and perhaps outdated concepts may soon be supplanted by other terminology as newer epigenetic factors, such as genomic imprinting and anticipation, are discovered and described.

### **Epigenetic Factors**

**Genomic Imprinting, Uniparental Disomy, and Anticipation.** *Genomic imprinting*, also known as parental imprinting, is an epigenetic, non-Mendelian phenomenon that occurs during gametogenesis in which the expression of a gene or chromosome region depends on whether it is inherited from the mother or the father, who is then called the parent-of-origin. Two modes have been proposed to explain the phenomenon: (1) inheritance of two copies of a gene from one parent as in cases of uniparental disomy (see below); and (2) methylation of the allele contributed by one parent, making an offspring effectively hemizygous for the other parent's allele. Four confirmed examples of genomic imprinting in humans include: (1) *myotonic dystrophy*, (2) *retinoblastoma*; (3) *Huntington disease*, where affected individuals have more severe clinical signs if the trait is inherited from the father; and (4) the *Prader–Willi/Angelman syndromes*, where a single genetic cause (a small deletion) if inherited from the father results in one syndrome (Prader– Willi), while if inherited from the mother results in another, completely different phenotypic syndrome (Angelman).

Double copies of certain alleles inherited from a male seem to control normal placental development. Double copies of certain alleles inherited from a female seem to control normal embryogenesis. Imprinting has been suggested as a mechanism that may be partly involved in the evolution of conflicting reproductive strategies between males and females (Haig, 2000; Terleph, 2000).

Genomic imprinting caused by *uniparental disomy* (as in mode (1), above) may be accompanied by *loss of heterozygosity* (LOH) of all loci along an entire chromatid. In other words, several loci on a chromatid seem to convert spontaneously from heterozygosity (Rr) to homozygosity (rr). LOH is a feature of many malignant cell lines in genetic disease, and is an important non-Mendelian epigenetic phenomenon. LOH may be achieved by several modes, but it is suspected that nondisjunction is the most common modality. In this case, an individual who is heterozygous (Rr) in germline DNA for a cancer gene such as *retinoblastoma* could later acquire the cancer "spontaneously" during a cell division event and become an rr homozygote. During cell division the individual would be temporarily hemizygous at the RB locus due to isochromy in one cell line (R), and polyzygous (Rrr) due to trisomy in a second. The isochromic cell line containing the single R allele would most likely be inviable and resorb. In the remaining cell line, however, if the third trisomic chromosome is then lost such that the temporarily polysomic (Rrr) cell line reverts to a disomic (rr) cell line, this second mutation could give rise to a converted cell line in which the subsequent clone would be homozygous (rr) for all the loci on the affected chromatid pair. This altered cell line would be malignant.

Uniparental disomy, as this mechanism is termed, is one of several important new epigenetic non-Mendelian mechanisms that can now explain many formerly elusive developmental phenomena at the cellular level. One of the other important new epigenetic mechanisms is anticipation.

*Anticipation* is a phenomenon whereby a genetic disorder becomes increasingly severe from one generation to the next (the age of onset usually gets lower, as well), and is a feature of about 40 nucleotide triplet repeat expansion disorders in humans. In anticipation, a gene gets progressively longer, as generations pass, usually due to unequal crossing-over. This succession of lengthening events usually makes the gene progressively more dysfunctional with time, and apparently explains many cases where symptoms are similar, yet differ by degrees. Examples of genetic diseases characterized by anticipation are *androgen insensitivity syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Huntington disease*, and *myotonic dystrophy* (see Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II).

Genomic imprinting and anticipation have been recently implicated in the etiology of certain conditions long suspected to have a genetic component but that did not yield to simple Mendelian models of disease. Among the multifactorial, high heritability conditions that are being re-evaluated in the light of these new mechanisms are the *major affective disorders* (both bipolar and manicdepressive phases), *Tourette syndrome*, and *schizophrenia* (Anonymous, 1997a, 1997b).

### **Polygenic Factors**

**Heritability and Risk of Inheritance in Multifactorial Disorders.** Heritability may be defined as the additive proportion of total phenotypic variance in a polygenic trait attributable to genetic variation in a population. The values of heritability estimates can range from 0% to 100%. Heritability is a function of genetic factors, environmental factors, and the interaction of genetic and environmental factors. Simple Mendelian traits have a heritability of 100%. Diseases with a heritability of less than 100% are inevitably controversial, such as those listed in the previous paragraph.

Other non-Mendelian mechanisms of clinical significance have been recently re-evaluated in terms of new

#### **Biotechnology and "Darwinian Medicine" 399**

molecular knowledge (the "new genetics"), but are not considered in this review (Anonymous, 1997a, 1997b). These mechanisms include: X inactivation, dosage compensation, epistasis, ectopic recombination, meiotic drive, position effects, microdeletions, other contiguous gene syndromes, chimerism, pleiotrophic homeotic mutations, slippage, and germline mosaicism.

### **Phenocopies**

**Kuru, New Variant CJD, and the Other Prion Diseases.** Phenocopies appear initially to be inherited conditions, but upon closer inspection turn out to be, either wholly or in part, due to an environmental agency. The thalidomide babies of the 1960s, for example, were teratogen-induced phenocopies of *phocomelia*.

*Kuru* is a chronic, progressive, uniformly fatal transmissible neurodegenerative disease now suspected to be a phenocopy, and is caused by a prion. Several other *prion diseases* also exist, such as new variant *Creutzfeld–Jakob disease (vCJD)*; because the prion diseases may *not* be wholly environmental, however, these will be discussed in more detail below.

## **DISTRIBUTIONS OF GENETIC DISEASES**

The genetic epidemiology and distributions of genetic disease is the subject of the companion entry, Genetic Disease II.

# **ONLINE SOURCES OF CURRENT INFORMATION ABOUT SPECIFIC GENETIC DISEASES**

*Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)* is a Federally-funded, searchable database of virtually all 6,000 known or suspected heritable conditions or traits. Each trait is assigned an OMIM identification number referred to as "McKusick's ID," after the founder of the database, Dr. Victor McKusick. The URL of OMIM is: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/

*Merck Manual Online* is a searchable database containing most morbid conditions, including many with a genetic component. The URL is: http://www.merck.com/ pubs/mmanual/sections.htm

*The Human Genome Project* (HGP) has an excellent subsection on genetic diseases. In the Table of Contents at the HGP site, find the Frame/Section titled "Medicine and the New Genetics," and click on "Genetic Disease Information-pronto!" The base URL is: http://www.ornl. gov/hgmis/

# **BIOTECHNOLOGY AND "DARWINIAN MEDICINE"**

## **Demographic Transition(s) and Genetic Disease**

Demographic theory suggests that as human populations become economically developed, there will be a reduction in mortality that leads to population growth, sometimes (but not always) followed by a reduction in fertility that leads to growth equilibrium. There are three or sometimes four stages to this process; the fourth stage invokes the reduction of morbidity, as well. In the early stages of a demographic transition, life spans are short, and morbidity and mortality are related to trauma and infectious disease. In the latter stages, average life spans are much longer, and morbidity and mortality are more due to degenerative processes and age-dependent genetic diseases. Most diseases (such as cancer) and degenerative processes (such as arthritis), even though not classified as "genetic," impact human metabolic and physiological processes that are themselves the result of gene-mediated processes, and will come in time to have a larger molecular aspect to their etiology. Thus, many developmental, congenital, metabolic, infectious, allergic, neoplastic, thrombotic, and some psychiatric conditions will likely come to be understood, in some sense, as increasingly genetic (Childs, Moxon, & Winkelstein, 1992). Only trauma, certain functional/ psychosomatic defects, and some psychiatric conditions seem to be destined to escape this fate. Many of the emerging diseases appear to have a genetic or molecular component: several cancers, degenerative diseases, and many infant diarrheas are now understood by Western researchers to have at least a partially molecular etiology.

Examples of cancers or cancer-related agents with a genetic component include: some *breast cancers, Burkitt lymphoma*, chronic myeloid leukemia (see the *Philadelphia chromosome*), *colon cancer* and *familial adenomatous polyposis, malignant melanoma*, those conditions affected by mutations to the p16 and *p53 tumor suppressor(s)*, the *Ras oncogene*, and *retinoblastoma*.

Degenerative genetic diseases with a late onset are well known: in addition to those already mentioned are *essential tremor* and *Parkinson disease*. Among examples of late-onset, "normative" degenerative diseases of aging that have an acknowledged genetic component are: rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, and systemic lupus erythematosis, although each has a significant environmental components as well.

Similarly, among the many examples of malabsorption diseases with a genetic component, and that are significant contributors to the prevalence of diarrhea, worldwide, are: *disaccharide intolerance* (including *lactose intolerance*), *familial Mediterranean fever, fructose intolerance, galactosemia, glucose–galactose malabsorption, glycogen storage disease*, and *inflammatory bowel disease*.

### **The Human Genome Project**

The Human Genome Project (HGP) project was initiated in 1989 and funded by the U.S. government, with one of its explicit goals set as the understanding and cure of genetic disease. The HGP's initial task was to locate and identify all the coding genes in the human genome by the year 2005. A secondary goal, to sequence the DNA in the entire human genome, was expected to take somewhat longer. The American HGP was eventually combined with the international Human Genome Organization (HUGO) to make the project global in scope. Currently, the worldwide HGP is substantially ahead of schedule. One of the major findings of the rough draft of the human genome, completed early in 2001, was that the number of human genes may be closer to 30,000 than to the previously higher estimate of 70,000, and that the enormous library of human proteins is produced by fewer complete cistrons (coding sequences) than initially estimated. The human genome thus has an apparent protein: gene ratio higher than 3 : 1, yet some other species maintain a ratio that is closer to 1 : 1. This seems to be due in humans (and some other organisms) to differential splicing of segments of genes called exons ("exon shuffling"). The human genome appears to be composed of thousands, perhaps even hundreds of thousands, of these smaller functional segments, rather than complete and contiguous larger genes. Through differential splicing of these exons, many large and complex genes can apparently be constructed. This organization of the human genome has dramatically affected how research in genetic disease is being approached.

Many of these smaller segments are almost identical in their DNA sequences to segments found in "lower" species such as mice, fruit flies, and even yeast. One can use the analogy of an arm to understand that it might be constructed of functional exons that separately code for elbows, long bones, carpals, and metacarpals, rather than from one large gene called "human arm." The elegance of this strategy is that each of the many smaller segments, such as a molecular "elbow," had to evolve only once, and that through "exon shuffling" they can be used in many different ways in many different organisms. The function of such genes within other organisms can be studied, and the results extrapolated to humans. This study of the differential use of linear DNA and the assembly of nearly identical segments of DNA across species is known as *genomics*. Processes that occur within the organism after the genes are transcribed are called *epigenetic* processes.

Interest in epigenetic processes is increasing dramatically, and the prion diseases provide an illustration. "True" genetic diseases are transmitted vertically; that is, from one generation to the next. The discovery in 1957 that certain genetic conditions also have *phenocopies* conditions that mimic a known genetic disease or a genetic mode of transmission, but that can also be transmitted horizontally, by infection—was startling. Even more surprising was a suggestion made in the 1980s by Stanley Prusiner, known as the "protein only hypothesis," that the agent of these phenocopy infections lacked DNA, unlike any then-known infectious agent. Prusiner's "proteinaceous infectious particles," or *prions*, were soon validated (Prusiner & Scott, 1997), and they quickly blurred the distinction between vertical (genetic) and horizontal (infectious) transmission.

Although scrapie was known to cause neurodegeneration in sheep, the first of these prion-transmitted conditions to be described in humans was *Kuru*, a neurodegenerative disease found in the Highlands of New Guinea, and now well known to medical anthropologists (Gajdusek & Zigas, 1957; Matthews et al., 1968; Rhodes, 1997). *Kuru* was at first thought to be a genetic disease, as family members of those afflicted with *Kuru*, primarily females and children, were eventually also affected. *Kuru* was next thought to be the action of a "slow virus," when infected human tissue caused the onset of similar symptoms in a chimpanzee infected experimentally. Only

#### **Biotechnology and "Darwinian Medicine" 401**

much later was the infectious agent shown to be a prion, passed to women and children who customarily ate the brains and other parts of cadavers, which men almost never did. Today, *Kuru* is thought of as an infectious disease. Whether or not this perception is valid will depend upon future research on the prion diseases (see below).

### **Creutzfeldt–Jakob Disease (CJD)**

CJD is a rare, partly inherited disease (about 15% of cases are classically inherited; other cases are either infectious or sporadic). Shortly after the outbreak of "mad cow disease" in Great Britain, the incidence of CJD also increased dramatically. CJD, which had been thought of until that time as a purely genetic condition, was being precipitated in humans after ingestion of contaminated beef. The infection pathway was circuitous: the cattle had been fed supplemental bone meal from dead sheep previously infected with scrapie, a disease also effected by a change in the *prion protein (PrPc)*. The prion that caused scrapie in the infected sheep had transformed normal bovine PrPc to cause bovine spongiform encepahalitis (BSE), and the infectious form of the BSE prion (PrPSc) when ingested by humans caused some of them to contract an analog, a new variant of CJD.

Researchers soon asked: Is CJD, like *Kuru*, an infectious disease, rather than a genetic condition? The answer turned out to be both yes and no. The gene for PrPc (PRNP) was mapped to the long arm of human chromosome 20, and it was soon cloned and sequenced. This sequencing revealed that humans are polymorphic for several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found in native PrPc. Of the 253 amino acids in PrPc, humans can have any of several amino acids at certain locations especially at codon 129. People can have either valine (V) or methionine (M) at this position, so the possible PrPc genotypes at position 129 are VV, VM, and MM. People with the MM genotype ("methionine homozygotes") overwhelmingly manifested the new transmissible variant form of CJD (called *vCJD*, formerly nvCJD, for new variant). In other words, methionine homozygotes (MM) have the vCJD-susceptible genotype. VM heterozygotes and VV homozygotes sometimes acquired the infectious form of CJD, but their incubation times were significantly longer than people with the homozygous MM genotype. How the infectious prion interacts with native prion (PrPc) to form transformed prion (PrPSc) is currently unclear. It is understood, however, that a second mutation at position 178 (aspartic acid to asparagine) is also required before native PrPc can be changed into the infectious form, PrPSc. Position 178 is located next to one of several bridging sites where a strong hydrogen bond holds the molecule in its proper 3D conformation; the normal topology is somehow disturbed by this second mutation, causing a process known as templated refolding, and results in PrPSc, a mutant conformational isoform of native PrPc.<sup>8</sup> Furthermore, a new, even smaller (176 base-pair) prion-like particle called Dopple (Dpl, "double," PRND) has also been discovered on chromosome 20p, just downstream from native PrPc. Dpl shares significant biochemical and structural homology with PrPc. Dpl also seems to interact *in vivo* with PrPc during this process of transformation to PrPSc (see Table 2).

More clarity was achieved when it was found that a related neurogenetic disease, familial fatal insomnia (FFI), was manifested predominately in VV genotype individuals who also had the mutation at position 178. Likewise, *Kuru* patients were almost all found to possess the MM genotype.

Both *Kuru* and new variant *Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (vCJD)* have begun to look suspiciously like classic cases of a *balanced genetic polymorphism* in which VM heterozygotes have a higher fitness than either genotypic class of homozygotes (MM or VV), both of which seem to have a higher susceptibility to prion-like diseases.

Like humans, sheep have specific PrPc genotypes that predispose susceptibility to transmissible scrapie (the "S" in PrPSc indicates that the original agent is scrapie).

Because PrPc is conserved in mammalian species, refolded PrPSc can apparently be shuttled between several species, causing similar but species-specific conditions called the transmissible neurodegenerative diseases (TNDs, or the *prion diseases*; for an excellent popular account of these events, see Rhodes'1997 book, *Deadly Feasts*). Homologous Dpl has also been found in several mammals.

The search for similar epigenetic processes such as those observed in the prion diseases—processes that occur after linear DNA has been transcribed into spliceable fragments within a species, called the *transcriptome*—has begun to take precedence over the sequencing effort for researchers in both the government-funded and private sectors. This effort, involving both DNA and several RNAs, is called *functional genomics*. The accumulation of

**Table 2.** Summary of Genotypic Data for New Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob Disease*<sup>a</sup>*

| Population         | Sample size | MM           | MV           | VV           | p, q       | Ref.b  |  |
|--------------------|-------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|------------|--------|--|
| Control<br>Control | 109<br>300  | 0.45<br>0.43 | 0.39<br>0.49 | 0.16<br>0.08 |            | 1<br>2 |  |
| Total Control      | 409         | 0.44         | 0.46         | 0.10         |            |        |  |
| H-W equilibrium    |             | (0.43)       | (0.45)       | (0.12)       | 0.67, 0.33 |        |  |
| nvCJD              | 15          | 0.73         | 0.14         | 0.13         |            | 1      |  |
| nvCJD              | 67          | 0.69         | 0.06         | 0.25         |            | 3      |  |
| nvCJD              | 35          | 1.00         | 0.00         | 0.00         |            | 4      |  |
| Total nvCJD        | 117         | 0.79         | 0.05         | 0.16         |            |        |  |

*<sup>a</sup>*Four studies have provided genotypic data on two control and three affected populations. The two control populations (top) total 409 individuals; allele frequencies for the pooled groups are methionine (M)0.67, and valine (V)0.33. The population appears to be in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.

Pooled data for the three nvCJD study groups (*N*117) indicates that a significant number of affected nvCJD individuals have prion genotype MM (79% observed vs. 44% expected) or VV (16% observed vs. 10% expected); although 46% of MV heterozygotes were expected to acquire nvCJD, only 5% of this group actually acquired the disease. These differences are highly significant (*p* 0.0001), and strongly suggest that MV heterozygotes are at a selective advantage relative to either of the homozygote classes.

*<sup>b</sup>*References: (1) Bratosiewicz et al. (2001); (2) Zimmerman et al. (1999); (3) Windl et al. (1996); (4) Will et al. (2000).

massive amounts of sequence and gene interaction relationship data is the work of those who practice *bioinformatics*. The old dogma of "one gene, one enzyme" has given way to a vision that a "gene" is an amalgam of fragments that can be used in several ways in many different organisms, and the path from raw gene sequence to final gene product may not be linear, or even determinate. The study of gene expression and how proteins are assembled and modified by both RNAs and other proteins (including prions) is called *proteomics*. Many agencies have already transferred resources from the HGP to this new effort; with less fanfare than the HGP launch in 1989, the Human Proteome Project (HPP) was funded by Congress in 2001. Because many of these epigenetic processes are so similar in both higher and lower species, proteomics seeks to understand both individual cases of dissimilarity and the cause of massive similarity in these processes across so many species, including the recently recognized domain of the *Archaea*. This research has given rise to an entirely new field of endeavor, *Darwinian Medicine*, the search for evolutionary explanations of vulnerabilities to disease (Nesse & Williams, 1996; Stearns, 1999; Trevathan, McKenna, & Smith, 1999).

### **Biotechnology**

Biotechnology is the industrial development of commercial products through the modification and extension of biological processes, and their commercial production through bulk processes such as fermentation. The development process may utilize intact organisms (e.g., bacteria or yeast) or natural substances (e.g., enzymes) extracted from such organisms. Biotechnology, as a modern human endeavor, dates to 1972 when scientists at Stanford University recombined fragments of DNA from different organisms, and the era of "genetic engineering" was born.

Recent events in biotechnology, including the HGP's draft of the human genome, have proven dramatic, and the evolution of this technology has occurred rapidly. Some critics hold that changes have come too fast for reflective human assimilation. Proponents counter that biotechnology is not new, that humans have been manipulating genotypes and phenotypes for some 10,000 years, since the time of early plant and animal husbandry, and that only the degree of technical sophistication has changed in recent decades.

Most of these events in the recent history of biotechnology directly impact the treatment and cure of genetic disease; those that do not, such as agricultural biotechnology, utilize methodology that has spun off from the primary medical endeavors. Among the banner events with both short-term (or proximate) and potentially long-term (ultimate) consequences for humanity are stem cell research, whole organism cloning, and human gene therapy.

### **Stem Cell Research and Cloning**

**Stem Cell Research.** An embryonic stem (ES) cell is any cell taken from a pre-implantation embryo. ES cells are totipotent, that is, they retain the potential to form any specialized cell type in the body. Totipotency is a characteristic of cells in the inner cell mass of a preimplantation blastocyst. A non-embryonic stem cell, on the other hand, is a cell from a slightly later stage of fetal development that can proliferate in an undifferentiated state, as well as give rise to differentiated cell lines. These latter stem cells are merely pluripotent, that is, relatively unspecialized stem cells not yet committed to becoming specific types of derived cells; for example, a dermal stem cell that can give rise to the several types of dermal tissues, but cannot give rise to brain tissue. Both types of stem cells can be manipulated in gene targeting and whole organism cloning.

**Cloning.** Whole organism cloning depends upon the manipulation of totipotent embryonic stem cells, or—as in the well-known case of Dolly the sheep—the technical reversion of a pluripotent stem cell into one that is thought to be totipotent. Advocates of cloning argue that unrestricted stem cell research is a critical prerequisite to realize any of the potential benefits of whole organism cloning.

Whole organism cloning is the creation of a collection of genetically identical individuals that have been derived from a single parent cell; that is, the clone has been reproduced asexually. In biotechnology, cloning usually involves growing genetically identical vectors or host cells—usually bacteria, yeast, or non-human mammalian cells grown in culture—which all contain the same piece of inserted recombinant DNA, including the target gene.9

One of the aims of stem cell research and whole organism cloning is the husbandry of pharmaceutically valued DNA fragments that have been successfully recombined into a larger organism. These fragments can then be harvested at will from that organism or from other clones of that organism. Recombinant human insulin, for example, is currently harvested from clones of bacteria that multiply rapidly in industrial-sized fermenting vats. The clones yield pounds of less toxic and less expensive product. Biotechnologists argue that the insertion of the same human insulin gene into a mammal instead of a bacterium so that product can be harvested daily from normal transgenic mammalian milk, is a logical quantitative

but not qualitative next step in this process. The proximate benefit of this process, it is argued, is a safer medical product (insulin, in this case) that can be substituted by injection for a patient's defective gene product, and that humanely saves the lives of juveniles afflicted with *insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IdDM)*.

Knowledge of these processes is not yet widespread, and one of the medical specialties that seeks to inform the public about these issues is genetic counseling.

## **Genetic Counseling and Gene Therapy**

**Genetic Counseling.** This is an allied medical specialty that provides an understanding of medical genetics, including the estimation of the empirical risk of recurrent inherited disorders that may be inherent in prospective families. Such counseling may include details of the laws of inheritance and pedigrees, a complete natural history of a genetic disorder, along with empirical risk estimates and the currently available options for testing and treatment. One of the options that may be available is gene therapy.

**Gene Therapy.** This is the treatment of a genetic disease by substitution of a working copy of a gene for a defective copy. This can be done by repeated injection, which is transient, or by the permanent insertion into cells of a normal gene or DNA segment that can correct an abnormal cellular function or disease. Three potential levels of gene therapy can be applied to genetic diseases.

**Potential Levels of Gene Therapy.** *Level 1: Substitutional gene therapy* is a transient, non-heritable replacement or augmentation of a working product for a null gene product, one typically knocked out by a mutation. The repeated use of recombinant human insulin by *insulin-dependent diabetics* as a replacement for genetically defective insulin, and glucocerebrosidase in the case of *Gaucher disease*, are examples of successful substitutional gene therapy.

*Level 2: Somatic cell gene therapy* is a longer-term, non-heritable modification of somatic cell genomes to cure or prevent deleterious conditions, without modification of gametes or the germ-line. Typically, body cells are removed from an individual, genetically modified or engineered, and placed back into the same individual. The first successful application of somatic gene therapy in humans occurred in the well-known case of Ashanti DaSilva, a four-year-old girl affected with a genetic form of SCID called *adenosine deaminase deficiency*, who, on September 14, 1990, at 12:52 pm,<sup>10</sup> successfully received a transfusion of her own cells in which her defective ADA gene had been genetically modified. An aerosol system that delivers a genetically engineered CFTR product to *cystic fibrosis* patients has also been developed.

These first two levels of gene therapy substitute or repair genes in a patient's body cells only and, very importantly, the sex cells remain unaffected. If the patient then chooses to reproduce, children may be affected with the same condition as the parent.

*Level 3: Gametic gene therapy* is the proposal of the permanent genetic engineering of either a patient's gametes or a fertilized pre-morula zygote, after which certain alterations are perpetuated in all the cell lines of a resulting embryo and the normal gene may be transmitted to future generations if the patient later chooses to reproduce. To date, gametic gene therapy has never been attempted in humans. Gametic gene therapy is also called germ-line or germ-cell gene therapy.

Gametic gene therapy is the only form of gene therapy that can potentially eliminate a genetic disease from an individual family line—by engineering *both* body and sex cells—so that subsequent reproduction results in unaffected offspring.<sup>11</sup>

### **Bioethical Concerns**

**Proximate versus Ultimate Effects of Intervention.** Anthropologists often point out that in the PTC taste blindness polymorphism there are nil frequencies of non-tasters among many recent hunting peoples, but high non-taster frequencies in cosmopolitan areas, where humans have been longer removed from a foraging subsistence (Boyce et al., 1976; Pool, 1992) (see *PTC tasting* in Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II).<sup>12</sup>

The classic explanation for this observation is that modernization provides both enhanced tools and special environments in which such a gene-based condition can survive and perhaps thrive—that culture in some respects buffers the harsh effects of natural selection, and that the former tension due to natural selection has been "relaxed." As populations modernize, the argument goes, the need to personally detect goitrogens and other toxic alkaloids becomes less and less necessary, and—like an unused organ that has atrophied through disuse—the result is a vestige of a former adaptation.

On the other hand, it has been argued that such cultural interventions into "natural" processes, while offering attractive short-term solutions, can ultimately result in a burden. Such ameliorative processes may ultimately only increase the genetic load of populations that exploit strategies that are only beneficial in the short term.

New forms of disease can be inadvertently introduced by iatrogenic measures.<sup>13</sup> In some cases, new forms of disease are produced as a direct result of proximate intervention. In the well-known case of *phenylketonuria*, the humane intervention by dietary management has the proximal effect of buffering the naturally debilitating course of this condition during the critical period of post-natal development, but can result in an entirely new form of the disease in subsequent generations, known as *maternal phenyketonuria* (see Table 1 of the entry Genetic Disease II).

In a more modern—and ethically more complex case, the cultural response to the genetic disease *IDDM* was, in the 1920s, due directly to the development of a molecular etiologic model of this mostly genetic disease. This led immediately to substitutional therapy: to the prophylactic substitution of defective human insulin molecules with working analogs of insulin extracted from pigs and cows. These porcine and bovine molecules were used until the 1980s, when less expensive recombinant human insulin produced in transgenic bacteria became available. The proximate, humane result of this medical intervention was that lives were saved, suffering was relieved, and the quality of life for those affected was vastly improved. Furthermore, *IDDM* individuals who prior to this prophylactic technology would probably have died before reproducing, now survived to procreate, and to achieve fitness parity with the unaffected population. Ironically, to the extent that IDDM (or any disease) is genetic, this meant that affected individuals survived to place new copies of their defective IDDM genes into the next generation, thus potentially increasing the incidence of the disease. Increases in IDDM incidence have been reported in Michigan (1949–1972), France (1988–1995), and in all the Nordic countries, where a secular increase in IDDM incidence has been noted for the past 70 years (Joner & Sovik, 1989; Levy-Marchal, 1998; North et al., 1977).

Under the laws of natural selection, nature is the primary arbiter of life and death. In the case of "relaxed" selection—or what has most recently been called *directed*

#### **References 405**

*evolution*—humans have co-opted this role. With our cultural solutions, humans have sometimes become the alternative arbiters of life and death. Formally, directed evolution is a mode of biological selection in which the agent of differential reproduction or differential mortality is a human, or a human-based medical system. The concept is not new. During Darwin's time this process, when applied to plants and animals, was called domestic selection (Darwin, 1868) and was well known to husbandrymen (Russell, 1986).

As a neologism, directed evolution was coined as a supplement to the older term "relaxed selection." Relaxed selection had originally been applied to the cultural buffering of natural selection, but was also a core concept employed by (and therefore negatively associated with) the eugenics movement in pre-World War II America. Today, the term directed evolution has been suggested specifically for cases in which domesticated DNA has been manipulated to serve human ends.<sup>14</sup>

The "unnatural" cultural modification of a "natural" process may result ultimately in new generations of children born with the gene for IDDM, and such cultural interventions—regardless of the humane motivation for the proximate medical treatment—may increase the incidence of genetic diseases. Proponents of gene therapy hold that humans are now in the early stages of such genetic manipulation, and that the anthropogenic (human-caused) manipulation of genetic diseases can succeed only if followed through to a third logical level of manipulation: gametic gene therapy. But because this third level of gene therapy involves techniques such as embryonic stem cell manipulation and *in vitro* fertilization, human gametic gene therapy is unlikely to be realized in the current political climate without the advocacy of political lobbyists, genetic counselors, and bioethicists.

Bioethicists are concerned with behaviors and policies concerning biological materials. Issues pertinent to bioethics include organ transplantation, induced abortion and life termination, artificial insemination and sex selection, the use of embryonic tissue in research, and the engineering of genomes. Some of the current bioethical issues are these apparent disparities between the short- and long-term outcomes of medical intervention policies, and costs versus benefits of genetically engineered plants, animals, and humans.

These are complex issues, not only technically, but ethically and morally, as well (see, e.g., Zilinskas & Balint, 2001). In the coming decades, it should be of immense interest to medical anthropologists to follow not only the directed cultural evolution of the new biotechnologies, but also to observe the dynamic of the associated bioethical concerns.

## **NOTES**

- 1. Unless a specific work is cited, material contained in this work is common knowledge to human geneticists, and may be found in introductory genetics texts such as Mange and Mange (1999), Vogel and Motulsky (1999), or Lewis (2001).
- 2. Nosology: knowledge of, and the systematic classification of diseases.
- 3. Genetic conditions italicized in the text are summarized in Table 1 of the companion entry Genetic Disease II.
- 4. There has been a trend in recent years to omit the possessive case when an eponym is associated with a syndrome; Down's has become Down syndrome. This convention is followed here. Names for certain diseases, for example Alzheimer's disease, still feature the possessive case.
- 5. Leridon (1977, table 4.20, and pp. 76–81), and Carr and Gedeon (1977).
- 6. While some defects are life threatening, others, such as male pattern baldness or colorblindness, are more benign.
- 7. Epigenetics: study of the causes and course of development, especially those mechanisms that affect the timing and interaction of gene expression and tissue induction (Mai et al., in press).
- 8. Several other, less frequent mutations, includung deletions and insertions, also cause transformational folding of the prion protein, and result in clinically similar—but not identical—phenotypes.
- 9. Whole organism cloning should not be confused with DNA cloning, which is the amplification of a segment of DNA (the clone) after in vitro insertion of the clone into a suitable DNA vector, such as a modified virus.
- 10. This date and time has become an understandably famous landmark among medical geneticists, because of the historical importance of the treatment.
- 11. Other in vitro techniques, such as fetal cell sorting, offer this same promise.
- 12. Similarly, the incidences of congenital hearing loss, congenital blindness, and juvenile-onset myopia have markedly increased in urban populations for presumed similar reasons (although myopia has both a genetic and a large environmental component).
- 13. Iatrogenic: an effect, usually negative and unintended, introduced directly through the treatment of a healer.
- 14. Directed evolution is also known by the labels anthropogenic selection, directed selection and directed molecular evolution.

## **REFERENCES**

Anonymous. (1997a). Molecular medicine: A primer for clinicians. Part X: Clinical implications of the new genetics—I. *South Dakota Journal of Medicine*, *50*(11), 401–404.