# **ANNEXURE-2**

Extracts of Volume 5 on Internal Security, Criminal Justice and Centre State Cooperation of Commission on Central State Relationship Headed by Justice M. M. Punnchi

The Constitution has assigned to the States the legislative and executive powers in respect of 'public order'. The same Constitution has assigned to the Central Government the duty 'to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance, so bound by the Constitution and to work together is the crux of the recommendation. For managing internal security in the country, a clear understanding between the Union and the States on sharing this responsibility will be a pre-requisite.

# **maintenanCe of Communal haRmony**

The overall economic development and its resultant impact on the socioeconomic sectors such as education, health and employment among the masses has, generally, had a positive impact towards Nation building among all communities for preserving the unity and integrity of the country and for making India a stronger Nation.

# **A2.2 Annexure-2 • Extracts of Volume 5 on Internal Security...**

The recommendations have been divided into two parts:

- i. Dealing with the pro-active steps and
- ii. Dealing with the prevention and control of the conflicts, in case such conflicts are imminent and the rehabilitation of the victims of such conflicts, in case they do take place.

# **Pro-active Steps**

Steps relating to planning and effective pro-active networking for communal harmony, it would be better served by invigorating the available set up like National Integration Council. Objective of The National Integration Council is to find ways and means to combat the evils of communalism, casteism, regionalism, linguism and narrow mindedness. The goal of the council has been to achieve national solidarity through the following action programme.

- a. Discouraging communal ill-will and regional animosities and weaning the misguided elements of society from paths of violence;
- b. Active and energetic propagation of the principles, especially of tolerance and harmony for which this Nation stands;
- c. Mobilization of constructive forces in the cause of National unity and solidarity and giving them leadership, encouragement and articulation; and
- d. Devise suitable community activities and programmes for fostering fellow feeling emphasizing the privileges of Common citizenship and in general raising the quality of National life.

Today National Integration Council acts more as a forum for speeches by various Chief Ministers and others without any actionable decisions. To make this institution more effective it would be necessary to make provisions for regular and periodic meetings of NIC with a definite agenda and the effort should be to reach consensual and actionable decisions which could be implemented and monitored in a time-bound manner. The Commission envisages a definite, expanded and effective role of NIC not only for addressing religious, but all other major divisive issues. The Commission, as such recommends:

• That a committee of eminent persons should study and report to the Government as to whether the NIC has been able to fulfil its objectives and if not what should be done and how the NIC should be empowered to achieve its objectives. This Committee could perhaps be headed by the MOS in the Ministry of Home Affairs to whom the subject of Communal Harmony has been allocated. This Committee should also, simultaneously, study the working of National Foundation for Communal Harmony (NFCH), a foundation funded by and functioning under the administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs, as to whether the Foundation is successfully achieving its objectives or not. It is Commission understands that the objectives are only being partly fulfilled.

- The Council should meet preferably twice a year but must have a meeting at least once a year. This should be included in the Charter of the Council. Indeed, the meetings have to be well structured with a definite agenda, as suggested by Ministry of Home Affairs.
- The Constitution of the Council will be suitably amended to have the Union Home Minister as the ex-officio Dy. Chairman of NIC in order to continuously galvanize the Council's work programme.
- A Standing Committee of the NIC should be set-up with the Minister of State in MHA as its Convenor. State Home Ministers from six regions— Northern, Western, Southern, Eastern Central and North-Eastern should be represented on this Committee on a rotational basis. This Standing Committee should preferably have quarterly meetings but most certainly should meet at least twice a year to address the emerging issues.
- In case of any serious communal incidents anywhere in the country, a delegation of five members of the Council nominated by the Council should visit the area to understand the issues involved and give a quick fact finding Report to the Council so that such issues, if required, can be addressed at National level.
- The Task force on internal security which also deliberated on the issue of Communal harmony in detail has, inter-alia, opined that 'for obvious reasons, the Union Government has to play a more effective role. It must take a lead and ensure that issues of communal conflicts do not become a subject of electoral politics. The National Integration Council should not become a forum for fighting electoral battles. It should be used as a forum for reaching a broad consensus among all the political parties and governments on a comprehensive strategy to fight communal conflicts in the society'.
- The commission observed that the objectives of the National Foundation for Communal Harmony (NFCH) and the objectives of the NIC are similar; the Commission recommends that the NFCH could perhaps be used to work as the field arm of the NIC to take up and arrange specific studies and projects for and on behalf of NIC. In order to provide functional linkages the Commission recommends that some of the non-official members of the NFCH should be represented NIC and vice-versa.
- The Commission deliberated on the Liberhan Commission suggestion of giving Constitutional status to the NIC, at length and found that it is not in favour the same. Its Constitutional status may erode its flexibility in functioning. It is important to make the NIC a continuously operational body through its effective functioning.
- Also the Commission is convinced that the NIC and NFCH by themselves and by supporting and with the co-operation of counterpart State-level bodies and the NGOs can play a pro- active and determining role in the maintenance of communal harmony including the issues that come out through caste and ethnic conflicts. The Commission hopes that linkages

# **A2.4 Annexure-2 • Extracts of Volume 5 on Internal Security...**

with the regional and State level bodies and the NGOs, the NIC will be able to achieve its goal and objectives effectively.

- The commission also highlighted the role of media in ensuring that it does not sensationalize inter community conflicts. It must play a non-partisan role. The media in India was known for its discretion and restraint in printing or telecasting stories of communal conflict. But lately, there is a noticeable tendency among a section of the media, due to spirit of competitiveness, to ignore this self-imposed restraint. This can best be combated by district authorities by expeditiously providing accurate information to citizens in a balanced manner through all available media channels. In addition, the district authorities must maintain regular active relations with responsible, peace loving citizens so that at times of crisis they can be speedily mobilized for restoring communal harmony. The district authorities even under the existing laws such as Indian Penal Code can and should act effectively in ensuring that the media does not exceed such limits which can jeopardize public peace and may cause avoidable conflicts.
- The Government in consultation with the Press Council of India and other media organizations should formulate a uniform code of ethics for the visual, print and other media. The implementation of such a code should be done either by the existing Press Council or a Special Council constituted for this purpose. Such an initiative will play an extremely useful role. In the National interest that the electronic media come forward to volunteer dedicating a percentage of the air time for the programmes on communal, social and ethnic harmony through appropriate socio-cultural entertainment programmes.

# **Prevention and Control of the Conflicts and the Rehabilitation of the Victims**

- a. In almost all cases of inter-community conflicts whether on local issues or those which have wider dimensions – speedy, non-partisan response of the local police and administration is crucial in restoring peace and preventing vested interests from converting small local issues into divisive national issues, which gives an opening to hostile and anti-national forces both inside and outside the country. Clear directives must be issued to the local police and administration to take pro active measures to bring the situation under control within the first two hours or else the area-in'-charge must be held personally responsible.
- b. Accountability on any act of delay or showing partisan attitude must be sternly dealt with. In this respect it is added that while the State must fulfil their duty and responsibility of maintaining a trained police force including filling up of all vacancies and bringing up their police force to full strength, the Centre will have to continue providing the needed financial and technical (including intelligence) support to the States.

- c. The government may hope that a major communal conflict which can cause large scale damage to life and property may not occur, the Government still has to be prepared in case such a situation does develop when things go out of control. The Commission of the view that, a situation which has a potential of causing wide spread violence within a territory, the use of Article 355 may be in order. A clarificatory line in this, regard, if required, may be inserted making the provision explicitly clear that the Centre can depute Para-Military Forces to such trouble spots in exceptional circumstances even if a request from the State Government is not received. The aim has to be to ensure quick control of the situation, bring it back to normal, hand over the area to the local administration as quickly as possible and then withdraw the central forces.
- d. **Organized conversion** either through allurement or coercion has been a cause of communal tension and even violence, all citizens in the country enjoy full freedom of faith and there is no legal bar if one chooses voluntarily for changing his own religious faith to another religion. Some State Governments have passed legislations in the form of Freedom of Religions Act/Anti Conversion Act. The Commission deliberated on this issue and recommends that
- i. Model law should be enacted by the Centre on the subject taking all aspects in view which could be adopted by the States and
- ii. Sternest action should be taken under the existing laws in the proven cases of forcible conversions because such incidents invariably end up in communal tension and even violence.
  - e. **Ethnic related insurgency** in and rousing the '**Local' sentiments** are some other worrisome issues in the larger context of maintenance of peace and harmony in the country. Such violent incidents usually are ignited by regional chauvinism and political mobilization of sectarian and local interests which sometimes work contrary to the national harmony. There is a need to take a balanced and national approach by all political parties.

# **Central Law Enforcement Agency**

For the maintenance of internal security the country does need an over-arching structure at the National level. This structure should be capable of handling all matters relating to serious internal disturbances caused by terrorist attacks and/or militancy including insurgency within the country. The structure has to be so designed that it can take care of all stages of serious crimes committed against the security and integrity of the country, such as pre-emption, prevention, control, investigation and prosecution. A similar structure in the form of Department of Home Land Security was created in the USA after the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001 on the World Trade Centre in New York and the Pentagon. It is often claimed that with the creation of this Department, in spite of continuing threats, USA has been able to avert any serious terrorist attack since September 2001.

#### **A2.6 Annexure-2 • Extracts of Volume 5 on Internal Security...**

'A New Architecture for India's Security' is the need of the hour which will be created by amending the NIA act 2008 in order to make the agency more powerful organisation. Indeed, for such a structure to function and operate successfully in a federal system that the country has, co-operation of the States will have to be fully in-built right from the start.

The Commission has the following recommendations to strengthen the central law enforcement agency:

- In order to strengthen the agency the commission recommended that all crimes related to terrorism, such as terrorism, production and distribution of Fake Currency Notes (FCNs), espionage, smuggling of arms and ammunition money laundering, drug trafficking, organized crime, hijacking and assassination/assassination attempts on the life of iconic figures/political leadership, cyber crimes, crime related to acquisition of radio-active and poisonous substances, bio-terrorism, Narco terrorism, i.e. drug trafficking money used for organizing terrorist operations, etc., should be brought into the ambit of the NIA Act. NIA will have the jurisdiction in all these types of crimes on the presumption that they are terrorism related, unless proven otherwise. The burden of proving that the crime committed is not terrorism related will lie solely with the accused.
- A structure at the National level, be it NCTC or any such designated entity, should be created, which may subsume the NIA too along with other concerned Agencies/Organizations in its overall character. The commission feels that the agency should be fully empowered and responsible for the internal security of the country and should, accordingly, be equally accountable. The agency to be successful the cooperation of the state is an essential thing.

# **Suo motu Deployment of Central Forces**

- The Commission concluded that a whole range of action on the part of the Union under Article 355 is possible depending upon the circumstances, the nature and the gravity of the internal disturbance. This may include suo motu deployment of Central forces in the State(s) albeit for the shortest required period of time and desirably with the full advance knowledge of the affected State(s).
- The Commission recommends that an amendment through a clarificatory addition may be made as part Article 355 to remove any doubts on this question and to settle the debate once and for all.
- The commission suggested that the Centre may bring central rule in a limited affected area, of the State, may be a municipality or a district. For that suitable constitutional amendment in Article 356 is needed.
- During the period of Central Control for the suggested limited period of time the powers of the District Magistrate, including the magisterial powers will have to be vested in the designated Central Authority

(Officer-in-charge). The Commission recommends that a corresponding amendment in section 20 of the CrPC be made for enabling the designated authority to be vested with the magisterial powers.

• The Commission expressed the view that 'Cooperative Federalism' holds the key for healthy Centre-State relationship in our country. Such situations handled correctly keeping the sensitivities of the State Governments in mind can become the lasting ground for a harmonious relationship.

# **The Migration Issues**

- The Commission feels that the time is ripe to pay utmost attention at the highest level to the seriousness of the issue before it attains unmanageable proportions. The subject should be on the agenda for consultations by the Union Government with the State Governments at a meeting of the NIC or other internal security meetings called at the National level for reaching a unanimous and clear resolution against such provocative actions.
- Notwithstanding this course of action, the existing laws and other legal provisions and instruments in this respect must be applied sternly on the provocateurs to ensure **firstly** that the situation is not allowed to be exploited and **secondly** to send a firm message to all political and social outfits that the provisions of the Constitution shall be fully and unequivocally respected.
- The National Integration Council and the National Foundation for Communal Harmony with the support of the Government and non-Government organizations in the States should play an effective role, in helping the migrant population getting fully assimilated into the local environment, in removing mutual suspicions and also in creating an atmosphere of general harmony.
- The focus of our economic planning is to ensure inclusive growth and to remove imbalances among different regions, it has not been possible to achieve this objective fully and several States and Regions continue to be much less developed as compared to others causing 'distress migration'. A focussed attention has to be paid both by the Union and State Governments to address the issue of removing these imbalances as quickly as possible.
- The Commission feels that the achievement of removal of economic imbalances between different regions in the country, though a National objective, still lies in some distant future and hence 'distress migration' will continue to be a reality for quite some time to come. It will, therefore, be in the National interest to sensitize effectively all political and social groups who oppose such migration in an unconstitutional manner and provoke the innocent local communities egging them on to take aggressive and violent postures and resort to unlawful methods.

# **Other Internal Security Issues**

#### **The Naxal Problem**

- This problem requires a multi pronged approach, the Union and the States are, by and large, working hand in hand both on security and development fronts, the blame game and voicing of differences in the approach notwithstanding. The roots of the problem lie in the socio-economic neglect of tribal and backward areas over a period of time.
- Violence, indeed, cannot be an answer in any law abiding society and a solution to this serious and long lingering problem has to be found as quickly as possible. The Commission suggests that concerted efforts on socioeconomic development in all these backward and tribal areas must continue inspite of the hurdles created by the extremists while the needed intelligence based, well calibrated and effective action by the security forces also continues.
- The commission suggests that the government should try to break the barriers that are coming in the way of holding a dialogue with the Naxal leadership. In case this kind of attempt is not possible, then the commission recommends for Track II initiative. Commission also feels that if this recommendation is accepted by the Government then the Track II effort should be headed not by a single interlocutor but by an 'interlocution team of three to four persons, which besides having a component of known internal security and intelligence experts.
- The main objective of the interlocutory team has to be to sensitize the Naxal leadership (and the cadres, if possible), without being defensive, of the several initiatives taken by the Government such as putting the R&R policy in place, the efforts on land reforms, the restoration of forest rights of the regular dwellers and in respect of various other socioeconomic developments being undertaken in order to improve the lot of the people living in tribal and other backward areas.
- The goal has to be that the team by using its skills and knowledge makes the Naxal leadership understand that the State will not to be cowed down by such acts of violence and the best option lies in having a dialogue so that a beginning can be made towards a peaceful resolution of all issues. In another words, the main task of such an interlocution team should be to persuade the Naxal leadership to abjure violence for say a fixed period of time and initiate a formal dialogue and see the outcome. Indeed, full support of the State Governments will be a pre-requisite for any success to be achieved in case such an initiative is started. The Commission feels that though the process suggested may become somewhat long drawn, something positive only can come out if this effort succeeds.

#### **The North East**

• The Commission is in agreement with the broad approach that while specific insurgency/militancy related problems may have to be handled separately and individually as demanded by the "situation" has been the approach so far, the common issues of the region as a whole to ensure its socio-economic development and a better security situation may have to be addressed together. For both these approaches, a clear and active cooperation between the Centre and the States will be a pre-requisite.

- The Union and the State Governments must work with a single vision and not adopt different approaches for handling the problem. It is important that complete understanding and synergy must be there between the Centre and the State(s) and only then can these efforts prove to be effective. For this purpose as well as for some other purposes such as regular sharing of intelligence between different States on insurgent groups (a practice which was prevalent earlier but has for some reasons been discontinued for some time), keeping an eye on inter-state border disputes so that the situation does not become tense, coordinating possible joint actions involving more than one State against the insurgent/ militant groups and for articulating the difficulties and problems of the States in a realistic manner before the Union Government and so on, the constitution of a Regional Security Authority headed by a sufficiently senior officer is recommended. The proposed Authority should also in no way interfere in the role of the Governments as enshrined in the Constitution and should act more as a facilitator for providing guidance on overall security situation in the region and as a coordinator between different security agencies.
- A long term objective for the mandate of this Authority may include working on a strategy for reducing over dependence on the Para Military Forces and the Army by the States of the region and simultaneously developing their own police forces to be able to proactively handle the situation which is already showing overall signs of improvement.
- The Commission is firmly of the view that emphasis is needed to be paid for the early development of multi-dimensional infrastructure in the region to bring it at par with the best in the rest of the country. This effort besides socio-economic development will also indirectly impact on the security situation in the region. The need of the hour, however, is creation of Regional Infrastructure Advisory Council manned by knowledgeable and dedicated professionals which may provide through existing or new technical financial and management/institutions modern technical and financial skills for development of the local human resources so that the local talent gets well trained and fully involved in the development process of the region through productive employment. Besides, this Council should also provide guidance on complex technical requirements and financial management areas to the State Governments to help them in timely and efficient completion of the projects.
- The Centre may consider withdrawing of AFSPA from the North East and, if required appropriate other provisions pertaining to terrorist crimes could be inserted in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act itself.

#### **A2.10 Annexure-2 • Extracts of Volume 5 on Internal Security...**

- The international borders in the North East are guarded by different Para Military Forces. The difference in the economic levels between the India and Bangladesh, inspite of our best efforts we have not been able to stop illegal migration from that country. There are early indications that with the recent change in Bangladesh, a higher level of cooperation will be forthcoming to control this problem. The Commission does feel that it may be worthwhile to implement a work permit regime so that such migration can be somewhat controlled and administered as also entry and exit systematically registered.
- The 'insider/outsider' syndrome is not a healthy sign for the country's unity and integrity. While several steps have been taken through cultural etc. institutions, to ensure greater emotional integration in real sense of the word, it recommends that a dedicated sub-committee under National Integration Council (NIC) could be given. It will prepare both strategy and a time bound action plan for the purpose. Indeed, secretarial support and adequate funds will have to be provided for the purpose. Fullest support of the State Governments and the NGOs will be a prerequisite. The NIC can make use of the existing departmental structures also for the purpose. The National Foundation for Communal Harmony (NFCH) can also be asked to undertake this task. Besides, this should be a regular item on the Agenda for the NIC meetings so that progress can be seen at the highest level.
- Handling North-East is more complex than Naxal problem, requires understanding and cooperation between the Centre and the States is a must. The Commission is aware of the local compulsions which the political leadership faces in many North-Eastern States, but with reduced level of violence, neutralization of some hardcore elements and the talks too making a reasonable headway this appears to be the opportune moment. A general atmosphere of improvement in the situation is becoming more and more evident. It may still take some time, but the efforts are seen to be moving in a right direction. With the suggested additional institutional structures in place and with the implementation of other recommendations suggested by the Commission to strengthen the systems and develop the local work force for all levels of management that time could well be shortened.

#### **Jammu and Kashmir**

- The Commission feels that in J&K the policy has to have the two core elements of;
- i. Rapid socio-economic development with equal effort on confidence building; and
- ii. Continuation of strong administrative action to put an end to the militancy as quickly as possible.

- Reduction in the deployment of the Central Para Military Forces and simultaneous augmentation and training of the State Police for taking full charge of the law and order situation in the State over a period of time, quicker rehabilitation of the deprived persons who have suffered on account of war or militancy and bringing back and resettling the communities who had left the State when the militancy was to its peak.
- The commission feels that the situation to repeal the AFSPA is not yet ripe at the same time the government has to ensure that no human rights violation takes place.
- To sensitize the people and prevent them from distorted news of the local media, major National press should be encouraged to bring out local editions from Srinagar and if required security support and other incentives should be offered for this purpose. Similarly, there is a definite need for installation of high power transmitters with adequate powered back up so that the National and State activities are seen on Television by the population of the State even in the in far flung border areas. This handicap is well known and efforts have already been started for the upgradation of the systems. It is all the more important since electronic media from across the border has a much larger reach.
- Government through its various infrastructure projects such as development of railways, border roads, power, and communication may continue to be the source of major employment, there has to be substantive additionality in investment which should come from the private and the public sector, so that youth will not be allured by militancy, which gets reinforced by lack of economic opportunity.
- If the security situation continues to improve greater efforts should be put in to develop Srinagar, Jammu and Leh as the tourism hubs with all round modern facilities, good infrastructure and easy connectivity with other places of tourist interest in the State such as religious shrines, forests reserves etc. Tourism traditionally has been and can be further developed as a major revenue earner and employment provider.

#### **Police Reforms**

• A high level Committee may be constituted by the Centre with senior representatives of the States for monitoring and reporting periodically the progress of acceptance and implementation or otherwise of the recommendations made by several Commission and Committees. The last Review Committee was constituted in 2005. A lot of water has flown under the bridge in the last five years and several new types of crimes, particularly affecting the country's internal security and other challenges, have emerged, putting the Police forces under even greater pressure. In this regard, Justice Thomas Committee has been separately appointed by the Supreme Court to oversee the implementation of the 2006 directions

#### **A2.12 Annexure-2 • Extracts of Volume 5 on Internal Security...**

of the Supreme Court. The Commission feels that the Committee appointed by the Centre should submit a report every quarter to the Union Home Minister, copies of which should simultaneously go to all State Chief Ministers so that the implementation of Police Reforms becomes one of the regular items on the agenda for the annual or biannual Chief Ministers Conference on Internal Security chaired by the Prime Minister. The Commission feels that this is a critical area, responsibility of which has to be shared both by the Centre and the States and ignoring it will be at the cost of public peace and order.

- The commission highlighted the need for augmenting the total manpower of the civil police including the District Armed Reserve Police and filling up the existing vacancies. This issue has also been highlighted on several occasions in the past that the ratio of the civil police vis-à-vis the population of the country is highly unsatisfactory. As on 1.1.2008 according to Ministry of Home Affairs the sanctioned and actual strength of police personnel at all India level per one lakh population is 153.08 and 129.65 respectively which is much lower than even most of the Asian countries. The committee suggests that:
- i. The Centre in consultation with the State Governments should immediately appoint a National level Committee for carrying out a comprehensive study of this subject. The requirement of the total police force in different States of the country and the number of police stations needed keeping the population, the geographical area, the crime profile and the internal security vulnerability etc. in view should be projected by this Committee. The report may include the requirement atleast upto the year 2025 simultaneously giving clear indication on the augmentation needed in different States annually or at a maximum of every two years.
- ii. A mechanism to regularly fill up the recurring vacancies in a time bound manner also should be put in place by the State Governments.
- iii. The officer to policemen ratio in the different wings of police (some highly technical wings may require more officers and less subordinate staff whereas for routine duties the ratio would be somewhat different), the need for modernization of training institutes and the training required, minimum educational standards for each level of recruitment and the equipment needed by the police force and the special needs of mega city and coastal policing etc. should also be given full attention.
  - The issue of budgeting and financial support required the burden must be bear by the shared sense of responsibility. It must also be recognized that there are limits to what the Central Government can provide. The Commission understands the pressures of competing demands on national resources by different sectors. Internal security, in view of this the Commission, however, needs a higher prioritization and this is where both the Centre and the States have to share the responsibility. It is well established that security and development go hand in hand; the more secured

the environment, the better prospects of economic growth. Besides, a debate has been going on for a long time as to whether the funding for the physical infrastructure, such as, the police stations, the police housing and the training institutions etc. should be part of the plan schemes or it should be funded by non-plan expenditure. The Committee so appointed should examine this important issue also with all its pros and cons. This ought to be a comprehensive study which will reflect on the needs of police forces in the country (other than Central Para Military Forces) covering a period of the next 10 to 15 years. The Commission is of the view that this study which should be completed in a time bound manner, will prove to be extremely rewarding both for the Centre and the States.

- It is important to upgrade the status of average policeman with an adequate pay package so that he becomes less corruption prone and earns greater respect from the society.
- Bringing in a Model law which would incorporate within itself most of the salutary recommendations made hitherto by the Commissions and Committees on police reforms, by the Centre in a time bound manner and then to pursue the matter with States for early adoption.
- Utmost attention needs to be given to the subject of police reforms and that too, on a continuous basis so that our police forces are ever ready to face the existing and the emerging challenges threatening the internal security of the country.

# **Criminal Justice System**

For a large country with a diverse population on a fast track of economic development, peace and security are essential pre-requisites for which governments at all levels have a joint and separate responsibility. Already substantial material on this subject is available with the Government, by way of reports of different Commissions and Committees, we feel that as a first step the Government may institute immediately, a review and a monitoring mechanism; firstly to conclude as to which all recommendations made by the Commissions/Committees are to be accepted and then to put the same into an implementation schedule. The three recent Reports, i.e., the Second Administrative Reforms Commission Report on Public Order of June, 2007, the Report of the Committee on Draft National Policy on Criminal Justice of July, 2007 and the Judicial Impact Assessment Committee Report (2008) have examined the related issues in an all inclusive manner comprehensively and could be given greater attention. It will be important that the States are involved ab initio and are members of the proposed review and monitoring mechanism so that their difficulties and demands for the purpose of implementation, if any, can be articulated by them at the initial stage itself. It is also important that the implementation schedule is kept within a reasonable time frame. In addition to the above, it recommends that constitution of the following three institutional mechanisms may be considered for the effective administration of Criminal Justice System:

**A2.14 Annexure-2 • Extracts of Volume 5 on Internal Security...**

# **A Standing Commission on Criminal Justice and Internal Security**

There is a need for a Standing Commission at the National level on Criminal Justice and Internal Security involving experts from the field of law, criminology, public administration, information technology, finance, defence services and management. The Commission may be set up on the lines of the Law Commission for a three year term under an Executive order and can include part-time members. The mandate of the Commission may include advising the Government on long-term and short term policies on crime control and management, presenting an annual report to Parliament on status of internal security and criminal justice administration and providing guidelines for central assistance to States in the matter of crime control and management. It may also advise on international co-operation in social defence and crime management.

### **Department of Criminal Justice at the Centre and in the States**

- i. Criminal justice involves a number of activities spread over various departments of governance. Policing including crime prevention measures, traffic control, forensic laboratories and investigation of crimes are usually with the Home Ministry. Prosecution agency and the criminal courts are looked after by the Law Ministry. Prisons, Correctional institutions including juvenile justice are under the Ministry of Social Welfare. The increasing manipulation of financial systems by criminal elements including customs control and narcotics traffic is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance. There is very little co-ordination among these departments often leading to delay and defeat of criminal justice.
- ii. Crime statistics and criminal data base need improvement for ensuring intelligent policy development on internal security issues. The emergence of cyber technology has compounded matters making many existing arrangements redundant and outdated. It is in this context, the Commission welcomes the recommendation for a full-fledged Department for Criminal Justice under a Secretary reporting directly to the Home Minister on criminal justice issues. The Department will monitor implementation of criminal justice policies, maintain an upto date data base on crime and criminal justice administration, undertake sponsored projects and research on identified issues, propose legislative proposals and co-ordinate with State Governments on the one hand and concerned departments at the Centre on the other.
- iii. Similar departments in each State will enable criminal justice policy development and administration a real chance to face up to the emerging challenges in crime control and management. The Department should be responsible to catalyze the implementation of the recommendations of a large number of Government appointed Committees and Commissions on the subject of criminal justice reforms.

# **A Bureau of Crime Prevention, Criminal Statistics and Criminal Justice Planning**

- i. An expert group of law enforcement personnel from the States and the Centre should be charged with the responsibility of crime mapping, community involvement in crime prevention, collecting and collating criminal statistics and criminal justice planning at State, Regional and National levels. The Bureau may work as an independent forum under the Department of Criminal Justice in the Union Government.
- ii. Together with the anti-terror outfit being set up by the Union Home Ministry, the proposed institutional structures should be able to organize crime control and management at least for the immediate future. The idea is not to let internal security anywhere in the country to go out of control so as to endanger national security. The idea is also not to create a situation in which the Defence Forces are compelled to be deployed for internal security management.

The former President of India, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, had rightly observed, "If real criminals in our society are left without punishment for years, because of delay in criminal justice for various reasons, it will indeed result in the multiplication of people taking to criminal acts." This in essence sums up as to why there is a need to continuously monitor the system in operation. The aim should be that our Criminal Justice system is able to match the requirements of the emerging challenges on the crime front and help in the effective maintenance of the internal security, peace and public order in the country.