# **TRIBUNALS**

## ARUN K THIRUVENGADAM\*

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

IN 1982, Upendra Baxi authored a withering critique of the Indian legal system arguing that it had failed to transform India into a democratic and egalitarian society as envisaged by its Constitution.<sup>1</sup> Baxi urged a thorough restructuring of—rather than mere tinkering with—the Indian legal system. His analysis highlighted the 'frightful urgency' for combating the problem of overload and arrears in the Indian legal system, and cited figures to demonstrate his central claim of a deep state of systemic crisis. 2

Assessing the situation of backlog and pendency in the Indian legal system in contemporary times reveals an interesting paradox. While the problems of delay and backlog have increased exponentially, one rarely hears calls for a thorough overhauling of the Indian legal system. Baxi wrote against a backdrop when the Indian Supreme Court's abdication, during the Emergency, of its primary function of acting as a guardian of the Constitution was fresh in public memory. The absence of a sense of crisis in the contemporary era can be attributed in part to the high esteem in which the Indian Supreme Court is held by the general public today. An important consequence of the judiciary's higher public regard today is that the solutions offered for reform of the legal system tend to be far less radical.

This chapter's focus on the constitutional status of tribunals must be understood against this backdrop. Tribunals have existed in India since the colonial era, but their existence was not regarded as constitutionally controversial for a quarter-century after the adoption of the Constitution. However, the introduction of provisions authorising the creation of tribunals through the Forty-second Constitutional Amendment in 1976 has led to a contentious debate over the 'tribunalisation' of the Indian legal system.

This chapter seeks to provide an overview of the constitutional issues and the body of case law that has developed around this issue since the early 1980s. Although I focus on the constitutional arguments raised to challenge the validity of particular tribunals, the primary goal of the chapter is to probe the doctrinal consistency of the approach of the judiciary across a range of cases, and to assess why the shifts occurred over time.

A stated justification for the introduction of constitutionally authorised tribunals in the mid-1970s was the reduction of the problems of delay and backlog. Recent criticism of the growth of tribunals by practising lawyers tends to treat this as a fig leaf. This critique argues instead for upholding the integrity of the judicial system by refusing to outsource essential judicial functions to bodies such as tribunals where control over crucial decisions rests with members of the executive government. As I will argue, some of the objections advanced by the critics have considerable force, but since they offer no alternative suggestions for reforming the current system, this amounts to a *do nothing* approach, which is equally untenable.

What is striking about such critiques is that they ignore the contributory actions of the legal

profession and do not suggest ways of reining in the acts of omission and commission by the legal profession and the judiciary that are a major reason for backlog and delay. The existing crisis of the legal system requires creative and unconventional solutions that will have to be crafted through coordinated action among a range of actors beyond those emanating from judges, lawyers, and government officials (the traditional sources of ideas for reform). Given that tribunals exist extensively across the Indian legal system, calls for their abolition altogether are impractical, even as there is a need to focus on removing defects in their structure and functioning, and integrating them within the overall legal system.

#### **II. A BRIEF HISTORYOFTHE EVOLUTION OF TRIBUNALS IN INDIA**

## **1. Origin of Tribunals and Debates Among Law Reform Bodies from 1950 to 1975**

Although the colonial government in British India had established some tribunals in the 1940s, they were of marginal significance in the colonial legal order. The original Constitution too refers to tribunals only incidentally—they find mention in Articles 136 and 227, which specify that the Supreme Court and the High Courts respectively will have the power to review decisions delivered by tribunals. In the post-Independence era, tribunals were first created in the sphere of tax laws. To understand why tribunals began to find favour with legislators, judges, and members of government over time, one has to track the growth of the backlog in the legal system more generally.

The Indian judiciary as a whole consists of about 12,000 courts. Below the Supreme Court are arraigned 24 High Courts, 3,150 district courts, 4,816 *Munsif*/magistrate courts and 1,964 class II magistrate and equivalent courts.<sup>3</sup> The total number of cases before the judicial system has been growing steadily since the colonial era. I focus first on the Supreme Court of India, which in many ways has a superior managerial capacity to handle backlog and delay. In 1950, the number of cases pending before the Supreme Court was only  $771<sup>4</sup>$  By 1978, that number had grown to 23,092, crossing 100,000 in 1983.<sup>5</sup> Following a series of measures, this number came down to as low as 19,806 in 1998, but has continued to increase thereafter, standing at  $63,843$  as of May 2014.<sup>6</sup> This is an extraordinary increase within a single court. The Supreme Court has generally been better than the rest of the judicial hierarchy in handling its backlog.

The crisis has been much more severe in the High Courts and lower judiciary. At the first conference of Chief Ministers held in 1957, Prime Minister Nehru reported that the total number of arrears in the entire judicial system was  $164,000$  cases.<sup>7</sup> By the time Baxi speaks of their having assumed crisis proportions in 1982, that number had swelled to 600,000 within only the High Courts and Supreme Court. As of March 2013, the total number of cases had reached a colossal 31.39 million: 64,330 in the Supreme Court, 4.5 million in the twenty-four High Courts, and 26.83 million in the district and subordinate courts. $8$  The backlog has also resulted in long delays. News reports of cases being decided nearly twenty years after they were instituted are becoming distressingly common.

Delay and backlog were a problem even during the colonial era. The earliest available report

suggesting a slew of reforms to handle backlog and delay was the 1924 report of the Justice Rankin Committee. Since then, there have been a number of such expert body reports, including several reports of the permanent body constituted for suggesting legal reforms in post-colonial India, the Law Commission of India. $\frac{9}{2}$  An issue on which there has been a shift of opinion is the desirability of instituting tribunals, and formulating how they would interact with the regular judiciary. In what follows, I choose examples selectively to emphasise the shift in thinking among policymakers.

The First Law Commission of India was constituted in 1956, and had an impressive membership.<sup>10</sup> Its first term of reference was 'to review the system of judicial administration in all its aspects and suggest ways and means for improving it and making it speedy and less expensive'.<sup>11</sup> Our focus is on its Fourteenth Report issued by the First Law Commission in 1958, entitled *Reforms of Administration of Justice*, which is regarded as one of the earliest and most comprehensive studies of the issues affecting administration of justice in India.

A major issue that the Law Commission had to confront was whether to recommend the creation of tribunals for specific subject areas such as administrative law. The Fourteenth Report canvasses the issue by extensively examining comparative experiences in England, France, and the US, before concluding that the 'creation of a general administrative body like the *Conseil d'etat* in France is not feasible' in India.<sup>12</sup> Its reasons are worth examining, as similar arguments have reappeared in more recent times in calls for the abolition of tribunals in general:

It would be derogatory to the citizens' rights to establish a system of administrative courts which would take the place of ordinary courts of law for examining the validity of administrative action. It may be that in view of the inherent advantages like speed, cheapness, procedural simplicity and availability of special knowledge in extra-judicial tribunals, these may be useful as a *supplementary* system. But it will not be right to conceive them as a device to *supplant* the ordinary courts of law. It would be unthinkable to allow judicial justice administered by courts of law to be superseded by executive justice administered by administrative tribunals. It would be a step backward to erect in the place of deliberate judicial tribunals restrained by formal procedure and deciding according to notions for the time being of administrative officers, unfettered by any rules as to what general interest or good conscience demands. So conceived, the administrative court might well be regarded 'as a court of politicians enforcing a policy, but not a court enforcing a law'—a description which Maitland gave to the Court of Star Chamber.<sup>13</sup>

In this single paragraph, the Law Commission summarised a number of points that have been raised by critics of tribunalisation in later years: (i) the fear of executive-minded adjudication which would detract from the impartiality of judicial decision making; (ii) the substitution of principles of general interest and good conscience by the subjective interests of administrators; (iii) the replacement of legal considerations by political ones.

Significantly, however, even as it rejected the idea of a general system of administrative courts, the Law Commission endorsed the creation of a specific type of tribunal to deal with cases where 'government servants seek redress for real or fancied violations of their constitutional safeguards or the breach of rules regulating their conditions of service'.<sup>14</sup> Recognising that a large volume of cases had developed on this subject and their number was increasing, it recommended that while the jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 should be retained for such matters, a new system of tribunals at the Centre and the States should also be set up. These tribunals, according to the Commission, should be presided over by a legally qualified Chairman (with qualifications similar to those of a High Court judge), with experienced civil servants serving as other members.<sup>15</sup>

It bears emphasis that the recommendation to create a separate system of administrative tribunals for service matters came as early as in 1958, from the venerable First Law Commission speaking in its much-lauded Fourteenth Report. Another influential reform body, which reiterated the recommendation to set up specialised administrative tribunals, was the High Court Arrears Committee, set up under Justice Shah of the Supreme Court, and delivered its report in 1972.

In 1974, the Sixth Law Commission<sup>16</sup> came to the opposite conclusion, and recommended against the creation of a separate system of tribunals or courts for administrative/service law matters.<sup>17</sup> It is important, however, to emphasise the reason that the Law Commission advanced in support of this conclusion. The Commission recognised that having a separate system might have positive benefits for the increasing backlog situation, but felt that this could be effective only if the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 and the special leave petition (SLP) jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 136 was curtailed, which it was not prepared to do. $\frac{18}{10}$  The identification of this issue is prescient, as in later years the issue of striking the right balance between a separate system of tribunals and maintaining the writ and SLP jurisdiction of the superior courts would become a centre of controversy in the litigated cases that followed in the 1980s and 1990s.

### **2. The Push for Tribunals During the Emergency (1975–77)**

At least part of the hostility towards the idea of tribunals can be attributed to their insertion into the constitutional scheme during the Emergency imposed by the Indira Gandhi government. The Emergency refers to the period between 26 June 1975 and 21 March 1977 when constitutional government was suspended through a Presidential proclamation of Emergency at the instance of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's Congress government. The official justification for the Emergency was that it was necessary not just for preserving order by preventing turmoil and incipient rebellion, but also for saving democracy, protecting the social revolution guaranteed by the Indian Constitution, and maintaining national integrity.<sup>19</sup> The Emergency is today associated with the excesses of authoritarian policies adopted during the time, which resulted in across-the-board censorship and muzzling of the press, 'the jailing of over one hundred thousand "enemies", the brutality of Sanjay Gandhi's sterilization and slum clearance programmes, and the terrorizing of Parliament into obedience'.<sup>20</sup> An aspect of the Emergency that dominates the legal community's memory of the period is the blatant attempt of the regime to constrain and emasculate the higher judiciary in India. To appreciate this, some background context is necessary.

The Supreme Court and the Congress government under Prime Minister Indira Gandhi had been at loggerheads since the time she first came to power in 1966. Three decisions of the Supreme Court in *Golak Nath v Union of India*, <sup>21</sup> *Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v Union of India*, <sup>22</sup> and *Madhavrao Scindia v Union* of *India*<sup>23</sup>—that resulted in the striking down of major governmental initiatives as unconstitutional led Prime Minister Indira Gandhi to cast the higher judiciary as the enemy of social progress in the electoral campaign for the 1971 elections.

After being returned to power in the 1971 elections with an enhanced majority in Parliament (352 seats in the 518 member Lower House), the Congress government under Prime Minister Indira Gandhi became more determined to take on the judiciary, and the tensions continued from the early to the mid-1970s. Matters were not helped by the ruling in *Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala <sup>24</sup>* which, even as it overruled the *Golak Nath* case, nevertheless held that it was the Supreme Court which would have the final say on stipulating the features of the Constitution that were beyond the amending power of Parliament. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's petulant response to the *Kesavananda Bharati* judgment was to supersede the three seniormost judges of the Supreme Court, all of whom had been part of the majority in *Kesavananda Bharati*, and to appoint the relatively junior Justice AN Ray as the new Chief Justice of India. This decision created shockwaves in the legal community in particular, which justifiably regarded the decision as a blow, not just to the independence of the judiciary, but also to democratic constitutionalism in India. Many commentators believe that the event that had a decisive influence on the imposition of the Emergency by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi also involved the judiciary. On 12 June 1975, Jagmohan Lal Sinha J of the Allahabad High Court delivered judgment in *State of Uttar Pradesh v Raj Narain <sup>25</sup>* and held that Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's election from the Rai Bareli constituency in Uttar Pradesh was invalid, since she had been found guilty of a corrupt practice which amounted to an electoral offence under Section 123(7) of the Representation of the People Act 1951. Within a fortnight after Justice Sinha delivered his judgment, the Proclamation of Emergency was in place.

Two important developments during the Emergency played a pivotal role in the introduction of tribunals within the Indian legal and constitutional system, and also affected how they would be perceived by many sections of the bar and bench until the present day, nearly four decades on. These were the report of the Swaran Singh Committee, which had been constituted by the Congress Party, and the consequent adoption of many of its recommendations in the Forty-second Constitutional Amendment that was enacted by the Congress government during the Emergency.

One of the hallmarks of the Emergency was the frequent tendency among those in power to call for fundamental changes in the constitutional framework to restore the balance in constitutional power arrangements which, according to them, had been undone in the years preceding the Emergency. In this view, members of the judiciary, who were from—and represented—landholding, privileged, and elite sections of society, had used constitutional discourse to uphold their own interests and subvert the Congress's social programmes including land reform, nationalisation of banks, and abolition of privy purses. At the annual session of the Congress Party held at the end of 1975, a resolution was passed urging a review of the Constitution:

If the misery of the poor and vulnerable sections of our society is to be alleviated, vast and far-reaching changes have to be effected in our socio-economic structure … The Congress … urges that our Constitution be thoroughly re-examined in order to ascertain if the time has not come to make adequate alterations to it so that it may continue as a living document.<sup>26</sup>

Shortly thereafter, on 26 February 1976, the Swaran Singh Committee (known after its chairman who was the Union minister for Defence) was appointed 'to study the question of amendment to the Constitution in the light of  $\dots$  experience'.<sup>27</sup>

#### a. *The Swaran Singh Committee*

The report of the Swaran Singh Committee recommended the setting up of tribunals for three broad subject areas to combat delays in the Indian legal system. $\frac{28}{3}$  The report also recommended that the decisions of all these tribunals should be subject to the SLP jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution, but should exclude the jurisdiction of all other courts, including the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 and the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution.<sup>29</sup> These recommendations were accompanied by more drastic steps to curtail the power of the superior courts to strike down laws as unconstitutional,  $\frac{30}{2}$  and to limit the writ jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 226.<sup>31</sup>

The Swaran Singh Committee's report was perceived as seeking to muzzle the High Courts and the Supreme Court, which were among the few institutions that had stood up to the Congress government during the Emergency in a bid to preserve some freedoms.

## b. *The Forty-second Amendment to the Constitution and the Attempt to Undo its Ef ect by the Forty-fourth Amendment*

The Constitution (Forty-second) Act, drawing in part from the report of the Swaran Singh Committee, was introduced in the Lok Sabha in September 1976. Given the Congress's control of Parliament, its fate was preordained, even as outside of Parliament many citizens and groups expressed concern about its content. It quickly passed through the various constitutionally prescribed stages and came into force in January 1977.

In many respects, the Forty-second Amendment went beyond the recommendations of the Swaran Singh Committee and has justifiably gained a reputation for being a draconian attempt to derail constitutional democracy in India. However, in respect of tribunals, the Amendment closely followed the recommendations of the Swaran Singh Committee. As a consequence of the Forty-second Amendment, a new Part XIV-A was introduced into the Constitution, consisting of two new provisions, namely Articles 323A ('Administrative Tribunals') and 323B ('Tribunals for other matters'). The official justification for these provisions is to be found in the Statement of Objects and Reasons:

To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to secure the speedy disposal of service matters, revenue matters and certain other matters of special importance in the context of the socio-economic development and progress, it is considered expedient to provide for administrative and other tribunals for dealing with such matters while preserving the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to such matters under article 136 of the Constitution. It is also necessary to make certain modifications in the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under article 226.<sup>32</sup>

Following the logic of the Swaran Singh Committee, a distinction was made between administrative tribunals and tribunals for other matters. Where the Swaran Singh Committee made a further distinction between labour and industrial cases and other matters, the Amendment put all other issues in a broad category of 'Tribunals for other matters', which was also defined more expansively to include rent and election cases.<sup>33</sup> The Amendment followed the report in excluding the jurisdiction of all courts except that of the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.

A few weeks after the Forty-second Amendment became law, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi called for elections, which were held in March 1977. The main opposition party was the Janata Party, which had been formed as late as January 1977. Interestingly, the contents of the Forty-second Amendment were a significant part of campaign battles. In its manifesto, the Congress Party claimed that the Amendment had been enacted 'to overcome the various obstacles put by economic and political vested interests, and not for the purpose of increasing the power of the executive at the expense of the judiciary or the legislature'.  $\frac{34}{1}$  The Janata Party responded by promising to release the people of India 'from the bondage of fear' that had become a characteristic feature of the Emergency, and also promised to rescind the 'anti-democratic Forty-second Amendment'.<sup>35</sup>

In the general elections of 1977, the Congress Party suffered a massive defeat, winning only 153 seats out of the 542 seats in the Lok Sabha. The Janata Party won 270 seats, and with the help of its allies, was able to command a majority in the Lok Sabha. For the first time in independent India's history, a non-Congress government took office, but occupied it for a mere sixteen months. Our focus is on the chief success of the Janata government, which consisted in repairing some of the damage brought about by the Congress and in restoring, to a large extent, the independence of the judiciary through changes brought about by the Forty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution.

At the time it was voted into government in 1977, the Janata Party could count on its majority in the Lok Sabha, but had only 27 out of 244 seats in the Rajya Sabha, where the Congress Party still held 154 seats. It was therefore crucial for the Janata Party to secure votes of Congress Rajya Sabha MPs, who had only recently voted overwhelmingly in favour of the Forty-second Amendment. Given this scenario, it took a great deal of diplomacy and tact for the Janata government to secure the passage of the Forty-fourth Amendment into law, reversing many of the problematic provisions inserted through the Forty-second Amendment. However, there were some losses as well. The Law Minister under the Janata government, Shanti Bhushan, and several officials within the Ministry of Law 'wanted to remove tribunals entirely from the Constitution because they had the taint of the Emergency and seemed subject to executive branch manipulation'. 36 Buoyed by this belief, the originally proposed text of the Forty-fourth Amendment contained a clause deleting the constitutional provisions introducing tribunals, and was passed by the Lok Sabha by a huge majority on 23 August 1978. However, this attempt to reverse the introduction of the new Part XIV-A failed when the clause to this effect did not pass in the Rajya Sabha when the Forty-fourth Amendment was moved before it on 28 August 1978. The rest of the Forty-fourth Amendment came into force weeks before the Janata government led by Morarji Desai fell.

Thus, while many of the provisions that were introduced by the Forty-second Amendment were reversed by the passage of the Forty-fourth Amendment, Articles 323A and B, which introduced tribunals as constitutional entities, were retained.

#### **III. CONSTITUTIONAL LITIGATION OVER TRIBUNALS (1985–2014)**

#### **1. The Administrative Tribunals Act 1985 and** *Sampath Kumar*

Although Indira Gandhi was returned to power as Prime Minister in 1980, perhaps because of the taint of the Emergency that tribunals had come to be associated with, her government did not seek to follow through on plans to establish tribunals and implement the mandate of Articles 323A and B. Those plans were revived only after the Congress (I) government under Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi took office in 1984. The first such step was the enactment by Parliament of the Administrative Tribunals Act 1985, which authorised the creation of administrative tribunals at the Centre and in the States as envisaged by Article 323A.

Almost immediately after the enactment of this law, several writ petitions were filed before various High Courts and the Supreme Court challenging the constitutional validity of the authorising constitutional provision and law. The main ground of attack in these petitions was that the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 and that of the High Courts under Article 226 had been excluded, which was unconstitutional. This led, eventually, to the judgment of a constitutional bench of five judges of the Supreme Court in *SP Sampath Kumar v Union of India*, which was delivered in December 1986.<sup>37</sup>

At the initial stage of the case, on 31 October 1985, a two-judge division bench of the Supreme Court consisting of PN Bhagwati CJ and Ranganath Misra J heard the initial petition, admitted the writ petitions, and issued interim orders, while the case was assigned to be heard by a constitutional bench consisting of five judges of the Supreme Court. Even as it passed the interim order, which was designed to make the newly created tribunals conform more closely to the expectations that the legal community had of judicial institutions, the Supreme Court gave an early indication of its approach to the case. It directed that a bench of the tribunal should consist of at least one 'judicial member', and that a seat of the tribunal be located wherever the High Court was seated.<sup>38</sup> The interim order also noted, somewhat unusually, that the Attorney General had agreed that whatever changes were required to be made to the law to make it acceptable would be 'introduced shortly in Parliament'.  $\frac{39}{2}$ 

This approach of the Court is worth reflecting upon. In other contexts, particularly in those involving public interest litgation (PIL) cases, Bhagwati J has counselled the Court to abandon the traditional common law adversarial approach and adopt a dynamic approach that was more suited to the situation in India. <sup>40</sup> However, it is not clear that such an approach was applicable in *Sampath Kumar*, which was not a classic PIL case. The petitioners in *Sampath Kumar* had raised constitutional objections to the law because it excluded the jurisdiction of the High Courts and potentially of the Supreme Court under Article 32, and thus violated their constitutional rights to judicial review. As will be clear from an analysis of the constitutional bench's decision in *Sampath Kumar*, the Court appeared to be unduly sympathetic to the impugned law. One gets the sense that the Court was eager to work with the government to save the law and the system of administrative tribunals that was being ushered in. However, by not taking the constitutional objections seriously enough in the first instance, the Court contributed to a situation where, a decade later, those problems resurfaced, resulting in a new round of litigation over the same issues.

The final decision of the constitutional bench of the Supreme Court in *Sampath Kumar's* case, delivered a year later, consists of two separate judgments. The main judgment was delivered by Ranganath Misra J, with Bhagwati CJ authoring a separate, concurring judgment. Misra J's judgment focuses on two main questions: (i) whether by excluding the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, the law was violating the Constitution by adversely affecting judicial review, which had been held to be a part of the basic structure of the Constitution; and (ii) whether the tribunals created under the Administrative Tribunals Act were capable of being substitutes for the High Courts and would inspire trust in parties subjected to their jurisdiction.<sup>41</sup> Misra J first noted that pursuant to the Court's initiative at the interim stage, the government had amended the law to save the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 as well as Article 136, removing one problem with the law as originally enacted. Turning to the power of the High Courts under Article 226, Misra J relied on Bhagwati J's separate judgment in *Minerva Mills v Union of India*, where, while holding that the power of judicial review was an integral part of the Indian constitutional system, Bhagwati J had held that this would not prevent Parliament from providing for 'effective alternative institutional mechanisms'.<sup>42</sup> Misra J noted the growing problems of backlogs and arrears, which had only worsened by the mid-1980s. He reasoned that taking those special circumstances into account, Parliament was justified in setting up an 'effective alternative institutional mechanism' in the form of administrative tribunals for service matters. Turning to the second question, he emphasised that the High Courts had a long tradition of a century and a quarter that had enabled them to gain the trust of
the people. He held that for this reason it was 'of paramount importance that the substitute institution —the tribunal—must be a worthy successor of the High Court in all respects'. $\frac{43}{12}$  He held that if this did not happen, 'the constitution of the tribunal as a substitute of the High Court would be open to challenge'.<sup>44</sup> His judgment ended by expressing the hope that the law would be amended to enable the administrative tribunals to act as true substitutes for the High Courts. This too is unusual in a judgment. Judges do not typically see their task as helping create institutions. Their task is to make hard judgments about whether an institutional innovation measures up to the demands of the Constitution or not. Misra J's judgment seems to leave the issue open and dependent upon the implementation of the law in the future.

While agreeing with Misra J's judgment and its reasons, Bhagwati CJ's concurring judgment focused on aspects of the qualifications and appointments of the Chairman, Vice Chairman, and members of the tribunals which would be necessary, in his view, to save the law from invalidation. Bhagwati CJ endorsed Misra J's identification of the 'effective alternative institutional mechanism' theory (which had been drawn from Justice Bhagwati's own minority opinion in *Minerva Mills*, which he somewhat unpersuasively argued could be attributed also to the majority since it did not disagree with him on the point).  $\frac{45}{1}$  He held that in order for the tribunals to fit this theory, it was necessary that appointments to the tribunals be made by the government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India. $\frac{46}{12}$  He also recommended further amendments to the Administrative Tribunals Act.  $\frac{47}{12}$ 

What is unusual about the *Sampath Kumar* case is that it ignored previous Supreme Court rulings that had held the jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 226 to be part of the basic structure of the Constitution. These precedents included *Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala*, <sup>48</sup> *Re Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures*, 49 *Indira Gandhi v Raj Narain*, <sup>50</sup> and the majority judgments in *Minerva Mills v Union of India*. <sup>51</sup> The sole authority cited by the two main judgments for the 'alternative institutional mechanism' theory that enabled the bypassing of the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts was Bhagwati J's minority judgment in *Minerva Mills*. As we have noted earlier, the First Law Commission, in its Fourteenth Report, while calling for the creation of service tribunals had expressly recommended retaining the Article 226 jurisdiction of the High Courts. The 'alternative institutional mechanism' theory was thus conceived on shaky conceptual and practical foundations, as was to become clear in the aftermath of *Sampath Kumar*.

### **2. The Post-***Sampath Kumar* **Cases (1986–93)**

Shortly after the *Sampath Kumar* decision was delivered, the Administrative Tribunals Act was amended along the lines suggested in the judgments of Misra J and Bhagwati CJ. However, these did not, by themselves, take care of problems with the administration of the newly established tribunals.

The initial round of cases dealt with fairly minor issues.<sup>52</sup> However, by the early 1990s, severe problems of management and operation began to emerge in various tribunals, some of which were created not under Articles 323A or B but under pre-existing statutes. However, their structure and operation had also been affected by the application of the theory of 'alternative institutional mechanism' created in *Sampath Kumar.* As is detailed below, the administrative tribunals created under Article 323A had their share of problems. However, by then, some had also created tribunals under Article 323B. This latter category of tribunals had faced problems in coordinating their

jurisdiction with their parent High Courts, whose jurisdiction they were supposed to exclude under the 'alternative institutional mechanism' theory propounded in *Sampath Kumar*.

The first doubts about the validity of the theory propounded in the *Sampath Kumar* case were expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of *RK Jain v Union of India* (hereinafter *RK Jain*). 53 Decided in May 1993, a mere eight years after the *Sampath Kumar* ruling, the case dealt with problems in the functioning and appointment of members in the Customs, Excise, and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter CEGAT) that had been established in 1982. While dealing with problems in CEGAT, a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court consisting of Ramaswamy, Ahmadi, and Punchhi JJ drew attention to the malfunctioning and maladministration in tribunals as a whole, and recommended that the Law Commission review the situation of coordinating functions between tribunals and the regular courts as also the issue of appointments to tribunals, which were not being able to act credibly as substitutes for the High Courts.

# **3. Revisiting and Revising** *Sampath Kumar: Sakinala Harinath* **and** *L Chandra Kumar* **(1993–97)**

Later that same year, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh issued a bold judgment authored by MN Rao CJ that dealt a severe blow to the legitimacy of the system of administrative tribunals authorised by the *Sampath Kumar* decision. In *Sakinala Harinath v State of Andhra Pradesh*, <sup>54</sup> Rao CJ held that Article 323A(2)(d) of the Constitution was unconstitutional to the extent it empowered Parliament to exclude the jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 226. Rao CJ explicitly held that the theory of 'alternative institutional mechanisms' propounded in *Sampath Kumar* flew in the face of earlier constitutional bench decisions of the Supreme Court that had expressly held judicial review enshrined in Articles 226 and 32 to be a basic feature of the Indian Constitution.<sup>55</sup> He emphasised that the judgments of Misra J and Bhagwati CJ had not referred to those decisions, which were binding upon them, and had also not considered whether Article 323A was itself unconstitutional.<sup>56</sup>

The judgment in *Sakinala Harinath* is bold because even *per incuriam* decisions of the Supreme Court are usually treated as binding by High Court benches. However, Rao CJ's judgment astutely drew support from the judgments of Ramaswamy and Ahmadi JJ in *RK Jain*'s case, which had also expressed criticism and doubt over the reasoning in *Sampath Kumar*. By noting that the *Sampath Kumar* judgments had skirted around the arguments of constitutionality raised by the petitioners, Rao CJ was also subtly criticising the abdication by the judges in *Sampath Kumar* of their responsibility to adjudicate constitutional questions that arose for consideration before them.

In March 1997, a seven-judge constitutional bench of the Supreme Court, speaking through Ahmadi CJ, effectively buried the 'alternative institutional mechanism' theory propounded in *Sampath Kumar* even as it sought to bolster the system of tribunals that had been ushered into the Indian legal system through that decision. Ahmadi CJ's judgment in *L Chandra Kumar v Union of India* sought to perform a delicate balancing act in handling the several issues before it.<sup>57</sup> On the central question before it, the court endorsed the reasoning of MN Rao CJ's judgment in *Sakinala Harinath* that the judgments in *Sampath Kumar* had ignored binding precedents in holding that the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226, which was part of the basic structure of the Constitution, could be excluded by the Administrative Tribunals Act. The Court went on to assert its own reasons for

holding that the power of judicial review over legislative action vested in the superior courts in India (ie, the High Courts and the Supreme Court) could not be ousted or excluded. Ahmadi CJ argued that the inclusion of elaborate provisions relating to tenure, salaries, retirement age, etc for judges was evidence that the framers sought to insulate judges of superior courts from any executive or legislative interference with their decisions.<sup>58</sup> He reasoned that since these safeguards were not available to judges of the subordinate judiciary or those who sat on tribunals, 'they could not be considered full and effective substitutes for the superior judiciary in discharging the function of constitutional interpretation' and adjudication.<sup>59</sup> Employing this logic, the Court rejected the theory—advanced in *Sampath Kumar*—that tribunals could act as *substitutes* for the High Courts. Instead, the Court suggested that tribunals perform a *supplemental* role to the High Courts. <sup>60</sup> Although the Court did not expressly cite the Law Commision's Fourteenth Report on this point, this is the exact language used by the First Law Commission to explain what it thought was a justifiable role for tribunals. Significantly, the Court went on to hold that:

[T]he power vested in the High Courts to exercise judicial superintendence over the decisions of all courts and tribunals within their respective jurisdictions is also part of the basic structure of the Constitution. *This is because a situation where the High* Courts are divested of all other judicial functions apart from that of constitutional interpretation, is equally to be *avoided*. 61

The Court therefore disagreed with Rao CJ's conclusion that Article 323A was unconstitutional for enabling the creation of tribunals, and asserted that there were 'pressing reasons why we are anxious to preserve the conferment' of adjudicative power on tribunals.  $\frac{62}{2}$  The Court acknowledged that Misra J's judgment in *Sampath Kumar* had correctly identified the colossal backlog before the superior courts as justifying the creation of administrative tribunals. The Court noted that *Sampath Kumar* drew justification from expert bodies (including the Shah Committee Report and the Administrative Reform Commission) for supporting the introduction of tribunals.  $63$  Ahmadi CJ's judgment for the Court rejected the suggestion of the Malimath Committee (1990) that tribunals be abolished, holding as follows:

That the various tribunals have not performed up to expectations is a self-evident and widely acknowledged truth. However, to draw an inference that their unsatisfactory performance points to their being founded on a fundamentally unsound principle would not be correct. The reasons for which tribunals were constituted still persist; indeed, those reasons have become even more pronounced in our times. 64

The Court went on to suggest several steps to improve the functioning of tribunals. It emphasised that the selection committee for members of tribunals had been changed to include a Supreme Court judge as its head (to be nominated by the Chief Justice), which would provide an important safeguard.<sup>65</sup> It also recommended that all existing tribunals be within the administrative supervision of a single nodal ministry, preferably the Ministry of Law, to overcome the absence of administrative coordination between tribunals. 66

# **4. The Immediate Aftermath of** *Chandra Kumar* **(1997–2004)**

A trend is discernible in the cases decided across the decades of the 1990s and 2000s. In the early part of the 1990s, as we have noted, complaints about the functioning of tribunals led to calls for their

abolition. In the wake of *Chandra Kumar*, the judiciary appears to have accepted the legitimacy of the system of tribunals. The focus of attention, instead, has turned to the practical conditions of their operation in order to ensure that tribunals are able to function effectively and maintain the quality and standards expected of regular courts.

A similar trend came to be seen with tribunals constituted under laws that did not fall under Articles 323A and B. Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) were constituted under the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act 1993. Consequently, DRTs were established across the nation, starting with Delhi. Almost immediately, a case was filed before the High Court of Delhi challenging the constitutional validity of the enabling statute. In March 1995, the Delhi High Court held in *Delhi High Court Bar Association v Union of India* that the parent law was unconstitutional as it eroded the independence of the judiciary and violated the equal protection guarantee in Article 14.<sup>67</sup> Appeals from this and allied cases were heard by the Supreme Court and decided in a judgment delivered by Kirpal J in March 2002 in *Union of India v Delhi High Court Bar Association*. <sup>68</sup> While the case was pending before the Supreme Court, the government framed rules to address the concerns raised by the Delhi High Court. As a consequence, appointments to the DRTs would be made by a selection committee that would consist of the Chief Justice of India or a judge of the Supreme Court nominated by him.

Kirpal J's judgment rejected the argument that establishing DRTs violated judicial independence by referencing the fact that tribunals under Articles 323A and B were not considered to violate that same principle.<sup>69</sup> He drew a direct connection to the fact that decisions of the DRTs would be subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under Articles 226 and  $227$ .<sup>70</sup> Implicitly drawing upon the logic and reasoning used in *Chandra Kumar*, he emphasised that tribunals for income tax, sales tax, and for excise and customs had become 'an essential part of the judicial system' in India, and upheld the constitutionality of the law creating DRTs. $\frac{71}{2}$  He also clarified that the effect of incorporating Articles 323A and B was not to attenuate the power of Parliament to create tribunals for subjects not contemplated by those two provisions. $\frac{72}{2}$ 

### **5. The National Company Law Tribunals—Round I (2004–10)**

Several of the tribunals discussed here were created by Congress governments at the Central and State levels. However, it is now clear that the phenomenon of creating tribunals has transcended politics, as governments of every political persuasion have come to embrace them over time. In 2002, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) coalition government (consisting of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its allies) shepherded the Companies (Amendment) Act 2002, which sought to create the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT). The justification for this move was the considerable delay in dissolution of companies, caused in part by a multiplicity of forums which included the High Courts, the Company Law Board, the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) and the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (AIFR). The new law proposed to replace all these forums with a single NCLT. This was to be a three-member body based in New Delhi that would hear appeals from benches of the NCLT located across the nation.

The Madras Bar Association filed a writ petition before the High Court of Madras challenging the

constitutional validity of the amendments to the Companies Act that would lead to the creation of the NCLT. Its principal objection was to the growing trend of tribunalisation which, in its view, would lead to executive aggrandisement of power, and violated the principles of separation of power and judicial independence. The High Court of Madras delivered its judgment in *R Gandhi v Union of India* in March 2004.<sup>73</sup> Jayasimha Babu J held that Parliament was competent to create the NCLT. However, the High Court went on to hold that several of the provisions of the amended law were unconstitutional for neglecting the imperatives of the principles of separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary. It gave detailed reasons why the scheme of the appointments procedure was fundamentally flawed in many respects, and held that until the identified defects were removed, it would be unconstitutional to constitute the NCLT.

On appeal, a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court in *Union of India v R Gandhi* delivered a judgment that endorsed much of the reasoning in Justice Babu's judgment.<sup>74</sup>

Raveendran J's judgment for the Supreme Court reviewed existing precedents and laid down the following broad principles that would apply to the creation and functioning of tribunals:

(i) Parliament has the power to create tribunals on subjects over which it possesses subject matter competence. However, following *Chandra Kumar*, the creation of tribunals cannot exclude the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supreme Court under Articles 226 and  $32.$ <sup> $\frac{75}{7}$ </sup>

(ii) While the legislature can make a law providing for tribunals, the superior courts can, in exercise of the power of judicial review, examine whether the qualifications and eligibility criteria provided for selection of members are proper and adequate.<sup>76</sup>

(iii) Parliament cannot pack tribunals with members from the civil service. Considerations of separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary must be respected.<sup> $77$ </sup>

Applying these principles to the NCLT, the Supreme Court held that the presence of grave defects in its structure rendered the actual operation of the NCLT unconstitutional. The Supreme Court listed fourteen major defects in extensive detail in its judgment, and held that until the defects were cured through legislative amendments, the NCLT would continue to be unconstitutional. $\frac{78}{2}$ 

## **6. The National Tax Tribunal Decision (2014)**

In September 2014, a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court rendered judgment in the case of *Madras Bar Association v Union of India*. <sup>79</sup> This judgment extended the logic of *Chandra Kumar* and *R Gandhi* to spell out how the power of judicial review vested in the superior courts must be respected while creating tribunals. The National Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 enabled the creation of a National Tax Tribunal (NTT), to adjudicate appeals from appellate tax tribunals created under several statutes, and to effectively be a substitute for the jurisdiction of the High Courts as appellate bodies. As justification for the NTT, the government cited the following reasons: (i) the huge arrears in tax cases that afflicted High Courts across the country; (ii) the diversity in interpretation of tax law on account of differences between the various High Courts requiring a single forum that would deliver uniformity in the law; and (iii) the need for specialist tax adjudication.

The main judgment delivered by Kehar J found several constitutional problems in the structure and

content of the law creating the NTT. It held that since the NTT was seeking to *supplant* rather than *supplement* the jurisdiction of the High Courts, and since it did not provide enough guarantees of independence to those who were appointed to the NTT, it fell foul of the various stipulations set out in *Chandra Kumar* and *R Gandhi*. Going beyond those cases, the Court held that the parent law was unconstitutional as a whole. In so doing, the *Madras Bar Association* judgment went beyond the somewhat more restrained approach in *Chandra Kumar* and *R Gandhi*, where the judges had sought to save parts of the scheme of the legislature. Nariman J's separate judgment argued that the Act sought to take away the core judicial function of deciding substantial questions of law away from the High Courts. This may account for why the Supreme Court was intolerant of this particular legislative attempt to create tribunals.

## **7. The National Company Law Tribunals—Round II (2010–15)**

On 14 May 2015, a five-judge constitutional bench of the Supreme Court delivered judgment in the case of *Madras Bar Association v Union of India (Madras Bar Association II*), <sup>80</sup> which it termed as a 'sequel' to the earlier round of litigation on the NCLT. As we have noted, in the first round of litigation on this issue in the *R Gandhi* case, both the High Court of Madras and the Supreme Court rejected the argument that the constitution of NCLTs was per se unconstitutional. However, both courts also held that while Parliament could constitute tribunals on subjects within its legislative domain, the manner in which the NCLT had been constituted was problematic and resulted in violations of the principles of judicial independence and the separation of powers. The Supreme Court's judgment in *R Gandhi* therefore issued specific directions indicating how Parliament could remedy the problems identified by it.

The second round of litigation arose as a result of the enactment of a new company law, the Indian Companies Act 2013, which had specific provisions dealing with the establishment of the NCLT and the NCLAT. The Madras Bar Association, which had also been a principal petition in the *R Gandhi* case, challenged the provisions of the new Indian Companies Act on the ground that the provisions relating to the establishment of the NCLT and the NCLAT ignored the elaborate recommendations issued in the *R Gandhi* case relating to the qualifications and appointments of members of these tribunals as well as the structure of their appointments procedure, and were thus liable to be struck down as unconstitutional. The Madras Bar Association also sought to rely on the judgment in the NTT case in support of its stance that the very creation of the NCLT was unconstitutional.

AR Sikri J's judgment for the Court in *Madras Bar Association II* essentially reiterated the judgment in *R Gandhi*, and refused to advance the more aggressive trend witnessed in the NTT judgment. Thus, Sikri J held that Parliament was entirely competent to establish the NCLT and the NCLAT. However, he accepted the argument of the petitioner that the provisions dealing with the prescription of qualifications of the head and members of the NCLT and the NCLAT, as well as the structure of the selection of the personnel of these two tribunals, did not meet with the requirements laid down in *R Gandhi* and struck them down as being invalid. Sikri *J*'s judgment specifically distinguished the NTT judgment and noted that that situation may have been exceptional. It is worth noting that Nariman J, who adopted a bold position on the question of judicial independence in the NTT judgment, was also a signatory to Sikri J's judgment.

Some observers, writing in the immediate aftermath of the NTT judgment, felt that it may signal a

new trend where the judiciary would not condone the creation of new tribunals. However, the judgment of Sikri J—the latest at the time of writing—seems to indicate that such claims may have been overstated, and the logic and reasoning employed in *Chandra Kumar* continues to hold the ground, at least for the foreseeable future. Sikri J's judgment ends by expressing concern that the NCLT and the NCLAT should be constituted soon, so that they can start functioning in earnest.

### **IV. CONCLUSION**

The law and policy on tribunals has witnessed several shifts over the period covered in this chapter. Playing a relatively insignificant role in the first quarter-century of the working of the Constitution, tribunals became more crucial actors as a result of their insertion into the constitutional scheme through the Forty-second Amendment in 1976. Thereafter, successive governments, regardless of political persuasion, have consistently resorted to creating tribunals, especially in the more recent era. The stance of the Supreme Court has also shifted from its enthusiastic endorsement of tribunals in *Sampath Kumar* to a more cautious approach in *Chandra Kumar*, where it accepted the need for tribunals but insisted on safeguards to ensure that their independence was ensured. The more recent trend, in *R Gandhi, Madras Bar Association* and *Madras Bar Association II,* indicates that the Supreme Court is more vigilant about ensuring that tribunals are not controlled by the executive and that their working conditions and standards meet constitutionally specified standards. As I have shown, the continuously increasing backlog and delay in the overall Indian legal system has been an important causal factor for the rise of tribunals. At the time of writing, cases challenging the structure and functioning of existing tribunals such as the Intellectual Property Appellate Tribunal and the National Green Tribunal are pending before the courts and may cause a further shift in the evolution of the narrative relating to tribunals.

There has been considerable commentary in academic journals and newspaper reports on the growing trend of tribunalisation over the past two decades. <sup>81</sup> Practising lawyers tend to argue for the jettisoning of tribunals entirely, pointing to some justifiable concerns about executive encroachment over what used to be judicial functions. These critiques are reminiscent of the misguided opposition of the English jurist AV Dicey to the French system of tribunalisation, which led a generation of common law lawyers to imbibe the same prejudices. Even in the UK, however, a later generation of British jurists embraced tribunals that perform a major role in the contemporary British legal system. Comparative experience in the UK and Australia suggests that tribunals can be integrated into a wellfunctioning legal and judicial system. $\frac{82}{ }$  The Supreme Court's recent jurisprudence shows that it has not yet embraced this critique in its entirety (even as it has sympathy for the logic); and has, for now, chosen to uphold Parliament's power to constitute tribunals while retaining for itself the power to scrutinise how the appointments and qualifications are set for these tribunals, in order to ensure that the principles of independence of the judiciary and separation of powers are complied with.

What is more troubling about the critiques offered by the practising bar is that they do not offer much by way of solving the more fundamental problems of delay and backlog in the overall legal system that have caused tribunals to be advanced as solutions. None of them offer, for instance, an exhaustive empirical critique of various tribunals that have been functioning for over a quartercentury.<sup>83</sup> The mainstream legal profession and judiciary seem to be in denial over the severe damage caused to the overall legitimacy of the legal system by the worsening state of affairs of backlog and

delay. Official bodies of judges and lawyers continue to rely on stale, empirically unsound, shortterm solutions such as increasing the judge strength of existing courts. Scholars who have conducted sound empirical studies on backlog have offered unconventional solutions that are unacceptable to the mainstream legal profession and judiciary because they require a fundamental reordering of the current system, and would threaten the vested interests of dominant sections of the legal profession. <sup>84</sup>

In trying to understand the causes for the 'crisis' of delay and backlog that he identified in 1982, Upendra Baxi identified four principal types of delays in the legal system: those caused in turn by the State, the Courts, the litigants, and lastly, by the legal profession. Baxi was particularly critical of the active contributions of the legal profession to the problems of backlog and delay.<sup>85</sup> Writing more recently, Pratap Bhanu Mehta has argued that '[t]he single biggest weakness of the Indian justice system is its legal profession'. <sup>86</sup> To justify this assessment, Mehta notes the number of strikes resorted to by the profession, and argues that 'almost every single attempt by the Courts to reform their procedures in any way that would expedite matters has met stiff resistance from the respective Bar Associations concerned'.<sup>87</sup> By way of evidence for this claim, Mehta describes how lawyers sabotaged attempts made to reform the Code of Civil Procedure in the early part of this century.

In contemporary India, the legal profession has lost credibility in part because, while lawyers were at the forefront of demanding professional regulation of other professionals such as doctors, the Bar Council of India's own system of disciplining lawyers who bring disrepute to the profession is nonexistent. Given these realities, the legal profession's perception that the problems in the Indian legal system are caused by self-interested bureaucrats is not one that will find general support. What is required instead is a dispassionate, non-partisan examination of the root causes for the problems of delay and backlog in the Indian legal system, problems that threaten to fundamentally undermine its promise and potential for delivering justice to ordinary Indians.

<span id="page-15-0"></span><sup>1</sup> Upendra Baxi, *The Crisis of the Indian Legal System* (Vikas Publishing 1982).

 $2$  Baxi ([n](#page-15-0) 1) 58.

<span id="page-15-1"></span> $3$  See <u>Nick Robinson, 'Judicial Architecture and Capacity'</u> (chapter 19, this volume).

 $4$  Bibek Debroy, 'Justice Delivery in India—A Snapshot of Problems and Reforms' (2008) Institute of South Asian Studies Working Paper 47/2008, 6 [<http://mercury.ethz.ch/serviceengine/Files/ISN/91150/ipublicationdocument\\_singledocument/80daa505-0e21-4871](http://mercury.ethz.ch/serviceengine/Files/ISN/91150/ipublicationdocument_singledocument/80daa505-0e21-4871-a190-2b22ea81642d/en/46.pdf) a190-2b22ea81642d/en/46.pdf>, accessed October 2015.

 $\frac{5}{2}$  Debroy ( $\underline{n4}$  $\underline{n4}$  $\underline{n4}$ ) 6.

6 Information obtained from the website of the Supreme Court of India [<http://www.supremecourtofindia.nic.in/p\\_stat/pm01052014.pdf>](http://www.supremecourtofindia.nic.in/p_stat/pm01052014.pdf), accessed October 2015.

<sup>7</sup> Granville Austin, *Working a Democratic Constitution: A History of the Indian Experience* (Oxford University Press 2000) 139.

<sup>8</sup> Supreme Court of India, Court News (January–March 2014) 9(1) <http://supremecourtofindia.nic.in/courtnews/2014 issue 1.pdf>, accessed 3 November 2014.

 $3^9$  See reports of the Law Commission numbered 14, 44, 45, 58, 77, 79, 80, 120, 121, 124, and 215.

<sup>10</sup> Its chair was MC Setalvad, the first Attorney General of India, who is generally regarded as the most independent and distinguished occupant of the office. Other members included MC Chagla, KN Wanchoo, and SM Sikri, all of whom were or went on to become among the most significant superior court judges in India.

<sup>11</sup> Terms of reference of the First Law Commission, cited in Law Commission of India, *Reform of Judicial Administration* (Law Com No 14, vol 1, 1958) 3 [<http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/1-50/Report14Vol1.pdf](http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/1-50/Report14Vol1.pdf)>, accessed 3 November 2014.

<sup>12</sup> Law Commission of India, *Reform of Judicial Administration* (Law Com No 14, vol 2, 1958) 694 [<http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/1-50/Report14Vol2.pdf>](http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/1-50/Report14Vol2.pdf), accessed October 2015.

<sup>\*</sup> I am grateful to Michael Dowdle, Mathew John, Vikram Raghavan, Adithya Reddy, and R Senthil Kumar for substantive comments. I also thank Arthad Kurlekar for providing able research assistance and Devashish Dhar for assistance in editing. The usual caveat applies.