## I PRECEDENTS FOR MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE

Many of the monuments cited in this chapter as well as subsequent ones are discussed and illustrated in the two classical sources: Percy Brown, *Indian Architecture, Islamic Period,* 5th ed. rev., Bombay, 1958, and John Marshall, "The Monuments of Muslim India," in *The Cambridge History of India,* Vol. in, Cambridge, 1922.' While monographs and books concerning more limited areas or single sites have since been written, these two texts remain the best sources for comprehensive treatment of architecture in the pre-Mughal period and should be consulted for many works discussed here. John Hoag, *Islamic Architecture,* New York, 1977, is useful for placing the material in a greater Islamic context.

Other sources for material discussed here as well as in subsequent chapters include Alexander Cunningham (ed.), *Archaeological Survey of India Reports (ASIR),* 23 vols., Calcutta, 1871-87. In addition there are numerous reports and series issued by the Archaeological Survey of India which will be cited in specific contexts throughout this essay. However, of particular value for historical inscriptions on these monuments are the *Annual Report of Indian Epigraphy (ARIE)* and *Epigraphia Indica: Arabic and Persian Supplement {ElAPS).* These sources are invaluable, but for descriptive rather than analytic material.

Sites settled prior to the establishment of the Delhi Sultanate are discussed by F. A. Khan, *Banbhore, A Preliminary Report of the Recent Archaeological Excavations at Banbhore,* Karachi, 1963, and Mehrdad Shokoohy, *Bhadresvar, The Oldest Islamic Monuments in India,* Leiden, 1989. Holly Edwards, "The Genesis of Islamic Architecture in the Indus Valley," Ph.D. dissertation, Institute of Fine Arts, 1990, discusses more pre-Sultanate-period works.

In addition to Brown and Marshall, there are useful works dealing particularly with the Delhi Sultanate through the Tughluq period. J. A. Page, *A Historical Memoir on the Qutb: Delhi,* Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, No. 22, Calcutta, 1926, provides extensive information, but little analysis, on all phases of the Quwwat al-Islam mosque. Anthony Welch, "Qur'an and Tomb: The Religious Epigraphs of Two Early Sultanate Tombs in Delhi," in Frederick M. Asher and G. S. Gai (eds.), *Indian Epigraphy: Its Bearing on the History of Art,* New Delhi, 1985, thoughtfully interprets the inscriptional program of monuments within this complex. Tokifusa Tsukinowa, "The Influence of Seljuq Architecture on the Earliest Mosques of the Delhi Sultanate Period in India," *Ada Asiatica,* 43, 1982, is an excellent study on the links between early Indian mosques and Iranian building types. Tughluq architecture and patronage is ably discussed by Agha Mahdi Husain, *Tughluq Dynasty,* New Delhi, 1976. Anthony Welch and Howard Crane, "The Tughluqs: Master Builders of the Delhi Sultanate,"

<sup>1</sup> Citations are given in full at the first mention; thereafter usually only the author's last name and a shortened title are cited.

*Muqarnas,* i, 1983, have published an insightful typological survey of imperial Tughluq monuments. Although in Japanese, extensive documentation for twelfththrough mid-sixteenth-century Delhi monuments is in Tatsura Yamamoto, Matsuo Ara and Tokifusa Tsukinowa, *Delhi: Architectural Remains of the Delhi Sultanate Period,* 3 vols., Tokyo, 1967-70.

The architecture produced under the successor states of the Tughluqs is well documented, although recent interpretative scholarship is often lacking. The classical work for Jaunpur remains A. Fuhrer, *The Sharqi Architecture of Jaunpur,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. xi, Calcutta, 1889. The architecture of pre-Mughal Bengal has been examined by several modern scholars. The most comprehensive text is A. H. Dam, *Muslim Architecture in Bengal,* Dacca, 1961, while articles by various scholars in George Michell (ed.), *The Islamic Heritage of Bengal,* Paris, 1984, reflect current scholarship. Extensive photographic documentation and accompanying essays for Islamic monuments in eastern India, including Bengal, is in Catherine B. Asher, *Islamic Monuments of Eastern India and Bangladesh,* Leiden, 1991. For the pre-Mughal architecture of Gujarat the most thorough sources remain James Burgess, *On the Muhammadan Architecture of Bharoch, Cambay, Dholka, Champanir, and Mahmudabad in Gujarat,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. xxm, London, 1896, and the same author's *The Muhammadan Architecture of Ahmadabad,* 2 parts, Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vols. xxiv and xxxiii, London, 1900—05. These volumes are indispensable for detailed plates and plans. Mandu is best covered by G. Yazdani, *Mandu, the City of Joy,* Oxford, 1929; R. Nath, *The Art of Chanderi,* New Delhi, 1979, anticipates links with later Mughal architecture. Recent scholarship on Muslim architecture of the Deccan includes Z. A. Desai, "Architecture," chapter iv (i)-(iii) in H. K. Sherwani (ed.), *History of the Medieval Deccan,* 2 vols., Hyderabad, 1974, and Elizabeth Schotten Merklinger, *Indian Islamic Architecture: The Deccan, IJ4/-1689,* Warminster, 1981. Her text most clearly discusses the impact of Timurid forms on Deccani buildings.

In addition to the works by Marshall and Brown cited at the opening of this essay, see Muhammad Siraju-'l-Islam, "The Lodi Phase of Indo-Islamic Architecture (1451-1526 A.D.)," Ph.D. dissertation, Freie Universitat Berlin, i960, for an annotated catalogue of Lodi works. Matsuo Ara, "The Lodhi Rulers and the Construction of Tomb-Buildings in Delhi," *Acta Asiatica,* 43, 1982, provides thought-provoking arguments on the social context for the construction of Lodi tombs. The development of a new mosque type under the Lodis is discussed by Catherine B. Asher, "From Anomaly to Homogeneity: The Mosque in 14th- to i6th-Century Bihar," in G. Bhattacharya and Debala Mitra (eds.), *Studies in Art and Archaeology of Bihar and Bengal,* Delhi, 1989. Architecture under Sher Shah Sur has been a primary concern of this author; articles relevant to the future development of Mughal architecture include "The Mausoleum of Sher Shah Suri," *Artibus Asiae,* xxxix, 3/4, 1977, "The Qal<sup>c</sup> a-i Kuhna Mosque: A Visual Symbol of Royal Aspirations," in Anand Krishna (ed.), *Chhavi - 2,* Benares, 1981, and "Legacy and Legitimacy: Sher Shah's Patronage of Imperial Mausolea," in Katherine P. Ewing (ed.), *Sharic at and Ambiguity in South Asian Islam,* Berkeley, 1988.

Architecture produced for non-Muslims during this period has been largely ignored. Frederick M. Asher, "Gaya: Monuments of the Pilgrimage Town," in Janice Leoshko (ed.), *Bodhgaya,* Bombay, 1988, Adris Banerji, "Some Post-Muslim Temples of Bihar," *Journal of the Asiatic Society,* iv, 1962, and H. Bisham Pal, *The Temples of Rajasthan,* Jaipur, 1969, the latter two descriptive, are among the few authors to consider temples constructed during this period. A monograph and interpretative essay on the Gwalior

palace is badly needed. To date, G. H. R. Tillotson, *The Rajput Palaces*, New Haven, 1987, provides the best discussion.

Few publications on Iranian architecture are written from the perspective of the influence it had upon the Mughals. One notable and excellent exception is Lisa Golombek, "From Tamerlane to the Taj Mahal," in Abbas Daneshvari (ed.), Essays in Islamic Art and Architecture in Honor of Katharina Otto-Dorn, Malibu, 1981. Among recent publications useful as background material to the study of Mughal architecture are Bernard O'Kane, *Timurid Architecture in Khurasan*, Costa Mesa, 1987, and Lisa Golombek and Donald Wilber, The Timurid Architecture of Iran and Turan, Princeton, 1988.

#### 2 THE BEGINNINGS OF MUGHAL ARCHITECTURE

The most immediate source for Babur, his gardens and buildings is his own memoirs. Zahir al-Din Muhammad Babur Badshah, *Babur Nama* (tr.), reprint ed., New Delhi, 1970, is meticulously indexed, making the lengthy text easily accessible. A second invaluable source for Babur immediately after his conquest of India is Zain Khan Khwafi, *Tabaqat-i Baburi* (tr.), Delhi, 1982. Zain Khan, Babur's close companion, often provides detailed information about buildings and gardens that otherwise is unknown. Babur's daughter, Gulbadan Begum, *Humayun Nama* (tr.), London, 1902, also provides useful information regarding Babur's patronage.

The best secondary work on Babur's gardens prior to and after his conquest of India is by Howard Crane, "The Patronage of Zahir al-Din Babur and the Origins of Mughal Architecture," Bulletin of the Asia Institute, 1, 1987. For Babur's Indian gardens, see Elizabeth B. Moynihan, "The Lotus Garden Palace of Zahir al-Din Muhammad Babur," *Mugarnas*, 5, 1988, which deals with the garden at Dholpur, and her *Paradise* as a Garden in Persian and Mughal India, London, 1980. Well-illustrated, Sylvia Crowe and Sheila Haywood, *The Gardens of Mughal India*, Delhi, 1973, is popular but useful especially for its photographs. Inscriptions associated with Babur's gardens and wells are cited by M. Ashraf Husain, "Inscriptions of the Emperor Babur," EIAPS, 1965. For a discussion of Rahim Dad's garden and madrasa, see Z. A. Desai, "A Note on the Nagari Inscription of Mughal Emperor Babur from Gwalior Fort," in B. N. Mukherjee et al. (eds.), Sri Dinesacandrika, Studies in Indology, Delhi, 1983. Attilio Petruccioli, Fathpur Sikri, Città del Sole e delle Acque, Rome, 1988, is the only source for plans and illustrations of Babur's *baoli* at the Fatehpur Sikri rock scarp.

Babur's stone cutters are mentioned in the emperor's *Babur Nama*, cited above. Possible links between a stone cutter and the architect of Humayun's tomb are suggested by W. E. Begley, "Ghiyas, Mirak Mirza," in Macmillan Encyclopedia of Architects, Vol. 11, New York, 1982, which is based on biographical notices by the sixteenth-century author, Baha al-Din Hasan Nisari Bukhari, Mudhakkir-i Ahbab, New Delhi, 1969. Howard Crane, "The Patronage of Zahir al-Din Babur," presents an excellent overview of Babur's architecture with conclusions slightly different from those drawn here. The inscriptions on Babur's mosques are given by Husain, "Inscriptions of the Emperor Babur." Abu al-Fazl, A'in-i Akbari (tr.), 3 vols., reprint ed., Delhi and New Delhi, 1965–78, relates Mughal perceptions of Sambhal and Ayodhya. Useful modern lore associated with the Sambhal mosque is in Esha Basanti Joshi (ed.), *Uttar* Pradesh District Gazetteers: Moradabad, Lucknow, 1968, and tradition associated with the Ayodhya mosque as well as a photo of it is included by the same editor, *Uttar* Pradesh District Gazetteers: Faizabad, Allahabad, 1960.

The most thorough contemporary discussion of Humayun's architecture is by Muhammad Khwand Amir, *Qanun-i Humayuni* (tr.), Calcutta, 1940, and useful information is also provided by Abu al-Fazl, *Akbar Nama* (tr.), 3 vols., reprint ed., Delhi, 1972-73. Hereafter this work is cited as *Akbar Nama.* A brief summary of Khwand Amir is by Percy Brown, "Monuments of the Mughal Period," in *The Cambridge History of India,* Vol. iv, Cambridge, 1937. Golombek, "From Tamerlane to the Taj Mahal," cogently analyzes the implications of Khwand Amir's descriptions of no longer surviving buildings. Humayun's library, the Sher Mandal, is mentioned in the *Akbar Nama.* Percy Brown, *Indian Architecture, Islamic Period,* discusses the Sher Mandal, as does his contribution to the original *Cambridge History;* in both publications it is included under the monuments of Sher Shah Sur. Glenn D. Lowry, "The Tomb of Nasir-ud-Din Muhammad Humayun," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1983, recognizes the library as Humayun's. Humayun's mosque at Kachpura is rarely discussed; the best source for a plan, the inscriptions and a description remains *ASIR:* iv. As yet there is no overview of Humayun's patronage.

To date almost all scholarship on Mughal architecture has focused on imperially sponsored works; non-imperial works have been sorely ignored. Zafar Hasan, *A Guide to Nizamu-d Din,* Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, No. 10, Calcutta, 1922, discusses the restoration of Amir Khusrau's tomb during this early Mughal period. References to other non-imperially sponsored structures are in the easily available Y. D. Sharma, *Delhi and its Neighbourhood,* 2nd ed., New Delhi, 1974, which is based on the exhaustive *List of Muhammadan and Hindu Monuments: Delhi Province,* 4 vols., Calcutta, 1916-22. Here descriptions of nearly all surviving monuments are provided, but no analysis. Hereafter this work will be known as *List.* For monuments outside of Delhi during this period the *ASIR* is invaluable; Subhash Parihar, *Mughal Monuments in Punjab and Haryana,* New Delhi, 1985, provides a useful, although not comprehensive, annotated list. Mehrdad and Natalie Shokoohy, *Hisar-i Firuza,* London, 1988, is a good source for detailed plans and photographs of early Mughal monuments in Hisar District. Inscriptional evidence for non-imperial construction at this time is given by Paul Horn, "Muhammadan Inscriptions from the Subah of Delhi," *Epigraphia Indica,* 11, 1884, although it appears that many of these inscriptions are no longer *in situ.*

### 3 THE AGE OF AKBAR

For all aspects of Akbar's reign, including his architecture, the most thorough accounts are by Abu al-Fazl: *Akbar Nama* and his *A 'in-i Akbari* that was written as an administrative manual as part of the *Akbar Nama.* An invaluable but unofficial history of Akbar's reign is by al-Badayuni, *Muntakhab al-Tawarikh* (tr.), 3 vols., reprint ed., Patna, 1973, a courtier in the Mughal court whose writings on Akbar's attitudes toward Hinduism must be read cautiously. Important secondary sources that aid our overall understanding of Akbar's attitudes toward kingship and ultimately of his architectural patronage include S. A. A. Rizvi, *Religious and Intellectual History of the Muslims in Akbar's Reign,* Delhi, 1975, J. F. Richards, "The Formulation of Imperial Authority under Akbar and Jahangir," in J. F. Richards (ed.), *Kingship and Authority in South Asia,* Madison, 1978, and Iqtidar Alam Khan, "The Nobility under Akbar and the Development of his Religious Policy, 1560-80," *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,* 1-2, 1968.

Many of the monuments in this chapter are discussed and illustrated in texts

## THE AGE OF AKBAR

mentioned previously: Brown, *Indian Architecture, Islamic Period,* his essay in the original *Cambridge History* and Hoag, *Islamic Architecture.* Another easily available source with good plans and illustrations is Andreas Volwahsen, *Living Architecture: Islamic Indian,* New York, 1970.

The *List,* cited earlier, is the most comprehensive source for the architecture of Delhi through the first twenty years of Akbar's reign. Sharma, *Delhi and its Neighbourhood,* offers much of the same material in compact form. Glenn D. Lowry, "Delhi in the 16th Century," *Environmental Design,* 1983, provides an overview of the Akbar-period monuments there. Hasan, *Nizamu-d Din,* remains the best documentation for the Akbar-period monuments in this important shrine, including the tomb of Ataga Khan, while Anthony Welch, "A Problem of Sultanate Architectural Calligraphy," forthcoming, offers new insight into the inscriptional program of Ataga Khan's tomb. Zafar Hasan, *Mosque of Shaikh cAbdu-n Nabi,* Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, No. 9, Calcutta, 1921, is the only monograph on this often ignored but important building. Glenn D. Lowry, "Humayun's Tomb: Form, Function and Meaning in Early Mughal Architecture," *Muqarnas,* 4, 1987, provides an intriguing study of Delhi's most important building of this time. This article expands on the same author's thesis, "The Tomb of Nasir-ud-Din Muhammad Humayun." Bukhari, *Mudhakkir-i Ahbab,* is the only contemporary source that gives detailed information about the tomb's architect. W. E. Begley, "Mirak, Mirza Ghiyas," *Macmillan Encyclopedia of Architects,* Vol. 11, New York, 1982, suggests a connection between the architect of Humayun's tomb and Babur's stone cutters. Lisa Golombek, "From Tamerlane to the Taj Mahal," is the best source for Timurid influences on this tomb.

Akbar's palaces have received varied treatment. Recently contemporary passages that mention Akbar's palaces, largely from Persian texts including one never before translated, have been compiled by Michael Brand and Glenn D. Lowry (eds.), *Fatehpur-Sikri: A Sourcebook,* Cambridge, 1985. Hereafter this compilation will be known as *Sourcebook.* The classic source for Akbar's palaces at Ajmer remains Har Bilas Sarda, *Ajmer: Historical and Descriptive,* Ajmer, 1911, who provides considerable information, but little analysis. Plans and illustrations for the better known of the two Ajmer palaces are in Hoag, *Islamic Architecture,* while the only published illustration of the Badshahi Mahal is in Ebba Koch, "Influence of Mughal Architecture," in George Michell (ed.), *Ahmadabad,* Bombay, 1988. Muhammad Wali Ullah Khan, *Lahore and its Important Monuments,* 2nd ed., Karachi, 1964, explains that there are very few surviving Akbari buildings in the Lahore fort. Ebba Koch, "The Architectural Forms," in Michael Brand and Glenn D. Lowry (eds.), *Fatehpur Sikri,* Bombay, 1987, is the only recent scholar to consider the pavilion in the Allahabad fort. William G. Klingelhofer, "The Jahangiri Mahal of the Agra Fort: Expression and Experience in Early Mughal Architecture," *Muqarnas,* 5, 1988, is the most recent study of Akbar's surviving palace in the Agra fort. For a discussion of the fort's exterior walls and entrance gates as well as superb illustrations, see Oscar Reuther, *Indische Palaste und Wohnhauser,* Berlin, 1925. Sources on the buildings in Bengal and Gujarat that influenced the development of these palaces as well as Fatehpur Sikri are cited in the bibliographic essay for chapter 1.

More has been written on Fatehpur Sikri than any other Mughal site. The classic work on the site, with excellent descriptions and detailed drawings and plans, remains Edmund W. Smith, *The Mughal Architecture of Fathpur-Sikri,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. xvm, Parts 1-4, Allahabad, 1895-98. S. A. A. Rizvi and John Vincent Flynn, *Fathpur Sikri,* Bombay, 1975, is a useful source, although the

authors' attempts to define the purpose of each pavilion as well as their discussion of their conscious use of Hindu forms should be read with caution. The waterworks at the site have been documented in detail by Petruccioli, *Fathpur Sikri, Citta del Sole e delle Acque.* The proceedings of a seminar on Fatehpur Sikri by Michael Brand and Glenn D. Lowry (eds.), *Fatehpur-Sikri,* Bombay, 1987, reflects recent scholarship on the site; of particular merit for the study of architecture are the articles by Ebba Koch, "The Architectural Forms"; Attilio Petruccioli, "The Geometry of Power: The City's Planning"; Glenn D. Lowry, "Urban Structures and Functions," and John F. Richards, "The Imperial Capital." In conjunction with the seminar, the same editors produced the *Sourcebook,* which deals mostly with Fatehpur Sikri. Although not concerned with architecture, Iqtidar Alam Khan, "The Nobility under Akbar and the Development of his Religious Policy," provides valuable insight into Akbar's political concerns during the period that much of Fatehpur Sikri was under construction.

While the imperially sponsored architecture of the Mughals has been increasingly the subject of analytic study, sub-imperial architectural patronage remains virtually untouched by recent scholars. This present author's "Sub-Imperial Patronage: The Architecture of Raja Man Singh," in Barbara Stoler Miller (ed.), *The Powers of Art: Patronage in Indian Culture,* New Delhi, 1992, the only case study of this sort, evaluates the moti. es behind types of construction by one leading member of Akbar's court. In addition to contemporary histories cited above, Mughal biographies of the leading nobles, such as Farid Bhakkari, *Dhakhirat al-Khawanin,* 3 vols., Karachi, 1961-74, and Samsam al-Daula Shah Nawaz Khan and cAbd al-Hayy, *Maasiral-Umara* (tr.), 2 vols., reprint ed., Patna, 1979, provide considerable data regarding the nobility and their construction. The first work is available in Persian only, but Z. A. Desai is preparing an English translation that will be available shortly. The latter work hereafter will be known as *Maasir.*

Secondary material on sub-imperial work is cited in various sources, but often only in passing or in a context where the buildings are of secondary importance. Z. A. Desai, *Published Muslim Inscriptions of Rajasthan,* Jaipur, 1971, is an invaluable resource listing by site all known inscriptions there. The full text of the Nagaur Jami<sup>c</sup> mosque's inscription is in A. Chaghtai, "Some Inscriptions from Jodhpur State, Rajputana," *Epigraphia Indo-Moslemica, 1949-50.* For earlier material in Nagaur, see *ASIR:* xxni. Ajmer and its environment has been more thoroughly studied than Nagaur, although it is the inscriptions, rather than the monuments themselves, that have attracted the most attention. S. A. I. Tirmizi, *Ajmer through Inscriptions (1532-1852 A.D.),* New Delhi, 1968, provides an excellent historical background to the buildings. Sarda, *Ajmer,* is the best source for non-imperial monuments and remains extremely useful in spite of the paucity of analysis and illustrations. The Baroda tomb is most recently published by E. Koch, "Influence of Mughal Architecture," in Michell (ed.), *Ahmadabad,* cited above. For Akbar-period work at Mandu, see Yazdani's *Mandu.*

Information on monuments in Hasan Abdal and other sites in modern Pakistan is difficult to procure. The *ASIR* is useful. S. R. Dar has prepared volumes of photographs and plans of Mughal-period monuments in Pakistan. These volumes are not yet published, but available at the Lahore Museum. They provide invaluable data about structures otherwise undocumented.

Published material on monuments of Akbar's period in north India is available, although it is generally descriptive rather than analytical. Better understood than many works is the tomb of Muhammad Ghaus, almost invariably included in texts on the history of Indo-Islamic architecture: Brown and Hoag, for example. Buildings at

#### JAHANGIR: AN AGE OF TRANSITION

Narnaul and other sites in Haryana and Punjab are included in Parihar, *Mughal Monuments in Punjab and Haryana,* essentially an annotated list. Although considerably older, G. Yazdani, "Narnaul and its Buildings," *Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,* in, 1907, remains highly useful. cAbd al-Haqq Muhaddis Dehlavi, *Akhbar al-Akhiyar,* Deoband, n.d., completed in 1619, contains useful information on saints buried in Narnaul. Comparative material in the Deccan is in Desai, "Architecture," in *History of the Medieval Deccan,* Vol. n. Lowry, "Delhi in the 16th Century," considers sub-imperial work there. M. C. Joshi, "Bada Batashewala-Mahal: A Study," *Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art,* 1, 1977-78, provides an in-depth study of this monument.

Eastern India, like other regions, is the subject of numerous articles and archaeological site lists, but modern interpretations are badly needed. The classic source for Jaunpur remains Fuhrer, *The Sharqi Architecture of Jaunpur,* and J. Burton-Page, "Djawnpur," *Encyclopedia of Islam,* illustrates nineteenth-century drawings of a now destroyed palace pavilion there. Recently Iqbal Ahmad Jaunpuri, *History of Sharqi Rulers and Sufis of Jaunpur,* Jaunpur [1988], has produced a massive tome in Urdu that includes Akbar-period buildings not published elsewhere. Akbar's fort at Chunar remains virtually unstudied, although A. F. C. de Cosson, "Chunar," *Bengal Past and Present,* iv, 1909, provides useful illustrations. One inscription at Chunar is included in *ARIE,* 1970-71. Robert Skelton, "Shaykh Phul and the Origins of Bundi Painting," in Anand Krishna (ed.), *Chhavi- 2,* Benares, 1981, gives proof that students of the painter <sup>c</sup> Abd al-Samad worked in Chunar.

For Bihar, Muhammad Hamid Kuraishi, *List of Ancient Monuments Protected Under Act vn of 1904 in the Province of Bihar and Orissa,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. LI, Calcutta, 1931, remains the standard source. Also valuable is D. R. Patil, *The Antiquarian Remains in Bihar,* Patna, 1963. Inscriptions and much useful historical information is in Qeyamuddin Ahmad, *Corpus of Persian and Arabic Inscriptions of Bihar,* Patna, 1973. This present author's "From Anomaly to Homogeneity" analyzes the development of a standard mosque type in Bihar during Akbar's reign. Asher's *Islamic Monuments of Eastern India* provides extensive documentation for the monuments of Bihar and Bengal.

In addition to general works on Bengal cited in the essay for chapter 1, this author's "Inventory of Key Monuments," in George Michell (ed.), *The Islamic Heritage of Bengal,* Paris, 1984, covers the Akbar-period works. Included in the same volume, her article "The Mughal and Post-Mughal Periods" deals with the development of mosque architecture there. Although not comprehensive, Shamsud-Din Ahmed, *Inscriptions of Bengal,* Vol. iv, Rajshahi, i960, provides the text of many Mughal-period inscriptions.

#### 4 JAHANGIR: AN AGE OF TRANSITION

Nur al-Din Muhammad Jahangir, *Tuzuk-i Jahangiri* (tr.), 2 vols., reprint ed., Delhi, 1968, the emperor's personal memoirs, is the most immediate source for Jahangir's attitude toward buildings and gardens. Hereafter this work will be called *Tuzuk.* Other contemporary histories, such as Husaini Kamgar, *Ma'asir-i Jahangiri,* Delhi, 1978, contain important information not found elsewhere, for example, that Akbar at his death designated Jahangir his successor. Beni Prasad, *History of Jahangir,* London, 1922, remains the best secondary treatment of Jahangir's reign and contains many useful references to architectural projects. Well-known monuments such as Akbar's tomb and the tomb of I<sup>c</sup> timad al-Daula are included in standard art historical sources: the two works by Brown, and Hoag, *Islamic Architecture,* all mentioned previously. Most of the monuments discussed in this chapter, however, are not sufficiently well known to be included in such standard sources.

Jahangir's early architectural patronage is considered in no single source. The inscriptions on the black throne and the Agra fort are in M. A. Husain, "Arabic and Persian Inscriptions in the Agra Fort," *El APS, 19^1-^2.* The career of the throne's calligrapher is traced in an important forthcoming article, Z. A. Desai, "Inscription on the Mausoleum of Mir Abdullah Mushkin-Qalam at Agra." The only modern consideration of Jahangir and the Allahabad pillar is by this present author, "Jahangir and the Reuse of Pillars," in M. C. Joshi (ed.), *Archaeological Survey of India Commemoration Volume,* New Delhi, forthcoming. Contemporary references to early work at Vernag, Hasan Abdal and elsewhere are in Jahangir, *Tuzuk.*

Shah Begum's tomb has not been the focus of any recent study. Its inscription is recorded in Z. A. Desai, "Inscriptions from the Khusraw Bagh, Allahabad," *EIAPS,* 1961, while that on the garden's entrance gate is in Abdulla Chaghtai, "Aqa Riza Musawwar," *Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 2nd Session,* 1938. Ralph Finch in Samuel Purchas (ed.), *Hakluytus Posthumus or Purchas His Pilgrimes,* 20 vols., Glasgow, 1905—07: iv, gives contemporary observations on this tomb, and an eighteenth-century illustration by the Daniells in Mildred Archer, *Early Views of India,* London, 1980, gives an indication of its original appearance. Akbar's tomb has attracted considerably more attention, although an interpretative monograph is still needed. Edmund W. Smith, *Akbar's Tomb, Sikandarah,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. xxv, Allahabad, 1909, remains the most thorough source for illustrations, description and inscriptions. In a major study, Wayne E. Begley, "Amanat Khan and the Calligraphy on the Taj Mahal," *Kunst des Orients,* xn, 1978-79, traces the career of the gate's calligrapher. R. Nath, *The Immortal Taj Mahal,* Bombay, 1972, discusses the tomb's architectural development. Contemporary comments about the tomb and its site are in the *Akbar Nama* and Jahangir's *Tuzuk,* as well as in Muhammad Baqir Najm-i Sani, *Kulliyat,* India Office Per. Ms. 1330. Comments of Europeans and later observers in Mughal India are particularly valuable. These include: Finch in Purchas, cited above; Sebastien Manrique, *Travels of Fray Sebastien Manrique* (tr.), 2 vols., Oxford, 1927; Niccolao Manucci, *Storia do Mogor or Mogul India, 1653-1708* (tr.), 4 vols., London, 1907-08; and Peter Mundy, *The Travels of Peter Mundy,* Vol. 11, London, 1914. Ishwardas Nagar, *Futuhat-i cAlamgiri* (tr.), Delhi, 1978, in discussing the tomb's later plunder, gives clues to its meaning and appearance. All Quranic passages included in the tomb's calligraphy are in Abdullah Yusuf Ali (ed. and tr.), *The Meaning of the Glorious Qur'an, 2* vols., Cairo, 1938.

The *Tuzuk* indicates the emperor's attitude toward buildings. There he refers to the provision of public works, while A. M. B. Husain, *The Manara in Indo-Islamic Architecture,* Dacca, 1970, provides a list of the surviving *kos minars.* Nur Bakhsh, "The Agra Fort and its Buildings," *Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India, 1903-04,* Calcutta, 1906, includes translations of Mughal texts discussing Jahangir's construction at the Agra fort; however, David Price (tr.), *Memoirs of the Emperor Jahangueir,* London, 1829, and reprinted several times since, is probably based on a spurious manuscript. M. A. Husain, "Inscriptions in the Agra Fort," provides important information on the fort. Sculptures of the defeated rana of Mewar and his son are discussed by Prasad, *History of Jahangir,* and Sajida S. Alvi, "Religion and State During the Reign of the Mughal Emperor (1605-27): Nonjuristical Perspectives," *Studia Islamica,* LXIX, 1989. Similar images said to be from Akbar's time are in Michael Brand and Glenn D.

# JAHANGIR: AN AGE OF TRANSITION

Lowry, *Akbar's India: Art from the Mughal City ofVictory*, New York, 1985. William Hawkins' discussion of the Agra Fort is in Purchas: HI, while Edward Maclagan, *The Jesuits and the Great Mogul,* London, 1932, a major work, documents the Jesuits' awareness of court ceremony. Milo Cleveland Beach, *The Grand Mogul: Imperial Painting in India, 1600-1660,* Williamstown, 1978, publishes an illustration intended for the *Jahangir Nama* with European subjects on the emperor's throne. In a pivotal study, Ebba Koch, "The Influence of the Jesuit Mission on Symbolic Representations of the Mughal Emperors," in C. W. Troll (ed.), *Islam in India, Studies and Commentaries,* Vol. 1, New Delhi, 1982, discusses the new-found significance of such European subject matter in an imperial context.

Basic sources for Jahangir's buildings and inscriptions inside the Lahore fort are Nur Bakhsh, "Historical Notes on the Lahore Fort and its Buildings," *Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India, 1902-oj,* Calcutta, 1904; M. W. U. Khan, *Lahore and its Important Monuments;* and Syed Muhammad Latif, *Lahore: Its History, Architectural Remains, and Antiquities,* Lahore, 1892. Excellent analytical work on the Kala Burj is by Ebba Koch, "Jahangir and the Angels: Recently Discovered Wall Paintings under European Influence in the Fort of Lahore," in J. Deppert (ed.), *India and the West,* New Delhi, 1983. For the fort's exterior walls and tile mosaics, see J. P. Vogel, *Tile Mosaics of the Lahore Fort,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. XLI, Calcutta, 1920. Ahmad Nabi Khan, "Restoration of the Fresco Decoration at the Mosque of Maryam Zamani at Lahore," *Pakistan Archaeology,* 7, 1970-71, is the only recent work on this important but rarely considered mosque. The tomb of Maryam al-Zamani in Agra is included in most Mughal architecture surveys, although its presumed Lodi origins have never been scrutinized. While Anarkali's tomb is included in all the standard works on Lahore, only Muhammad Baqir, *Lahore, Past and Present,* Lahore, 1952, challenges the traditional notion that it entombs a concubine.

Aside from Jahangir's own memoirs, cited above, the two best sources for imperial work at Ajmer and the vicinity remain Tirmizi, *Ajmer through Inscriptions,* and Sarda, *Ajmer.* These two works provide basic data, but little interpretation. Paintings of Jahangir's visits to the shrine of Mu<sup>c</sup> in al-Din Chishti are in A. K. Das, *Mughal Painting during Jahangir's Time,* Calcutta, 1978, and Beach, *The Grand Mogul.* Thomas Roe, *The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe to the Court of the Great Mogul, 1615-19,* 2 vols., London, 1899, who visited the Chesma-i Nur, provides a contemporary description, while cAbd al-Hamid Lahauri, *The Padshah Nama,* 2 vols., Calcutta, 1867, indicates that the marble pavilions on the Ana Sagar were commenced under Jahangir. Mandu, Ahmadabad and Agra are described in Jahangir's *Tuzuk,* and for Mughal-period buildings in Mandu see Yazdani, *Mandu.* Jahangir in his memoirs acutely observes Kashmir and its gardens. Illustrations and inscriptions are found in G. M. D. Sufi, *Kashir,* 2 vols., reprint ed., New Delhi, 1974, and Crowe and Haywood, *The Gardens of Mughal India.* In addition to Jahangir's *Tuzuk,* Ahmad Rabbani, "Hiran Munara at Shekhupura," in S. M. Abdullah (ed.), *Armughan-e cllumi, Professor Muhammad Shafi<sup>c</sup> Presentation Volume,* Lahore, 1955, and Ahmad Nabi Khan, "Conservation of the Hiran Minar and Baradari at Sheikhupura," *Pakistan Archaeology, 6,* 1969, provide significant information on his pavilion and minaret at Sheikhupura.

Although it is a topic of major importance, Nur Jahan's patronage is considered in no single source. Francisco Pelsaert, *Jahangir's India: The Remonstrantie of Francisco Pelsaert* (tr.), Cambridge, 1925, and Mundy, *Travels of Peter Mundy,* provide valuable information about her patronage and her serai in Agra, known also as Serai Nur Mahal. The empress' serai in the Punjab has been considered with insight by Wayne E. Begley,

"Four Mughal Caravanserais Built during the Reigns of Jahangir and Shah Jahan," Muqarnas, 1, 1983. Ebba Koch, "Notes on the Painted and Sculpted Decoration of Nur Jahan's Pavilions in the Ram Bagh (Bagh-i Nur Afshan) at Agra," in R. Skelton, A. Topsfield, S. Stronge and R. Crill (eds.), *Facets of Indian Art*, London, 1986, presents the best analysis of the queen's Agra garden, although she appears not wholly convinced that the Gul Afshan garden and Nur Afshan garden are two names for the same garden. This queen's most famous project, the tomb of I<sup>c</sup>timad al-Daula, is in all basic works on Mughal art, but the treatment is generally perfunctory. The tomb's dates and calligrapher as well as a consideration of its vaulting are only in Koch, "Jahangir and the Angels." For the most recent discussion of the origins of *pietra dura*, first seen on this tomb, see Ebba Koch, *Shah Jahan and Orpheus*, Graz, 1988. A carpet design similar to that on the tomb's floor is in Mulk Raj Anand and Hermann Goetz, Indische Miniaturen, Dresden, 1967.

Sub-imperial-level architecture outside of the main cities has been badly ignored. However, Roe, *The Embassy of Sir Thomas Roe*, is a useful source for Ajmer, since he resided there for several years. The best secondary sources on Ajmer have been mentioned earlier: Sarda, Ajmer, and Tirmizi, Ajmer through Inscriptions. Desai, Published Muslim Inscriptions of Rajasthan, is important for inscriptions on monuments outside of Ajmer. The writings of the traveler Finch in Purchas: IV gives insights into monuments he visited in Rajasthan. Daya Ram Sahni, Archaeological Remains and *Excavations at Bairat*, Jaipur, n.d., describes the cIdgah in Bairat, not noticed elsewhere. Work in Ahmadabad has had somewhat better coverage than Mughal architecture in Rajasthan. The most comprehensive source for monuments in Ahmadabad remains Burgess, The Muhammadan Architecture of Ahmadabad, although recently superior illustrations were published in John Burton-Page, "Mosques and Tombs," in George Michell (ed.), Ahmadabad, Bombay, 1988. Shaikh Farid's patronage in Gujarat is mentioned in Persian sources: Maasir, Farid Bhakkari, Dhakhirat al-Khawanin, and cAli Muhammad Khan, *Mirat-i Ahmadi* (tr.), Baroda, 1965. For Wajih al-Din, see al-Badayuni, Muntakhab al-Tawarikh. M. A. Chaghatai, "Muslim Monuments of Ahmadabad through their Inscriptions," Bulletin of the Deccan College Research *Institute*, 111, 1942, is invaluable for inscriptions there.

<sup>c</sup>Inayat Khan, *The Shah Jahan Nama of <sup>c</sup>Inayat Khan* (tr.; ed. by W. E. Begley and Z. A. Desai), Delhi, 1990, discusses Jahangir's orders for the nobility to build serais en route to Kashmir. For illustrations of them see Ram Chandra Kak, Antiquities of Bhimbar and Rajauri, Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, No. 14, Calcutta, 1923. The writings of Finch, Richard Steel and John Crowther, all in Purchas: IV, have many useful comments about Lahore and the road to Delhi and Agra. Abdul Kahir Muhammad Farooqui, Roads and Communications in Mughal India, Delhi, 1977, identifies the main roads and serais through the empire. Begley, "Four Mughal Caravanserais," and S. Parihar, "The Mughal Serai at Doraha - Architectural Study," East and West, 37, 1987, are the major sources for Serai Doraha. Parihar, Mughal Monuments in Punjab and Haryana, provides useful data for monuments covered here. ASIR: XIV gives plans of the tombs at Nakodar; however, the labels are reversed. The serai at Chatta merits study, but for now the best source is F. S. Growse, *Mathura: A* District Memoir, reprint ed., Ahmedabad, 1978.

For Delhi detailed data, though without interpretation, is in the *List*. Other books, more descriptive than analytical, to consult are: Carr Stephen, The Archaeology and Monumental Remains of Delhi, reprint ed., Delhi, n.d., and Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Asar al-Sanadid, reprint ed., Delhi, 1956. Hasan, Nizamu-d Din, remains the standard

#### JAHANGIR: AN AGE OF TRANSITION

English source for the famous shrine. An outstanding volume in Japanese is Matsuo Ara, *Dargahs in Medieval India,* Tokyo, 1977. For Mirza cAziz Koka's patronage, see the *Maasir,* and also Bhakkari, *Dhakhirat al-Khawanin* and A. M. Khan, *Mirat-i Ahmadi.* For Shaikh Farid, see the sources noted above under Ahmadabad, as well as *ARIE,* 1970-71, for his work at Faridabad. Agra is poorly documented for this period. Edmund W. Smith, *Moghul Colour Decoration of Agra,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. xxx, Allahabad, 1901, remains the only detailed source for the Kanch Mahal and Suraj Bhan-ka Bagh. Mu<sup>c</sup> tamad Khan's mosque is only mentioned in passing, for example in Syad Muhammad Latif, *Agra, Historical and Descriptive,* Calcutta, 1896.

The most important Jahangir-period work in Allahabad, the tombs in the Khusrau Bagh, is mentioned in several Mughal-period sources, including Manrique, Mundy and Pelsaert. In addition to materials mentioned in the context of Shah Begum's tomb (especially Desai, "Inscriptions from the Khusraw Bagh"), H. Bevendge, "Sultan Khusrau," *Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,* 1907, gives the inscriptions on the interior of these tombs; in the 1908 issue of the same journal, R. P. Dewhurst, 'Inscriptions in the Khusrau Bagh at Allahabad," provides an addendum to Beveridge's comments and translations. R. Skelton, "A Decorative Motif in Mughal Art," in P. Pal (ed.), *Aspects of Indian Art,* Leiden, 1972, discusses the source of the flowering motiftype that is painted on the tomb's interior. Archer, *Early Views of India,* reproduces illustrations by the Daniells of the tombs in Khusrau Bagh as well as the *dargah* of Shah Qasim Sulaiman in Chunar. Thomas William Beale, *An Oriental Biographical Dictionary,* rev. ed., London, 1894, gives information about the Chunar saint. For his shrine, see A. Fuhrer, *Monumental Antiquities and Inscriptions in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh,* Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. xn, Allahabad, 1891, as well as de Cosson, "Chunar," and D. L. Drake-Brockman (ed.), *District Gazetteers of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh: Mirzapur,* Allahabad, 1911, who also mentions the tomb of Iftikhar Khan. For the inscription at Iftikhar Khan's tomb, see *ARIE,* 1952-53; R. P. Hingorani, *Site Index to the A.S.I. Circle Reports, 1881-1921,* New Delhi, 1978, indicates where the sole published photographs are available. Jahangir, *Tuzuk,* and the *Maasir* provide information on Iftikhar Khan's career.

Architecture in Bihar during Jahangir's reign is best covered in Asher, *Islamic Monuments of Eastern India.* Especially valuable for epigraphic and historical information is Ahmad, *Corpus of Arabic and Persian Inscriptions of Bihar.* Also useful are M. H. Kuraishi, *List of Ancient Monuments,* Patil, *The Antiquarian Remains,* and Z. A. Desai, "Architecture," in S. H. Askari and Q. Ahmad (eds.), *Comprehensive History of Bihar,* Vol. n, part 1, Patna, 1983.

Dani, *Muslim Architecture in Bengal,* remains the standard work for the Jahangir period there. Recent writings by Asher, "Inventory," and "The Mughal and Post-Mughal Traditions," in *The Islamic Heritage of Bengal* include works of this time. The contemporary writings of Mirza Nathan, *Baharistan-i-Ghaybi* (tr.), 2 vols., Gauhati, 1936, and John Marshall,/o&« *Marshall in India,* London, 1927, provide insight into the rapid construction of forts and palaces on the part of the rebel prince Shah Jahan. Also useful is Francis Buchanan (afterwards Hamilton), *Journal of Francis Buchanan Kept During the Survey of the District of Bhagalpur in 1810-u,* Patna, 1930.

B. P. Ambastha, *Non-Persian Sources on Indian Medieval History,* Delhi, 1984, gives some insight into non-Muslim architectural patronage under Jahangir, but this area is generally inadequately studied. The most recent work on Datia and Orchha is by

Tillotson, *The Rajput Palaces*, but Reuther, *Indische Palaste*, still should be consulted. Muhammad Salih Kanbo, *Amal-i Salih*, 3 vols., Lahore, 1967, not only praises these buildings, but also gives insight into political motivations for the subsequent destruction of some of these temples. Bir Singh's Keshava Deva temple at Mathura is discussed by the late seventeenth-century French traveler, Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, Travels in India (tr.), 2 vols., London, 1925, and by Sagi Must ad Khan, Maasir-i Alamgiri (tr.), Calcutta, 1947. Growse, *Mathura: A District Memoir*, still remains a good source for the Brindavan temples. Ground-breaking work on Mughal support of these temples is by Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, "Akbar and the Temples of Mathura and its Environs," Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 48th Session, Panajim, Goa, 1988 and "The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan during the Reigns of Jahangir and Shahjahan," Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 49th Session, Dharwad, 1989. The most recent work on Bengal temples in this period is by David McCutchion, "Architecture," in George Michell (ed.), Brick Temples of Bengal, Princeton, 1983, although the Kharagpur temples are only in Banerji, "Some Post-Muslim Temples of Bihar."

#### 5 SHAH JAHAN AND THE CRYSTALLIZATION OF MUGHAL STYLE

In contrast to sources for other major Mughal rulers, no complete histories or chronicles of Shah Jahan's reign have been translated into a European language. Lahauri, Padshah Nama, the official history of the first twenty years of Shah Jahan's reign, is available in Persian only. Muhammad Waris, Padshah Nama, succeeded Lahauri in writing the official history of this reign, but this is available only in manuscript form. These works are especially valuable for architecture, since most imperial projects are described in great detail. Kanbo, *Amal-i Salih*, is an unofficial history of Shah Jahan's entire reign and highly reliable. He, too, describes architectural projects, although more concisely than the official chroniclers. Kanbo is available in an Urdu translation, 2 vols., Lahore, 1971–74. <sup>c</sup>Inayat Khan's *The Shah Jahan Nama of Inayat Khan* is invaluable for political events, but gives less attention to architecture. Some useful passages on Shah Jahan's architecture taken from contemporary chronicles have been published in various articles. These are cited below in reference to specific monuments. The writings of Europeans visiting Mughal India also provide insight into Shah Jahan and his architecture. For example, François Bernier, Travels in the Mogul *Empire* (tr.), 2nd ed., London, 1914, as well as Tavernier, *Travels in India*, Manrique, Travels of Fray Sebastien Manrique, Mundy, Travels of Peter Mundy, and Marshall, John *Marshall in India*, are useful. The best secondary source remains Banarsi Prasad Saksena, History of Shahjahan of Dilhi, Allahabad, 1932, who consulted these and other sources.

Shah Jahan is the most famous Mughal patron of architecture. Many of the monuments in this chapter are discussed and illustrated in works mentioned in the previous chapters: Percy Brown, Indian Architecture, Islamic Period, his "Monuments of the Mughal Period," John Hoag, Islamic Architecture, and Andreas Volwahsen, Living Architecture, provide general overviews. Inayat Khan, The Shah Jahan Nama, has many plates.

For Shah Jahan's patronage as a prince, one must consult primary sources and Saksena, *History of Shahjahan*. Shah Jahan's construction of Jahangir's tomb is barely mentioned in Persian sources, remarkable since other projects are detailed. Kanbo provides the most information, while Lahauri mentions it only briefly. Mu<sup>c</sup>tamad Khan, "Iqbal Nama," in H. M. Elliot and J. Dowson (ed.), The History of India as Told

## SHAH JAHAN

*by its own Historians,* 8 vols., London, 1867-77, provides important information regarding the site. J. P. Thompson, "The Tomb of the Emperor Jahangir, "/o«rna/ *of the Punjab Historical Society,* 1, 1911-12, cites passages from contemporary texts, and remains the best analysis of the tomb's original appearance. Later sources include: M. W. U. Khan, *Lahore and its Important Monuments,* and Baqir, *Lahore, Past and Present.* The location of Nur Jahan's tomb is discussed in the *Maasir,* while the tomb's recent restoration is in "Conservation of Ancient Monuments in West Pakistan," *Pakistan Archaeology,* 7, 1970-71.

In addition to the primary sources, Shah Jahan's patronage at the *dargah* of Muc in al-Din and at the Ana Sagar is discussed in sources cited earlier: Sarda, *Ajmer,* and Tirmizi, *Ajmer through Inscriptions.* Also useful is P. M. Currie, *The Shrine and Cult of Muc in al-Din Chishti of Ajmer,* Delhi, 1989. Ebba Koch, "The Lost Colonnade of Shah Jahan's Bath in the Red Fort of Agra," *The Burlington Magazine,* cxxiv, 951,1982, notes that the marble pavilions on the Ana Sagar may not be solely Shah Jahan's, while the best source for plans and illustrations is Reuther, *Indische Palaste.* W. E. Begley, *Monumental Islamic Calligraphy from India,* Villa Park, Illinois, 1985, offers insight into the inscription on the entrance that Shah Jahan provided the *dargah* of Muc in al-Din.

Lahauri, Waris and Kanbo are the key sources for Shah Jahan's palace architecture. For construction at the Lahore fort, see Nur Bakhsh, "Historical Notes on the Lahore Fort," as well as the relevant sections in Baqir, *Lahore, Past and Present;* they include generous selections from Lahauri and Kanbo. Khan, *Lahore and its Important Monuments,* and Latif, *Lahore,* are also useful. Reuther, *Indische Palaste,* provides good plates of both the Agra and Lahore forts. Excellent analytical studies by Ebba Koch touch on issues of Shah Jahan's work at the Lahore and Agra forts. In addition to her "The Baluster Column - A European Motif in Mughal Architecture and its Meaning," *Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes,* 45, 1982, her other works relevant here, mentioned previously, include "Lost Colonnade," and *Shah Jahan and Orpheus.* Useful methodical studies of Shah Jahan's work at the fort, including excerpts from primary sources, are Nur Bakhsh, "The Agra Fort and its Buildings," and Muhammad Ashraf Husain, *An Historical Guide to the Agra Fort,* Delhi, 1937. Shah Jahan's inscriptions in the Agra fort are in the same author's "Inscriptions in the Agra Fort." Wayne E. Begley, "The Symbolic Role of Calligraphy on Three Imperial Mosques of Shah Jahan's Time" in Joanna G. Williams (ed.), *Kaladarsana,* New Delhi, 1981, offers a new interpretation of the Moti mosque and its inscriptions. The same article also discusses Jahan Ara's Agra Jami<sup>c</sup> mosque and the symbolism of its epigraphs. Analysis of the amounts spent on this fort as well as other architectural projects is provided by Shireen Moosvi, "Expenditure of Buildings under Shah Jahan - A Chapter of Imperial Financial History," *Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 46th Session,* Amritsar, 1986.

The Persian chroniclers Waris and Kanbo (especially Vol. m) are the most immediate sources for the city of. Shahjahanabad and its palace, while Bernier and Manucci, mentioned above, provide useful descriptions from a European view. The most thorough English language description is the *List;* Vol. 1, *Shahjahanabad,* is devoted to the walled city and palace as they appeared at the turn of this century. Much of Stephen P. Blake, "Cityscape of an Imperial Capital: Shahjahanabad in 1739," in R. E. Frykenberg (ed.), *Delhi Through the Ages,* Delhi, 1986, analyzes Shah Jahan's construction of the city and palace, and the same author, "Shahjahanabad, Isfahan and Istanbul: Sovereign Cities in Medieval Islam," forthcoming, provides statistics for the population of the city and palace. Other useful sources include Carr Stephen, *The*

Archaeology and Monumental Remains of Delhi, and Sharma, Delhi and Its Neighbourhood, as well as H. C. Fanshaw, Shah Jahan's Delhi - Past and Present, London, 1902. All of these authors owe a tremendous debt to Savvid Ahmad Khan, Asar al-Sanadid. This work has been translated into English by R. Nath, Monuments of Delhi, New Delhi, 1979.

For the Shahjahanabad palace, see Gordon Sanderson, "Shah Jahan's Fort, Delhi," Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India, 1911–12, Calcutta, 1915, where relevant Persian passages are translated and reference is made to earlier reports on the fort. In addition to works mentioned in conjunction with the imperial city, Ebba Koch, Shah Jahan and Orpheus, provides a detailed analysis of the Public Audience Hall throne and its symbolism. John Burton-Page, "The Red Fort," in Mortimer Wheeler (ed.), Splendors of the East, New York, 1965, contains a useful discussion with drawings that show how the palace originally was divided into quadrangles. Ebba Koch, "Architectural Forms," indicates Shah Jahan's conscious modeling of the Shahiahanabad Jamic mosque on Akbar's at Fatehpur Sikri. The inscriptions on the city's Jamic mosque have been considered in terms of their religious and political significance by Wayne E. Begley, "The Symbolic Role of Calligraphy on Three Imperial Mosques," while the entire text is in Volume 1 of the *List*. Monuments outside the walled city, such as Raushan Ara's tomb or the Shalimar Bagh, are found in Volumes II-IV of the List, as well as in more general texts on the monuments of Delhi. These, however, tend to be descriptive, not analytical. Bernier, *Travels*, gives a useful account of Shalimar which he claims was the emperor's country estate.

Jeffery A. Hughes, "Shah Jahan's Lal-Mahal at Bari and the Tradition of Mughal Hunting Palaces," Ph.D. dissertation, University of Iowa, 1988, provides the sole study of hunting pavilions at Bari, Rupbas and Mahal. The one at Sheikhupura has received attention from Rabbani, "Hiran Munara at Shekhupura," and A. N. Khan, "Conservation of the Hiran Minar and Baradari." The summer palace at Faizabad is virtually ignored outside of contemporary Persian chronicles and Fuhrer, Monumental Antiquities. The location of some hunting palaces is often difficult to find on modern maps, so a good source for some, but not all, is Irfan Habit., An Atlas of the Mughal Empire, Delhi, 1982.

For general coverage of Shah Jahan's gardens, see Moynihan, Paradise as a Garden, and Crowe and Haywood, The Gardens of Mughal India. Shah Jahan's revitalization of the Bagh-i Hafiz Rakhna is discussed by Subash Parihar, "A Little-Known Mughal Garden in India: Aam Khas Bagh, Sirhind," Oriental Art, 31, 1985-86. There is no detailed study on the Shalimar garden in Kashmir, so the writings of the Persian chroniclers and Bernier, Travels, remain important sources. More secondary work has been done on the Lahore Shalimar garden, including Baqir, *Lahore: Past and Present*, who quotes extensively from Persian sources. Also useful are S. R. Dar, *Historical* Gardens of Lahore, Lahore, 1982, and I. H. Nadiem, "The Hydraulics of Shalamar Garden," Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society, 43, 1986.

The publications on the Taj Mahal are many, but most repeat unsupported ideas. Muhammad Abdulla Chaghtai, Le Tadj Mahal d'Agra, Brussels, 1938, remains a classic. It was the same author, in "A Family of Great Mughal Architects," Islamic *Culture*, x1, 1937, who first recognized Ustad Ahmad as the architect of the Taj. Nath, The Immortal Taj, is a useful introduction to the building's origins and appearance. W. E. Begley and Z. A. Desai, Taj Mahal: The Illumined Tomb, Cambridge and Seattle, 1989, is a superb compilation of seventeenth-century Mughal and European documentary sources on this famus tomb. It has many plates. Certainly the most

## SHAH JAHAN

innovative work on the Tai Mahal is contained in two articles by Wayne E. Begley, "The Myth of the Taj Mahal and a New Theory of its Symbolic Meaning," Art Bulletin, LVI, I, 1979, and "Amanat Khan and the Calligraphy of the Taj Mahal," cited earlier.

Although many passing references are made to the architectural patronage of Jahan Ara and Dara Shukoh, they are the focus of no single study. Sarda, Ajmer, and Currie, The Shrine and Cult of Musin al-Din Chishti, remain the best secondary sources for the princess' patronage at the shrine of Musin al-Din. Her construction of Mulla Shah's mosque is disgussed by Kanbo: III, and Inavat Khan, *The Shah Jahan Nama of Inavat Khan*. Bernier, *Travels*, is the only European who mentions the mosque, which he calls a hermitage. Bikrama Jit Hasrat, *Dara Shikuh: Life and Works*, New Delhi, 1982, reveals documentation for Jahan Ara's devotion to Mulla Shah. Persian chronicles, especially Kanbo, are excellent sources for Jahan Ara's garden at Achibal, but Bernier, *Travels*, also provides insight. Illustrations are in Crowe and Haywood, *The Gardens* of Mughal India, although they credit the entire garden to Jahangir's reign; the same work is also a good source for Dara Shukoh's Pari Mahal. Jahan Ara's patronage of Chauburji was first proposed by M. Abdulla Chughtai, "The So-Called Gardens and Tombs of Zeb-un-Nisa at Lahore," Islamic Culture, IX, 1935. Subsequent writers such as M. W. U. Khan, Lahore and its Important Monuments, tentatively accept this attribution.

Bernier, *Travels*, specifically states that building in Shahjahanabad was one way to win imperial favor. Yet the official chronicles offer considerably less insight into subimperial architectural patronage during Shah Jahan's reign. Instead, biographies of the nobility, such as the *Maasir* and Bhakkari, *Dhakhirat al-Khawanin*, and inscriptions on the buildings themselves are of primary value. The monuments of Thatta are best covered by Ahmad Hasan Dani, *Thatta: Islamic Architecture*, Islamabad, 1982, while an article in Sindhi by Sayyid Hussamudin Rashidi, whose title may be translated "Thatta City's Older Geography," *Mehran*, 21, 3/4, 1972, transcribes inscriptions on the Thatta Jamic mosque. Epigraphic and textual evidence for construction in Ahmadabad during Shah Jahan's reign is provided by M. A. Chaghatai, "Muslim Monuments of Ahmadabad through their Inscriptions," and cAli Muhammad Khan, Mirat-i Ahmadi. Aczam Khan's serai is in Burgess, Muhammadan Architecture of Ahmadabad, and more recently in J. Burton-Page, "Mosques and Tombs." S. H. Desai, Arabic and Persian Inscriptions of Saurashtura, Junagarh, 1980, publishes the inscriptions of A<sup>c</sup>zam Khan's Ranpur buildings.

The sources for sub-imperial architecture in Ajmer have been cited previously: Sarda, Ajmer, and Tirmizi, Ajmer through Inscriptions. In general they deal little with the structures themselves, but with epigraphs and history. In Rajasthan outside of Ajmer, Desai, Published Muslim Inscriptions of Rajasthan, is a key source for epigraphic information, although few of the buildings on which these inscriptions are placed have been published. Imperial orders affecting the Makrana quarries are in Begley and Desai, Taj Mahal: The Illumined Tomb. Additional information on the Makrana quarries is in K. K. Seghal (ed.), Rajasthan District Gazetteers: Nagaur, Jaipur, 1975.

Comments of European travelers such as Manrique and Bernier are useful for understanding Lahore's cityscape. The work of Wazir Khan, a major sub-imperial patron, is mentioned by Bhakkari, *Dhakhirat al-Khawanin*, and in the *Maasir*. For his Baradari, see Reuther, Indische Palaste, and M. Abdullah Chaghatai, The Wazir Khan Mosque, Lahore, 1976, for this important mosque and baths. For the Gulabi Bagh gate, M. W. U. Khan, Lahore and its Important Monuments, provides current summaries. Only M. Abdullah Chaghatai, *Masajid-e Lahore*, Lahore, 1975, has suggested that the mosque

attributed to Dai Anga was built by Khwaja Maqbul. For a more traditional view, see most general sources for Lahore's monuments: Khan, Latif and Baqir, all cited earlier.

The serais between Delhi and Lahore are discussed by Wayne E. Begley, "Four Mughal Caravanserais," while his "A Mughal Caravanserai Built and Inscribed by Amanat Khan, Calligrapher of the Taj Mahal," in Asher and Gai (eds.), *Indian Epigraphy,* deals in depth with Serai Amanat Khan. The tomb at Nakodar is in Parihar, *Mughal Monuments in Punjab and Haryana; ASIR:* xiv publishes a plan of the tomb but mislabels it as the tomb of Muhammad Mumin. In spite of fine workmanship, Shaikh Chilli's madrasa and tomb are virtually unnoticed with the exception of Parihar, *Mughal Monuments in Punjab and Haryana,* and *ASIR:* n. Shah Jahan-period additions to Bu cAli Qalandar's shrine at Panipat are mentioned in the *Maasir* in conjunction with the career of Muqarrab Khan and by Fuhrer, *The Monumental Antiquities.* The tomb's inscription is in S. Parihar, *Muslim Inscriptions in the Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh,* New Delhi, 1985.

Sub-imperial monuments within the walled city of Shahjahanabad from this time are only in the *List:* 1. Although Manrique comments that the nobility pay little attention to the shrine of Nizam al-Din, Kanbo indicates that the emperor himself visited the shrine from time to time. Zafar Hasan, *Nizamu-d Din,* cites epigraphs recording Khahl Allah's provision of a new veranda at the tomb. The *List:* n supplies inscriptional evidence indicating that a new serai was built close to the shrine.

Almost all Europeans traveling in India commented on Agra's size, but notable among them are Bernier, Tavernier and Mundy. The eunuch Firuz Khan is mentioned in Mughal sources, perhaps most succinctly in the *Maasir,* and the tomb has been published most recently by R. Nath, *Some Aspects of Mughal Architecture,* New Delhi, 1976. For plans and illustrations of the Chini-ka Rauza, the best source remains E. Smith, *Moghul Colour Decoration of Agra,* while W. E. Begley, "Amanat Khan and the Calligraphy of the Taj Mahal," posits that the tomb's calligraphic bands were probably designed by Amanat Khan, Azfal Khan's devoted brother. In addition, Amanat Khan's Shahi Madrasa mosque is discussed in this important article as well as in the same author's *Monumental Islamic Calligraphy from India.* Agra's cIdgah is attributed to Shah Jahan in Latif, *Agra, Historical and Descriptive,* and *ASIR:* iv (where a plan is provided), as well as M. A. Chaghatai, *The Badshahi Mosque,* Lahore, 1972; none of these provides reasoning or analysis.

Rustam Khan's patronage in Sambhal and Moradabad can be understood only by consulting several sources. These include: Ganga Prasad and H. Blochmann, "On Sambhal Inscriptions and on Muradabad Inscriptions," *Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,* May, 1873; tn e  *Maasir;* Bhakkari, *Dhakhirat al-Khawanin;* Joshi (ed.), *Uttar Pradesh District Gazetteers: Moradabad;* and Fuhrer, *Monumental Antiquities.*

In general the best sources to consult for Shah Jahan-period work in Bihar are the same as those for Bihar cited in the essay for chapter 4. Of special value among these are Asher, *Islamic Monuments of Eastern India* and Ahmad, *Corpus of Arabic and Persian Inscriptions of Bihar.* In addition, comments by contemporary travelers, most notably Mundy, and the *Maasir* are valuable. For an understanding of the complex situation at Rohtas during Shah Jahan's reign, see both K. M. Karim, *Provinces of Bihar and Bengal Under Shahjahan,* Dacca, 1974, and "Sanscrit Inscription on the Slab Removed from above the Kothoutiya Gate of the Fort Rohtas, *"Journal of the Asiatic Society,* VIII, 1839; the journal does not credit the author of this article.

A standard work for Bengal during this period is Dani, *Muslim Architecture in*

35°

#### AURANGZEB

Bengal, although it has been updated by Asher, "Inventory," and "The Mughal and Post-Mughal Traditions," in *The Islamic Heritage of Bengal*. Other useful information is included in C. A. E. W. Oldham's appendices in Francis Buchanan (afterwards Hamilton), Journal of Francis Buchanan; he summarizes the observations of Europeans who visited the Sangi Dalan in Rajmahal. In addition to Nathan's *Baharistan-i-Ghaybi*, Marshall, John Marshall in India, gives insight into the additions at Teliagarhi made by Shah Shuja<sup>c</sup>. This same prince's additions to the Oadam Sharif shrine in Gaur are best outlined in M. Abid Ali, *Memoirs of Gaur and Pandua*, rev. ed., Calcutta, 1931.

To fully understand Shah Jahan's politically motivated destruction of Hindu temples, contemporary Persian sources such as Kanbo must be read in context. Most modern writers, for example Saksena, *History of Shahjahan*, have not grasped the context of the Persian sources and so misinterpret the ruler's motivations. Rai Mukand Das' construction in Narnaul is recorded by G. Yazdani, "Narnaul and its Buildings," while his mansion is discussed in Parihar, Mughal Monuments in the Punjab and Haryana. The princely palaces of Rajasthan have considerably more coverage than Hindu dwellings elsewhere. The two best sources for Mirza Raja Jai Singh's Amber palace are Reuther, Indische Palaste, and Tillotson, The Rajput Palaces, although Tillotson at times presents dates and views at variance with those suggested in this volume. Aside from contemporary texts, a good secondary source for Mirza Raja Jai Singh is Jadunath Sarkar, A History of Jaipur, rev. ed., New York, 1984. Shah Jahan's imperial decrees are in Begley and Desai, Taj Mahal: The Ilumined Tomb. The best and most recent source for Shah Jahan-period temples in Bengal, including photographs and plans, is George Michell (ed.), Brick Temples of Bengal.

## 6 AURANGZEB AND THE ISLAMIZATION OF THE MUGHAL STYLE

Aurangzeb's reign, a complex yet pivotal period, has long fascinated historians, especially those concerned with reasons for Mughal political decline. Yet scant attention has been paid to architecture under this sixth Mughal emperor. In fact Jadunath Sarkar, *History of Aurangzeb*, 5 vols., Calcutta, 1925–30, swayed by later legend and unreliable evidence, has presented this emperor as a religious zealot who was more eager to destroy than to build. Sarkar's views reflect popular opinion, even among the educated. Well-reasoned views to the contrary have been little noticed, for example S. Moinul Haq in his introduction to Khafi Khan, Khafi Khan's History of 'Alamgir (tr.), Karachi, 1975, Jnan Chandra, "Aurangzib and Hindu Temples," Pakistan Historical Society, 5, 1953, and S. N. Sinha, Subah of Allahabad under the Great *Mughals*, New Delhi, 1974. When Aurangzeb ordered the destruction of temples, he did so for political not religious reasons, as indicated, for example, by events leading to the destruction of the Keshava Deva temple at Mathura described in Saqi Must<sup>c</sup>ad Khan, *Maasir-i Alamgiri*; the demolition of temples in Cooch Behar is described by Khafi Khan, *Khafi Khan's History of Alamgir*. He also provides information on the destruction of temples in Rajasthan, as do Saqi Must ad Khan, Maasir-i Alamgiri, and Ishwardas Nagar, Futuhat-i Alamgiri. Indication of Mughal maintenance of temples is in Mukherjee and Habib, "Akbar and the Temples of Mathura," and "The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan." A document indicating Aurangzeb's appreciation of Ellora is presented in Inayat Allah Khan Kashmiri, *Kalimat-i Taiyibat* (tr.), Delhi, 1982, while Saqi Must<sup>c</sup>ad Khan, *Maasir-i <sup>c</sup>Alamgiri* also admires Ellora's beauty. J. Chandra, "Aurangzib and Hindu Temples," indicates that contrary to popular belief Aurangzeb supported temples throughout his reign.

A number of contemporary sources provides insight into Aurangzeb's attitude toward the construction and maintenance of mosques. Khafi Khan, Khafi Khan's History of Alamgir, and Agil Khan Razi, Wagisat-i Alamgiri (tr.), Delhi, 1946, indicate Aurangzeb's interest in repairing old mosques. Aurangzeb's own letters, Rukacat-i Alamgiri (tr.), reprint ed., Delhi, 1972, and Saqi Mustead Khan, Maasir-i *Alamgiri*, relate the emperor's concern for the maintenance of mosques. Sagi Must ad Khan also cites Aurangzeb's orders for the construction of new mosques and relates that he once even involved himself in the manual labor. When he captured forts in the Deccan, Aurangzeb frequently ordered the construction of a mosque, although none has been published. Sidney Toy, Strongholds of India, London, 1957, mentions a fort, Shivner, with a surviving Mughal-period mosque, but neither describes nor illustrates it. cInayat Allah Khan Kashmiri, Kalimat-i Taiyibat, records an order issued for the burial of unused building materials. Contemporary sources for Aurangzeb's Moti mosque are Saqi Must ad Khan, *Maasir-i Alamgiri*, Muhammad Kazim, *Alamgir* Nama, Calcutta, 1868, and Tavernier, Travels in India. The Moti mosque, despite its fame, has received little scholarly attention. Brown, Indian Architecture, Islamic Period, provides the best analysis of this mosque. Chaghatai's monograph, *The Badshahi Mosque*, presents much useful information about this Lahore mosque. Bagir, *Lahore*; Past and Present, provides additional information. There is no single source for the Mathura cIdgah. Tavernier, Travels in India, discusses the temple upon which it was built. Contemporary sources for events leading to the mosque's construction include Saqi Mustcad Khan, Maasir-i cAlamgiri, and Ishwardas Nagar, Futuhat-i cAlamgiri. Later accounts of the cIdgah are by Joseph Tieffenthaler, Description Historique et Géographique de l'Inde, 5 vols., Berlin, 1786, and Growse, Mathura: A District Memoir. ASIR: 1 illustrates a plan of the building.

Imperial orders recorded by Inayat Allah Khan Kashmiri, Kalimat-i Taivibat. provide insight into Aurangzeb's attitudes toward royal tombs and saints' shrines. Other useful sources are Saqi Must ad Khan, *Maasir-i Alamgiri*, and Nagar, *Futuhat-i* cAlamgiri. The prince Aurangzeb's concern for the Taj Mahal's maintenance is in Begley and Desai, *Taj Mahal: The Illumined Tomb.* For Khuldabad and Aurangzeb's tomb there, Khafi Khan, Khafi Khan's F"story of Alamgir, and Maharashtra State Gazetteers: Aurangabad District, Bombay, 1977, are the best sources. Aurangzeb's attitude toward palaces, gardens and fortifications is found in contemporary sources: Khafi Khan, Khafi Khan's History of Alamgir; Saqi Mustcad Khan, Maasir-i Alamgiri, Kazim, *Alamgir Nama*, Nagar, *Futuhat-i Alamgiri*, Kashmiri, *Kalimat-i Taiyibat*, and Aurangzeb, Rukacat-i Alamgiri. Discussion of Aurangzeb's gates at the Shahjahanabad palace is in the *List*: 1.

Sarkar, History of Aurangzeb, is the most accessible source for members of Aurangzeb's family. For their patronage, however, there is no single source. The most recent discussion of the Bibi-ka Maqbara is in W. E. Begley, "cAta Allah," Macmillan Encyclopedia of Architects, Vol. 1, New York, 1982, and it includes a useful bibliography. Valuable documents relating to this tomb's construction are in M. A. Nayeem, Mughal Documents: Catalogue of Aurangzeb's Reign, Vol. 1, part 1, Hyderabad, 1980. For work in Delhi, several sources, all catalogue-like in nature, are useful. Jahan Ara's tomb is in Hasan, Nizamu-d Din, while the now destroyed tombs of Zeb al-Nisa and Zinat al-Nisa are in Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Asar al-Sanadid. Zinat al-Nisa's mosque is discussed by Sayyid Ahmad Khan as well as by Sharma, Delhi and Its Neighbourhood, Carr Stephen, The Archaeology and Monumental Remains of Delhi, and the List: 1. This volume of the List includes a map of the

#### AURANGZEB

walled city indicating the location of each monument, although no illustrations are provided.

As is the case for the entire Mughal period, sub-imperial work is sorely neglected. The sources for buildings in Ajmer are the same as noted in previous chapters: Sarda, Aimer, and Tirmizi, Aimer through Inscriptions. As noted earlier these works are concerned largely with inscriptions and history, with less emphasis on the monuments themselves. The Merta Jamic mosque's inscriptions are in Desai, Published Muslim *Inscriptions of Rajasthan*, while the only published plate of the mosque building is in Seghal (ed.), Rajasthan District Gazetteers: Nagaur. Buildings in Ahmadabad have attracted more attention than those elsewhere in western India. Textual evidence for Muhammad Aczam Shah's palace construction is in Ali Muhammad Khan, Mirat-i Ahmadi. Burgess, Muhammadan Architecture of Ahmadabad, remains the classic work, but Burton-Page, "Mosques and Tombs," provides excellent plates.

The condition of contemporary Lahore is astutely observed by Bernier, Travels. Dai Anga's tomb, the only significant surviving Aurangzeb-period monument there, is in previously mentioned standard books on Lahore: M. W. U. Khan. Lahore and its Important Monuments and Latif, Lahore. Most monuments along the Lahore–Delhi road are included in Parihar, Mughal Monuments in Punjab and Haryana, and some relevant inscriptions are recorded by the same author's *Muslim Inscriptions*. Neera Darabari, Northern India under Aurangzeb: Social and Economic Condition, Meerut. 1982, is useful for understanding the need for more caravan serais.

In north India more attention has been paid to the sub-imperial architecture of Delhi than elsewhere. Two important articles for understanding the condition of Delhi during Aurangzeb's reign are Satish Chandra, "Cultural and Political Role of Delhi, 1675–1725," and Blake, "Cityscape of an Imperial Capital," both in Frykenberg (ed.), Delhi Through the Ages. In general, structures inside the walled city are in the List: 1, while those outside the Shahjahanabad city walls are in the *List*: 11. These volumes, prepared as an administrative manual, are invaluable for locating monuments, but contain neither analysis nor plates. In addition, see Hasan, *Nizamu-d Din*, for the doors to Amir Khusrau's tomb, ASIR: IV for the mosque of Nasir Daulat, and S. M. Yunus Jaffery's unpublished MS., "The Madrasa-i Ghaziuddin," for buildings south of the city. The Mathura Jami<sup>c</sup> mosque is discussed by Brown, *Indian Architecture, Islamic* Period, and Growse, Mathura: A District Memoir, while Saqi Must ad Khan, Maasir-i *Alamgiri*, is a useful contemporary source. Although fine monuments, the mosques of Gwalior and Benares remain largely unnoticed by modern scholars. The best source for the Gwalior Jami<sup>c</sup> mosque remains *ASIR*: 11, although notations correcting its location are in ARIE, 1969-70. Mu<sup>c</sup>tamad Khan, *gal<sup>c</sup>adar* of the Gwalior fort, is mentioned in contemporary histories, notably those by Khafi Khan and Saqi Must<sup>c</sup>ad Khan. Sinha, Subah of Allahabad under the Great Mughals, provides the best rationale for Aurangzeb's destruction of the Vishvanath temple in Benares, although J. Chandra, "Aurangzib and Hindu Temples," is also helpful. The destroyed temple whose style indicates that it dates to the late sixteenth century is described by Tavernier, Travels in *India*. A plan and drawing of the temple as well as the Gyanvapi mosque built from its ruined walls are provided by James Prinsep, *Benares Illustrated*, Calcutta, 1833. The Jami<sup>c</sup> mosque at Benares' Panchganga Ghat was also illustrated by Prinsep in the same volume, although the more famous view is by the Daniells in Archer, Early Views of India. Pierre-Daniel Couté and Jean-Marie Leger, Benares, un Voyage Architectural, Paris, 1989, are the only modern authors to consider the Benares mosques.

The sources for Bihar mentioned in the essay for chapter 4 remain the best for this

same area during Aurangzeb's reign. These include works by Asher, Ahmad, Kuraishi and Patil. For Bengal a standard work is Dani, *Muslim Architecture in Bengal*; Asher, "Inventory," and "The Mughal and Post-Mughal Periods," provide more recent analysis. S. M. Ashfaque, *Lalbagh Fort*, Karachi, 1970, is a useful monograph on the Lalbagh garden complex. For the flourishing Hindu building tradition in Bengal, Michell (ed.), Brick Temples of Bengal, gives the fullest picture. Sub-imperial architecture in eastern India remains much better studied than that in the Deccan. Only Desai, "Mughal Architecture," ch. IV (iii) in Sherwani (ed.), *History of the Medieval Deccan*, and the Maharashtra District Gazetteers: Aurangabad have considered Aurangzebperiod structures in the Deccan.

## 7 ARCHITECTURE AND THE STRUGGLE FOR AUTHORITY UNDER THE LATER MUGHALS AND THEIR SUCCESSOR STATES

The extensive bibliography of works on political decline and historical developments under the later Mughals includes hardly a single volume on the arts. A case in point is the fine volume in this series, C. A. Bayly, *Indian Society and the Making of the British Empire*, Cambridge, 1988, whose bibliography includes few references to works on the arts. Nevertheless, substantive information can be gleaned from works not specifically devoted to the subject. For example, recent studies by Blake, "Cityscape of an Imperial Capital," and S. Chandra, "Cultural and Political Role of Delhi," indicates that Delhi continued to flourish well into the eighteenth century. For monuments in Delhi prior to 1739, a variety of sources is available. Valuable analysis of Shah cAlam's and Farrukh Siyar's provisions at the shrine of Bakhtiyar Kaki is by Ara, *Dargahs*. Although less substantive, Carr Stephen, The Archaeology and Monumental Remains of Delhi, Sharma, Delhi and its Neighbourhood, Fanshaw, Shah Jahan's Delhi, and S. A. Khan, Asar al-Sanadid, all provide important information. Muhammad Shah's monuments are discussed in the above four sources. In addition, the List: I mentions the wooden mosque he built in the Shahjahanabad palace, and Hasan, *Nizamu-d Din*, provides the best discussion of his tomb. Z. Malik, *The Reign of Muhammad Shah*, New York, 1977, discusses Raushan al-Daula, an active patron both before and after the 1739 invasion of Nadir Shah. His mosques and a few others are in Carr Stephen, Fanshaw (where an illustration is provided) and Sayvid Ahmad Khan. But the most extensive coverage for Raushan al-Daula's mosques and others within the walled city is in the *List*: I. The Tripolia and Jai Singh's observatory, outside the city walls, are in the *List*: 11. Mention of these is also in Carr Stephen, Sharma and S. A. Khan. A detailed account of Sawai Jai Singh and his observatory is in G. R. Kaye, The Astronomical Observatories of Jai Singh, Archaeological Survey of India, New Imperial Series, Vol. XL, Calcutta, 1918.

S. Chandra, "Cultural and Political Role of Delhi," observes Delhi's quick revival immediately after the 1739 invasion. For post-1739 monuments there is little modern scholarship. H. Goetz, "The Qudsia Bagh at Delhi: Key to Late Mughal Architecture," Islamic Culture, XXIV, 1, 1952, remains the main source for Qudsiya Begum's palace and garden complex, although the attitude is dated. Her Sunahri mosque is discussed in *List*: 1, S. A. Khan, *Asar al-Sanadid*, and Carr Stephen, while her beneficence at the Qadam Sharif and the Shahi Mardan shrine is in *List*: 11 and S. A. Khan. Safdar Jang's tomb is included in most general works on the monuments of Delhi (for example, Stephen, S. A. Khan, Brown), while a thorough description is in the List: II.

Recently coherent pictures of late eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Delhi have emerged in N. Gupta, *Delhi Between Two Empires*, 1803-31: Society, Government and

## THE LATER MUGHALS

Urban Growth, Delhi, 1981, and the same author's "Delhi and its Hinterland: The Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries," in Frykenberg, Delhi Through the Ages. In this same volume C. Bayly, "Delhi and Other Cities in North India During the 'Twilight'," and S. Noe, "What Happened to Mughal Delhi: A Morphological Survey," add substantially to this view. Monuments, however, have not been considered in recent work, so the *List*: I remains the only good source for buildings inside the walled city. A very few structures of this date, however, are in Stephen, *The Archaeology and* Monumental Remains of Delhi, as well as S. A. Khan, Asar al-Sanadid. The List: 11 is the primary source for material outside the walled city, but Volumes III and IV are also of use. Ara, *Dargahs*, and Hasan, *Nizamu-d Din*, should be consulted for work at the Chishti shrines, while Stephen and S. A. Khan provide general information on late Mughal structures south of the walled city.

Published work on architecture in the Mughal hinterlands and the splinter states is uneven. Monuments even in Ajmer remain little studied. In addition to Sarda, Ajmer, and Tirmizi, Ajmer through Inscriptions, pertinent historical information about the Savvid family is found in Khafi Khan, "Muntakhab al-Lubab," in H. M. Elliot and I. Dowson (eds.), History of India as Told by its own Historians, 8 vols., reprint ed., Allahabad, 1964: VII; and information about Mu<sup>c</sup>in al-Din's shrine is in Rustam <sup>c</sup>Ali, "Tarikh-i Hind," in Vol. VIII of the same series. A good syncretic treatment of Jaipur's history and layout is in A. K. Roy, *History of Jaipur City*, New Delhi, 1978, and more recently in Tillotson, The Rajput Palaces. Reuther, Indische Palaste, should be consulted for illustrations.

Later Mughal architecture in Lahore is perfunctorily covered in Latif, Lahore, and M. W. U. Khan, Lahore and its Imperial Monuments. A recent study of a single late Mughal monument is M. Khokhar, "The Tomb of Sharaf un-Nisa Begum Known as Sarvwala Maqbara at Lahore," Pakistan Journal of History and Culture, 3, 1982. Architecture under the Sikhs needs more modern consideration, but for now see P. S. Arshi, Sikh Architecture in the Punjab, New Delhi, 1986, and the same author's The Golden *Temple*, New Delhi, 1989. For the late Mughal history of the Agra region, see Bayly, "Delhi and Other Cities in North India." The palaces at Dig and Bharatpur are discussed by Tillotson, The Rajput Palaces, while M. C. Joshi, Dig, New Delhi, 1971, is a good monograph on the site and contains a useful bibliography. The only source for late Mughal Mathura and Govardhan remains Growse, Mathura: A District Memoir, while some of the temples at Brindavan are listed in Roy, *History of Jaipur City*.

The eighteenth- and nineteenth-century architecture of Awadh, unlike contemporary material in Delhi and most of north India, is the subject of much recent scholarship. Rosie Llewellyn-Jones, A Fatal Friendship: The Nawabs, the British, and the City of Lucknow, Delhi, 1985, is an excellent work on the architecture of the Awadh nawabs. Keith Hjortshoj, Urban Structures and Transformations in Lucknow, India, Cornell University Press, 1979, is a careful study of the transformation of public and private spaces in Lucknow. Two works by B. Tandon are concerned with the morphology of buildings in Faizabad and Lucknow: "The Architecture of the Nawabs of Avadh Between 1722 and 1856 A.D.: A Descriptive Inventory and an Analysis of Types," dissertation, University of Cambridge, 1978, and "The Architecture of the Nawabs of Avadh, 1722–56," in R. Skelton, A. Topsfield, S. Strong and R. Crill (eds.), Facets of Indian Art, London, 1986. Joshi (ed.), Uttar Pradesh District Gazetteers: Faizabad, is another useful source. For an insightful picture of Nawabi Lucknow culture, see A. H. Sharar, Lucknow: The Last Phase of an Oriental Culture (tr.), Boulder, 1975.

In spite of the fame of Benares, P. Coute and J. Leger, *Benares, un Voyage Architectural,* is the only modern consideration of its structural remains. The most extensive coverage for late Mughal architecture in Bihar is Asher, *Islamic Monuments of Eastern India,* although additional coverage of the tomb of Shamsher Khan is in Kuraishi, *List of Ancient Monuments.* Patil, *The Antiquarian Remains,* includes some of the works discussed here, while Ahmad, *Corpus of Persian and Arabic Inscriptions of Bihar,* discusses inscriptions on the buildings, but not the structures themselves.

The classic works on Murshidabad are J. H. T. Walsh, *A History of Murshidabad District,* London, 1902, P. C. Majumdar, *The Musnud of Murshidabad,* Murshidabad, 1905, and L. S. S. O'Malley, *Murshidabad,* Calcutta, 1914. More recent studies include Dani, *Muslim Architecture in Bengal,* Asher, "Inventory," and "The Mughal and Post-Mughal Periods." Asher's forthcoming study, "Murshidabad: Regional Revival and Islamic Continuity," in A. L. Dallapiccola and S. Zingel-Ave Lallemant (eds.), *Islam and Indian Regions, 1000—1/50 A.D.,* provides a new interpretation of structures there as well as a more substantial bibliography. The palace is best discussed in Sten Nilsson, *European Architecture in India, 1/50—1850,* London, 1968.

#### ADDENDUM

Ebba Koch, *Mughal Architecture: An Outline of its History and Development (1526-1858),* Munich, 1991, appeared too late to be included in the bibliographical essay. A particular strength of this book is its discussion of the morphology of Mughal buildings. Its plates and especially its plans serve as an excellent companion to this volume.