#### **Background 23**

- Sargent, C. (1989). *Maternity, medicine and power: Reproductive decisions in urban Benin*. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Stoner, B. P. (1985). Formal modeling of health care decisions: Some applications and limitations. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 16*, 41–46.
- Tyler, S. A. (1969). Introduction. In S. A. Tyler (Ed.), *Cognitive anthropology* (pp. 1–23). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
- Weller, S. C. (1983). New data on intracultural variability: The hot-cold concept of medicine and illness. *Human Organization, 42*, 249–257.
- Weller, S. C. (1984a). Cross-cultural concepts of illness: Variation and validation. *American Anthropologist, 86*, 341–351.
- Weller, S. C. (1984b). Consistency and consensus among informants: Disease concepts in a rural Mexican town. *American Anthropologist, 86*, 966–975.
- Weller, S. C., & Baer, R. (2001). Intra- and intercultural variation in the definition of five illnesses: AIDS, diabetes, the common cold, empacho, and mal de ojo. *Cross-Cultural Research, 35*, 201–228.
- Weller, S. C., & Romney, A. K. (1988). *Systematic data collection*. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- Weller, S., Pachter, L., Trotter, R., II, & Baer, R. (1993). Empacho in four Latino groups: A study in intra- and inter-cultural variation in beliefs. *Medical Anthropology, 15*, 109–136.

- Weller, S. C., Ruebush, T. R., II, & Klein, R. E. (1997). Predicting treatment-seeking in Guatemala: A comparison of health service research and decision–theoretic approaches. *Medical Anthropological Quarterly, 11*, 224–245.
- Weller, S. C., Baer, R., Pachter, L., Trotter, R., II, Glazer, M, García de Alba García, J. G. & Klein, R. E. (1999). Latino beliefs about diabetes. *Diabetes Care, 22*, 723–728.
- White, G. M. (1982a). The ethnographic study of cultural knowledge of 'mental disorder.' In A. J. Marsella & G. M. White (Eds.), *Cultural conceptions of mental health and therapy* (pp. 193–213). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
- White, G. M. (1982b). The role of cultural explanations in "somatization" and "psychologization," *Social Science and Medicine, 16*, 1519–1530.
- White, G. M., & Kirkpatrick, J. (Eds.). (1985). *Person, self, and experience: Exploring Pacific ethnopsychologies*. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Young, J. C. (1978). Illness categories and action strategies in a Tarascan town. *American Ethnologist, 5*, 81–97.
- Young, J. C., & Garro, L. C. (1994 [1981]). *Medical choice in a Mexican village*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Young, J. C., & Garro, L. C. (1982). Variation in the choice of treatment in two Mexican communities. *Social Science and Medicine, 16*, 1453–1465.

# **Critical Medical Anthropology**

#### **Merrill Singer**

## **BACKGROUND**

Since its inception, medical anthropology has had an applied orientation; much of the work done by medical anthropologists is concerned with understanding and responding to pressing health issues and problems around the world as they are influenced and shaped by human social organization, culture, and context. Despite its strong emphasis on addressing practical health issues, initiatives within the discipline have tended to be guided by one or another of several alternative theoretical perspectives. While the boundaries between these frameworks for explaining health in a socio-cultural context have not been always sharply defined, and, although there have been disagreements about which are the leading theoretical approaches at any point in time, most medical anthropologists are influenced in their work by the dominant theories within the field.

Several efforts have been made to describe and contrast the most influential theories within medical anthropology. In his book *Sickness and healing: An anthropological perspective*, Robert Hahn (1995) identified three dominant theoretical frameworks within medical anthropology, including environmental/evolutionary theories, cultural theories, and political/economic theories. In his book, *Medicine, rationality, and experience: An anthropological perspective*, Byron J. Good (1994) identified four theoretical orientations found in medical anthropology: the empiricist paradigm, the cognitive paradigm, the meaning-centered paradigm, and the critical paradigm. Finally, in *Medical anthropology in ecological perspective*, Ann McElroy and Patricia Townsend (1996) also discussed four approaches, namely medical ecological theories, interpretive theories, political economy or critical theories, and political ecological theories. Despite these varying ways of grouping and ordering conceptual and explanatory models in medical anthropology, it is evident that there is general agreement that there are a small number of identifiable clusters of theory guiding the work that is done within the field. Prominent among these is the perspective that has been labeled either critical medical anthropology (CMA) or, less frequently, political economic medical anthropology (PEMA) (Baer, Singer, & Susser, 2002; Morsy, 1996).

## **THE CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE IN THE HEALTH SOCIAL SCIENCES**

During its formative phase, explanations within medical anthropology tended to be narrowly focused on the micro level and involved explaining health-related beliefs and behaviors at the local level in terms of specific ecological conditions, cultural configurations, or psychological factors. From the perspective of CMA, these traditional approaches, while providing insight into the nature and function of folk medical models, tended to ignore the wider causes and determinants of human decision-making and action. From the critical vantage, explanations that are limited to accounting for health-related issues in terms of the influence of human personalities, culturally constituted motivations and understandings, or even local ecological relationships are inadequate because this distorts and hides the structures of social relationship that unite (in some, often unequal fashion) and influence far-flung individuals, communities, and even nations. A critical understanding, by contrast, involves paying close attention to what Mullings (1987) has called the "vertical links" that connect the social group under study to the larger regional, national, and global human society and to the configuration of social relationships that contribute to the patterning of human behavior, belief, attitude, and emotion. For the last 150 years, this broader, encompassing perspective has been known as political economy, although, as Morsy (1996) emphasizes, its deeper roots can be traced to the thinking of Abdul Rahman Muhammad Ibn Khaldun, a 14th century North African scholar.

Despite the frequency with which the term "political economy" is used in the social science literature, it is not certain that a clear understanding of the term exists. In part, this confusion may be rooted in the fact that the most common meanings attached to the term have changed over time. Eric Wolf, in his seminal political economic study entitled *Europe and the People Without History*, examined the nature of this socio-linguistic change and its underlying causes. As Wolf (1992, pp. 7–8) emphasizes, the field of political economy predates and was parent to contemporary social sciences such as sociology, anthropology, economics, and political science. Until the middle of the 19th century, political economy referred to study of "the wealth of nations," which included the production and distribution of wealth within and between political bodies and the social classes that composed them. But events at mid-century led the global field of political economy to fragment, and research into the nature and varieties of human society split into separate (and unequal) specialties and disciplines (Wolf, 1992).

The key events in question, namely the rise to dominance of the capitalist mode of production and of a set of opposed social classes brought into existence by it, disrupted the unity not only of social inquiry but, ultimately, the pre-existent frameworks of cohesiveness and health configurations of all societies around the globe as well. By mid-century, the specter of revolution hung in the air in Europe and eventually found expression in the armed clashes of a looming class war. In the midst of mounting turmoil, the question of the nature of social solidarity and social order was raised as a burning issue of structurally determined scholarly interest, suggesting the usually unspoken social function of much academic inquiry. The field of sociology branched off from political economy with the expressed mission of delving into the structure of social relations and social institutions. The new disciple came to define the core challenge as understanding the character of the bonds and associated cohesiongenerating beliefs and customs that tie individuals together to form families, small groups, institutions, and whole societies. Quickly the early sociologists came to view ties among individuals and the development of community as the casual engine driving the functioning and unity of society. In this way, the issues of concern to political economy, including how ties among individuals are shaped by the relations among classes in the production of national and international wealth, were submerged.

While sociology focused its attention on the grand industrial societies brought into existence by the rise of capitalism, anthropology, its exotic sister discipline, developed as the study of the small-scale, non-Western societies situated in the interstitial spaces between and within industrial centers. Under the methodological banner of direct observation in natural settings, anthropologists came to

#### **The Origin of Critical Medical Anthropology 25**

concentrate their investigative lens on the subtle details and unique social and cultural configurations of individual cultural cases, while, as noted, ignoring, for the most part, the sweeping processes and broader social relations that transcend micro populations historically tying them to each other and to developments within capitalist mode of production (e.g., the emergence of the national corporation and later the multinational corporation and subsequent rise of globalism). Wolf (1992) argues that all the contemporary social sciences, each of which now has developed its own approach to (and subdiscipline concerned with) health issues, owe their existence to a shared rebellion against political economy, which had been their parent discipline.

In the aftermath of this transition, and with the rise of a new set of conventional perspectives within the social sciences, those individuals who still attempted to promote a critical political economic orientation tended to be marginalized within their respective disciplines. As Navarro (1986) argues, even the terms of political economic discourse have been tainted. In mainstream scholarship, concepts and terms such as class struggle, capitalism, and imperialism are frequently treated as rhetorical and are dismissed by the dominant schools. Further, such terms often are written between quotation marks, presumably to alert the reader that they are under suspicion. Marxists who submit papers to social science journals commonly are instructed to rewrite their papers using "fewer valueladen terms" that are more attune to prevalent sociological thought.

Despite discrimination, an academic tradition of political economy of health survived and the literature associated with this perspective began to grow during the 1970s, becoming considerable during the 1980s and 1990s. Adherents, individuals who embrace the notion that social inequality and inequality of power in society are primary determinants of health, health-related behavior, and health care, see the critical approach as offering a much needed corrective for the disciplinary fragmentation of social science that hides the relationship among economic systems, political power, and social ideologies (Wolf, 1992).

## **THE ORIGIN OF CRITICAL MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

Medical anthropology as a distinct, named subdiscipline of anthropology can be traced to the 1950s. Otto von Mering (1970, p. 272), however, contends that the formal relationship between anthropology and medicine is much older and began when Rudolf Virchow, a renowned pathologist interested in social medicine, helped to establish the first anthropological society in Berlin. Indeed, Virchow influenced Franz Boas, the father of American anthropology, while he was affiliated with the Berlin Ethnological Museum during 1883–1886 (Trostle, 1986, p. 45). Nevertheless, the keen political economic perspective that Virchow fostered did not really have its impact on medical anthropology until the 1970s.

The initial effort to develop a distinct critical orientation within medical anthropology can be traced to the symposium "Topias and Utopias in Health" at the 1973 Ninth International Congress for Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences, which ultimately developed into a volume with the same title (Ingman & Thomas, 1975). Six years later, a consciously critical perspective within medical anthropology was launched by Soheir Morsy's (1979) review essay entitled "The Missing Link in Medical Anthropology: The Political Economy of Health." Morsy's article, as well as exposure to the political economy of health literature, particularly the work of Vincente Navarro, a progressive physician with extensive training in the social sciences, prompted Hans Baer (1982) to write a short review of this corpus of literature and its relevance for medical anthropologists. Beginning in 1983, Baer and others began organizing scholarly sessions at anthropological meetings and editing and writing articles, special issues of journals, and books on critical medical anthropology (Baer, 1996; Baer, Singer, & Johnson, 1986; Crandon-Malamud, 1991; Farmer, 1999; Frankenberg, 1980, 1981; Morsy, 1993; Scheper-Hughes, 1990; Singer, 1986, 1989; Singer & Baer, 1995; Singer, Baer, & Lazarus, 1990). Central to this effort has been the "making social of disease" (Frankenberg, 1980, p. 199).

The emergence of CMA reflects both the turn toward political–economic approaches in anthropology in general and an effort to engage and extend the broader political economy of health tradition by marrying it to the microlevel understandings of on-the-ground behavior in local settings and socio-cultural insights of medical anthropology. As Morsy (1996) notes, the critical approach to health in medical anthropology is distinctive not simply because of its scope and concern with the macro level, but more importantly by its commitment to embedding culture in historically delineated political–economic contexts. The goal is not to dismiss the contributions of microanalyses of illness and healing but rather to extend the realization of the relevance of culture to issues of power, control, resistance, and defiance associated with health, illness, and healing (Morsy, 1996).

## **KEY CONCEPTS IN CRITICAL MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

### **Health**

Conventionally, within the dominant perspective of biomedicine, health has tended to be thought of as the absence of disease. The World Health Organization (WHO), recognizing the shortcomings of this biomedical model of health, sees health as the possession of complete physical, mental, and social well-being (WHO, 1978). What are the barriers to achieving well-being of this sort? From the critical perspective, in the contemporary world, such barriers include social inequality, class, gender, racial, and other discrimination, poverty, structural violence, social trauma, relative depravation, being forced to live or work in a toxic physical environment, and related factors. Consequently, within CMA health is defined as access to and control over the basic material and nonmaterial resources that sustain and promote life at a high level of satisfaction. Health is not some absolute state of being but an elastic concept that must be evaluated in a larger socio-cultural context.

### **Disease**

Even under the best of circumstances, human beings inevitably find themselves confronted with disease or illness. As it is for biomedicine, a central question for medical anthropology must be: What is disease? It is clear why this question is important to biomedicine. Medical anthropologists, however, have tended to avoid the question altogether by defining "disease" (i.e., clinical manifestations of ill health) as the domain of medicine and "illness" (i.e., the sufferer's experience of those manifestations) as the appropriate arena of anthropological investigation. From the perspective of CMA, however, defining disease as beyond the concern or expertise of anthropologists is a retreat from ground that is as much social as it is biological in nature. Disease varies from society to society in significant ways because of organic, climatic, or geographical conditions, but also because of the ways productive activities, resources, and reproduction are organized and carried out, and because of the living and working conditions that flow from the social distribution of resources. From the CMA perspective, discussion of specific health problems, apart from their social contexts, only serves to downplay social relationships underlying environmental, occupational, nutritional, residential, and experiential conditions. Disease is not just the straightforward result of a pathogen or physiological disturbance. Instead, a variety of social problems such as malnutrition, economic insecurity, occupational risks, industrial pollution, substandard housing, and political powerlessness contribute to susceptibility to disease (Baer, Singer, & Johnson, 1986). In short, disease is as much social as it is biological. In this light, the tendency, be it in medicine or in medical anthropology, to treat disease as a given, as part of an immutable physical reality, contributes to the tendency to neglect its social origins. CMA strives, in McNeil's (1976) terms, to understand the nature of the relationship between microparasitism (the "tiny organisms," malfunctions, and individual behaviors that are the proximate causes of much sickness) and macroparasitism (the social relations of exploitation that are the ultimate causes of much disease). For example, an insulin reaction in a diabetic postal worker might be seen in a very reductionist mode as an excessive dose of insulin that causes an outpouring of adrenaline, a failure of the pancreas to respond with appropriate glucagon secretion, etc. However, a critical perspective would tend to lead a researcher to investigate whether the postal work skipped breakfast because of being late for work, the psychobiological effects of the derisive demands of a supervisor, or the inability to break for a snack because of pressure from above to increase productivity, or, more broadly, the health consequences of the structure of class forces in U.S. society that ensures capitalist domination of production and the moment to moment working lives of working people like postal employees (Woolhandler & Himmelstein, 1989).

### **Syndemics**

As part of its effort to identify and understand health within the intersecting frameworks of political economy and bio-social causality, the CMA approach to the study of disease is characterized by the investigation of a set of factors including biology, epidemiology, sufferer and community understandings of the disease(s) of concern,

#### **Key Concepts in Critical Medical Anthropology 27**

and the social, political, and economic conditions that may have contributed to the development of ill health. To help frame this "big picture" approach to the conception of diseases, critical medical anthropologists introduced the concept of "syndemic" in the mid-1990s (Singer, 1994, 1996). While biomedical understanding and practice, traditionally, have been characterized by the tendency to isolate, study, and treat diseases as if they were distinct entities that existed separate from other diseases and independent of the social contexts in which they are found, CMA, by contrast, focuses on trying to understand social and biological interconnections as they are shaped and influenced by inequalities within society. At its simplest level, and as now used by some researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the term syndemic refers to two or more epidemics (i.e., notable increases in the rate of specific diseases in a population), interacting synergistically with each other inside human bodies and contributing, as a result of their interaction, to excess burden of disease in a population. As Millstein (2001), the organizer of the Syndemics Prevention Network at the CDC, notes, syndemics occur when health-related problems cluster by person, place, or time. Importantly, the term syndemic refers not only to the temporal or locational co-occurrence of two or more diseases or health problems, but also to the health consequences of the biological interactions among co-present diseases. For example, researchers have found that coinfection with HIV and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTb) augments the immunopathology of HIV and accelerates the damaging progression of HIV disease (Ho, 1996). At the same time, studies have shown that because HIV damages human immune systems, individuals with HIV disease who are exposed to TB are more likely to develop active and rapidly progressing tuberculosis compared with those who are HIV negative. The important feature of syndemics is not just co-infection but enhanced infection due to multiple disease interactions. Importantly, beyond the notion of disease clustering in a social location or population and the biological processes of disease interaction, the term syndemic also points to the determinant importance of social conditions in disease interactions and consequences. For example, as Paul Farmer (1999, p. 13) argues, if we look at the persistence of TB in poor countries and its resurgence among the poor in industrialized countries, we find that it is impossible to understand its marked patterned occurrence in the United States, for example, disproportionately

striking those in homeless shelters and in prisons without assessing how social forces, such as political violence and racism, come to be embodied and expressed as individual pathology (Farmer, 1999). Living in poverty increases the likelihood of exposure to the bacteria that causes TB because of overcrowding in poorly ventilated dwellings. Research in homeless shelters has shown that they are a focal point of TB transmission among the poor. Once infected, the poor are more likely to develop active TB, both because they are more likely to have multiple exposures to the TB bacteria (which may push dormant bacteria into an active state) and because they are more likely to have pre-existent immune system damage from other infections and malnutrition. Also, poverty and discrimination place the poor at a disadvantage in terms of access to diagnosis and treatment for TB, effectiveness of available treatments because of weakened immune systems, and ability to adhere to TB treatment plans because of structurally imposed residential instability and the frequency of disruptive economic and social crises in poor families. As the case of TB suggests, diseases do not exist in a social vacuum nor solely within the bodies of those they inflict, and thus their transmission and impact is never merely a biological process. Ultimately, social factors such as poverty, racism, sexism, ostracism, and structural violence may be of far greater importance than the nature of pathogens or the bodily systems they infect. A shift in focus from individual diseases to syndemics and even individual diseases in social contexts allows a more encompassing understanding of disease as far more than a clinical challenge.

### **Sufferer Experience**

Medical social scientists have become increasingly concerned about sufferer experience—the manner in which an ill person manifests his or her disease or distress. Writing from a critical perspective, Margaret Lock and Nancy Scheper-Hughes have criticized the Cartesian duality of body and mind that pervades biomedical theory (Lock & Scheper-Hughes, 1996). In this effort, they have made a significant contribution to an understanding of sufferer experience by developing the concept of the "mindful body" (Scheper-Hughes & Lock, 1987). Lock and Scheper-Hughes delineate three relevant "bodies" in health: the individual body, the social body, and the body politic. An individual's image of his/her body, whether in a state of health and well-being or in a state of distress or disease, is mediated by particular meanings of being human as defined by the local cultural system. The body also serves individuals in society as a cognitive map of their conceptions of natural, supernatural, socio-cultural, and spatial relations. Further, individual and social bodies express power relations in both a specific society or in the world system.

Sufferer experience can be understood, therefore, as a social product, one that is constructed and reconstructed in the action arena between socially constituted categories of meaning and the political–economic forces that shape daily life. Although individuals often react to these forces passively, they may also respond to economic exploitation and political oppression in very active ways. In her highly acclaimed and controversial book *Death without weeping: The violence of everyday life in Brazil*, Scheper-Hughes (1992), for example, presents a vivid and moving account of human suffering in Bom Jesus, an abjectly impoverished *favela* or shantytown in northeastern Brazil. She contends that the desperate and constant struggle for basic necessities in this community induces in many mothers an indifference to the weakest of their offspring. Scheper-Hughes argues that ultimately the suffering of the mothers, their children, and others in Bom Jesus is intricately related to the collapse of the local sugar plantation industry, which has left numerous people in the region without even a subsistence income. Most of the residents of Bom Jesus have not benefited from the development of agribusiness and industrialization sponsored by both transnational corporations and the Brazilian state. Their suffering, in short, is far from a local phenomenon, and certainly not a narrowly individual experience, but rather it is intimately connected to global changes in the capitalist world economic system as these are played out on the local stage of Bom Jesus.

### **Medicalization**

This process entails the absorption of ever-widening social arenas and behaviors into the jurisdiction of biomedical treatment through a constant extension of pathological terminology to cover new conditions and behaviors. Health clinics, health maintenance organizations, and other medical provider organizations now offer classes on managing stress, controlling obesity, overcoming sexual impotence, alcoholism, and drug addiction, and promoting smoking cessation. Even the birth experience, not just in the United States but also in many

countries that pride themselves on undergoing modernization, has been distorted into a pathological event rather than a natural physiological one for childbearing women and their families. Aspects of the medicalization of birthing, for example, include (1) the withholding of information on the disadvantages of obstetric medication, (2) the expectation that women give birth in a hospital, (3) the elective induction of labor, (4) the separation of the mother from familial support during labor and birth, (5) the confinement of the laboring woman to bed, (6) professional dependence on technology and pharmacological methods of pain relief, (7) routine electronic fetal monitoring, (8) the chemical stimulation of labor, (9) the delay of birth until the physician's arrival, (10) the requirement that the mother assume a prone position rather than a squatting one, (11) the routine use of regional or general anesthesia for delivery, and (12) routine episiotomy (Haire, 1978, pp. 188–194). Beginning in the 1970s, the feminist health movement, an expression of resistance and advocacy in the health arena, has prompted many women and men to challenge many of these practices and has contributed to a heavier reliance on home births conducted by a now significant cadre of lay midwives in industrialized societies. One factor driving medicalization is the profit to be made from "discovering" new diseases in need of treatment. Medicalization also contributes to increasing social control on the part of physicians and health institutions over behavior. It serves to mystify and depoliticize the social origins of personal distress. Medicalization transforms problems at the level of social structure—such as stressful work demands, unsafe working conditions, and poverty—into individual-level problems subject to medical control (Waitzkin, 1983).

### **Medical Hegemony**

Underlying the medicalization of contemporary life is the broader phenomenon of medical hegemony, the process by which capitalist assumptions, concepts, and values come to permeate medical diagnosis and treatment. Antonio Gramsci, an Italian political activist who fought against fascism under Mussolini, developed this concept as an elaboration upon Marx and Engels' observation that the ideas of the ruling class are, in every age, the ruling ideas in society. Whereas the ruling class exerts direct domination through the coercive vehicles of the state apparatus (e.g., the government, courts, military, police,

#### **The Impact of Critical Medical Anthropology Studies 29**

prisons), hegemony, as Femia (1975) observes, is exercised through the institutions of civil society such as the educational system, religious institutions, and the mass media. Hegemony refers to the process by which one class exerts control of the cognitive and intellectual life of society by structural means as opposed to coercive ones. Hegemony is achieved through the diffusion and constant reinforcement throughout the key institutions of society of certain values, attitudes, beliefs, social norms, and legal precepts. Doctor–patient interactions also constitute an arena of hegemonic interaction. Studies of these interactions show that they commonly reinforce nonegalitarian hierarchical structures in the larger society by (1) stressing the need for the patient to comply with a social superior's or expert's judgment, and (2) directing patient attention to the immediate causes of illness (e.g., pathogens, diet, exercise, smoking) and away from structural factors (over which physicians feel they have little control). For example, although a patient may be experiencing job-related stress caused by an onerous work environment, the physician may prescribe a sedative to calm the patient rather than challenging the power of an employer or supervisor over employees. In the contemporary world, globablization is a primary engine of medical hegemony. As Whiteford and Manderson (2000) stress, the forces shaping the contemporary health scene, for example health care and health practices around the world, including those promoted by the main international lending institutions upon which many countries are fiscally dependent, derive from Western domination and reflect Western values of rationality, competition, and progress, in all of which contexts there is an implicit assumption that with modernization local "traditional" institutions and structures in and out of health care will be replaced by Western alternatives.

### **Medical Pluralism**

Regardless of their degree of complexity, all health care systems are based upon a dyadic core consisting of a healer and a patient in interaction. The healer role may be occupied by a generalist, such as the shaman in preindustrial societies or the family physician in modern societies. It may also be occupied by a complex array of specialists from herbalists to oncologists even within a single society. Rather than a single medical system, contemporary societies can sport a pluralistic set of healing traditions, some of indigenous origin within particular subgroups in society and others imported from other societies. Medical pluralism, which flourishes in all class-divided societies, tends to mirror the wider sphere of unequal social relationships, with the patterns of hierarchy among co-present medical systems being based upon the reigning structure of class, caste, racial, ethnic, regional, religious, or gender distinctions. It is perhaps more accurate to say that national medical systems in the modern or postmodern world tend to be "plural," rather than "pluralistic," in that biomedicine enjoys a dominant status over all heterodox and ethnomedical practices. In reality, plural medical systems may be described as "dominative" in that one medical system generally enjoys a pre-eminent status vis-à-vis other medical systems (Baer, 1989). While within the context of a dominative medical system one healing tradition attempts to exert, with the support of elites of society, dominance over other medical traditions, people are quite capable of the simultaneous use of quite distinct medical systems.

## **THE IMPACT OF CRITICAL MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY STUDIES**

As Morsy (1996) observes, a review of the CMA literature shows that this genre of medical anthropology spans a range of both substantive and analytical concerns. Critical medical anthropologists have worked on a growing number of health-related issues and health conditions, including mental health, illicit substance abuse, smoking, AIDS, homelessness, reproduction, folk healing, infant care and mortality, diabetes, medical pluralism, immunology, nutrition, health policy, health care disparities, the pharmaceutical industry, rural health services, doctor–patient relationships, the role of the state in primary health care, and medical hegemony. As this (quite partial) list suggests, CMA theory has fostered numerous research and explanatory efforts and proven to be particularly fertile ground for the development of new explanatory concepts and new research questions. Consequently, the CMA perspective has not only strongly influenced the work of many medical anthropologists who define themselves as working in a critical vein, but its emphasis on the fundamental importance of considering political economic factors in health has influenced the work of many medical anthropologists identified with an alternative explanatory framework. In fostering debate among the various perspectives in medical anthropology,

**30 Critical Medical Anthropology**

CMA also has contributed to a greater focus on theory in what, as noted, has tended to be a highly applied subdiscipline.

## **REFERENCES**

- Baer, H. A. (1982). On the political economy of health. *Medical Anthropology Newsletter, 14*(1), 1–2, 13–17.
- Baer, H. A. (1989). The American dominative medical system as a reflection of social relations in the larger society. *Social Science and Medicine, 28*, 1103–1112.
- Baer, H. A. (Ed.). (1996). Critical biocultural approaches in medical anthropology: A dialogue [Special Issue]. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* (n.s.), *10*(4).
- Baer, H. A., Singer, M., & Johnsen, J. (eds.). (1986). Towards a critical medical anthropology [Special issue]. *Social Science and Medicine, 23*(2).
- Baer, H., Singer, M., & Susser, I. (2002). *Medical anthropology and the world system: A critical approach* (2nd ed.). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Crandon-Malamud, L. (1991). *From the fat of our souls: Social change, political process, and medical pluralism in Bolivia*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Farmer, P. (1999). *Infections and inequalities: The modern plagues*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Femia, J. (1975). Hegemony and consciousness in the thought of Antonio Gramsci. *Political Studies, 23*, 29–48.
- Frankenberg, R. (1980). Medical anthropology and development: A theoretical perspective. *Social Science and Medicine, 14B*, 197–207.
- Frankenberg, R. (1981). Allopathic medicine, profession, and capitalist ideology in India. *Social Science and Medicine, 15A*, 115–125.
- Good, B. (1994). *Medicine, rationality, and experience*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Hahn, R. (1995). *Sickness and healing: An anthropological perspective*. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
- Haire, D. (1978). The cultural warping of childbirth. In J. Ehrenreich (Ed.), *The cultural crisis of modern medicine* (pp. 185–200). New York: Monthly Review Press.
- Ho, D. (1996). Viral counts count in HIV infection. *Science, 272*(24), 1167–1170.
- Ingman, S. R., & Thomas, A. E. (eds.). (1975). *Topias and Utopias in health: Policy studies*. The Hague: Mouton.
- Lock, M., & Scheper-Hughes, N. (1996). A critical-interpretive approach in medical anthropology: Rituals and routines of discipline and dissent. In C. F. Sargent & T. M. Johnson (Eds.), *Medical anthropology: Contemporary theory and method* (pp. 41–70). Westport, CT: Praeger.
- McElroy, A., & Townsend, P. K. (1996). *Medical anthropology in ecological perspective* (3rd ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- McNeill, W. H. (1976). *Plagues and peoples*. New York: Anchor Books.
- Mering, O. von (1970). Medicine and psychiatry. In O. von Mering & L. Kasdan (Eds.), *Anthropology and the behavioral and health*

*sciences* (pp. 272–307). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

- Millstein, B. (2001). Introduction to the syndemics prevention network. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
- Morsy, S. (1979). The missing link in medical anthropology: The political economy of health. *Reviews in Anthropology, 6*, 349–363.
- Morsy, S. (1993). *Gender, sickness, and healing in rural Egypt: Ethnography in historical context*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Morsy, S. (1996). Political economy in medical anthropology. In C. F. Sargent & T. M. Johnson (Eds.), *Medical anthropology: Contemporary theory and method* (Rev. ed. pp. 21–40). New York: Praeger.
- Mullings, L. (1987). Cities of the United States in urban anthropology. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Navarro, V. (1986). U.S. Marxists scholarship in the analysis of health and medicine. *International Journal of Health Services, 15*, 525–545.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. (1990). Three propositions for a critically applied medical anthropology. *Social Science and Medicine, 30*, 189–197.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. (1992). *Death without weeping: The violence of everyday life in Brazil*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Scheper-Hughes, N., & Lock, M. (1987). The mindful body: A prolegomenon to future work in medical anthropology. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* (n.s.), *1*, 6–41.
- Singer, M. (1986). The emergence of a critical medical anthropology. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 17*(5), 128–129.
- Singer, M. (1989). The coming of age of critical medical anthropology. *Social Science and Medicine, 28*(11), 1193–1203.
- Singer, M. (1994). AIDS and the health crisis of the urban poor: The perspective of critical medical anthropology. *Social Science and Medicine, 39*, 931–948.
- Singer, M. (1996). Farewell to adaptationism: Unnatural selection and the politics of biology. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* (n.s.), *10*(4), 496–575.
- Singer, M., & Baer, H. A. (1995). *Critical medical anthropology*. Amityville, NY: Baywood Press.
- Singer, M., Baer, H. A., & Lazarus, E. (Eds.). (1990). Critical medical anthropology: Theory and research [Special issue]: *Social Science and Medicine, 30*(2).
- Trostle, J. (1986). Early work in anthropology and epidemiology: From social medicine to the germ theory, 1840 to 1920. In C. R. Janes, R. Stall, & S. M. Gifford (Eds.), *Anthropology and epidemiology: Interdisciplinary approaches to the study of health and disease*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
- Waitzkin, H. (1983). *The second sickness: Contradictions of capitalist health care*. New York: Free Press.
- Whiteford, L., & Manderson, L. (2000). Global health policy, local realities: The fallacy of the level playing field. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.
- Wolf, E. (1992). *Europe and the people without history*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Woolhandler, S., & Himmelstein, D. (1989). Ideology in medical science: Class in the clinic. *Social Science and Medicine, 28*, 1205–1209.
- World Health Organization (1978). *Primary health care*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.