## **Thorp, Edward**

Edward O. Thorp is a mathematician who has made seminal contributions to games of chance and investment science. He invented original strategies for the game of blackjack that revolutionized the game. Together with Sheen Kassouf, he showed how warrants could be hedged using a short position in the underlying stocks and described and implemented arbitrage portfolios of stocks and warrants. Thorp made other important contributions to the development of option pricing and to investment theory and practice. He has had a very successful record as an investment manager. This note contains a brief account of some of his major contributions.

Thorp studied physics as an undergraduate and obtained his PhD in mathematics from the University of California at Los Angeles in 1958. The title of his dissertation was *Compact Linear Operators in Normed Spaces*, and he has published several papers on functional analysis. He taught at UCLA, MIT, and New Mexico State University and was professor of mathematics and finance at the University of California at Irvine.

Thorp's interest in devising scientific systems for playing games of chance began when he was a graduate student in the late 1950s. He invented a system for playing roulette and also became interested in blackjack and devised strategies based on card counting systems. While at MIT, he collaborated with Claude Shannon, and together they developed strategies for improving the odds at roulette and blackjack. One of their inventions was a wearable computer that was the size of modern-day cell phone. In 1962, Thorp [3] published *Beat the Dealer: A Winning Strategy for the Game of Twenty One*. This book had a profound impact on the game of blackjack as gamblers tried to implement his methods, and casinos responded with various countermeasures that were sometimes less than gentle.

In June 1965, Thorp's interest in warrants was piqued by reading Sydney Fried's *RHM Warrant Survey*. He was motivated by the intellectual challenge of warrant valuation and by the prospect of making money using these instruments. He developed his initial ideas on warrant pricing and investing during the summer of 1965. Sheen Kassouf who was, like Thorp, a new faculty member at the University of California's newly established campus at Irvine, was also interested in warrants because of his own investing. Kassouf had analyzed market data to determine the key variables that affected warrant prices. On the basis of his analysis, Kassouf developed an empirical formula for a warrant's price in terms of these variables.

In September 1965, Thorp and Kassouf discovered their mutual interest in warrant pricing and began their collaboration. In 1967, they published their book, *Beat the Market*, in which they proposed a method for hedging warrants using the underlying stock and developed a formula for the hedge ratio [5]. Their insights on warrant pricing were used<sup>a</sup> by Black and Scholes in their landmark 1973 paper on option pricing.

Thorp and Kassouf were aware that the conventional valuation method was based on projecting the warrant's expected terminal payoff and discounting back to current time. This approach involved two troublesome parameters: the expected return on the warrant and the appropriate discount rate. Black and Scholes in their seminal paper would show that the values of both these parameters had to coincide with the riskless rate. There is strong evidenceb that Thorp independently discovered this solution in 1967 and used it in his personal investment strategies. Thorpc makes it quite clear that the credit rightfully belongs to Black and Scholes.

*Black Scholes was a watershed. It was only after seeing their proof that I was certain that this was the formula—and they justifiably get all the credit. They did two things that are required. They proved the formula(I didn't) and they published it (I didn't).*

Thorp made a number of other contributions to the development of option theory and modern finance and his ideas laid the foundations for further advances. As one illustration based on my own experience, I will mention Thorp's essential contribution to a paper that David Emanuel and I published in 1980 [2]. Our paper examined the distribution of a hedged portfolio of a stock and option that was rebalanced after a short interval. The key equation on which our paper rests was first developed by Thorp in (1976) [4].

Throughout his career, Edward Thorp has applied mathematical tools to develop highly original solutions to difficult problems and he has demonstrated a unique ability to implement these solution in a practical way.