# **14 Social Control**

Society, in order to exist and progress, has to exercise a certain control over its members since any marked deviation from the established ways is considered a threat to its welfare. Such control has been termed 'social control' by sociologists.

# **MEANING OF SOCIAL CONTROL**

Mannheim defi nes social control as 'the sum of those methods by which a society tries to infl uence human's behaviour to maintain a given order'. According to Ogburn and Nimkoff , 'the patterns of pressure which a society exerts to maintain order and established rules' are social control. E. A. Ross, who was the fi rst American sociologist to deal at length with social control in his book under the same name, refers it as 'system of devices whereby society brings its members into conformity with the accepted standards of behaviour'. According MacIver, social control is 'the way in which entire social order coheres and maintains itself—how it operates as a whole, as a changing equilibrium'.

In the defi nition of social control, the following three things are to be noted:

**1. Social control is an infl uence:** Th e infl uence may be exerted through public opinion, coercion, social suggestion, religion, appeal to reason, or any other method.

**2. Th e infl uence is exercised by society:** It means that a group is better able to exercise infl uence over the individual than a single individual. Th is group may be the family, the church, the state, the club, the school, the trade union, etc. Th e eff ectiveness of infl uence, however, depends on variable factors. Sometimes, the family may exercise more eff ective infl uence than the state, or sometimes it may be vice versa. Similarly, the infl uence of the club may be more eff ective than

that of the church. Th ere are innumerable agencies of social control and the eff ectiveness of each agency depends largely on the circumstances.

**3. Th e infl uence is exercised for promoting the welfare of the group as a whole:** People are infl uenced to act in the interest of others rather than in accordance with their own interests.

Th us, a proper defi nition of social control would be that 'social control is any infl uence which the society exerts on its members for the purpose of providing the welfare of the group as in whole'.

# **SOCIAL CONTROL VERSUS SELF-CONTROL**

Social control diff ers from self-control in as much as the latter is from within while the former is from without. When persons control themselves, their impulses are not because of a certain coercion but because of their own will and self-realization, and they are said to have practised self-control. One may exercise self-control either for one's own gain or for others' gain. When somebody gives up drinking because it aff ected his health, he exercises self-control for his own gain, but if he gives it up because his family is not fi nancially sound, he has exercised self-control for the gain of the family.

Th e essence of self-control is that it is always the result of one's own inner realization or feeling little infl uenced by others' authority. If it is not so, it will be transitory and will last as long as one is under the infl uence of others. But if self-control is out of one's own realization, it will be permanent and real.

# **SOCIAL CONTROL AND SOCIALIZATION**

Social control and socialization are closely related to each other. Social control is a part of socialization. During the process of socialization, the process of social control is also in operation. Th rough socialization social control becomes ipso-facto eff ective. Humans from birth to death are undergoing the process of socialization, and their behaviour is controlled in numerous ways. Th e customs regulate the birth and death ceremonies. Th e diet, the dress, the manner of speech, the marriage, the education, and a host of other matters are controlled by customs. In order to maintain the social order, there are defi nite procedures in society.

Further, the various agencies of socialization such as family, state, school, club, and neighbourhood are also the agencies of social control. Th ey exercise regulatory infl uence over the behaviour of the individual.

# **DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONCEPT OF SOCIAL CONTROL**

Every society has tried to control the behaviour of its members. In the earliest and primitive society, social control existed as a powerful force in organizing socio-cultural behaviour. From birth to death, humans are surrounded by social control of which they may even be unaware. However, it is only recently that the concept of social control has received any formal statement, although it is foreshadowed in Plato's *Republic* (369 BC) and in Comte's *Positive Philosophy* (1830–42). Lester F. Ward, in his book *Dynamic Sociology* (1883), greatly clarifi ed the concept.

It was in 1894 when the term 'social control' was used for the fi rst time by Small and Vincent. While discussing the eff ect of authority on social behaviour, these authors in their book *Introduction to the Study of Society* conclude, 'Th e reaction of public opinion upon authority makes social control a most delicate and diffi cult task'. In the same year, E. A. Ross became interested in discovering 'the linchpins which hold society together' and 'developed the germs' of the fi rst book in this fi eld. His book *Social Control* appeared in 1901 wherein Ross fully examined the concept of social control. His book is a pioneer work in the study of social control.

Cooley's *Human Nature and the Social Order* appeared in 1902, which has been regarded as an admirable supplement to the volume of Ross. He laid emphasis on the eff ect of group pressure on the personality of an individual. While Ross was concerned with studying the mechanism of social control, Cooley was interested in studying the eff ects of social control.

William Graham Sumner's *Folkways* was published in 1906. In this book, which has been called 'the Old Testament of the sociologist', he laid emphasis on folkways. According to him, 'social behaviour cannot be understood without a study of the folkways and mores which determine whether society will encourage or inhibit any specifi c item of behaviour'.

Th e three individuals are the main thinkers who made important contributions towards developing the concept of 'social control' and understanding its nature and eff ects.

# **NEED FOR SOCIAL CONTROL**

Social solidarity is essential for the existence of society. No two persons are alike in their nature, ideas, attitudes, and interests. Every individual is a separate personality. Th ere are cultural diff erences among the individuals. Some worship an idol, but others do not. Some eat meat, and others are vegetarians. Some are orthodox, and others are modern. Some are fashionable, but others are simple. Some are Protestants, but others are Catholic. As a matter of fact, society is a heterogeneous organization. If every individual is allowed unrestricted freedom to act and behave, it may create social disorder. For an orderly social life, social control is necessary. Th e aims of social control are to bring out conformity, solidarity, and continuity of a particular group or society. Social control is necessary for the following reasons:

**(i) To maintain the old order:** It is necessary for every society or group to maintain its social order, and this is possible only when its members behave in accordance with that social order. An important objective of social control is to maintain the old order. Family helps in the realization of this objective. Th e aged members of the family enforce their ideas over the children. Marriages are settled by the elder members of the family. In religious and other matters also, the old parents of the family infl uence the behaviour of its members. Although enforcement of the old order in a changing society may hinder social progress, it is necessary to maintain continuity and uniformity in society.

**(ii) To establish social unity:** Without social control social unity would be a mere dream. Social control regulates behaviour in accordance with established norms which brings uniformity of behaviour and leads to unity among the individuals. Th e family maintains its unity because its members behave in a similar manner in accordance with family norms.

**(iii) To regulate or control individual behaviour:** No two persons are alike in their attitudes, ideas, interests, and habits. Even the children of the same parents do not have the same attitudes, habits, and interests. People believe in diff erent religions, dress diff erently, eat diff erent food, marry in diff erent ways, and have diff erent ideologies. Th ere is so much diff erence in the ways of living of the people that at every moment there is the possibility of clash between them. In modern times, this possibility has all the more increased because people have become too self-centred. Social

 control is necessary to protect social interests and to satisfy common needs. If social control is removed and every individual is left to behave freely, society would be reduced to a state of jungle.

**(iv) To provide social sanction:** Social control provides social sanction to the social ways of behaviour. Numerous folkways, mores, and customs are prevalent in society. Every individual has to follow them. If an individual violates the social norms, he/she is compelled through social control to observe them. Th us, social control provides sanction to social norms.

**(v) To check cultural maladjustment:** Society is subject to change. New inventions, new discoveries, and new philosophies continue to take birth in society. People have to adjust their behaviour to the changes taking place in society, but all the individuals cannot adjust themselves to the new conditions. Some become progressive, while others remain conservative. When persons from the village move into the city, they come across new cultural standards and it is possible that they may wrongly adjust themselves to the new cultural environment. Th ey may become a slave of passions, visit bar, and spend nights in night clubs. During this transitional period in their life, social control is necessary lest they may become a deviant. In India, there is a greater need for social control today. Th e main cause of indiscipline among the students and chaos in the society is wrong cultural adjustment. It has become a fashion to violate social norms. Th eir violation is sought to be justifi ed in the name of progress and reform. Th ere is lack of social control. Th e children do not obey their parents. Th e students are not under the infl uence of their teachers, and the people openly violate the laws of the state. Nobody in the country seems to bother about the decreasing social control. India is passing through a transitional period. During this period, there is a need of social control of it. If the agencies of social control do not act eff ectively, the Indian society may suff er serious disintegration.

Th e above reasons clearly prove the need for social control. Th e need is greater in modem society because of its highly complex character and disintegrating forces present in it.

# **THE PURPOSES OF SOCIAL CONTROL**

Th e study of social control is an important aspect of sociology; here, every academic social discipline in one way or the other considers it. It is a signifi cant fi eld of study. It is a unifying factor, the study of human's behaviour. According to Kimball Young, the aims of social control are 'to bring about conformity, solidarity and continuity of a particular group or society'. Th ese aims are good but most individuals who endeavour to control their fellowmen show little perspective in their eff orts. Th ey want that others should accept the modes of conduct which they themselves prefer. Th is preference may be based on any factor training received in childhood, experience derived in life, desire to exploit others for own gain, political, personal, or economic. Some reformers and leaders try to conceal their motives by 'good reasons' in the form of altruistic rationalization. A newspaper advertisement that ten per cent rebate on goods will be allowed to those who make purchases by a particular date is an example of such rationalizations. As a matter of fact, it is diffi cult to know and classify the motives of the agents of social control; for example, it is diffi cult to understand the motives of parents who endeavour to train their children in outmoded patterns of conduct. It may be either because of unfamiliarity of the new patterns of conduct or because they think that what proved good to them will also prove good to their children, or they may be acting primarily from habit or distrust of the new modes. Likewise, it is diffi cult to ascertain the motives of a teacher who makes an attack on the prevailing folkways and life values.

Th us, classifi cation of the motives or purposes of the agents of social control is not easy. However, these purposes may be roughly classifi ed as (i) exploitative, motivated by self-interest, (ii) regulative, based on habit, and the desire for behaviour of the customary types, and (iii) creative or constructive, based on social benefi t. Th e results of social control are not always benefi cial to society or to the individual. Exploitation is clearly injurious to many. Even social control for constructive purposes may confuse the public and end in inactivity. Eff orts to regulate behaviour in accordance to custom may cause cultural lag, mental confl ict, emotional instability, and even psychosis. Th e established norms may be too restrictive for the creative individual and too conservative for the adventurous individual.

# **MEANS OF SOCIAL CONTROL**

Th e means by which individuals are induced or compelled to conform to the usages and life values of the group are so numerous and varied that a classifi cation is not possible. E. A. Ross has described a number of means that have been employed by social groups throughout the human history to keep individuals under control. Th e important among them are public opinion, law, custom, religion, morality, social suggestion, personality, folkways, and mores. E. C. Hayes, another American sociologist, distinguished between control by sanction and control by suggestion and imitation. By control by sanction he meant a system of rewards and punishments. According to him, education is the most eff ective means of control and family is the most signifi cant agency. Karl Manpheim distinguished between direct means of social control and indirect means of social control. Kimball Young classifi ed the means of social control into positive and negative means. Reward is a positive means, while punishment is a negative means.

Some sociologists have classifi ed the means of social control into informal means or formal means.

Sympathy, sociability, resentment, the sense of justice, public opinion, folkways, and mores are some of the informal means of social control. Th ey are very powerful in primary social groups where interaction is on a personal basis. Th e eff ectiveness of the informal devices of control, though somewhat lessened in modern, large communities wherein contacts tend to be impersonal, may still be observed in small villages. Ross cites instances of such informal eff ectively preserved without the help of constituted authority. In modern times, the informal methods have given place to formal ones such as laws, education, coercion, and codes.

#### **Informal Means**

Th e informal means of social control grow themselves in society. No special agency is required to create them. Th e Brahmins do not take meat. Th ey take meals only after bath. Th e Jains do not take curd. Th ey take their dinner before sunset. Th e Hindu women do not smoke. One can marry only in one's caste. Th e children should respect their parents. All this is due to informal social control. It is exercised through customs, traditions, folkways, mores, religion, ridicule, etc. Informal control prevails over all the aspects of human's life. Although it is said that people are not afraid of informal social control, informal means of social control are very powerful particularly in primary groups. No persons want to suff er loss of prestige. Th ey do not want to become the target of ridicule. Th ey do not want to be laughed at by the people. Th ey do not want to be socially boycotted. On the other hand, they want praise, appreciation, honour, and recognition by the society. Th us, informal means such as praise, ridicule, and boycott eff ectively control their behaviour. Moreover, the child through the process of socialization learns to conform to the norms of the group.

We may now describe briefl y the important means of informal control:

- **(i) Belief:** Belief is conviction that a particular thing is true. It is primarily of fi ve kinds:
  - (a) Th e belief in existence of an unseen power
  - (b) Th e belief in the theory of reincarnation
  - (c) Th e belief in Nemesis, the goddess of vengeance
  - (d) Th e belief in existence of hell and heaven
  - (e) Th e belief in the immortality of soul

All these diff erent beliefs infl uence human's behaviour in society. Th e fi rst belief in the existence of an unseen power leads people to right action because they believe that their actions are being watched by an unseen power. Th e second belief in the theory of reincarnation keeps people away from wrongful acts because they believe that in order to have a good birth in next life they must do good acts in this life. Th e third belief in the goddess of vengeance also regulates people's behaviour because they believe that they will be punished by the goddess of vengeance for their sins. A sinner is punished here and now. Th e fourth belief in the existence of hell and heaven infl uences people to virtuous acts and avoid sins in order to go to heaven or avoid going to hell after death. Heaven is a place full of luxuries, fairies, and romance. Hell is a place of terror, miseries, and tortures. Th e fi fth belief in the immortality of soul leads people to avoid such actions as it will cause pain to the souls of the deceased ancestors.

 In this way beliefs are powerful infl uences on human actions. Th ey are vital for human relations. Th ey defi ne the purposes and interests for the individuals and control their choice of means so that the purposes of the groups may be advanced or at least not hindered. No aspect of social relationship escapes them. Beliefs may be true or false. Th ey may be founded on factual or faulty evidence, but the question of their validity does not necessarily determine their eff ectiveness as social controls. We act with as much determination from false beliefs as from factually sound ones.

**(ii) Social suggestions:** Social suggestions are also powerful means of social control. Suggestion is the indirect communication of ideas, feeling, and other mental states. Such communications may be made through various methods. Th e fi rst method is putting the life examples of great people. We celebrate the anniversaries of Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shastri. We build monuments in the memory of great people. We place their life ideals before the people and exhort them to follow these ideals. Th e second method of making suggestion is through literature. Books, journals, newspaper, etc., may inspire people to heroic deeds and develop in them national feelings. Th e literature may also make people narrow minded, communal, conservative, and superstitious. Th e type of literature one reads will indirectly infl uence one's mind and consequently one's behaviour. Th e third method is through education. Th e educational curriculum may communicate certain ideas to the students and make them disciplined citizens. Th e fourth method is through advertisements. Many magazines carry beautiful advertisement depicting the advantages of visiting certain places and suggesting the prestige attached to travelling to these places. Th e advertisements from Doordarshan may attract the people to a particular toothpaste. Many of our business enterprises employ advertising to infl uence attitudes and, therefore, actions.

**(iii) Ideologies:** Ideology is a theory of social life which interprets social realities from the point of view of ideals to prove the correctness of the analysis and to justify these ideals. It is the projection of a certain ideal. Leninism, Gandhism, and Fascism are ideologies which have analysed social realities and laid down an ideal before the people. Ideologies infl uence social life to a great extent. Leninism has infl uenced the social life of Russians. Hitler's theory of socialism infl uenced Germans to the extent that they began to regard themselves as the supreme race of the world. Gandhism has infl uenced social life in India.

**(iv) Folkways:** Folkways are the recognized modes of behaviour which arise automatically within a group. Th ey are the behaviour patterns of everyday life which arise spontaneously and unconsciously in a group. Th ey are, in general, the habits of the individuals and are common to a group. Th ey are socially approved. Th ey have some degree of traditional sanction. It is not easy for the members of a group to violate the folkways. Th ey are the foundation of group culture. If individuals do not follow them, they may be socially boycotted by their group. A particular dress must be worn at a particular function. Th e Brahmins shall not take meat. Th e Jains should not take curd. Th e Hindu women should not smoke. Since folkways become a matter of habit, these are followed unconsciously and exercise powerful infl uence over human's behaviour in society.

**(v) Mores:** More are those folkways which are considered by the group to be of great signifi cance, rather indispensable to its welfare. Th e mores relate to the fundamental needs of society more directly than do the folkways. Th ey express the group sense of what is right and conducive to social welfare. Th ey imply a value judgement about the folkways. Mores are always moulding human's behaviour. Th ey restrain an individual from doing acts considered as wrong by his/ her group. Th ey are the instruments of control. In society there are innumerable mores such as monogamy, prohibition, endogamy, and antislavery. Conformity to mores is regarded necessary. It is essential for the members of the group to conform to them. Behaviour contrary to them is not permitted by society. Certain mores may even be harmful for the physical well-being of an individual, yet these must be obeyed. Th us, mores control human's behaviour in society to a great extent.

**(vi) Customs:** Customs are the long-established habits and usages of the people. Th ey are those folkways and mores which have persisted for a very long time and have passed down from one generation to another. Th ey arise spontaneously and gradually. Th ere is no constituted authority to declare them, to apply them, or to safeguard them. Th ey are accepted by society. Th ey are followed because they have been followed in the past. Th e importance of customs as a means of social control cannot be minimized. Th ey are so powerful that no one can escape their range. Th ey regulate social life to a great extent. Th ey bind humans together. Th ey control the purely selfi sh impulses. Th ey compel the individual to confi rm to the accepted standards. Th ey are held so sacred that any violation of them is regarded not only a crime but also a sacrilege. In primitive societies, customs were powerful means of social control, but in modern times their force has loosened.

**(vii) Religion:** Religion also exercises a powerful infl uence on human's behaviour in society. Th e term 'religion' has numerous defi nitions. Religion is an attitude towards superhuman powers. It is a belief in powers superior to humans. Religion pervades practically in all the societies, though there may be diff erent forms of religious beliefs and practices. Th e Hindu religion assigns great importance to ceremonies. At the time of birth, marriage, and death, a number of ceremonies are performed. 'Mantras' are recited even if one does not understand their meaning. Religion is a powerful agency in society. It infl uences human's behaviour. Some of the teachings of religion which infl uence human's behaviour are as follows: Children should obey their parents, and should

not tell a lie or cheat; women should be faithful to men; people should be honest and virtuous; one should limit one's desires; and humans should renounce unsocial activities. People should do good acts is a common teaching of all the religions. Religion makes people benevolent, charitable, forbearing, and truthful. It may also be noted that religion is easily distorted into superstition and dogmatism. Instead of being an incentive to brotherhood, social justice, and ethical idealism, religion may be used as a tool to make people content with their lot, obedient to their rulers, and defenders of status quo. It may deny freedom of thought. It may favour poverty, exploitation, and idleness and encourage practices such as cannibalism, slavery, untouchability, communalism, and even incest.

**(viii) Art and literature:** Art in its narrow sense includes painting, sculpture, architecture, music, and dance. Literature includes poetry, drama, and fi ction. Both art and literature infl uence the imagination and exert control on human's behaviour. Th e martial music of the military band arouses feelings of determination and strength. A classical dance creates an appreciation of our culture in us. Th e statue of Mahatma Gandhi teaches us the virtue of simple living and high thinking. A painting may arouse a feeling of sympathy, aff ection, and hatred in us. Th ere is always a close relationship between the art of a period and the national life. Th e civilization of any specifi ed time can be judged by an examination of its art. Th e Ajanta and Ellora caves give a vivid account of the ancient Hindu culture. An artist has been called an agent of civilization.

 Literature also infl uences human's behaviour in society. We have 'good' literature and 'bad' literature. A good literature possesses an indefi nable quality which makes it live through the ages. Ramayana, Bhagvad Gita, and Mahabharat are classical works of great social value. On the other hand, detective literature may have its eff ect on crime. Romantic literature may make the readers passionate, while religious literature may make them virtuous or superstitious. Rousseau in France hastened French Revolution. Dickens changed the entire school system in Britain by writing David Copperfi eld and his other books. In this way both art and literature exert control through their infl uence on the imagination.

**(ix) Humour and satire:** Humour is also a means of social control. It assumes various forms, depending on the situation and purpose. It often serves to relieve a tense situation.

 Humour controls society by supporting the sanctioned values of the society. Th rough cartoons, comics, and repartees, it supports the values of the society in a form that is light in spirit but eff ective in control.

 Satire employs wit and scorn as indirect criticism of actions felt to be vicious and socially harmful. By ridicule it exposes the falsity and danger of behaviour. Th ereby it causes the people to give up their vicious and harmful action. Th e Flop Show of Mr. Jaspal Bhatti televised by Doordarshan was a great satire on corruption in Indian society.

**(x) Public opinion:** Th e infl uence of public as a means of social control is greater in simple societies. In a village the people are known to one another personally. It is diffi cult for a villager to act contrary to the public opinion of the village. Public opinion greatly infl uences our actions. For fear of public ridicule and criticism, we do not indulge in immoral or antisocial activities. Every individual wants to win public praise and avoid public ridicule or criticism. Th e desire for recognition is a natural desire. Human praise is the sweetest music. Th e greatest eff orts of the human race are made to win public recognition or at least to avoid public ridicule. Th us, opinion is one of the strongest forces infl uencing the behaviour of people.

## **Formal Means**

Among the formal means of social control, the important ones are law, education, and coercion. A brief explanation of these means is as follows:

**(i) Law:** Law is the most important formal means of social control. Early societies depended on informal means of social control, but when societies grew in size and complexity, they were compelled to formulate rules and regulations which defi ne the required types of behaviour and specify the penalties to be imposed on those who violate them. Law is a body of rules enacted by legally authorized bodies and enforced by authorized agencies. It defi nes rights, duties, as well as punishments clearly for their violation. Th e modern societies are large in size. Th eir structure in complex, consisting of a number of groups, organizations, institutions, and vested interests. Informal means of social control are no longer suffi cient to maintain social order and harmony. Perforce modern societies had to resort to formal means of social control.

 In modem society relationships are of a secondary nature. Security of life and property, as well as the systematic ordering of relationships, make formalization of rules necessary. Law prescribes uniform norms and penalties throughout a social system. Th e body of law in every state is being increased. What was in mores and customs earlier has now been formalized into a body of law. Th e Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, has laid down the rules regulating the marriage among Hindus. It has recognized the right of a Hindu woman to divorce her husband. A number of laws have been enacted, governing food handling, fi re protection, sewage disposal, traffi c, sex regulation, entertainment, education, etc. Law prohibits certain actions, for example, Anti-untouchability Act prohibits untouchability in any form and a person practising untouchability is liable to punishment. Prohibition Act forbids drinking at public places. Smoking in cinema halls is prohibited under law. A uniform civil code, if and when enacted, may remove the social barriers in the Indian society. In this way, law exercises a powerful infl uence on the behaviour of people in modem societies. Today, law takes an ever larger part in total social control.

**(ii) Education:** Along with law, the importance of education as a means of social control is being growlingly realized. Education is a process of socialization. It prepares the child for social living. It reforms the attitudes wrongly formed by the children already. Th us, a family may make the children superstitious; education will correct their beliefs and remove their prejudices. It teaches them value of discipline, social cooperation, tolerance, and sacrifi ce. It instils the qualities of honesty, fair play, and a sense of right and wrong in them. Th e importance of education for creating right social attitudes among the youth cannot be minimized. It is sad to note that education in India has miserably failed to create right social attitudes among the youth and act as an eff ective means of social control.

**(iii) Coercion:** Coercion is the use of force to achieve a desired end. It may be physical or nonviolent. It is the ultimate means of social control when all other means fail. Physical coercion may take the form of bodily injury, imprisonment, and death penalty. Physical coercion is without doubt the lowest form of social control. Societies would least desire to use it. It may have immediate eff ects on the off ender, but it does not have enduring eff ects. If a society has to depend on external force, it shows its weakness rather than strength in social control.

 Non-violent coercion consists of the strike, boycott, and non-cooperation. A person who threatens to withdraw his support from a friend, if he does not give up smoking, is using nonviolent coercion to change his action. Th e students may go on strike to force the principal to

ensure them adequate library facilities. Boycott is the withholding of social or economic intercourse with others to express disapproval and to force acceptance of demands. A student who teases the girls may be socially boycotted by the other students of the college. Non-cooperation is refusal to cooperate. Th e teachers may refuse to cooperate with the principal for his/her insulting behaviour. Non-violent coercion can be a successful way of eff ecting social control. Mahatma Gandhi used it to force the British Government to grant political independence to India.

# **SOCIAL CONTROL THROUGH AGES**

It is evident from what has been said so far that social control through ages has not been exercised through one and the same methods. Th eir relative effi ciency varies with changes in the social organization and life value of the group. In primitive societies, generally informal means such as convention, usage, custom, and tradition were employed for controlling individuals and groups. In the middle ages, since feudal customs and the church had the greatest authority, the whole social life was controlled by the church. With the passage of time, the authority of the church diminished and the power shifted from it to the king. Th en, kings became the great controlling agencies who began to rule the state by what was called the Divine Right of Kings. Later on there came the period of laissez faire and the control of the state over the individual became less. With the march of technical advance and economic transformation, new social problems cropped up which again necessitated control by the state. Th is time, however, the state represented not the will of the autocratic ruler but the collective will, the will of the community. A large number of associations—economic, social, and political—gained birth which hence forward began to greatly control the social life. And today social control is so vast and widening that people fi nd themselves at every step of life under control of some agency or the other. Whether this control is necessary or desirable, is a question which has given rise to the great controversy of man versus the state. However, if we remember that there is no contradiction between the interests of society and the individual, then the controversy of man versus society loses all its signifi cance.

**Social control in modern society:** In modern times social control is mostly exercised through an appeal to reason. Modern society does not favour the use of force, though coercive methods are quite often used in making the individuals obedient to the system. Today, humans' behaviour is controlled by showing them through education and propaganda, the consequences of their action. All discussions and talk about the values of family planning or the evils of drinking are the examples of the modern type of control. Appeal to feelings is not greatly resorted to in modern times. It was only in primitive societies that people behaved according to the social pattern because they feared that any deviation from the prescribed modes would annoy gods and bring curse on them. People do not believe much in supernatural forces today. However, social suggestion as to what people will say and desire to win commendation exercise control over human's behaviour in modern society. Leadership has become a great controlling force in modern times. Th e leader controls the mob mentality in times of crisis and excitement.

**Social control in future:** Th e present society is a highly complex society as compared to the past one, and it is to become still more complex in future. Th e social problems which an individual has to face are becoming so complicated that it is beyond the power of a single individual to cope with them. Consequently, he/she must join with someone in working for the goal that he/she desires. Th e individual is impotent before the mighty forces of society, and this fact has led to a signifi cant multiplication of the voluntary agencies of social control committees, clubs, association, institutes, bureaus, and cooperations.

Th e disintegrating forces present in the modern society are likely to give rise to great social control to secure uniformity of conduct. Th e theory of 'laissez faire' has collapsed. It is now generally held that intelligent, collective planning alone can solve the present-day social problems. Th e superiority of the human mind over the blind forces of nature has been established. Society is not the result of forces operating automatically and regardless of human's eff orts. In contrast to the theory of 'evolutionary determinism', the conception of 'telesis' proposed by L. F. Ward has greater strength. Th e more and more increasing control of the government and expanding budgets show that in future social control is further to increase than decrease. Moreover, in recent times we have come to possess more and more knowledge of the methods of social control. New agencies of social control have come into being. In totalitarian states, social control has reached the maximum point: every human's life is under state direction and regulation. In democracies too, social control is no less vast. A number of regulatory agencies and voluntary bodies have cropped up to infl uence people's behaviour. Th e increasing complexity of culture will increase rather than diminish the need for eff ective social control.

# **QUESTIONS**

- 1. What do you understand by the term 'social control'? How does it diff er from self-control?
- 2. Is social control necessary? What are the various means through which social control may be exercised?
- 3. What do you mean by formal and informal means of social control? Give examples.
- 4. Discuss the need and aims of social control.