# 1

# IndIan SocIology: The Journey So Far and The Way ahead

Yogesh Atal

A growing discipline passes through various phases. It begins its journey as an illegitimate child; in due course, it gets institutionalized—it begins to wear a professional look; and then it starts participating in the culture of romance with other disciplines. The living discipline, thus, remains endogamous only for a little while; its strength lies in its being heterogamous.1

# **Prefatorial**

The Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR), soon after its inception in the late 1960s, initiated a series of surveys of research in different social science disciplines. That was the first major attempt to document the history and growth of social sciences in the country. Covering the disciplines of (i) economics, (ii) geography, (iii) political science, (iv) public administration, (v) psychology, and (vi) sociology, social anthropology, and social work, this massive exercise resulted in the publication of 25 volumes. In each of the disciplines, several authors were commissioned to write individual chapters on different sub-branches. These surveys were intended to be stocktaking exercises, indicating what has been achieved in Indian social sciences in terms of theory, methodology, and empirical evidence, and what gaps exist, which need to be prioritized for future agendas. Apart from providing the academic community a useful reference material, and an intellectual history of the various disciplines, these surveys helped the ICSSR in determining its priorities for research grants and for sponsored projects. The academic community welcomed this initiative and expressed the hope that this would be a continuing exercise.

Encouraged by such overwhelming response, the ICSSR launched another programme of publishing *Journals of Research Abstracts and Reviews* in individual disciplines. These journals provide updates on current research and are a useful resource for any scholar interested in attempting a trend analysis.

Over the years, the programme of surveys of research has somehow lost its momentum with the result that the continuity has suffered. For example, while the fourth survey results of psychology, covering the period up to 1992, has been published, in sociology and social anthropology the fourth survey covering the period after 1987 was not commissioned until the year 2003. In that year, the ICSSR decided to give fresh impetus to this programme by initiating the next round of surveys covering six major disciplines, namely, economics, sociology and social anthropology, geography, political science and public administration, psychology, and education. These surveys were expected to update the developments in these disciplines up to the year 2002 so that all the disciplines have a comparative benchmark.

The present round of survey—which is the fourth—is intended to fill the lacunae and portray the intellectual history of sociology/social anthropology as it is shaping in India. The survey is intended to be India specific, focussing on the contributions of Indian scholars, on India or any other society, and the social scientific work on India by expatriates. The purpose of the survey is to portray the objective and quantitative growth of the discipline in India. It was not meant to be judgemental. The authors of various themes were expected to draw the emerging profile of that subspecialty rather than offer personal statements, or pass judgements on the 'merits' or the 'quality' of the publications. Covering the books and research papers, each surveyor was expected to identify the trends of research in a given specialty, indicating the themes that were losing attention and the new ones being adopted. It was hoped that such an analysis would help the author to search for factors responsible for new developments in the discipline. Couched in the framework of social science of knowledge, the survey was expected to go beyond a mere chronology of events and indicate the factors that have influenced the course of events. Apart from being a mere history of past developments, the purpose of this exercise was also to identify the gaps that exist in research—the unresearched (or little researched) topics, regions, or communities—and establish a fresh set of priorities for future research.

Unlike the first round of surveys, when no databases existed, the situation today is very encouraging. The present exercise is built upon the previous surveys, treating the last survey as the benchmark.

The selection of topics for the fourth round was a hilarious task. The ICSSR wanted no more than 12 studies to be commissioned. But the hope was that it would update the information on the themes covered in the previous surveys, and also include new areas which have been taken up for research during the period under survey. Fulfilling both the objectives and yet keeping to the limit of 12 essays was indeed a tall order.

In the first survey (Srinivas et al. 1974), a total of 24 papers were commissioned, and these were published in three volumes. The topics covered were applied anthropology, caste, community development and Panchayati Raj, cultural/social anthropology, economic development, folklore, historical sociology, industrial sociology, kinship, material culture, political sociology, research methodology, rural studies, scheduled castes, social change, social demography, social stratification, social work, sociology of education, sociology of law, sociology of medicine, tribal ethnography, and urban studies. The listing clearly shows that much of the work was done in the areas that fall in the common territory of sociology and anthropology. The studies on social stratification had high incidence; which is why three chapters were devoted to them namely, caste, scheduled castes, and social stratification. In anthropology also, in addition to a chapter on anthropological studies, a separate chapter was devoted to tribal ethnography. The overlaps were unavoidable. Anthropological studies, for example, on caste and the villages, were covered in chapters surveying research on village studies, caste, and anthropology. The newly emerging areas like sociology of medicine and sociology of law were also given space in that exercise.

 The number of studies commissioned for the second survey, covering the period 1969–79, was reduced to 20. However, only 16 themes were surveyed. The four that were left out were kinship and family, Indians abroad (diaspora), medicine and health, and sociology of arts. Eleven of the areas covered and reported were the same as in the first survey. Among those that were included but could not be completed two were new, namely, sociology of arts and Indian diaspora. No information is thus available on the developments in sociology of kinship and sociology of medicine for the second period. The areas that were dropped in the second survey were applied anthropology, caste, community development, economic development,2 material culture,3 scheduled castes, social change, and social work.4 This round covered for the first time sociological theory, sociology of communication, sociology of professions, and sociology of science and technology.5

In the third survey,6 17 themes were covered. Included among these were five new areas, namely, culture and communication, old age, women's studies, youth, and Indian diaspora—the last one was also included in the second survey but was later dropped.7 Sociology of education, political sociology, tribal ethnographies, urban studies, and sociology of religion are the five themes that have continuously been covered in all three surveys. Those that were covered in the first and the third surveys were rural development and scheduled castes. Similarly, social movements and sociology of science and technology were covered in both the second and the third rounds of the surveys.

In order to identify the themes/topics for the fourth round of survey in sociology and anthropology, a meeting of some senior sociologists—in the hope that they would also be potential authors—was convened on 22 September 2003. The tabular analysis of the subjects covered in the previous surveys was presented at the meeting, and the participants were invited to make recommendations for the topics that should be included in the fourth round of survey.

Reviewing the themes/topics covered in the last three surveys, the meeting decided to have the survey carried out on the following 11 themes: sociology of development and change, political sociology, rural and agrarian studies, urban studies and industrial studies, social stratification and mobility, criminological studies, population and health studies, gender studies, Indian diaspora, tribal studies; and culture and communication.

Scholars were also identified for each of these themes, most of whom were present at the September meeting. But as it transpired, some scholars withdrew from the exercise, others continued but did not make any progress and, therefore, had to be regrettably dropped; time was wasted in finding their replacements. Even the titles of the chapters had to be changed. For example, the meeting suggested that both urban and industrial studies should be covered in one chapter, but the author found it difficult to handle them in a single exercise and, therefore, volunteered to prepare two separate chapters.

We had the hardest time in three areas—the survey on social stratification and mobility, sociology of development, and culture and communication. Social stratification had to be finally dropped as no progress had been made on it despite changing twice the scholars who were to do that part of the survey. Similarly, the survey on sociology of development and change, taken so enthusiastically by a scholar, remained at a standstill until the middle of 2006, when the contract had to be withdrawn, and another scholar was approached to prepare a chapter on just developmental studies. Similarly, with no progress made on the chapter on culture and communication, despite a change of authors, the theme had to be dropped. In place of social stratification, it was decided to have a chapter on sociology of law; that too was commissioned as late as May 2006. The present survey, thus, finally covers the following 11 topics: tribal studies, rural and agrarian studies, political sociology, urban sociology, industrial sociology, women's studies, demographic transition, Indian diaspora, studies on development, criminological studies, and sociology of law.

Appendix 1 shows the different topics covered in the four surveys. Table 1.1 shows the continuity and discontinuity of the different topics.

With all the ups and downs, the fourth round of the survey that was initiated in September 2003, was completed towards the middle of 2007. This story, in short, should convey to the reader how hard it is to commission a cooperative project. While every effort has been made by the editor to ensure uniformity of presentation in each chapter, the reader is sure to find deviations.

Overall, the exercise has been rewarding. It has updated the story of the growth of the two disciplines in India up to the year 2002/03—in some cases even going beyond the set limit—paving the way for the fifth round. Learning from this experience, it might be advisable to routinize this exercise by developing a suitable data bank, amenable to constant updating so that delays are curtailed and continuity is maintained. It might also be necessary to review the policy of surveying research by conventional subdivisions/topics. With only 11 themes covered, it is certain that some of the areas in which Indian sociologists have contributed have been inadvertently left out. How can one ensure that the present history of the growth of the discipline documents all the developments faithfully? We have followed one approach and noted its limitations. The other possibility is to go by the list of publications of individual scholars, or of various departments,

| Coverage in                                | Topics covered                                                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.<br>First survey only                    | Applied anthropology, caste, folk<br>lore, historical sociology, kinship,<br>material culture, social change, social<br>work, sociology of medicine |
| 2. Second survey only                      | Sociological theory, sociology<br>of communication, sociology of<br>professions                                                                     |
| 3. Third survey only                       | Culture, communication and devel<br>opment, old age, youth                                                                                          |
| 4. First and second surveys                | Cultural anthropology, social<br>stratification                                                                                                     |
| 5. First and third surveys only            | CDP/ rural development, scheduled<br>castes                                                                                                         |
| 6. Second and third surveys only           | Social movements, sociology of<br>science and technology                                                                                            |
| 7. Third and fourth surveys only           | Women's studies, Indian diaspora                                                                                                                    |
| 8. First, second and third surveys<br>only | Sociology of education, sociology<br>of religion                                                                                                    |
| 9. First, second and fourth only           | Industrial sociology, social<br>demography                                                                                                          |
| 10. First, third and fourth only           | Economic development/develop<br>ment studies, agrarian studies                                                                                      |
| 11. Second, third and fourth               | Deviant behaviour/criminology                                                                                                                       |
| 12. In all the four surveys                | Political sociology, tribal studies,<br>urban studies                                                                                               |

**Table 1.1** Frequency of coverage of different Topics in the Four Surveys

and attempt a classification to identify the categories in which their work falls. Combining the two approaches is indeed a difficult and complicated exercise. This is a challenge for future surveys.

# **Growth of Sociology in India**

It was the period of the early 1970s when the first exercise of surveys of research in the social sciences was carried out under the auspices of the Indian Council of Social Science Research. The sociology enterprise even then was already impressive in size. At that time, 49 universities and 34 affiliated colleges had sociology departments teaching postgraduate courses. In addition, there were 15 departments of anthropology. The number of colleges that taught sociology at the undergraduate level was even higher. In Rajasthan, for example, sociology began to be taught at the Maharana Bhopal College, Udaipur, long before the Rajasthan University had its own department. In 1969–70, postgraduate enrolment in India in sociology and anthropology stood at about 5,000, constituting 12 per cent of the total postgraduate enrolment in the social sciences.8 In sociology alone, there were as many as 352 students registered for Ph.D. courses, accounting for 16.34 per cent of the total enrolled for doctoral degrees in all the social sciences. The faculty in the postgraduate departments of sociology and anthropology numbered 362 (243 sociologists and 119 anthropologists) constituting 14 per cent of the total social science faculty. By 1971, India had already produced a total of 483 doctoral theses in sociology, social anthropology, criminology and social work. An average of 46 Ph.D.s per year is being produced in the country since 1968. Incidentally, this number does not include those who have received their degrees from abroad.

Considering that sociology and anthropology were late entrants into the Indian academia, and that they arrived through different doors—philosophy, psychology, economics, human geography, and Indology—these figures suggested a phenomenal growth of the twin disciplines. The 1970s was a period of their institutionalization. While the two disciplines were facing a recognition and identity crisis, the puritans in them, on the other hand, had begun demanding separate territories for sociology and anthropology. Sociologists regarded social anthropologists as 'intruders' into their discipline, and physical anthropologists treated them as 'defectors' and 'renegades'. Amidst all this, village studies provided a common ground for the specialists of the two disciplines. Some foreigners also joined the debate on what constitutes Indian sociology. The early issues of the journal, *Contributions to Indian Sociology*, then edited by Louis Dumont and David Pocock, covered this interesting development. Opinions differed on whether Indian sociology is defined as sociology *for* India, or sociology *of* India, or a sociology that is *Indian* as distinct from the Western sociology. Somewhere in this debate was hidden the demand for *Indigenization* (Atal 1981). Again, this concept was vaguely defined. Indian critics of Western sociology began to highlight the non-applicability of the theories/concepts and methodology originating in the West in the Indian setting. Others insisted on developing a *different* sociology for India, using the traditional concepts and ways of understanding society rooted in religious and philosophical literature. Some extremists even thought of the *Bhagwad Gita's* emphasis on *karma* as the predecessor to do Talcott Parsons' Action Frame of Reference!! Empirically oriented researchers followed the path of descriptive study the present through rigorous participant observation rather than bothering about theoretical formulations.

The situation has changed remarkably over the years. One does not notice the kind of acrimony between sociologists and social anthropologists that prevailed in the 1960s, although there are still some proponents of this divide.9 In fact, some of India's pioneering sociologists are those who had their degrees in social anthropology. However, it is frustrating to notice today the relative negligence of social anthropology in the departments of anthropology, which are overwhelmingly dominated by physical anthropologists. The Sagar University, under the leadership of Professor Dube, started a joint department of anthropology and sociology, but after his departure, they have become separate entities and the anthropology department there does not have any permanent faculty member in social anthropology. Anthropology departments in, Lucknow, Raipur, and Punjab Universities are, likewise, dominated by physical anthropology.

In the 1970s, there were 15 departments of anthropology. The *Status Report on Anthropology*, published by the University Grants Commission (UGC) in 1982, counted 26 departments in 22 universities, two universities having two and three departments respectively. Sixteen of them were exclusively of anthropology. Six were composite departments,10 two each of sociology and anthropology, and sociology and social anthropology, and one each of human genetic, and physical anthropology, and prehistoric archaeology. At one time, Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati, had two anthropology departments, one of social anthropology and the other of physical anthropology and archaeology; they have now been merged into one department. Two universities had departments of social anthropology, one of anthropological linguistics and the other of human biology. There are presently 33 university departments of anthropology the most recent additions being at Bundelkhand University, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh.

In the area of sociology, one can discover changes on several indicators number of departments, size of faculty, number of Ph.D.s, number of students enrolled for postgraduate courses, volume of publications, membership of the Indian Sociological Society, even the number of Research Committees (RCs) created by the ISS. The profession has grown by any indicator we may employ. It is no longer a small tribe where practitioners knew each other personally, and even familially; *gemeinschaft* has given way to *gesselschaft.*

According to the University Grants Commission, sociology is currently taught in 80 universities in 25 states and Union territories; our search has added nine more to this number. These are given in Table 1.2.11 It is surprising that the UGC list did not mention Panjab University in Chandigarh, which set up its Department of Sociology and Anthropology as far back as 1960. It also wrongly mentions Jadavpur in the State of Maharashtra. Worthy of note is the fact that the list mentions only those universities that have teaching departments. There are other universities, of the affiliating type, that allow teaching at the Masters level in the colleges affiliated to it, and conduct examinations and awards degrees. A case in point is Kanpur University in Uttar Pradesh. There may be similar other cases. We will, thus, have to add the colleges that teach sociology at the undergraduate and the postgraduate level. In this list, there is mention of one Agricultural University in Orissa that teaches sociology. There are several other such institutes and universities in the field of agriculture and engineering and technology that have departments of social sciences with the faculty specialising in sociology/social anthropology. However, Table 1.2 gives a broad idea of the spread of teaching in sociology at the post graduate level in our institutions of higher learning. From 49 universities in the 1970s the number of sociology departments in the universities has grown to at least 89. That itself indicates huge growth in the popularity of the discipline. Add to this, the number of Institutes set up to teach management and business administration where some aspects of sociology form part of the essential core syllabus.

| Name of the State /<br>Union Territory | Number of<br>Universities | Names of the<br>Universities                                                                         |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Andhra Pradesh                         | 7                         | Andhra, Hyderabad, Kakatiya, Nagar<br>juna, Osmania, Sri Krishnadevaraya, Sri<br>Venkateshwara       |
| Assam                                  | 2                         | Assam, Dibrugarh                                                                                     |
| Bihar                                  | 4                         | Kameshwar Singh Darbhanga Sanskrit,<br>L.N. Mithila, Patna, T.M. Bhagalpur                           |
| Chandigarhi                            | 1                         | Panjab                                                                                               |
| Chhattisgarh                           | 1                         | Pandit Ravi Shankar Shukla                                                                           |
| Delhi                                  | 4                         | Delhi, Jamia Milia, JNU, IGNOUii                                                                     |
| Goa                                    | 1                         | Goa                                                                                                  |
| Gujarat                                | 6                         | Bhavnagar, Gujarat (Ahmedabad),<br>Baroda, Sardar Patel, Saurashtra, South<br>Gujarat                |
| Haryana                                | 2                         | Kurukshetra, Maharshi Dayanand<br>(Rohtak)                                                           |
| Himachal Pradesh                       | 1                         | Himachal Pradesh (Shimla)                                                                            |
| Jammu and Kashmir                      | 2                         | Jammu, Kashmir (Srinagar)                                                                            |
| Jharkhand                              | 1                         | Ranchi                                                                                               |
| Karnataka                              | 7                         | Bangalore,Gulbarga, Karnataka, Kuvem<br>pu, Mangalore, Mysore, Karnataka State<br>Open Universityiii |
| Kerala                                 | 2                         | Kerala, Sri Sankaracharya University of<br>Sanskrit                                                  |

**Table 1.2** State-wise distribution of universities with Sociology departments

| Name of the State /<br>Union Territory | Number of<br>Universities | Names of the<br>Universities                                                                                                                          |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Madhya Pradesh                         | 4                         | Barakatullah, Dr H.S. Gaur, Rani Durga<br>vati, MG Chitrakoot Gramodaya Vish<br>wavidyalaya                                                           |
| Maharashtra                            | 10                        | Mumbai, Dr B.R. Ambedkar Marathwa<br>da, Nagpur, SNDT Women's, Shivaji,<br>University of Pune and Tilak Universityiv,<br>North Maharashtra, Amravativ |
| Meghalaya                              | 1                         | North Eastern Hill (NEHU)                                                                                                                             |
| Nagaland                               | 1                         | Nagaland                                                                                                                                              |
| Orissa                                 | 3                         | Orissa University of Agriculture & Tech<br>nology, Sambalpur, Utkal                                                                                   |
| Punjab                                 | 2                         | Guru Nanak Dev, Punjabi                                                                                                                               |
| Rajasthan                              | 5                         | Jai Narain Vyas, ML Sukhadia, Rajas<br>than, Banasthali, Rajasthan Vidyapeeth                                                                         |
| Tamilnadu                              | 8                         | Annamalai, Bharathiar, Bharatidasan,<br>Madras, Madurai Kamraj, Manonmaniam<br>Sundaranar, Mother Terresa, Gandhigram<br>Rural Institute              |
| Uttar Pradesh                          | 8                         | Aligarh, BHU, Bundelkhand, Agra,<br>Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Kashi Vidyapeeth,<br>and Kanpurvi                                                             |
| Uttaranchal                            | 2                         | H.N. Bahuguna Garhwal, Kumaun                                                                                                                         |
| West Bengal                            | 4                         | Burdwan, Kolkata, Kalyani, North<br>Bengal,vii Jadavpurviii                                                                                           |
| Total                                  | 89                        |                                                                                                                                                       |

Table 1.2 (*Continued*)

 i. This name was not included in the UGC list. Punjab University began teaching sociology in 1961.

ii. Not included in the UGC list.

iii. Not included in UGC list.

 iv. University of Pune and Tilak University are not included in UGC list; it may be noted that Pune University has one of the oldest departments.

v. The last two universities, according to Professor Bhowmik, do not teach sociology.

 vi. Last three not included in the UGC list. University of Lucknow had pioneered teaching in sociology.

vii. Not included in the UGC List.

viii. UGC list put Jadavpur in the State of Maharashtra!

The figures for those who received Ph.D.s in sociology between 1988 – 2003 are given in Table 1.3. This suggests that, in these eight years, a total of 2,818 Ph.D.s were produced in sociology, anthropology, and social work giving an average of 176 Ph.D.s per year.

| Year  | Sociology | Social<br>Anthropology | Social<br>Work | Total |
|-------|-----------|------------------------|----------------|-------|
| 1988  | 163       | 33                     | 26             | 222   |
| 1989  | 152       | 22                     | 31             | 205   |
| 1990  | 153       | 26                     | 19             | 198   |
| 1991  | 100       | 100                    | 34             | 234   |
| 1992  | 137       | 119                    | 36             | 292   |
| 1993  | 140       | 132                    | 55             | 327   |
| 1994  | 180       | 70                     | 80             | 330   |
| 1995  | 91        | 18                     | 12             | 121   |
| 1996  | 80        | 12                     | 9              | 101   |
| 1997  | 86        | 29                     | 4              | 119   |
| 1998  | 73        | 24                     | 6              | 103   |
| 1999  | 43        | 16                     | 2              | 61    |
| 2000  | 44        | 17                     | 4              | 65    |
| 2001  | 98        | 14                     | 20             | 132   |
| 2002  | 96        | 16                     | 18             | 130   |
| 2003  | 145       | 21                     | 12             | 178   |
| Total | 1781      | 669                    | 368            | 2818  |

**Table 1.3** Ph.d.s in Sociology/anthropology/Social Work 1988–2003

*Source:* compiled from various sources by the *ICSSR* Social Science documentation centre.

## *Indian Sociological Conferences Held Between 1989 and 2003*

During this period, the Indian Sociological Society organized as many as 13 All India Sociological Conferences. The themes chosen for these conferences and their venues are given in Table 1.4:

| Conference | Year                 | Venue                                                                          | Theme                                                                                                |
|------------|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| XVIII      | 19–21 May, 1987      | North Eastern<br>Hill University                                               | Sociology and<br>Social Transfor mation<br>in India                                                  |
| XIX        | 3–5 March, 1989      | Haryana Agri-<br>cultutral<br>University, Hissar                               | Rural Development                                                                                    |
| XX         | 29–31 December, 1993 | St. Alosious<br>College,<br>Mangalore                                          | Identity, Equality,<br>and Social<br>Transformation                                                  |
| XXI        | 19–21 December, 1994 | Jawaharlal Nehru<br>University,<br>New Delhi                                   | Cultural Dimensions<br>of Social Change                                                              |
| XXII       | 16–18 December, 1995 | Barkatullah<br>University,<br>Bhopal                                           | Challenge of Change<br>and the Indian<br>Sociology                                                   |
| XXIII      | 23–25 November, 1996 | Shivaji<br>University,<br>Kolhapur                                             | Ecology, Society<br>and Culture                                                                      |
| XXIV       | 22–24 December, 1997 | Osmania<br>University,<br>Hyderabad                                            | Fifty Years of<br>India's Indepenence<br>and Beyond                                                  |
| XXV        | 17–19 December, 1998 | Aligarh Muslim<br>University,<br>Aligarh                                       | Nation, Nationality<br>and National<br>Identity: South Asia                                          |
| XXVI       | 29–31 December, 2000 | University of<br>Kerala, Thiru-<br>vananthapuram                               | Civil Society in India                                                                               |
| XXVII      | 26–28 December, 2001 | Guru Nanak Dev<br>University,<br>Amritsar                                      | Half a Century of<br>Sociology in India<br>(1951–2001):<br>Challenges, Responses<br>and Expectations |
| XXVIII     | 18–20 December, 2002 | Indian Institute of Globalization and<br>Technology,<br>Kanpur                 | the Indian Society                                                                                   |
| XXIX       | 21–23 December, 2003 | M.P. University of Social Policy,<br>Agriculture and<br>Technology,<br>Udaipur | Governance and<br>Mobilization                                                                       |

**Table 1.4** all India Sociological conferences 1989–2003

#### 12 yogesh atal

The themes chosen for the various sessions of the conferences are indicative of the current interests of Indian sociologists. It may also be noted that in the 1990s, the Indian Sociological Society adopted the model of the International Sociological Association and set up various research committees. Today, they number 21. A glance through their nomenclature (see Appendix 2) will give an idea of the current research interests. However, it may be noted that not all RCs are that active.

## *Research Projects in Sociology Sanctioned by the ICSSR*

The Indian Council of Social Science Research sanctioned during the period 1988–2003 a total of 201 research projects, of which 53, representing 26.4 per cent of the total, were in the field of sociology (see Table 1.5).

| Years     | Total Projects<br>Sanctioned | Projects in<br>Sociology | Percentage of<br>the Total |
|-----------|------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|
| 1998–99   | 54                           | 13                       | 24.1                       |
| 1999–2000 | 37                           | 09                       | 24.3                       |
| 2000–01   | 36                           | 12                       | 33.3                       |
| 2001–02   | 20                           | 02                       | 10.0                       |
| 2002–03   | 54                           | 17                       | 31.5                       |
| Total     | 201                          | 53                       | 26.4                       |

**Table 1.5** research Projects in Sociology Sanctioned by the IcSSr

#### *Avenues for Publication*

Today there are several avenues open for publication of sociological research. Apart from the *Sociological Bulletin—*the official organ of the Indian Sociological Society—and the *Eastern Anthropologist*—the old journal in the field of anthropology published from Lucknow by Ethnographic and Folk Culture Society established by D.N. Majumdar in 1945—articles of sociological relevance are published in various other journals, including *Economic and Political Weekly.* There are today several journals in the field of sociology and anthropology.12 The Indian Council of Social Science Research started the *Journal of Abstracts and Book Reviews* for sociology and anthropology (as it did for other social science disciplines) in the 1970s, which reproduces abstracts of articles and book reviews published in a select number of sociology-anthropology journals published in India. This journal is a handy guide for judging the trends of research. The authors of this survey have used back volumes of this journal. However, it must be said that the journal could not maintain its regularity for a variety of reasons, and therefore the authors tapped other sources to supplement the information.

# **Trends in Various Sub-areas: A Summary View**

We may now turn to the survey chapters and examine the key findings in each of them. Before we do that, it should be said that the authors were requested to follow a common format for the presentation of their findings so that uniformity is maintained and comparisons are made possible. The ICSSR provided the following 'Format for Individual Chapters':

- 1. *Introduction*
- 2. *Growth of the* sub-speciality *in the country* in the context of international social science, linking it with the findings of the previous surveys
- 3. *Teaching of the sub-speciality* in Indian universities (if it is interdisciplinary, mention should be made of the interfaces with other disciplines)
- 4. *Research trends:* chronological with classification in terms of areas, population groups (target audiences), and topics
- 5. *Major landmarks* and highlights of the contributions and their perceived impact
- 6. *Research gaps* and other problems (for example, publication crises, non-utilization of research findings, etc.)
- 7. *Agenda for Future*
- 8. *Bibliography* by sub-speciality, by authors in a chronological order.

Every effort was made to ensure that this format was followed, although some deviations were unavoidable. It is encouraging to note that most of the participating authors yielded to the advice to tabulate the bibliographical data. However, in interpreting the quantitative information, one will have to observe some caution.

The following limitations may be kept in mind:

- 1. Not all scholars have followed the same time frame. Some have covered studies which were carried out prior to 1988; similarly, some others have covered studies beyond the year 2002.
- 2. Not all the articles covered may qualify as research papers. Some of them may have been written for the newspapers, and may even be opinionated. This is more so in the case of articles related to criminology, human rights, etc.
- 3. The articles produced in anthologies may have been written prior to the period under survey.

#### 14 yogesh atal

- 4. The books may not all be research monographs.
- 5. All unpublished Ph.D. theses may not have been covered in the survey. The same goes for the papers presented at seminars and conferences; such grey literature constitutes an important corpus but remains unreported. I have listed the themes of the All India Conferences of ISS, but a listing of the seminars and symposia held during the period under review could provide more information about the research trends in the profession.

| Years   | Pol<br>Soc | ban | Ur- Indus- Dias- Tri-<br>trial | pora | bal | Cri-<br>mino- rar-<br>logy |     | Ag- Deve- Wo- Demo- Total<br>lop-<br>ian mental | men | gra-<br>phic |       |
|---------|------------|-----|--------------------------------|------|-----|----------------------------|-----|-------------------------------------------------|-----|--------------|-------|
| 1988–90 | 32         | 17  | 6                              | 39   | NA  | NA                         | 43  | 247                                             | 35  | 6            | 425   |
| 1991–93 | 32         | 16  | 14                             | 80   | 44  | NA                         | 40  | 291                                             | 41  | 3            | 561   |
| 1994–96 | 14         | 14  | 26                             | 85   | 106 | 103                        | 42  | 253                                             | 51  | 13           | 707   |
| 1997–99 | 49         | 17  | 34                             | 68   | 89  | 132                        | 124 | 319                                             | 72  | 22           | 926   |
| 2000–02 | 37         | 15  | 25                             | 77   | 94  | 202                        | 101 | 340                                             | 69  | 12           | 972   |
| Total   | 164        | 79  | 105                            | 349  | 333 | 437                        |     | 350 1,450                                       | 268 | 56           | 3,596 |

**Table 1.6** Three-year Breakdown of Number of Studies in Various Subfields

A total of 3,596 studies in 10 of the 11 fields13 covered during this period have been analysed in the various chapters that follow. There is an incremental pattern in nine areas which shows that from 425 studies in the period 1988–90, the number has gone up to 972 in 2000–02. The largest number of studies is reported in the area of development research; however, it must be stressed that this is an area where interdisciplinary perspective has prevailed; Thus, contributions are made by scholars from a variety of disciplines. And not all of such writings can strictly be called research studies.14 Nevertheless such a large volume of publications indicates that there exists a substantial readership in the development field consisting not only of practising sociologists but also of administrators and planners. In the field of criminology also as many as 437 studies have been listed. But here again, not all of them are strictly research studies—articles by police officials, judges, committed scholars—constitute the bulk. Of course, Ph.D. studies are also listed in the field of criminology but are largely unpublished. Since we do not have comparable figures for Ph.D. theses, criminological studies might show a somewhat inflated number. In other areas, the largest number of studies relates to rural and agrarian studies (350) and the Indian diaspora (349), followed by tribal communities (333) and women's studies (268)15. There are a relatively smaller number of studies in the arena of political sociology (164). If one were to go by the numbers, then one would find that there are few studies in the areas of demography (i.e. sociological studies of population) and sociology of law.

It is important to mention here one major development which is not easily covered by theme-specific studies. This relates to the publication of festschrifts in honour of the leading sociologists of the country. This trend is indicative of the maturity of the discipline. During the period 1992–2007, the profession has felicitated nine sociologists. A five-volume publication under the title *Social Structure and Change* (Shah et al. 1996) has appeared in honour of M.N. Srinivas. Recently (2007), another book honouring M.N. Srinivas and his works was published by the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal. Three books have been published in different years (Bhattacharya and Ghosh 1995; Mukherji 2002; and Kar 2005) in honour of Ramkrishna Mukherjee. Other scholars honoured during this period are S.C. Dube (Atal 1992), Sachchidanand (Upadhyaya and Sharma 1995), Rajeshwar Prasad (Pachauri 1998), Brij Raj Chauhan (Chauhan and Chauhan 1998; Atal and Mishra 2004), T.N. Madan (Das et al. 1999), Andre Béteille (Guha and Parry 1999), and Yogesh Atal (Gupta 2004).

Let us now turn to individual areas.

#### *Tribal Studies*

To avoid an overlap, a separate paper on tribal studies, rather than social anthropology, was commissioned, as studies by social anthropologists in areas other than tribal have been covered in this volume in other chapters.

The review by Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant K. Chowdury reveals that during the period covered no full-length monograph on any tribal group had appeared. Lack of good ethnographies which could match the previously done studies in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries is an indication of the decline of interest in the conventional field of anthropology. Of course, during this period some encyclopaedias on tribal societies did appear. Also, the People of India Project of the Anthropological Survey of India covered the tribal communities. In addition, some good pictorial, in fact, expensive coffee-table, books done by professional photographers, in league with anthropologists who provided the script have also come into the market. But most research is reported as articles and communications in professional journals such as *Man in India* and *Eastern Anthropologist.* Even here, the number of articles on the social anthropological aspects of tribals is falling. The survey revealed that only 67.11 per cent of the articles published in *Man in India* during 1993–2002 and 18.9 per cent articles published in *Eastern Anthropologist* during the period 1988–2001 related to the tribals.

While interest amongst the social anthropologists in the study of tribal societies is generally declining, people from other social sciences have begun taking an interest in them. Thus, there are historians, philosophers, linguists, economists, legal scientists, and political scientists who have begun investigating the tribal terrain, using the approach and methodology from different that of conventional anthropology. It is also important to note that the spread of education amongst the tribals has created a group of indigenous scholars who have begun studying their own societies and cultures.16 Such scholars have not only brought in the 'insider view', but also made the very definition of the discipline of anthropology—as 'the study of other cultures'—questionable. Their participation has given strength to the demand made by some leading Indian anthropologists to erase the distinction between sociology and social anthropology. If one were to strictly adhere to the definition of anthropology as the study of other cultures then the study by the natives would not qualify as anthropology. Is it not a paradox that Hutton's or Adrian Mayer's study of caste is regarded as anthropology, but the study of caste by Ghurye or Srinivas is considered sociology? As an important growth point, what we must take note of is the fact that both insiders and outsiders, and scholars from various disciplines, and not only the anthropologists, are now getting involved in tribal studies. There is a definite change in orientation towards tribal studies, which would hopefully enrich our understanding of the changing tribal India.

The changing demographic profile of researchers doing tribal studies is also reflected in the themes covered. There are relatively few studies on tribal family and kinship, social structure, and religion. There is growing interest in tribal demography, and tribal economy in the context of national economy, tribal ecology, tribal languages, tribal women, and politics in tribal areas.

The survey also suggests that the word 'tribe' is used in a multiplicity of meanings. The changing socio-demographic profile of the tribes defies the conventional definition of the tribe as a preliterate, forest-dwelling, primitive, animistic people living in complete isolation from the civilized world. The prefix 'scheduled', the assertion by several groups earlier classified as subgroups for an independent status, claims by some castes to be reclassified as tribes, the phenomenon of conversion, and the like are several factors that make the universally acceptable definition of the word tribe rather difficult. The authors of the survey have dwelt at length on this definitional crisis. Present-day tribals are not social fossils and their gradual involvement in the affairs of the national polity needs a fresh perspective to analyse the integrative processes that are at work in Indian society. The authors are making a case for a revisit of the various tribal societies to prepare monographs in a comparative framework to see how the present-day tribal community differs from the description contained in the old ethnography. Also, there is need to carry out studies of those tribal communities that have never been studied, such as the Parangipera of Orissa, the Kolgha of Gujarat, the Karaga of Karnataka and Kerala, the Maria Gond of Maharashtra (only the Maria Gond of central India had been studied earlier), and the Buxas of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Other topics which deserve to be given priority are the phenomenon of tribal migration as well as the little-studied aspects of tribal life such as their music, dance, art and aesthetics, and folklore.

#### *Rural and Agrarian Studies*

Technically rural and agrarian studies belong to the field of rural sociology, as it has developed in India. However, the authors of the chapter do not approve of the latter appellation as it does not correspond with what falls under rural sociology in the West, particularly in the United States. There are those, however, who prefer of the use of rural sociology as an umbrella term to cover all studies done in the rural context, including agrarian studies.

In India, the *village* became the meeting ground for sociologists and social anthropologists. On the one hand, social anthropologists found the village amenable to ethnographic research and on the other hand, unable to carry out survey research in the village setting, sociologists also employed techniques of social anthropology to investigate the village communities. In the 1950s and 1960s Indian sociology witnessed a major trend of village studies involving not only Indian scholars but also foreign social scientists, particularly from the United Kingdom and the United States of America. The introduction of the Community Development Programme in 1952 gave a further impetus to village research. Both the Planning Commission and the Ford Foundation encouraged such studies. Initially, economists began researching the agricultural aspect of the Indian economy, but later sociologists, anthropologists, psychologists, and political scientists (including specialists in public administration) joined this enterprise and produced important monographs based on micro-level studies. Economists had earlier done research on the problem of rural cooperatives and rural indebtedness, but with the introduction of community development their interest shifted to planning.

This trend came to an abrupt halt sometime in the late 1970s. Researchers moved to the study of urban areas and the study of the processes of modernization, as a new dimension of social change. Focus on the peasant society returned but with a paradigm shift which adopted the framework of political economy. Rather than talking of the village social structure—in which the institution of caste had the central focus—scholars took the lead from Andre Béteille and began studying the 'Agrarian social structure'. Studies of peasant movements became the order of the day and the concept of class gradually replaced the framework of caste.

With a strong tradition of research on rural India, teaching of rural sociology became institutionalized not only in the departments of sociology and social anthropology, but also in the agricultural universities. It also received a spurt from the National Institute of Rural Development. Strangely, the focus on subaltern studies brought back the older concern of culture in agrarian studies. These studies also began analysing the role of the market forces, consumer culture, and the processes associated with globalization.

#### 18 yogesh atal

This review by Surinder S. Jodhka and Paul D' Souza of research in the period 1988–2002 suggests that a large number of single-state studies were carried out in the south, constituting 22.6 per cent of the total of 350 studies reported for this period. Another 22.3 per cent are inter-regional studies. Most of these studies are carried out in a universe larger than a single village—unlike the trend of the 1950s—and 64 per cent of them are done in single states. A solid 46 per cent studies are based either on fieldwork or on secondary empirical data. The analysis revealed that only 1.4 per cent studies have been carried out in the central regions of India. Even in the western and the north-western regions few studies have been undertaken (around 9 per cent in each region).

The themes studied are agrarian relations (33.7 per cent), rural development (22.6 per cent), rural politics (17.4 per cent), gender-related issues (10 per cent), village life (6.9 per cent), caste and related issues (5.7 per cent), and others (3.7 per cent). The focus of these studies has been on land reforms, the green revolution and its after effects, agrarian revolutions, agrarian mobilization, rural political process, and crises in agriculture.

A closer look at these topics would suggest that while all these contribute to our understanding of Village India, they also add to the repertoire of political sociology, economic sociology, and sociology of environment. Such an overlap is unavoidable when new areas are carved out.

#### *Political Sociology*

Empirical studies relative to villages and tribes, carried out in the mid 1950s did cover the political aspects of community life but 'the political' was not the key focus in Indian sociology and anthropology. This was the time when, from the study of political life, scholars moved to the arena of political sociology. This became a meeting ground for sociology and political science, which was earlier called the study of the government or politics, but its focus was non-empirical, study of constitutions and theories and ideologies. In the 1960s some scholars from both the disciplines chose to study the political process, particularly the elections, using the technique of survey research that was regarded as the specialization of the sociologists. One of the studies of the 1967 elections reviewed in a British journal was described as 'psephological'.

Since there were few studies of elections when the first ICSSR survey was carried out, the chapter on political sociology focused on other types of studies. Later reviews focused on power structure, issue of governance, and ethnic conflicts. In the present survey, the author, Surendra K. Gupta found that studies related to political sociology fall under four categories: (i) national and local politics, (ii) election studies, (iii) democracy, civil society and nation-building, and (iv) communalism. Studies in the area of political sociology constitute nearly 5 per cent of the total. As is evident from the topics, much of the work in the area of political sociology, done during the period under survey, was based on secondary data—government reports, content analysis, and media coverage. Intensive research in a selected community or a district which was the hallmark of the studies of the 1960s is becoming less popular. The new discipline of psephology—the term currently used for election studies of the Gallup Poll variety—has a different focus. It has combined the earlier concern of opinion polls with the newfound interest in poll predictions. Following the methodology of market research, psephologists have developed techniques such as exit polls to predict election outcomes. But such studies are reported only in the newspapers as predictions, and not as research papers. Political sociologists, on the other hand, have done analyses of elections at the state level, or at the national level, based on techniques other than survey research. Field research in this area, as in many others, is becoming less popular.

During this period, scholars attempted to study farmers' movements (also covered by agrarian studies), caste violence and Dalit politics, agitations (like the Assam agitation), linguistic nativism, role of cinema in shaping politicians, political parties (the BJP and Shiv Sena have been studied the most) and communalism. Amongst communal riots, most studies have focused on the Ayodhya episode and the demolition of the mosque and its aftermath.

This chapter recommends the study of mass media, regional parties, coalition politics, and the criminalization of politics as areas which deserve high priority.

#### *Urban Sociology*

There has been a long tradition of urban studies in Indian sociology. In fact, sociology at the Mumbai University—one of the first universities to start teaching it way back in 1919—owes its beginning to the urban studies programme initiated by the geography professor from New Zealand, Patrick Geddes. Concern with rural areas figured in the early years of sociology at Lucknow. But generally, sociology was synonymous with urban studies or Indology.

Despite such a long tradition, it is rather strange to note that during the period covered only 79 studies were reported in the survey, an average of five to six studies per annum. Such an apparent decline in interest may be due to the fact that new specializations have developed and researches carried out in those fields, but in the urban areas they are listed under those specialisms. Thus, studies in the field of industrial sociology and criminology, for example, are mostly carried out in the urban milieu, but are not covered as part of this chapter.

The studies covered in this chapter by Sharit K. Bhownik relate to city and urban communities, urban policies, urbanization and the growth of mega cities, urban poverty, street vendors, beggars, slums, urban violence, and urban infrastructure management.

In the period covered, the cities that have been studied include Bhubaneshwar, Chandigarh, Faridabad, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, and Rourkela. The study of urban communities has focused on migrant groups in urban metropolises, such as Telugu-speaking people in Pune, Tamils and Malayalis in Mumbai, the Chinese population in Kolkata; and castes and communities on the fringe. These have been studied in the general framework of integration. It is to be hoped the data generated by these studies will be analysed in the framework of the *sandwich culture*  that I proposed a few years ago. I strongly believe that in a multicultural society such as India the phenomenon of sandwich cultures offers a fruitful paradigm (Atal 2001, 2004).

The efforts for upward movement of the communities on the margins have also been studied in the fast-growing city of Hyderabad where such mobility is facilitated not by Sanskritization processes but by the spread of a globalizing culture.

Two major books have appeared on the urbanization of the north-east. Urbanization has also been studied in the states of Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. In the North-east urbanization has important implications. This area has generally been treated as a tribal zone and has always been studied from this aspect. Traditionally, Indian sociologists divided Indian society into urban, rural, and tribal, suggesting a sort of continuum. These studies reveal that the North-east has both urban and rural segments, and it certainly has some pockets of isolated tribal groups. Such a demographic composition, including the rising rate of literacy in that region, necessitates a different perspective for that region so as to devise suitable development policies.

Research on urban poverty has also changed. Earlier, such studies were almost synonymous with the study of slums. Poverty is now studied with a new focus on the poor such as beggars, drought-affected migrants, political refugees, pavement dwellers, and small street vendors. Studies of slums have also unravelled the existence of slums within slums, and the role of gangsters and mafia in these areas. Those who inhabit the slums are not a homogeneous group of the poor. They also include land grabbers and illegal occupants engaged in the theft of electricity and other public property.

Urban violence is also now being seen as part of the political process. Violence against different sections of society is being investigated, suggesting that a variety of factors cause violence and therefore a more variegated strategy is called for to handle the menace of rising violence, including communal violence and violence against women.

Researchers have begun paying attention to problems related to infrastructure—transport, roads, housing, communication and sanitation.

The growth of mega cities, million-plus cities, the processes of conurbation and suburbation, the village–city relationship, the role of Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs), and the spread of a consumer culture—malls and multiplexes, BPOs, the house-building industry, migrant workers, and returnee NRIs in the corporate sector—are some of the areas that will assume significance in the years to come.

#### *Industrial Sociology*

A total of 105 studies have been reported in the area of industrial sociology, constituting both research papers and books. The survey makes it clear that in this field contributions have been made not only by sociologists but also by scholars from other disciplines, as well as by authors belonging to other countries. In particular, Dutch scholars, under the Indo-Dutch Programme of the ICSSR, have done a good deal of work. Most of this work has been carried out in the state of Gujarat. Since the author, Sharit K. Bhowmik, has not analysed the bibliographic data in chronological terms, the review suggests that during this period the interest has certainly broadened to include work on the informal sector, the functioning of MNCs (multinational companies), the changing role of unions, gender disparity in the workforce, and India's participation in the new phenomenon of outsourcing. Significant work has been carried out in the area of management strategy and related problems. For the first time this was studied in a large-scale survey of 51 organizations. While the study revealed that the employees of these organisations are concerned about their job security, safety, and monetary benefits, the clash of interests in scientific management and human relations continues to exist. Most of the industries still believe in knee-jerk responses to crises rather than promoting strategic management. There have also been studies of entrepreneurship, particularly in small-scale industries. Studies of the prominent business houses have also been undertaken. An important shift has been in regard to the study of the impact of new technology in industry which necessitated labour cuts and flexible specialization. A new theme researched by some scholars relates to the scheme of voluntary retirement (VRS). In this area, there is good scope for further research since, it is not only factory workers who are taking advantage of VRS, but people from other salaried classes as well. Some of such voluntaries retirees are said to have joined industry or corporate houses, or started their own business.

#### *Women's Studies*

The field of women's studies is rather new. It began sometime in the mid-1970s which is why it was not covered in the first round of surveys of the research commissioned by the ICSSR.17

Following the decision by the international community to focus on women, the Government of India set up in 1971 a national committee on the status of women to prepare the national paper for presentation at the international conference on the status of women under the auspices of the United Nations. It was the work of this committee that set in motion several studies on and reviews of the existing literature relative to women. The committee approached the ICSSR for support—both financial and academic—to prepare the report. Upon the committee's advice, the ICSSR commissioned a series of studies. It also helped the committee in preparing schedules and questionnaires to collect information on the status of women from diverse sources.18 Finally, it hired the Secretary of the committee, Dr Vina Majumdar, a political scientist, to assist the council in developing a programme of research on women.

The Indian effort to portray the status of women was thus a part of the worldwide effort. The designation of the International Year of Women (IYW) and later the devotion of an entire decade to women by the international community occasioned a spate of studies and researches. The decade of the 1970s saw the rise of the feminist movement, which influenced not only politics but also the academia.

While working to promote studies relative to women it became clear that there was a dearth not only of scholars specializing in this area, but also of data on different aspects of women's participation in social, political, and economic life. The researchers had to select relevant material from various studies which focused on other themes or undertake fresh empirical studies. Ethnographies did discuss the roles of women in different spheres of community life but did not specifically focus on them. They were criticized for the absence of the so-called feminist perspective.

The women's studies movement that began in the 1970s has now gained a momentum of its own and today one can find several references. There are estimated to be as many as 67 centres of women's studies in various Indian universities. In the 1990s, the Indian Sociological Society also set up a research committee on women. A consequence of this has been a rise in the number of women social scientists and women writers. There are a few men who have specialized in women's studies. The important point to note is that the field of women's studies remains an interdisciplinary one. Of course, the perspective of sociology and social anthropology has also enriched the emerging paradigm for gender-based analyses.

During the period 1988–2003 as many as 179 books and reports were published on women. The author of this chapter, Abha Chuhan, has listed 134 articles for the period. Analysis also reveals that interest in such studies is constantly rising. There is an increasing volume of such studies in the last five years of the survey period. More than 23 themes covered in such studies have been regrouped by the author in four broad categories: family and kinship; ecology, environment, and globalization; gender, caste, and communities; and conflict, war, peace, and violence. In all these areas, authors of these studies have injected a feminist viewpoint in the sense that the studies have been conducted from the vantage point of a woman. Of course, in doing so, criticism of patriliny and male dominance has figured. The key areas investigated are women's experiences of everyday lives, socialization of the girl child including education of girls, the menace of dowry and the problem of women's access to property, women's confinement to the domestic sphere, male and female sexuality and women in situations of crisses.

The author has hinted about the debates surrounding conceptual and methodological issues. Scholars on women's studies are attempting to define sexuality, violence against women, nature of patriliny, male power and the phenomenon of gender-based inequality.

The themes suggested for priority research are domestic violence, dowry, customary and personal laws as they affect women, emotional tenor of family relations and women in situations of crises.

#### *Demographic Studies*

Demography is a vast field and is covered by various social science disciplines such as economics, geography, statistics, and sociology and social anthropology. It is at times difficult to classify such studies in strict disciplinary terms. The author of the chapter on demography, Leela Visaria, is a trained sociologist, but has worked all her life in the field of demography. Her survey covers the entire period from 1971 onwards. Departing from the guidelines provided for this survey, she has traced the major trends in demographic research, highlighting the main findings and emerging hypotheses.

While Visaria has covered the long period from 1971, she has referred to 54 articles, and 22 books and reports. For the period 1988–2003 her list includes only 56 publications.19 Some of these articles have appeared in edited books, mostly published abroad. Also among the books are those written by foreigners or are written as reports or discussion papers for international agencies. Those cited for findings cover the period from 1956 through 2004. However, the survey has considered 43 articles and 18 books published between 1988 and 2004. Leela Visaria's considered opinion is that most of the significant work done during this long period was on fertility—particularly those factors that affect fertility levels. Relatively less attention was paid to mortality and other health-related matters. It is also to be underlined that no work on migration has been included. Since the sociological aspects of migration, as reflected in the study of the Indian diaspora, are covered in another survey chapter, the area not covered relates to the demographic analysis of migration.

What is important to note is the point that during this period demographers focused their attention on highlighting regional variations—both inter-state and intra-state—in fertility decline, and tried to identify the factors that were responsible. Contrary to the general impression, the studies showed that such a decline has occurred not only among the educated, but among also the illiterate populations; and not only in economically developed areas but also in poor areas. Thus, no single factor can be isolated as 'the' factor responsible for the decline in fertility. Late marriage, an aggressive family planning programme, prolonged breastfeeding, induced abortions, women's autonomy, husband's outlook, etc., have played their role in different settings. Similarly, researchers have found a weak preference for sons in very low and very high fertility areas. Less than 10 per cent variation is attributable to structural economic factors. It emerges that it is politics, and not economics, that influences fertility patterns.

#### 24 yogesh atal

A similar effort has been made by social demographers to investigate the causes/factors for the decline in the mortality rate, as also the causes of death. Researchers have gone beyond macro analyses and investigated regional variations—variations not only between states but also between different parts of a given state. They have emphasized the need for the disaggregation of data at district levels to draw accurate profiles of both fertility and mortality, and identify the causes for differentials and for incidence. The studies reveal that there is a gradual but steady shift from infectious to non-communicative diseases as the cause of death. There is an increase in the incidence of heart attacks, cancer, asthma, and paralysis due to changing lifestyles. This provides a new avenue for health research. Research on ageing is also becoming important with the rising life expectancy.

#### *Studies on the Indian Diaspora*

While studies of the people of India settled abroad have a long history, research on them gained momentum only in the 1980s. For the first time, in the third round of ICSSR surveys of research in sociology, studies of this genre were included under the title 'Indian Communities Abroad'. This was published as an independent booklet by the ICSSR in 1993; it was authored by Ravindra K. Jain who had done pioneering work on the Indians working on rubber plantations in Malaysia (Jain 1993).

The present study covers the 17-year period from 1989 (the year in which Jain's survey was concluded) to 2006. It emerges that a good deal of work was carried out in this area during the period under survey. The author of the chapter, N. Jayaram, also edited and published several of articles on the Indian diaspora, which have appeared in the *Sociological Bulletin* over the last 50 years. In 2001, the model curriculum designed by the Grants Commission included a course on the Indian diaspora to be offered as an elective paper. The subject has thus gained entry into the profession.

Like any newly emerging field, the study of the Indian diaspora is also transdisciplinary in character. Besides historical studies of the Indian migration to distant lands, Indian diaspora has been studied following the sociocultural perspective or the perspective of political economy. In addition to Indian sociologists, scholars from other countries and those belonging to the diaspora communities have also contributed to the literature. These studies have been carried out in as many as 23 countries in different parts of the world—the Caribbean, North America, Europe, Africa, South-East Asia, and the Pacific. Besides offering descriptive accounts, some scholars have also proposed concepts and paradigms for the investigation of this phenomenon. Researchers have employed the concepts of sandwich culture, cultural hybridity, identity, host society, and integration in a multicultural milieu.

The studies have focused on the demography of population movements, causes and conditions of migration, process of emigration, socio-economic background of emigrants, responses of the host society, social organization of the diasporic communities, and the nature of the interactions between the diasporas and the parent society including the impact of emigration on those left behind.

These studies have added a new dimension to the study of migration, and invoked the anthropological concept of culture in the context of pluri-cultural societies. There is considerable scope for a variety of studies in this domain. The phenomenon of reverse migration, studies of the diasporic communities from abroad settled in India, policy towards people of Indian origin, distant nationalism, etc., are some of the themes that deserve priority attention.

#### *Development Studies*

It is not easy to isolate this field as studies on development have been carried out by social scientists from different disciplines, but mostly by economists. Development studies arrived in the field of sociology and social anthropology in the late 1950s when the country introduced the Programme of Community Development. Encouraged by the Planning Commission and the National Institute for Rural Development—earlier called the Central Institute for Training and Research in Community Development (located in Mussoorie)—sociologists from the Indian universities got involved in studies of community development projects.20 Such studies were an extension of the village studies movement that was initiated in the 1950s. This subject was taught as part of rural sociology or social change. Concepts of planned cultural change, innovation, tradition and modernity, and modernization began informing the theory of social change.

While some scholars are still studying the development process at the micro level, much of current development writing is in the form of theoretical or reflective thinking. Criticism of the prevailing development paradigm, review of past development efforts, and propagation of newer strategies by the government occupy a larger space in the literature on development which is voluminous compared to other subject areas. Although the author of this chapter, R.R. Prasad, exercised constraint and did not includes publications in the bibliography, the list, still contains as many as 1450 references, of which books alone number 220. This subject has continued to engage researchers; an average of 95 entries per year is reported for the period 1988–2002. The volume of publications is larger in the later years. Of course, it must be stated that not all were written by sociologists, and not all can strictly be called research studies.

There are around 24 areas related to development, in which studies have been carried out. The most studied aspects are the situation of the weaker sections, poverty, the problem of education, gender studies, decentralization, and Panchayati Raj. Naturally, these are the areas that overlap with other thematic areas and therefore cannot be isolated.

The other areas that interest the researchers are health and malnutrition, poverty and rural development, education and development, child labour, rural drinking water, role of the NGOs, and the process of globalization. The interest has shifted from analysis of the past and the present to the designing of the future. One gets the impression that in this area there is little by way of empirical research.21 And yet, the topic is popular and is taught in courses in sociology, economics, political science, and public administration. It is also an important subject in the training of the administrators and planners and policy makers. Writings on globalization are also more in the nature of perceived dangers rather than investigations of the actually occurring consequences of this newly initiated process.

### *Criminological Studies*

Though criminology is increasingly gaining a distinct identity with the opening of separate departments of criminology or joint departments of criminology and forensic sciences, it still remains an interdisciplinary discipline in the sense that social scientists belonging to sociology, social work, and psychology conduct research on criminology-related themes, and papers on criminology are offered to students specializing in these disciplines. During the period covered under this survey, 1995–2002, as many as 437 studies were reported. However, a large number of these—60 per cent—are classified as non-empirical, which means they are not research based. This is also proven by the fact that the number of books is quite small compared to the number of articles. Many Ph.D. dissertations also remain unpublished. It can be safely concluded that while there is an increase in the number of writings on the theme of crime and criminology, they do not contribute to the corpus of theory or methodology. Written by officials of the judicial administration, police force, and by concerned public men and journalists, these writings represent opinions rather than research findings. The author of the survey chapter, G. S. Bajpai, has not, however, separately analysed the empirical and the non-empirical studies; therefore, it is hard to say which areas have been the focus of serious scientific research. Nevertheless, the tables in the chapter suggest that the bulk of the studies relate to the subfield called 'victimology', and the 'crime categories'. The authors of these studies have focused on problems of drug addiction, violence—including terrorist violence, organized crime, and women criminals. Victimization of women and human rights (perhaps violation of these rights) have attracted a good deal of attention.

The author has argued a case for the promotion of a research agenda in the field of criminology, and suggested topics for priority attention. There is a need to inject a good sociological perspective into our concern for human rights. It is not enough to just examine whether people are aware or not about human rights or the number of cases of violation of human rights—a task that NGOs like Amnesty International perform professionally. How social science, sociology particularly, should handle the theme of human rights is a question which needs to be resolved. Riots, communal violence, and terrorism offer good avenues for solid sociological research; but to do this the first need is to develop a good methodology so that the studies go beyond mere chronological descriptions.

#### *Sociology of Law*

Sociology of law is a newly developing speciality. While it was covered in the first and second rounds of the ICSSR surveys, it was left out in the third. Even the first two rounds suggested the potential of this subject and had very little to analyse by way of research contribution. In the early 1970s the ICSSR set up a committee of experts on 'law and social change'22 to promote research in this area. This committee included law professionals and some sociologists, and it deliberated on the themes that could be taken up for research under the auspices of the Indian Council of Social Science Research.

Not much by way of research has been done in this area as the present survey chapter by Joginder S. Gandhi, covering the entire period of the third and fourth surveys indicates. The hopeful sign is that a number of law schools have been opened in the country, and the regular universities have also introduced a full-fledged Bachelor's programme in law. This has helped sociology gain an entry in the field of law. Thus, newly trained lawyers will have some sociological orientation. But to teach law graduates conventional courses in sociology would perhaps defeat the very purpose of their inclusion. Sociologists will have to demonstrate the utility of their discipline by providing research findings in the field of law. Anthropologists studying tribal cultures have reported on customary law and related themes. That material provides a good base to start with. But more researches are in order.

The author of this chapter has indicated some areas for future research. In addition to the study of lawyer–client relationships—in which some beginning has already been made—a good deal of work can be done relating to public interest litigations (PILs), right to information, and human rights.

## **Emerging Scenario**

There is a growing recognition in India of the social sciences, including sociology. The social science vocabulary has crossed the campus boundaries and is increasingly being used by media persons and the elite of the society. Social science methodology is employed to assess public opinion, analyse electoral behaviour, and even make predictions in the political arena. Already the science of psephology has attained respectable status. Increasingly, the more articulate amongst the social scientists, including sociologists, are using the print media for propagating their views. Despite these articles being opinionated they do display sociological underpinnings. Merton's concept of 'role model' and Srinivas' coinages of Sanskritization, 'dominant caste and vote bank' are used as part of informed parlance outside the academia. A good deal of sociology has entered into the management curricula; the technique of focussed interview developed by Merton and Paul Lazarsfeld (Merton et al. 1990) is widely used in market research. Sociologists are quite often approached by the media for their expert opinion. Some sociologists are regular contributors to newspaper columns, thus influencing audience opinion. The recent instance of the ill-famed Nithari exposure of cannibalistic behaviour and the callousness of the police earned the wrath of the people and the Bureau of Police Research decided to seek the cooperation of sociologists to participate in a research investigation. There are several other instances where social science expertise is utilized.

Sociology has thus arrived in India. How does it reflect in our teaching and in research?

#### *Teaching of Sociology*

At the beginning to this chapter, statistics were presented to suggest the growth of the sociology enterprise in India. One indicator was its inclusion in the teaching curricula, both as an independent subject leading to a degree—M.A., M.Phil., and Ph.D./D.Litt.—and also as part of the training kit of the professionals in the fields of medicine, agriculture, engineering, and even management. That it is also now included in the Higher Secondary syllabi is further proof of its growing significance and recognition.

While this is happening, one also notices a certain degree of dilution within the profession. Clearly there is a trend towards vernacularization. Both teachers and students prefer to use Hindi or any other vernacular language (Gujarati, Marathi, Tamil, Kannad, etc.) rather than English in all their work. This is a welcome trend but it also reminds us of our failure to gauge the waves of change and develop strategies to meet the rising demand. There is a dearth of good and respectable books in the vernacular; in their absence, shoddy stuff is being marketed. I had pointed to this malaise in my 1974 essay24 but the situation has refused to improve. The Ph.D. theses that are written in Hindi, for example, seem to compete with literature and they fail miserably both as good sociology and good literature. Mere linguistic competence cannot be a substitute for solid sociological substance. Most of the textbooks, be they in English or in a regional language, written by Indians demonstrate little originality. They are either plagiarized copies of foreign textbooks, or are written as notes for passing examinations. Those who have distinguished themselves in the profession have generally refrained from writing textbooks; those who have written such books and sold several copies are unknown entities in the profession. Ideally, textbooks should be written in such a fashion that a syllabus can be prepared on their bases. But textbooks are generally written according to prescribed syllabi. Since the syllabi do not change so easily because of the bureaucratic red tape in the universities, and also reluctance on the part of many in the teaching profession for fear of becoming outdated, textbooks reinforce continuity. Similarly, there continues to be a dearth of good translations of the originals from foreign languages; of course, there are some exceptions. Sociology has grown but it is not so readily reflected in our teaching.

 Let me elaborate this point by taking the example of NCERT textbooks at the 10+2 level. With all its claims to have replaced the old textbooks prepared by the government of the day at the Centre in the late 1990s, there was hardly any novelty in the replacements and they justly earned criticism from the press. In sociology, a fresher at the level of class 11 is introduced to some mighty pioneers of sociology, both international and national. And who are they? Karl Marx, Emile Durkheim, and Max Weber from abroad, and G. S. Ghurye, Radha Kamal Mukherjee, D. P. Mukerji, and Benoy Kumar Sarkar from India. Sarkar's inclusion in this category may be historically correct but what impact did he make on Indian sociology? His contribution was mainly in the form of challenging some of the interpretations of Indian sacred texts by outsider. He himself did not spend much time in India, and died quiet young. Demonstrating the tendency of what Merton called 'adumbrationism' in academic history, attributing everything to the past where it did not belong, this (NCERT) textbook revived yet another so-called 'pioneer' of Indian sociology—a Kutch-born freedom fighter named Shyamji Krishna Varma. The text book tells us that he met Auguste Comte during his European sojourn. For one thing, meeting eminent people and shaking hands with them does not by itself mean much. But what is important is whether a rendezvous with Comte really did occur. Comte (born in 1798) died in 1857, the year Shyamji Krishna Varma was born: how could they have met? It is true that Varma started a journal called *Indian Sociologist*<sup>25</sup> in 1905 but it was devoted to the freedom movement and social and religious reform, and not to sociology as an academic discipline. Some have called Varma a novelist; others speak of him as a Sanskrit scholar and a preacher of the Arya Samaj philosophy. But does that qualify him as a sociologist?

Certainly, he is of historical importance and a good subject matter for sociological research, but to assign him a pioneering role in sociology is unnecessary. One may ask what imprint this novelist and freedom fighter left on Indian sociology that a new initiate in the discipline must know about him. There is a tradition in the West of writing about pioneers in elementary textbooks, but need we copy it? Pedagogically, it is more important to train students in the perspective of the discipline rather than introducing them to ancestors whose writings have lost their relevance. The focus should be on ideas, concepts, and frameworks rather than on individuals.

The most distressing feature of our university teaching is the relative neglect of researches done within the country. Updating sociology means incorporating not only recent theoretical advances and methodological innovations—which are generally made by scholars from abroad—but also utilizing the findings of research done within the country both by Indians and by foreigners. While Indian sociologists have responded to the changing fads and fashions in research, as is evident from the topics chosen for study and investigation, there has been very little effort towards consolidating the of findings scattered in various monographs.

#### 30 yogesh atal

Let me illustrate this point. Recently, the Indian Sociological Society brought out a collection of papers published in the *Sociological Bulletin* in a series of seven volumes26 marking the golden jubilee of the journal. It is striking to note that the work *done on Caste and on Villages* during the 1950s and 1960s was not chosen for a separate volume. It is possible that the *Bulletin* had not published much on these topics; if so, then it also reflects on the editorial policy of the journal. David Mandelbaum did consolidate such researches way back in 1972 in his book *Society in India*. But is there no need to update that book? How do we teach rural sociology today? Apart from Mandelbaum, A.R. Desai did yeoman service when he revised and enlarged his book *Rural Sociology* (1969) by reproducing all the important essays published in various journals and books relative to village India. We need to ask ourselves whether we should still depend on Desai and Mandelbaum or do we need yet another consolidation.

I quote these examples to indicate how we have failed in our task of updating sociology. If we were to teach the same sociology that was taught some 30 or 40 years ago, or if we were to parochialize our sociology by reviving ghosts of least consequence from within our culture, then we are leading our discipline to a dead end. There is considerable material that Indian sociology and Indian sociologists have produced in the past five decades that must enter our curricula. It would mean a different orientation towards our peers and towards our output. This is not a prescription for insulating ourselves from the developments in our discipline elsewhere. Blind imitation of the trends abroad, or ancestor worship, or the revival of tradition cannot help us update our discipline. We need not cut ourselves off from our past, but we must condense its messages to lay the foundation for the present architecture of our discipline, and for building its future edifice.

#### *Research in Sociology*

Reviewing the growth of Indian sociology and social anthropology one is struck by the phenomenon of changing foci. While the size of the social science enterprise, which includes the two disciplines of sociology and social anthropology, has considerably enlarged, one notices a relative decline in the standards of research. This fact is also noted by the editor of the second round of survey, and is clearly reflected in the essays done for the third survey.

 Trends in research suggest attrition of old interests and accretion of new specialisms. The review of research carried out during 1988–2002 does indicate some shifts in the emphases. One notices that studies on the tribal and rural communities, which were once the forte of social anthropologists and of empirically oriented sociologists, are today fewer in number compared to that of the 1960s. For example, the attempt to get a chapter on social stratification written for this survey failed. Similarly, the kind of election studies done in the 1960s and 1970s, what gave a stimulus to the growth of political sociology in the country, was also not undertaken; this sphere has been taken up by the new breed of psephologists—a subject which is not taught in Indian universities and the experts in this field are generally people from market research organizations. There is a sudden spurt in the study of the Indian diaspora as a new branch of the study of migration. But there are not many scholars who have gone abroad to do research on the diaspora. Urban and industrial sociology, criminology, demography and women's studies continue to draw researchers.

Reading the review reports one gathers the impression that Indian sociologists have not contributed much to sociological theory. Commentaries on the existing theories, following borrowed paradigms, and some inclination towards social activism seem to inform our research. It is important to keep in mind that in the enthusiasm for the ill-described concept of 'commitment' there is the danger of promoting the misuse of key sociological concepts. In fact efforts should be made to standardize concepts. A clear case is that of the use of the word *caste* that is used as a convenient term for all sorts of groupings—a *gotra*, a caste, a cluster of castes, a *varna*, and even a minority religion. In the official term 'Other Backward Classes', or OBC, the letter C is taken to denote Caste and not Class; such use by non-experts is understandable, but not by professionals. The same is true of the word 'status' which is used loosely, as in 'Status of Women'. While scholars engaged in gender studies have come up with new concepts and perspectives, the term 'status' continues to be used more as a word with different meanings than as a concept.

However, there is some evidence of efforts towards conceptual clarity. Some writings on secularism and globalization, for example, exhibit this trend. The concepts that are in vogue and to which Indian scholarship pays attention are migration, caste, Sanskritization, dominant caste secularism, nationality and nationalism, insulators and apertures, sandwich culture, plural society, multiculturalism, globalization, and indigenization. But these are scattered efforts and need to be consolidated.

Most researches continue to be descriptive rather than explanatory. Researched who understand sociological theory or perspective and have a good command over the English language have distinguished themselves as columnists, a role, which is more in the realm of journalism than pure sociology. But they have played a welcome role in popularizing the social sciences.

## **Towards a New Research Agenda**

In developing a research agenda for the future, it will be necessary to ensure that some of the old concerns that are the strength of Indian sociology are not neglected. Village studies and the study of caste are two such concerns.

# *Concern for the Village*

Some 50 years ago, when village studies in India gained momentum and attracted both sociologists and social anthropologists, it appeared that people were giving up the old concerns with Indology and ethnology entirely and moving towards the village instead. I described then the village as a meeting ground for the two disciplines. Of course, the anthropologists brought in their holistic perspective treating the village as a 'whole', similar to the study of a tribal community—and the sociologists employed the techniques of survey research in a microcosm. Both soon realized the shortcomings of their respective approaches and grappled with the field data to come up with new theorizations. To quote Andre Béteille:

The first two decades following independence witnessed the emergence and ascendance of village studies. Individual scholars published monographs and there were also anthologies such as those edited by Mckim Marriott and M.N. Srinivas, both published in 1955. The village studies of this period did not merely describe the territorial framework of social life. They analysed in detail virtually every aspect of that life: family life, kinship and caste; religion and ritual; political structures and processes; and the organization of production and economic life. These studies provided a substantial empirical basis for the understanding of Indian society as a whole.27

Concern with the village, then, was guided by two factors: (i) the need to document the existing reality before it gets changed through the waves of external influences—planned development, Westernization and modernization; and (ii) to study the process of directed cultural change and its consequences both to contribute to theory and to assist the planning process of the country. While the first led to intensive studies of single villages in the tradition of ethnography, the second factor led to theme-specific studies not only by sociologists but also by political scientists, economists, and psychologists.

From static description to change in the villages, the trend moved towards the study of the processes, '–izations' of various kinds: universalization and parochialization, Sanskritization and several of its variants proposed by its critics (Kulinization and Kshatriyization*,* for example), modernization and Westernization. Somehow these shifts in focus led people towards the city, neglecting the village. Just as villagers were migrating to the city, the social scientists also began to move out of the village. In the last two decades, one notices very little by way of village studies of the kind that were carried out in the 1950s and 1960s.

This is not to deny the good work being done by some scholars in the rural areas. Rural is a broader category than the village. And the research interests in the rural India of today are somewhat different. The report 'Rural and Agrarian Studies' in this survey details the contribution of Indian sociology in this area. But this does not justify the neglect of village studies of the type that were undertaken in the 1950s and 1960s. The umbrella term 'rural sociology' can cover both village studies and agrarian studies.

It is clear that the village studies to be undertaken today would have a different focus. Village profiles of today's rural India are bound to be different. Connectivity—seen in terms of rail and roads and the spread of communication infrastructure and electricity—has considerably influenced village social life, notwithstanding pockets of isolation. Literacy profiles have also changed. Rural– urban linkages today tell a different story. So is the case with politics. Processes of democratic decentralization (of which Panchayati Raj institutions are a clear manifestation) and electoral participation in Parliamentary and Assembly elections have changed even the profiles of political participation and awareness of the people residing in the rural areas.

The village profiles of the bygone era do not correspond to the present-day reality. Even in those days questions were raised regarding the 'representativeness' of individual village studies. No one could answer then as to the number of village studies needed to draw up an all-India profile of the Indian village. In addition to the village studies done by stalwarts in the profession, the office of the Registrar-General of India commissioned nearly 800 village profiles during the 1961 Census. But no effort was made to identify the commonalities and differences. Going back once again to the individual village studies would raise the same questions: What for? How many?

I personally feel that the village provides an excellent laboratory for a social scientist, and it may be a good idea to ask young initiates to study individual villages, notwithstanding the argument that nothing new would come out of it. At least it would sensitize the young scholar, and force him/her to soil his/her hands with field data. And who knows, some studies may result in serendipitous discoveries!

 'Restudies' is another area. Earlier studies provide a good benchmark against which to calibrate the changes that the given village has experienced during the interregnum.

The processes of suburbation and conurbation have transformed many of the villages in the vicinage of growing metropolitan centres. These need to be studied as a category which lies somewhere between towns and large cities.

We have to approach villages and the entire rural sector with a different agenda. This would require a shift from the older paradigms of dichotomies and of isolationism attributed to rural and tribal communities. The time has come to review both the structural-functional and the Marxist frameworks in the context of the changing scenario of rural India.

#### *Concern for Caste*

A good deal has been written about caste as a defining attribute of Indian society by both Indian and foreign scholars. In the early period of the introduction of sociology in the Indian universities, courses on Indian society were fashioned as courses on the Hindu social system. In them, considerable attention was paid to the caste system—*varna* and *jati*. In the absence of dependable empirical studies, the work of Indologists was utilized for the portrayal of Indian society. But such a portrayal was based on what Srinivas characterized as the 'book view' and the 'upper caste view'. Writings of the British census authorities did challenge that view and provide empirical evidence from various regions to redo the conception of caste. The series of publications of *Castes and Tribes* also contributed a great deal to our understanding of caste. But these were the 'outsider views' and carried different sorts of biases. The so-called theory books emanating from the West provided a formal distinction between 'caste' and 'class', as relevant for the understanding of social stratification. Unaware of the actual existing social reality of caste, Western sociologists found India to be a 'classic' example of a caste society, and gave an easy-to-remember definition of the twin concepts of caste and class : *Class is an open caste; caste is a closed class*!

The stereotypical characterization of caste did not end even after publication of a number of well-researched fieldwork-based micro studies. Louis Dumont's 1970 publication titled *Homo Hierarchicus* is a glaring example of such a dichotomization. With this coinage, Dumont distinguished the societies of the West as *Homo Equalis.* This one-sided accentuation gives the impression that there is a complete absence of hierarchy in the West, and also absence of equality in the Indian social system. That book earned a detailed treatment in the pages of the journal, *Contributions to Indian Sociology* in the late 1970s.

While empirically oriented Indian sociologists devoted their time and attention to the phenomenon of caste beginning from the 1950s, they were criticized by the ideologically charged Marxists for 'not paying attention to class' (Saberwal 1972). Journalists and other non-empirical social scientists continue even today to emphasize the role of caste in Indian politics, and refuse to acknowledge the great changes occurring in the castes and the caste system. It would be wrong to assume that caste has ceased to exist; equally it would be fallacious to give an all-pervasive role to caste in the arena of politics. It is a pity that scores of micro-studies which contributed to the proper understanding of the phenomenon of caste in contemporary India have gone unnoticed and the stereotypes continue to prevail.

In a recently published book, *Caste in Question: Identity or Hierarchy*, this point is strongly emphasized: 'Fortunately, history and anthropology have provided us with so many interesting variations of fact that it is possible now to construct an analytical perspective on caste which is faithful to its multiple vocalities' (Gupta 2004: xiii). This is a very welcome publication, representing a revival of interest in caste, and indicating a departure from previous studies. It is to be hoped that other efforts in this direction will be made to help construct an analytical perspective so badly needed for Indian sociology to cross a new milestone.

It must, be said however, that it serves no purpose to blame the people who do not belong to the profession for misusing the concept of caste. Some sort of casteism prevails even within the profession, which forbids quoting fellow nationals, and particularly those who do not belong to the same 'school'. As a result, the theoretical insights that have been provided by early researchers have remained more or less unutilized. It is true of course, that in the formative years of Indian sociology researchers paid more attention to 'description' than to conceptualization.28 But that should not become a defence for ignoring the work of the pioneers.

To set the record right, let it be said that village studies of the 1950s and 1960s focused primarily on the caste as a predominant feature of the village social structure. The studies clearly indicated that while the village is a vertical unity of castes, caste is a horizontal unity spread over a number of villages. The investigation of the range of marital ties suggested that one has to go beyond the confines of a single village to understand the functioning of individual castes. But such investigations also highlighted that the castes have a regional character, although the caste phenomenon is an all-India one. The need to distinguish between caste as a system and caste as a unit was emphasized. Several scholars who found it difficult to put all the castes in the four neat categories of *varna* exploded the myth of hierarchy. Mckim Marriott (1959) came out with the 'attributional' and 'interactional' theories of the ranking of castes. Srinivas drew attention towards the phenomenon of the 'dominant caste'. Scholars who employed these conceptual frameworks, and so-called theories, indicated problems in their utilization. Dispersed inequalities, conflicting claims, factionalism within castes, and inter-caste coalitions and similar other features were identified by researchers of that time. Unfortunately, all such contributions remained discrete and scattered and no efforts were made to separate them from individual studies and synthesize them in the form of a theory for wider use. If an analytical perspective on caste has to be developed, one will have to return to the older studies to select vignettes and build upon them.

Earlier village studies had pointed out that what exists as a caste in a village is indeed a representation of caste—a family, or a lineage, or a group of closely linked lineages. Caste as a unit operated on a larger scale. Studies of the *Chokhla* in Rajasthan (Chauhan 1967; Atal 1968) and of the *Kudariya* in Madhya Pradesh brought home this point. What distinguishes the studies in the collection, *Caste in Question: Identity or Hierarchy* (Gupta 2004), is that these studies on caste have gone beyond the village, and therefore bring in a fresh perspective. Castes among the Sikhs and the Jains highlight the fact that the institution of caste is not the monopoly of the Hindus, conversion to a different religion does not mean cessation of caste. The existence of castes amongst the Muslims and the Christians adds more weight to the argument that caste should not be seen as a 'cultural' category confined to the Hindus alone, but as a 'structural' feature. The overall framework of a caste system in contemporary India, therefore, cannot be reduced to the Hindu system.

The need continues to exist to properly conceptualize caste so that future policy relative to quotas and reservations based on the ascriptive category of caste can be objectively drawn.

#### *Concern for Change*

We are living in an era of rapid social change. There is change everywhere and the pace is rapidly rising. Unless we properly understand the various processes of social change and their relative impact on the different sectors of society we will not be able to make any fruitful contribution. This is the challenge we face and we have to prepare ourselves for it.

In the late 1950s, when social scientists in this country turned their attention to social change, the situation was vastly different. There was very little by way of a social theory of change. The focus on change was also very different. The theories were generally grand, talking of civilizational change, mostly originating from the West. They constructed hierarchies of society in terms of evolutionary ladders and suggested various stages of growth. Changes in the structure and functioning of non-Western societies were seen either in comparison with the advanced societies of the West, or in terms of native categories of ideal/prescribed social structures. Noticeable changes of the recent past attributable to culture contacts with the outside world were also documented. With the onset of the era of planned social change, the attention shifted to the 'present' and to the dynamics of the processes of the change, and the acceptance or rejection of the 'new arrivals' by the recipient community. These analyses were attempted in the framework of modernity and tradition with the implicit assumption that tradition represents backwardness and needs to be replaced. The persistence of tradition in such a framework represented non-change, and the recipes for change invariably included strategies to kill tradition. Theory entered into the analysis through such paradigms and efforts were made both to conceptualize tradition and to question the assumptions of modernity and modernization. Scholars found modernity in tradition and also hinted that modernization was an attempt to smuggle in Western tradition in the garb of modernity. If modernizers talked of the nondesirability of tradition, the critics of modernization highlighted the ill-effects of the process on native culture and society, and the impending dangers of neocolonialism.

Somehow in the 1980s and 1990s, the focus on change shifted from the 'present' to the 'future'. Change was seen not only in the context of the past or the present, but also in the perspective of the future. When the change was *pastoriented*, the key questions were: Who were we? Where did we come from? In the *present-oriented* context, the mode of the question changed: How do we catch up with the developed world? What is obstructing our path to development? What model to choose—socialist or the capitalist? In the *future-oriented* exercise of change such questions have become somewhat irrelevant. The key questions that are now being asked are where do we go from here? Do we follow the path of others? Can we develop our own blueprint and a road map? What should be our desirable future?

The concern with the future has come alongside some major developments in the world as a whole. The last decade of the past century saw the collapse of the communist world accompanied by the liberalization of the economies, democratization of the polity, and globalization of our orientation. These developments have affected all societies. I regard this as the changing scenario and would advocate locating problems in this context and identifying the challenges that it poses to the social scientists everywhere, including India.

I now find many talking about globalization, mainly echoing the sentiments of the activists who perceive a conspiracy of the West in the new forces of change. They may be right; but where is the basis for making such assertions? How many of us have really investigated the phenomenon empirically? Are we practising journalism or doing social science? Much of the difficulty in understanding the writing on globalization arises from a multiplicity of definitions and an absence of a paradigm. When I read about the ill-effects of globalization I fail to see the difference between the arguments that were advanced against Westernization and modernization and the arguments now being advanced against globalization.

It would be wrong, in my view, to treat modernization and globalization as synonyms. Even at the risk of being criticized for 'intellection' let me attempt a distinction between the various phases of change caused as a result of culture contact. I would like to call them, tentatively, periods of *non-dependence* or *selfdependence, dependence, independence,* and *interdependence*. When societies and cultures were relatively *insulated* they were in the phase of *non-dependence*  or *self-dependence*. Under the colonial rule, they became heavily dependent on the colonizer country, which was, for them, the only *aperture* to the outside world; this is the period of *dependence*. Attainment of independence meant opening of more apertures and getting linked with a large number of other societies in bilateral frameworks, although the former colonies still remained recipients of outside traits and complexes. Since countries began exercising *their* options in making such choices, this phase may be called the phase of *independence*. It is a different matter whether such options were proxied by 'outsiders' or conceived from within. The new phase of globalization is characterized by growing mutual dependence and multilaterality of relations. This is a situation of *interdependence* where each country has become both giver and receiver. For such interactions, the framework of hierarchy, in which a country is seen always at the receiving end, does not seem to me to be appropriate. India is already proposing to be a 'developed country' by the year 2020. India is clubbed with Brazil and China as BIC or G3. How can we, in such a changing scenario, talk of the framework that puts India always at the receiving end?

In the changing context, the old dichotomies are being challenged. In this regard, the case of eastern Europe is very instructive. Thinking that rapid social transformation of these countries into a capitalist mode would improve the situation, the steps that the leaders of these countries took led only to frustration. The transition economies that boasted during the socialist era of the total absence of poverty now openly acknowledge its existence and show concern over the New Poor created by the transition. The countries of eastern Europe today are facing a threefold challenge of (i) stabilizing their economies, (ii) creating new institutions for functioning in the market-led economies, and (iii) thorough restructuring of their productive capacities to increase their efficiency in a competitive global market. In this process, the models of the West have been found to be deficient. This phenomenon is discussed in my book *Poverty in Transition and Transition in Poverty* (Atal 1999) which analyses the situation of social transformation in six countries of eastern Europe. The case studies of these countries are quite revealing and they challenge the prevailing theories of poverty.

The challenges of population growth, the environmental crisis (caused by the depletion of resources and pollution) and the globalizing influences of a dramatic revolution in the technosphere and infosphere are all influencing the architecture of human civilization. For the continuing and emerging crises in the social sphere, it is now widely realized that mere technological breakthroughs are not enough. Both for handling the existing crises of social development and resolving the problems created in the social, political, cultural and economic spheres, and for fashioning the future, the need for effective involvement of the social sciences is universally recognized. It is now clear that the future growth of knowledge depends on the ability of science and the social sciences to rediscover areas of convergence. They will have to innovatively combine different disciplines and different modes of enquiry to understand the ever-increasing complexity of our universe. This would require opening up of the sciences by breaking disciplinary boundaries and effectively pursuing not only interdisciplinary but also transdisciplinary orientation in our research and thinking. It is a call for the decolonization of the mindset and for a search for alternative models to organize knowledge. In the changed context, social sciences need no longer play second fiddle to science and technology. In fact, the spectacular achievements in the sphere of science and technology, which resulted in the IT revolution and moved the world towards an information society, have created enormous ground for the social sciences. The newly created hardware and software demand a new focus on *humanware*.

#### *Research and Advocacy*

While these challenges concern us both as social scientists and as members of a civil society, it is important to distinguish between the two roles. Since our principal identity is in terms of our professional expertise, whatever we speak or write is likely to be taken as an expert view. The danger is greater when we also begin partaking as social activists. Activists indulge in advocacy, but advocacy is not research. I say this not to deny the importance of advocacy, but only to alert that advocacy may be confused with research when a person, who also plays the role of a researcher makes it. Those who have pleaded for commitment in the social sciences have led the common people believe that a social scientist is an activist, a reformer. This is a point on which Andre Béteille has similar views:29

Research has to be distinguished from advocacy. The confusion of research with advocacy, or presenting advocacy in the guise of research is not as serious a problem in the natural as in the social sciences. A scientist doing research in the field of plasma physics or molecular biology is less likely to allow his research to be governed by his urge for advocacy than a sociologist working on topics such as local government or gender disparity. There is nothing wrong with advocacy as such, provided it does not dilute the requirements of systematic research. When the course of research is governed by the urge for advocacy, the results tend to be superficial, unreliable and misleading.

In the last two decades, research in sociology and social anthropology has come increasingly under the influence of advocacy. This may be seen very clearly in the field of village studies…

The interest in village studies began to flag in the mid-1970s. That interest has begun to be revived, but it is now driven by a different kind of impulse from the one by which village studies were driven in their formative years…

Even a casual comparison will reveal that the village studies being undertaken today lack the depth and detail of the studies of the 1950s and the 1960s. The earlier studies took time, five years or longer, for the research and the writing.30…Village studies of the earlier type were generally conducted by scholars in universities where the pace of work is relaxed, and, at least in India, the pressure to publish not very urgent. In the last 50 years, there have been shifts in the institutional setting of social science research: first from universities to research institutes and, more recently, from both to NGOs.

A new way of organizing research has accompanied the shifts in its institutional setting. This is based on the time-bound research project for which specific funds are earmarked and whose expected outcome is a specific research report. In the old system, within which village studies emerged shortly after independence, research was viewed as a lifetime's commitment that did not always lead to tangible outcomes, and certainly not at specified intervals of time. Those academics who failed to produce much by way of published work could always justify their existence by their teaching, and hope that their students might publish more than they had been able to do.

Project research is donor driven to a large extent. Donors want concrete results, and they want them within the prescribed time limit. Part of the money that went into the universities and research institutes is now going to the NGOs which have a much stronger interest in advocacy than in dispassionate and objective research. They appear to have become the favourites of foreign funding agencies. Many of them pay well and are thus able to attract some of the best products of the universities for research in fields ranging from health and education to forestry and water management. Those who are concerned about the long-term health of their discipline cannot afford to remain complacent about this trend towards 'result-oriented' research, or the shift from 'delayed-return' to 'immediate-return' research.

# **The Way Ahead: Challenges for the Future**

There are five major challenges that we face today, namely:

- 1. Updating teaching curricula and providing them with an interdisciplinary orientation, and introducing the social sciences at the school level;
- 2. Consolidating the findings of research done hitherto and systematizing contributions to theory, methodology, and to the understanding of Indian society and culture;
- 3. Immediately attending to the current and pressing problems of the society through empirical research and participation in policy-making and plan implementation;
- 4. Identifying the lacunae and setting an agenda to complete the unfinished tasks; and
- 5. Participating in the preparation of blueprints for the future.

This would require a careful review of courses in all the teaching streams. This has to be done with a view to indigenizing the social sciences; incorporating interdisciplinary orientation; and updating their contents by introducing recent developments in theory, research methodology, and integrating the findings of contemporary research. Borrowed models and methods will have to be suitably indigenized to be relevant and applicable in the Indian setting; and new concepts will have to be developed indigenously, where needed, to properly understand the Indian reality. Social science research has to move from being merely imitative to becoming innovative and rooted in Indian culture.

While social science research is already moving towards interdisciplinarity, the teaching of the social sciences in higher education remains uni-disciplinary and does not allow much cross-fertilization which is very essential for the growth of knowledge. Such an orientation is a must for those who will be joining the faculties of professional and technical institutions and contributing to the training of the professionals. Multidisciplinary orientation in the social sciences is the need of the day. The development of a highly differentiated job market in the wake of liberalization and globalization, and the demands of socio-economic development necessitate such reorientation.

Current research in sociology and social anthropology is highly diffused, underrated, and generally ignored by the potential users. While there are sporadic attempts to identify the *thrust areas* for research, there is a need to make this a serious and a coordinated exercise. We need to promote both micro-level studies and large-scale surveys. The good work done by the National Sample Survey Organization (NSS) through its various rounds of surveys at fixed intervals has provided useful databases to compute trends in economic behaviour. There is enormous scope for the use of census data and their re-analysis and reinterpretation. The large number of individual village studies carried out by the Census Organization in the 1961 Census provide useful material to draw up a national profile of the Indian Village: that work still remains to be done. Similarly, the large number of village studies and empirical studies on caste that marked the Indian social sciences of the 1960s and 1970s need to be carefully reviewed for drawing nationwide generalizations. Similar work on other human settlements and on specific ethnic communities will be extremely useful.

There is great scope for comparative research involving more than one region of the country. Scholars from one region should be encouraged to carry out studies in another region. This would provide better insight into the nature of the social phenomena as the researchers can easily place themselves in the category of relative 'outsiders' vis-à-vis the native 'insiders'. Such exercises can also be conceived as team researches involving people from different social science disciplines and belonging to different regions.

There is an urgent need to explore and strengthen the action-research potential. This would entail strengthening the research facilities of institutions engaged in such research programmes and also enhancing the skills in this field. Issues relevant to the Indian society must be given central place in teaching and research.

It is important to develop a fresh prioritization of the agenda for research. While doing so we must also review the manner in which our research committees function. I have a feeling that we have spread ourselves unduly thin so that very little of substance is delivered. This has largely been an imitative exercise, following the model of the International Association. In the few All India Conferences that I had the pleasure of attending after my return to India, I have been gravely frustrated. Besides inaugural sessions and the valedictories, and some special lectures, the rest of the time of the conferences is spent in sightseeing and entertainment programmes. The meetings of the research committees are thinly attended and the quality of papers presented there leaves much to be desired. I wonder whether we need so many committees; or can we regroup them into meaningful sizes to promote better exchange of ideas and encourage cross-cultural comparative research.

As we stand today, in the midst of the first decade of the new millennium, we have a different vantage point. In the last 50 years, the social sciences in India have attained a certain maturity. During these years, the social scientists engaged themselves both in the investigation of the past by way of researches in history and archaeology and in documenting the processes of change that are altering the present. Now is the time for them to reorient their work in the light of the coming tomorrow. Rather than letting autonomous forces lead us to an uncertain future, social scientists should participate in the process to determine the country's future destination and devise desirable paths to get there. Social scientists are called upon not only to anticipate the demands that the future society will make upon them, but also to assess the totality of the needs of society in the coming years. The future of the social sciences is linked to the future of our society. The way social sciences shape themselves, and rise or decline in their popularity, will depend on the manner in which they attend to the future needs and demands of society.

# appendix—1

| Theme                                                             | First<br>Survey | Second<br>Survey | Third<br>Survey | Fourth<br>Survey |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| Applied Anthropology                                              | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Caste in India                                                    | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Community Development<br>and Panchayati Raj/<br>Rural Development | Yes             |                  | Yes             |                  |
| Cultural Anthropology/<br>Social Anthropology                     | Yes             | Yes              |                 |                  |
| Culture, Communication and<br>Development                         |                 |                  | Yes             |                  |
| Deviant Behaviour/<br>Criminology                                 |                 | Yes              | Yes             | Yes              |

#### **Table A.1** Themes of the Four Surveys

| Theme                                        | First<br>Survey | Second<br>Survey | Third<br>Survey | Fourth<br>Survey |
|----------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| Economic Development/<br>Development Studies | Yes             |                  | Yes             | Yes              |
| Folklore                                     | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Historical Sociology                         | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Industrial Sociology                         | Yes             | Yes              |                 | Yes              |
| Kinship                                      | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Material Culture                             | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Old Age                                      |                 |                  | Yes             |                  |
| Political Sociology                          | Yes             | Yes              | Yes             | Yes              |
| Research Methodology                         | Yes             |                  | Yes             |                  |
| Rural Studies/ Agrarian Studies              | Yes             | Yes              |                 | Yes              |
| Scheduled Castes                             | Yes             |                  | Yes             |                  |
| Social Change                                | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Social Demography                            | Yes             | Yes              |                 | Yes              |
| Social Movements                             |                 | Yes              | Yes             |                  |
| Social Stratification                        | Yes             | Yes              |                 |                  |
| Social Work                                  | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Sociological Theory                          |                 | Yes              |                 |                  |
| Sociology of Communication                   |                 | Yes              |                 |                  |
| Sociology of Education                       | Yes             | Yes              | Yes             |                  |
| Sociology of Law                             | Yes             | Yes              |                 | Yes              |
| Sociology of Medicine                        | Yes             |                  |                 |                  |
| Sociology of Professions                     |                 | Yes              |                 |                  |
| Sociology of Religion                        | Yes             | Yes              | Yes             |                  |
| Sociology of Science/                        |                 | Yes              | Yes             |                  |
| Technology and Development                   |                 |                  |                 |                  |
| Tribal Ethnography                           | Yes             | Yes              | Yes             | Yes              |
| Urban Studies                                | Yes             | Yes              | Yes             | Yes              |
| Women's Studies                              |                 |                  | Yes             | Yes              |
| Youth Studies                                |                 |                  | Yes             |                  |
| Indian Diaspora                              |                 |                  | Yes             | Yes              |

Table A.1 (*Continued*)

# appendix—2

#### **Table B.1** Research Committees of the Indian Sociological Society

|       | RC-01. Theory, Concepts, and Methodology                          | RC-11. Sociology and Environment                   |
|-------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
|       | RC-02. Family, Kinship, and Marriage                              | RC-12. Population, Health, and<br>Society          |
|       | RC-03. Economy. Polity, and Society                               | RC-13. Science, Technology, and<br>Society         |
| RC-04 | Migration and Diasporic Studies                                   | RC-14. Culture and Communication                   |
|       | RC-05. Education and Society                                      | RC-15. Social Change and<br>Development            |
|       | RC-06. Religion and Religious Communities                         | RC-16. Urban and Industrial Studies                |
|       | RC-07. Rural, Peasant, and Tribal<br>Communities                  | RC-17. Social Movements                            |
|       | RC-08. Social Stratification, Professions,<br>and Social Mobility | RC-18. Sociology of Crime and<br>Deviance          |
|       | RC-09. Dalit and Backward Classes                                 | RC-19. Ageing and Social Structure                 |
|       | RC-10. Gender Studies                                             | RC-20. Leisure and Tourism                         |
|       |                                                                   | RC-21. Social Problems and<br>Marginalized Groups. |

# notes

- 1. Opening paragraph of the essay titled 'Sociology in the Indian Campus'. Reprinted in Atal 2003
- 2. It may be noted that in the initial list for the first survey, this topic was not included. But when the papers were reviewed by a seminar, the then member-secretary discovered to his surprise that no study had been commissioned to S.C. Dube. To rectify the error, the ICSSR requested Dube to prepare this paper. Even the honorarium made for this work was half of what had been paid to the other authors.
- 3. This was included in the first survey as the Anthropological Survey of India had a major project on it.
- 4. In place of social work, in the subsequent surveys the theme of deviant behaviour and criminology was included. Researches done by people in the field of social work could be accommodated under the various sub-themes of sociology, e.g. industrial sociology, sociology of medicine, and social psychology.