## **CONCLUSION**

The main objective of the manuscript is to analyse the environmental history of India for the modern India in a comprehensive manner from the late-eighteenth century to that of early twenty-first century, in a historical perspective. India's environmental history literature is largely confined to forestry and wildlife and again concentrated mainly on only a certain phase of the colonial era. Aspects other than forestry and wildlife of the environmental history received very little attention. Unfortunately, the post-Independence environmental history did not receive the due attention. Consequently, an attempt has been made to study the subject comprehensively, over a period of time ranging from the late eighteenth century to the early twenty-first century.

Until the colonial intervention or even during the early phase of the colonial period, India's economy predominantly depended on traditional agriculture and largely geared to meet the people's subsistence. The agricultural production process was labour-intensive with some support of cattle resources. Only the traditional technology was employed in the production process. Due to low density of population, the land brought under the cultivation was very limited. Further, the land resources were used for the other non-agricultural purposes also which were very limited. Owing to low density of population, traditional agricultural production processes and lack of other infrastructural facilities, only a limited extent of the land was brought under the utilisation/cultivation. Consequently, large extents of the land resources were left unutilised. Since the early nineteenth century, land-use pattern in the Indian subcontinent has changed in the non-arable lands, particularly in hill ranges due to establishment coffee and tea plantations. In other words, except for the plantation's development in the highlands, there was no change in the land use-pattern until the mid-nineteenth century.

Since the mid-nineteenth century, the common property lands were converted into the arable lands due to the large-scale agricultural expansion and extension of irrigation facilities in different parts of the country. Since the mid-nineteenth century, railway network was gradually developed which destroyed a large extent of the forest not only to lay down the timber plates but also to manufacture coaches, berths and for fuelwood. Since the last quarter of the nineteenth century, more

**9**

and more areas were brought under the reserve forest while the forest resources have been exploited for the commercial purposes at the cost of the tribals and other forest-dwelling communities' livelihood.

During the post-Independence period, the pressure on land and other natural resources has increased due to the explosive nature of population growth, agricultural expansion and the development of infrastructural facilities. Green revolution technologies further accentuated agricultural expansion and extraction and exploitation of the natural resources. Consequently, the land-use pattern has also changed remarkably. In other words, increasing proportion of common property resources were brought under the utilisation process. At the same time, thousands of hectares of land were brought under the nonagricultural use and the area under cultivation increased at the cost of other common property resources. Since 1985, the land-use policies emphasised upon efforts to bring the non-arable lands, particularly permanent pastures and other grazing lands, land under miscellaneous tree crops and groves, and cultural wastelands for utilisation in different parts of the country. Precisely, more and more common property lands have been brought either under cultivation or under development purposes, while the fallow land has increased due to lack of water, rainfall and other natural calamities that invariably occurred in different parts of the country during the post-Independence period.

During the precolonial period and the early phase of the colonial period, the population density was low and the requirement was mainly confined to subsistence livelihood levels. Since the colonial period, the colonial administration has designed different strategies to enhance the land revenue while they were never really concerned about India's population. Consequently, famines and other epidemic diseases occurred frequently which resulted in the loss of a large number of lives during the colonial period. In other words, death rate, birth rate and infant mortality rates were high and the longevity after birth was also low during the colonial period. To be precise, over the period of 200 years, the colonial administration was never concerned about the interest of the people of Indian subcontinent and their main agenda was how to extract the resources. There was no change in the population growth for over two centuries of colonial era. After Independence, the governments gave priority to protect the people by providing food grains through the expansion of agriculture and generating employment opportunities through various poverty alleviations programmes and hence sought improve the infrastructural facilities, such as schools, hospitals, roads, drinking water supply and household amenities. Consequently, death rate, birth rate and infant mortality rate have declined, and longevity after birth has increased remarkably during the post-Independence period. At the same time, the question of environment and ecological damage has not received due attention over the six decades of the post-Independence period.

Until the colonial intervention, forest resources were used by the people without any restrictions for their livelihood. However, since the beginning of colonial era, the foreigners had exercised control over the forest resources by imposing restrictions on the people and exported the forest resources extensively to different countries. Since the last quarter of the nineteenth century, forests were brought under the reserve forest purview while restrictions were imposed on the tribals and other forest-dwelling communities. While imposing restrictions, the colonial policy was continuing to be a guiding force for the commercialisation of the forest resources.

After Independence, the government did not launch any major initiatives to protect the environment besides of course adopting the various colonial acts during the first three decades post-Independent India. Since the forest was a state subject, a vast extent of forest area was diverted for various developments' activities by the different states during the post-Independence period. In fact, till the 1970s, the other environmental aspects also did not gain much attention. Even after the 1970s, these acts were controlled/regulated only to some extent. Further, the technological advancement in the agrarian sector has made serious impact on the ecology in terms of soil fertility, declining water quality, etc.

The post-Independent India's environmental history issues were multi-faceted and they were largely neglected during the early decades. In other words, within the three decades of securing Independence, a large extent of forest was diverted and other common property lands were quickly reduced to negligible proportion. Adding to that, the political economy of the tribals and other forest-dwelling communities further worsened the environment-related problems. Without realising the importance of environment, the common property resources were ruthlessly exploited in the early period. The vote-bank politics of political parties further aggravated the India's environmental concerns.

Since the early nineteenth century, the colonial government acquired land mainly in the urban areas for various development purposes. In fact, these enactments were largely confined only at the presidency level. Since the colonial government did not pay much attention for the development activities, the extent of land acquisition was very limited until the mid-nineteenth century. Soon railway construction was also included as a public work. For the country as a whole, a common land acquisition act was enacted during the mid-nineteenth century. Land Acquisition Act became instantly applicable since the land and survey settlement was held and ownership was given to the farmers during the third quarter of the nineteenth century.

After Independence, the government has made several major amendments which facilitated the inclusion of several private activities in the category of public purpose. Until the early twenty-first century, the Land Acquisition Act was in favour of government and companies and it has not adequately addressed the issues and problems regarding farmers' resettlement and rehabilitation, and the ecology and environment. Since the last quarter of the twentieth century, the government has acquired a huge extent of land for the various development activities to be undertaken by private concerns. The government here acted as a mere agent to acquire the land for the sake of private companies. On the one side, the common property land, particularly forest land, was diverted for the various development purposes which caused revolts in the tribal areas and, on the other hand, farmers' land was acquired for the private commercial interest in the name of public purpose. Finally, the Right to Fair Compensation and the Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013, have come into force. While ensuring the livelihood options of the affected people, the pressure to sustain the common property resources in general and forest in particular for a safe future should be of paramount concern, failing which the above frames would prove to be a great threat to the ecology and environment. In addition to the constraint of the natural resources, the modern electrical and electronic waste problem too has further aggravated the environmental crises not only from the quantity of the waste but its impact on the natural resources. Thus, population growth, agricultural expansion, technological advancement and development of various infrastructural facilities have further aggravated the complexity of conflict between land, population, environment and development for more than two centuries of India's environmental history.