# **Limit Order Markets**

The organization of trading in financial markets has undergone tremendous changes at the end of the twentieth century. In stock markets, electronic limit order books have progressively replaced floor and dealership markets. For instance, the Paris Bourse closed its floor and became a fully electronic limit order market in 1986. Bond and currency markets follow a similar evolution with the emergence of trading platforms such as EBS (FX) or E.speed and MTS (bond markets). This evolution has been a major impetus for academic research on limit order markets. This article provides a brief review of this research.

### **Market and Limit Orders**

Limit orders and market orders (*see* **Order Types**) are the core engine of limit order markets. Limit orders specify a price and a number of shares. For instance, a limit order to buy (respectively sell) 500 shares of stock XYZ at \$10 means that the order submitter is willing to buy up to 500 shares at \$10 or less (respectively more). As they have a prespecified price, limit orders cannot always be matched with contra-side orders upon arrival. In this case, they are stored in a limit order book. They exit the limit order book when they are hit by subsequent orders or cancelled by the order submitter.

A market order specifies a number of shares to buy or to sell with no price limit. It is matched upon arrival with contra-side limit orders (e.g., a buy market order is matched with sell limit orders). The latter execute in sequence according to price priority and other rules (e.g., first-in first-out) for orders tied at the same price. Consider, for instance, the arrival of a buy market order for 1000 shares when the limit order book features sell limit orders at (i) \$10 (best ask price) for 500 shares, (ii) \$10.5 for 700 shares, and (iii) \$10.7 for 200 shares. The market order executes for 500 shares at \$10 and for the remaining 500 shares at the next best offer, \$10.5. Execution of limit orders is "discriminatory" in the sense that each limit order is filled at its own price.

Copeland and Galai [12] point out that limit orders are similar to options. For instance, a buy (sell) limit order at \$10 is similar to a put (respectively call) option with a \$10 strike price. Indeed, it gives the possibility to other market participants to sell the security at \$10 when its value falls below \$10. These options are free. Yet, they can be written at a profit because, in contrast to regular options, they are sometimes exercised out-of-the money by traders who need immediate execution. Bid and ask prices can then be viewed as the strike prices that balance losses when limit orders execute in-the-money (are "picked off") with gains when they execute outof-the money [12]. Foucault *et al.* [18] argue, and show empirically, that the limit order book contains information on future price volatility since limit orders are options.

Limit order traders can reduce the likelihood of being picked off by monitoring their orders. Foucault *et al.* [19] analyze this monitoring decision in a model similar to that in [12]. Liu [32] extends this model to study the interactions between monitoring decisions and cancellations in a limit order market. He provides evidence that traders submitting limit orders actively monitor their orders to reduce the risk of being picked off.

The choice between limit and market orders hinges upon a trade-off between the gain of a limit order (a price improvement relative to standing quotes) and its costs, namely, the cost of nonexecution, the cost of being picked off, the cost of trading with better informed investors, monitoring costs, waiting costs [14], and submission fees. Harris and Hasbrouck [24] study the performance of actual limit orders. They find that buy (respectively sell) limit orders execute more frequently in the case of a price decline (respectively increase). Moreover, they also find that the opportunity cost of unfilled limit orders behind the best quotes is significant. Handa and Schwartz [23] use hypothetical limit and market orders. They find that the performance of filled (respectively unfilled) limit orders is higher (respectively smaller) than that of market orders. Unconditionally, the performance of each order type is identical. Overall, these findings suggest that the cost of being picked off and the cost of nonexecution are significant.

The optimal order submission strategy depends on each trader's objective (e.g., whether the trader is constrained to trade a specific number of shares or not), his/her expectation regarding future order submissions, and the current state of the book. In turn, traders' orders affect the state of the book and future order submission choices. Biais *et al.* [6] offer the first empirical description of the interactions between the state of the limit order book and the order flow in a pure limit order market (the Paris Bourse). They uncover a *diagonal effect*: the frequency of an order of a given type (e.g., a buy market order) conditional on an order of the same type is higher than the unconditional frequency of this order. This observation is confirmed by subsequent empirical analyses of other markets [22, 35]. Biais *et al.* [6] also show that order submission strategies depend on the state of the limit order book in systematic ways. These observations paved the road for research about the effect of the state of the limit order book (e.g., the size of the bid–ask spread, the depth at the best quotes, etc.) on order submission choices (see, for instance, Beber, A. & Caglio, C. (2004). *Order Submission Strategies and Information: Empirical Evidence from the NYSE*. Unpublished manuscript, University of Lausanne; Ellul, A., Holden, C.W., Pankaj, J. & Jennings, R.H. (2003). *Determinants of Order Choice on the New York Stock Exchange*. Unpublished manuscript, Indiana University [22, 35]).

Ahn *et al.* [1] study the interactions between order submissions and transitory volatility. They find that traders use limit orders more frequently after a rise in transitory volatility. One possibility is that this increase in volatility reflects an increase in the bid–ask spread due to transient liquidity pressures. This increase in the bid–ask spread attracts limit order traders as providing liquidity becomes more profitable. Consistent with this interpretation, Biais *et al.* [6] find reversals in the size of bid–ask spreads after the arrival of large market orders. The speed of this reversal determines the resiliency of a limit order market to liquidity shocks and constitutes one important dimension of market liquidity. Degryse *et al.* [13] and Large [30] provide empirical analyses of the resiliency of limit order markets.

Wyart *et al.* [41] uncover a high positive correlation between the bid–ask spread and the volatility per trade in limit order markets. They show that this relationship is expected if both liquidity providers and liquidity takers follow order submission strategies with positive expected profits.

## **Models of Price Formation in Limit Order Markets and Empirical Tests**

The limit order book can be described by the mapping between quotes in the book and the cumulative quantity available at these quotes (e.g., in the previous example, the cumulative quantity offered for sale is 500 shares at \$10, 1200 shares at \$10.5, and 1400 shares at \$10.7). Naturally, a strand of research on limit order markets focuses on this mapping as it determines the cost of execution for traders submitting market orders and thereby market liquidity. In the previous example, execution costs are smaller other things being equal if the limit order book features, say, a cumulative quantity of 1200 shares at \$10.5 instead of only, say, 600 shares.

Glosten [20] considers a model in which some traders submitting market orders can be better informed on the payoff of a risky security than traders submitting limit orders. He shows that the quotes associated with a given cumulative quantity are equal to limit order traders' expectation regarding the payoff of the security conditional on the size of the next market order being larger than this cumulative quantity. For instance, if *V* is the payoff of the risky security, *Q(A)* is the cumulative quantity offered at the ask price *A*, and *X* is the size of the incoming market order, then, in equilibrium, *Q(A)* satisfies

$$A = E(V \mid X > Q(A)) \tag{1}$$

Thus, ask prices are upper tail conditional expectations. By symmetry, bid prices are lower tail expectations. This feature is closely related to the discriminatory execution of limit orders and does not obtain in earlier models of trading with asymmetric information [29]. It implies that buy market orders execute at a mark-up compared to sell market orders, even if the size of these orders is infinitesimal. That is, there is "*small trade bid ask spread*."

Glosten [20] assumes perfect competition among limit order traders. Thus, the restrictions on quotes and cumulative quantities (e.g., equation (1)) derive from a zero profit condition for limit orders. Biais *et al.* [7] provide a more general analysis allowing for imperfect competition (see also [5]). Seppi [38], Viswanathan and Wang [40], and Parlour and Seppi [34] study the mapping between quotes and cumulative quantities in limit order markets in models without asymmetric information.

These models are static. Hence, they are silent on the determinants of the choice between market and limit orders. Cohen *et al.* [11] offer the first theoretical analysis of this choice. They uncover the "*gravitational pull effect.*" That is, when the bid–ask spread becomes tight, the benefit of a price improvement with a limit order becomes small compared to the cost of nonexecution. Thus, traders are "pulled" to use market orders. This effect provides another explanation for the existence of a small trade bid–ask spread in limit order markets.

Execution probabilities are exogenous in [11]. Foucault [16] (Foucault, T. (1995). *Price Formation and Order Placement Strategies in a Dynamic Order Driven Market*. Working paper, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.), Parlour [33], Foucault *et al.* [17], Rosu [36], and Large [31] introduce dynamic models of trading in limit order markets in which execution probabilities are consistent with order submission choices in equilibrium. These models explain variation in order submission choices by variations in the state of the book and traders' valuations for the security. Traders with high valuations submit more aggressive buy orders and traders with low valuations submit more aggressive sell orders. Thus, traders with extreme valuations are more likely to submit market orders and traders with intermediate valuations are more likely to submit limit orders.

Parlour [33] studies a one tick market. Upon arrival, buyers (respectively sellers) choose to submit a limit order at the bid (respectively ask) price or a market order. In this model, limit orders face a risk of nonexecution. In equilibrium, traders' order placement decisions depend on the state of the limit order book on *both* sides. For instance, the decision to submit a buy limit order depends on the depth on the ask side because this depth will affect future sellers' order submission choices. Moreover, the equilibrium features systematic patterns on order submissions. For instance, a sell market order is more likely after a sell market order than after a buy market order as found empirically in [6].

Foucault [16] focuses on the effect of price volatility on order submission choices. In this model, traders' valuations for the security are distributed around a consensus value that follows a random walk. Thus, changes in traders' valuations are positively correlated with changes in the consensus value. Consequently, buy (respectively sell) limit orders are more likely to execute when the consensus value decreases (respectively increases) than when it increases (respectively decreases). For this reason, limit orders are exposed to the risk of being picked off. Under simplifying assumptions (e.g., limit orders expire after one period), Foucault [16] characterizes order submission strategies in closed-form. In equilibrium, the fraction of limit orders in the order flow and the bid–ask spread increase with the volatility of the consensus value. In contrast, limit orders fill rate decreases with volatility since market orders are less frequent when the bid-ask spread is large. Van Achter extends this model by considering the case in which limit orders have longer time to expiration (Van Achter, M. (2006). *A Dynamic Limit Order Market with Diversity in Trading Horizons*. Working paper, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=967610.).

Foucault *et al.* [17], Rosu [36], and Large [31] study the role of waiting costs. In these models, traders care about time to execution for limit orders since it determines their expected waiting cost. Foucault *et al.* [17] study the determinants of expected time to execution and the speed at which the bid–ask spread reverts to competitive levels after liquidity shocks. Rosu [36] introduces the possibility of cancellations and provides an explanation for the high cancellation rate observed in some markets (See for instance Hasbrouck, J. and Saar, G. (2002). *Limit orders and volatility in a hybrid market: the Island ECN*, Working paper, NYU). Large [31] proposes a new approach that exploits the fact that there must be as many filled limit orders as submitted market orders.

All these models obtain analytical results at the cost of strong assumptions. Goettler *et al.* [21] relax many of these assumptions while retaining the idea that changes in traders' valuations and the consensus value drive variations in order submission choices. They use techniques from computational economics to numerically calculate the equilibrium of the limit order market for specific parameter values. They find that the diagonal effect is an equilibrium property of the limit order market. It arises because (i) there is persistence in the state of the limit order book (hence, traders submit similar orders) and (ii) it takes time for traders to take advantage of stale limit orders after large changes in the consensus value (as initially suggested by Hollifield *et al.* [26]).

Do the trade-offs considered in theories of limit order markets explain actual order submissions? Sandas [37] tackles this question by testing restric- ˚ tions implied by Glosten's [20] model for quotes, cumulative quantities, and changes in transaction prices using data from the Stockholm Stock Exchange. He rejects the model because actual limit order books are not deep enough to be explained by the model. One possible explanation is that competition among limit order traders is imperfect (a feature absent in [20]). Another, related, possibility is that it takes time for the limit order book to replenish after liquidity shocks. Thus, trades occur when profit opportunities remain in the limit order book.

Hollifield *et al.* [26] test a more general formulation of [16]. Their model makes predictions about which type of orders (e.g., a buy limit order one tick below the best ask price) should *not* be observed for each state of the limit order book because they are suboptimal for all traders (whatever be their valuation). They build a test of the model by tracking these suboptimal orders. They reject the model because the expected payoffs on limit orders with low execution probabilities are too small compared to the expected payoffs of limit orders with higher execution probabilities. Thus, these limit orders with low execution probabilities should not be observed according to the model.

#### **New Research Directions**

Despite their widespread use in financial markets, little is known on the allocative efficiency of limit order markets. Empiricists often use measures of bid–ask spreads as a proxy for efficiency, presuming that larger bid–ask spreads are associated with greater inefficiencies. However, Goettler *et al.* [21] show that bid–ask spreads are poor proxies of actual gains from trade in limit order markets. Hollifield *et al.* [27] develop a methodology to empirically estimate the fraction of the maximum gains from trade that are achieved in the limit order market. They implement this methodology with data from the Vancouver Stock Exchange and find that about 90% of the maximum gains from trade are achieved.

A related question is the performance of limit order markets relative to other market structures. Viswanathan and Wang [40] and Back and Baruch [3] compare equilibrium outcomes in a market with discriminatory execution of limit orders and a market with uniform execution of limit orders (i.e., all limit orders eligible for execution execute at the execution price of the marginal share). In a model related to Glosten [20], Back and Baruch [3] identify conditions under which the equilibrium of the two markets is identical. Some authors (e.g., Baruch [4] and Boehmer *et al.* [9]) also study theoretically or empirically the effects of trading rules in limit order markets (transparency, priority rules, tick size, etc.) on their performance (e.g., informational efficiency and liquidity).

Models of limit order trading often assume that informed traders submit market orders. Kaniel and Liu [28] relax this assumption and establish conditions under which informed traders use limit orders. Bloomfield *et al.* [8] find experimental evidence that informed traders use both market and limit orders. These findings imply that limit order books may contain information about future price movements. Anand *et al.* [2], Harris and Panchapagesan [25], (Irvine, P., Benston, G. & Kandel, E. (2000). *Liquidity Beyond the Inside Spread: Measuring and Using Information in the Limit Order Book*. Working paper, Emory University.), and Kaniel and Liu [28] provide empirical evidence consistent with this implication.

Theories of limit order placement assume that traders have rational expectations and choose their orders optimally in any circumstances. Several papers [10, 15, 39] (Ladley, D. & Reiner Schenk-Hoppe,´ K. (2007). *Do Stylised Facts of Order Book need Strategic Behaviour*. Working paper no. 383. National Centre of Competence in Research Financial Valuation and Risk Management.) study models of limit order trading with zero-intelligence traders. These traders submit random orders satisfying some minimal conditions (e.g., they do not violate traders' budget constraint). Interestingly, some empirical regularities of limit order markets (e.g., the diagonal effect) emerge even with zero-intelligence traders. Thus, the trading mechanics of these markets can in itself explain some of the properties of limit order markets, independently of the degree of sophistication for the traders.

#### **References**

- [1] Ahn, H.J., Bae, K.H. & Chan, K. (2001). Limit orders, depth and volatility: evidence from the stock exchange of Hong Kong, *Journal of Finance* **56**, 767–788.
- [2] Anand, A., Chakravarty, Q. & Martell, T. (2005). Empirical evidence on the evolution of liquidity: choice of market versus limit orders by informed and uninformed traders, *Journal of Financial Markets* **8**, 288–308.
- [3] Back, K. & Baruch, S. (2007). Working orders in limit order markets and floor exchanges, *Journal of Finance* **62**, 1589–1621.
- [4] Baruch, S. (2005). Who Benefits from an Open Limit-Order Book? *Journal of Business* **78**, 1267–1306.

- [5] Bernhardt, D. & Hughson, E. (1997). Splitting orders, *Review of Financial Studies* **69**, 101.
- [6] Biais, B., Hillion, P. & Spatt, C. (1995). An empirical analysis of the limit order book and the order flow in the Paris bourse, *Journal of Finance* **50**, 1655–1689.
- [7] Biais, B., Martimort, D. & Rochet, J.C. (2000). Competing mechanisms in a commun value environment, *Econometrica* **68**, 799–798.
- [8] Bloomfield, R., O'Hara, M. & Saar, G. (2005). The "make or take" decision in an electronic market: evidence on the evolution of liquidity, *Journal of Financial Economics* **75**, 165–199.
- [9] Boehmer, E., Saar, G. & Yu, L. (2005). Lifting the veil: an analysis of pre-trade transparency at the NYSE. *Journal of Finance* **60**, 783–815.
- [10] Bouchaud, J.P., Mezart, M. & Potters, M. (2002). ´ Statistical properties of stock order books: empirical results and models, *Quantitative Finance* **2**, 251–256.
- [11] Cohen, K.J., Maier, S.F., Schwartz, R.A. & Whitcomb, D. (1981). Transaction costs, order placement strategy, and existence of the bid-ask spread, *Journal of Political Economy* **89**, 287–305.
- [12] Copeland, T. & Galai, D. (1983). Information effects on the bid-ask spread, *Journal of Finance* **38**, 1457–1469.
- [13] Degryse, H., de Jong, F., van Ravenswaaij, V. & Wuyts, G. (2005). Aggressive orders and resiliency of the limit order book, *Review of Finance* **9**, 201–242.
- [14] Demsetz, H. (1968). The costs of transacting, *Quarterly Journal of Economics* **82**, 33–53.
- [15] Farmer, J.D., Patelli, P. & Zovko, I.I. (2005). The predictive power of zero intelligence in financial markets, *Proceedings of the National Academy of Science* **102**, 2254–2259.
- [16] Foucault, T. (1999). Order flow composition and trading costs in a dynamic limit order market, *Journal of Financial Markets* **2**, 99–134.
- [17] Foucault, T., Kadan, O. & Kandel, E. (2005). Limit order book as a market for liquidity, *Review of Financial Studies* **18**, 1171–1217.
- [18] Foucault, T., Moinas, S. & Theissen, E. (2007). Does anonymity matter in electronic limit order markets? *Review of Financial Studies* **20**, 1707–1747.
- [19] Foucault, T., Roell, A. & Sand ¨ as, P. (2003). Market ˚ making with costly monitoring: an analysis of SOES trading, *Review of Financial Studies* **16**, 345–384.
- [20] Glosten, L.R. (1994). Is the electronic open limit order book inevitable? *Journal of Finance* **49**, 1127–1161.
- [21] Goettler, R.L., Parlour, C.A. & Rajan, U. (2005). Equilibrium in a dynamic limit order market, *Journal of Finance* **60**, 2149–2192.
- [22] Griffiths, M., Smith, B., Turnbull, A. & White, R. (2000). The costs and determinants of order aggressiveness, *Journal of Financial Economics* **56**, 65–88.
- [23] Handa, P. & Schwartz, R.A. (1996). Limit order trading, *Journal of Finance* **51**, 1835–1861.
- [24] Harris, L. & Hasbrouck, J. (1996). Market vs. limit orders: the superdot evidence on order submission

strategy, *Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis* **31**, 213–231.

- [25] Harris, L. & Panchapagesan, V. (2005). The Information content of the limit order book: evidence from NYSE specialist trading decisions, *Journal of Financial Markets* **7**, 25–67.
- [26] Hollifield, B., Miller, R.A. & Sandas, P. (2004). Empirical analysis of limit order markets, *Review of Economic Studies* **71**, 1027–1063.
- [27] Hollifield, B., Miller, R.A., Sandas, P. & Slive, J. (2006). Estimating the gains from trade in limit order markets, *Journal of Finance* **61**, 2753–2804.
- [28] Kaniel, R. & Liu, H. (2006). So what orders do informed traders use? *Journal of Business* **79**, 1867–1913.
- [29] Kyle, R. (1985). Continuous auctions and insider trading, *Econometrica* **53**, 1315–1335.
- [30] Large, J. (2007). Measuring the resiliency of an electronic limit order book, *Journal of Financial Markets* **10**, 1–25.
- [31] Large, J. (2009). A market clearing role for inefficiency on a limit order book, *Journal of Financial Economics* **91**, 102–117.
- [32] Liu, W. (2007). Monitoring and limit order submission risks, *Journal of Financial Markets* **12**, 107–141.
- [33] Parlour, C.A. (1998). Price dynamics in limit order markets, *Review of Financial Studies* **11**, 789–816.
- [34] Parlour, C.A. & Seppi, D.J. (2003). Liquidity-based competition for order flow, *Review of Financial Studies* **16**, 301–343.
- [35] Ranaldo, A. (2004). Order aggressiveness in limit order book markets, *Journal of Financial Markets* **7**, 53–74.
- [36] Rosu, I. (2009). A dynamic model of the limit order book, *Review of Financial Studies* April, 1–41.
- [37] Sandas, P. (2001). Adverse selection and competitive ˚ market making: empirical evidence from a limit order market, *Review of Financial Studies* **14**, 705–734.
- [38] Seppi, D.J. (1997). Liquidity provision with limit orders and a strategic specialist, *Review of Financial Studies* **10**, 103–150.
- [39] Smith, E., Farmer, D., Gillenot, L. & Krishnamurthy, S. (2003). Statistical theory of the continuous double auction, *Quantitative Finance* **3**, 481–514.
- [40] Viswanathan, S. & Wang, J. (2002). Market architecture: limit order books versus dealership markets, *Journal of Financial Markets* **5**, 127–168.
- [41] Wyart, M., Bouchaud, J.P., Kockelkoren, J., Potters, M. & Vettorazzo, M. (2008). Relation between bid-ask spread, impact and volatility in order-driven markets, *Quantitative Finance* **8**, 41–57.

#### **Related Articles**

**Bid–Ask Spreads**; **Glosten–Milgrom Models**; **High-frequency Data**; **Market Microstructure Effects**; **Order Types**.

THIERRY FOUCAULT