- Newth, D. R. (1970). *Animal growth and development*. London: Edward Arnold.
- Pereira, M. E., & Fairbanks, L. A. (Eds.). (1993). *Juvenile primates: Life history, development, and behavior*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Sommerville, C. J. (1982). *The rise and fall of childhood*. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
- Stearns, S. C. (1992). *The evolution of life histories*. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Tanner, J. M. (1981). *A history of the study of human growth*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Tanner, J. M. (1986). Growth as a mirror for the conditions of society: Secular trends and class distinctions. In A. Demirjian (Ed.), *Human growth: A multidisciplinary review* (pp. 3–34). London: Taylor & Francis.

- Todd, J. T., Mark, L. S., Shaw, R. E., & Pittenger, J. B. (1980). The perception of human growth. *Scientific American*, *242*, 132–144.
- Ulijaszek, S., Johnston, F. E., & Preece, M. (Eds.). (1998). *Cambridge encyclopedia of human growth and development*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Ulijaszek, S. J., & Strickland, S. S. (1993). *Nutritional anthropology: Prospects and perspectives*. London: Smith Gordon.
- United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (2001). http://www.childinfo.org/eddb/malnutrition/
- Walcher, G. (1905). Ueber die Entstehung von Brachy- und Dolichocephalie durch willkürliche Beinflussung des kindlichen Schadels. *Zentralblatt für Gynakologie*, *29*, 193–196.
- Worthman, C. (1993). Biocultural interactions in human development. In M. E. Pereira & L. A. Fairbanks (Eds.), *Juvenile primates* (pp. 339–358). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

# **Dying and Death**

#### **Sharon R. Kaufman**

### **INTRODUCTION**

Dying and death are profound aspects of human experience whose definitions and meanings are fabricated through cultural and historical lenses. Though death is biologically inevitable, it is also a social fact; knowledge about it is made. It is understood through frameworks of religion and social structure, science and medicine, loss and disruption that are available to individuals within societies. There is no such thing as a *natural* death, that is, a death that occurs beyond the boundaries of culture and historical moment, social norms and expectations, tradition and innovation.

The anthropology of dying and death itself, considered from the early days of ethnographic practice, illustrates a major shift in how those terms have been situated and employed. Late 19th and early 20th century studies of death were conducted within the frameworks of the anthropology and sociology of religion, ritual practice, and structural–functionalism. Recent critiques of early studies note their attention to normative practices surrounding the corpse, the funeral, and the bereaved to the exclusion of acknowledgement of the dying person and the intense emotions surrounding the dying transition. Late 20th century and contemporary studies focus primarily on controversies that emerge from biomedical understandings about the physiologic body, the brain and the idea of consciousness, and how the cessation of life can be measured or unequivocally known, especially in the contexts of organ transplantation and values about life prolongation. Social and cultural studies of the body, medicalized death, and biotechnologies point to a double problematic: first, that death is negotiable terrain, rather than an absolute status; and second, that the separation and opposition of *life-and-death* is a culturally produced dualism, rather than a natural fact. Exploration of forms of biopower, influenced by the work of Foucault and Agamben, underscore ways in which *life* and *death* are politicized concepts that acquire meaning through law, science, and state practices.

World events throughout the 20th century, especially the Nazi holocaust and more recent genocides, displacements and political violence, and AIDS and other epidemics have fostered anthropological studies of the normalization of violence, ways in which the effects of war and terror are embodied, emerging considerations of risk in the face of disease and natural and human-made disasters, narratives of illness, dying, trauma, and how death is lived, and ethnographic explorations of social suffering. In much of this work, *death* is central to the events which are considered ethnographically, yet, as a biopolitical topic, it hovers in the background and is not taken up analytically.

Within anthropology and medical anthropology, the subjects of dying and death must be placed, too, in the changing shape of disciplinary knowledge and practice. Early investigations of death were undertaken in an anthropological enterprise that conceived the object of study to be discrete cultural groups whose native practices were considered perduring. The framework for approaching death was the individual within a bounded cultural group, the threat of death to social stability, and the role of ritualized, generalized mortuary practices in the re-stabilization and re-integration of small-scale societies. Studies of war and violence were not conceptually connected with studies of death or their associated rituals. Critiques of colonialism, the deconstruction of "the native," and the impacts of migration and globalization have forever altered earlier conceptions of culture as static and territorially demarcated. Thus, ideas about death as an easily identifiable part of some cultural whole, and the singular disruptive or integrative role death plays, have been dismantled as well.

The addition of interpretive methods and experiments in ethnographic writing also have changed the ways in which ethnographic facts come to be established. Highly complex notions such as life, death, and dying are viewed, in contemporary investigations, as subjects without clear boundaries, and any analytic exploration of those themes now problematizes their definition. Subjects of longstanding anthropological interest foundational to contemporary death studies include: personhood, identity, liminality, and the relationship between the sacred and the secular. Of more recent interest to medical anthropologists are three lines of inquiry: (1) studies of death situated in social science analyses of technoscience are concerned with biopower, body commodification, bioethics, and a rethinking of the culture/nature and human/non-human dichotomies; (2) AIDS/HIV has fostered anthropological work on the social underpinnings of disease acquisition and its spread, the political economy of epidemics, and the culture of risk; and (3) the anthropology of violence, war, and terror explores ways in which death is "lived" in memory, in illness, in the body, and in everyday practices. Critical, narrative, and phenomenological analytic approaches come to the fore in these contemporary explorations. Death is now a site where investigations of technology, medicine, and science; epidemics, poverty, and structural inequality; state and ethnic conflict and genocide; intersections of person, community, and the state; and traditional and innovative approaches to "culture" and "nature" come together.

# **THE CLASSIC STUDIES: RELIGION, RITUAL, AND THE SOCIAL**

Grounded in the work of Tylor, Frazer, and Durkheim on the origins and social function of religion, the anthropology of death developed around the task of describing normative funeral and mourning rituals in pre-literate societies. Analysis aimed to illustrate ways in which particular rites enabled the transfer of the soul from one realm to another and reinforced social solidarity. Durkheim's student, Robert Hertz (1907/1960) in his study of secondary burial rituals, set the standard for anthropological considerations of the corpse and its treatment, the soul, ritual practices of mourners, and relationships among them. His work emphasized the following: death does not coincide with the destruction of an individual's life; death is a social event and the beginning of a ceremonial process by which the dead person becomes an ancestor; and finally, death is an initiation into an afterlife, a rebirth. His insights about death as passage from one classificatory status to another remained central subjects in the anthropology of death through most of the 20th century.

The studies of Malinowski and Radcliffe-Brown, while influenced by Durkheim and Hertz, focused not on the corpse, but instead on the problem of death as a social crisis for society. (See Palgi & Abramovitch, 1984, for a review of the classic studies.) The impact of functionalist theory on anthropological studies of death, especially regarding the social implications of mortuary rituals, was felt well into the 1970s and 1980s. The period from the 1960s to the 1980s saw a profusion of ethnographic accounts of rituals surrounding death, in both their symbolic and structural aspects (e.g., Block & Parry, 1982; Danforth, 1982; Douglass, 1969; Goody, 1962; Gorer, 1965; Huntington & Metcalf, 1979; LeVine, 1982; Metcalf, 1982). Rosenblatt, Walsh, and Jackson (1976) surveyed grief and mourning practices in 78 cultural groups to identify universal or near-universal cultural responses to the death of someone close. They compared death customs from around the world—behavior surrounding the bereaved, taboos, ritual practice, and the role of anger and aggression, for example—with customs in the United States.

### **CRITIQUE AND INNOVATION**

While Hertz noted that death rituals tapped deep emotions, his study and those that followed emphasized the socially determined nature of emotional responses to death. Indeed, Block and Parry (1982, p. 41) describe emotion only in the service of sociality, stating that mortuary practices anchor the social group, "not just by political power, but by some of the deepest emotions, beliefs and fears of people everywhere." An exception is the work of LeVine (1982) in psychological anthropology on grief, anger, and fear among the bereaved in Gusii funerals. In their comprehensive cross-cultural review of death studies up to 1984, Palgi and Abramovitch (1984, p. 385) comment: "When reading through the anthropological literature in one large sweep, one is left with the impression of coolness and remoteness. The focus is on the bereaved and on the corpse but never on the dying." Agreeing with and extending that assessment of observer detachment and an absence of an engagement with powerful emotion, Rosaldo (1989a, 1989b) and Fabian (1974) both develop critiques of the state of the anthropology of death. Rosaldo characterizes ethnographic representations of death by their formality, externality, and generality, while ignoring lived experience, subjectivity, and particularity. Seeking to describe broad cultural patterns, anthropologists "flatten their accounts, distancing themselves from the tears and agony as they seek out the lowest common denominators that make all funerals not different from one another but the same" (Rosaldo, 1989a, p. 173). He calls for a shift from ritual to bereavement as the unit of analysis and a move in ethnographic writing from distanced witnessing of visual spectacle to an engagement with the subjective experience and intense emotion of mourners. Fabian, in a more scathing claim, asserts that the historical representation of death in selfcontained rituals, performed for the sake of social solidarity in bounded societies, has had an "intellectually disastrous effect" on anthropology. The discipline has looked only at visible behaviors surrounding death— "parochialization and folklorization"—rather than addressing the supreme social reality of the final dilemma of life. The study of "how others die," Fabian notes, has placed death at a safe distance from one's own society and one's self.

A number of pathbreaking ethnographies emerged from scholars trained in and following the 1960s. While maintaining the tradition of employing ritual as a central theme, those texts are influenced by the turn to interpretive techniques in ethnographic writing. They move well beyond strategies of generalization to explore the impact of individual deaths on particular communities and to consider the topic of death from the perspectives of poetics and politics, gender, emotion, the body, the self, memory, and modernity. For example, Myerhoff (1978), following Van Gennep and Victor Turner, describes the social drama and performative aspects of death as a life cycle passage ritual in a fading community of elderly Jews in California. Battaglia (1990) in an ethnography of cultural responses to mortality, explores the ways in which personhood is performed and experienced in rituals of commemoration in Sabarl society. Serematakis (1991) uses women's laments as her point of departure to examine the social uses of pain and methods of emotional communication and resistance in women's experience in modern Greece. Desjarlais (1992) focuses on sensory practices among the Yolmo Sherpa to develop an esthetics of experience that encompasses ways of understanding and writing about death, illness, and healing.

Moving beyond ritual as the guiding analytic frame, Cohen (1998) uses the themes of senility and old age in India, the United States, and in European social thought to ponder ways in which the decay of the body comes to be enacted and interpreted as decline and as reflection of family and community relations, the culture of the state, and scientific practices. The anticipation and location of death emerge as major preoccupations for elderly immigrants and refugees to the United States in Becker's (2002) study of transnationality and ethnic identity in late life. Biehl (1999) documents the interplay of science, government, poverty, and subjectivity in his study of AIDS and the experience of dying in Brazil's "zones of abandonment." The cemetery is a site of cultural production for Francis, Kellaher, and Neophytou (2004) in their cross-cultural study of memory-making, ethnic identity, and the incorporation of the dead into everyday life.

# **FROM THRESHOLD TO EVENT, PROCESS, AND EXPERIENCE**

In his comprehensive history of death in the Western world, Philippe Aries (1974, p. 28) writes of the Middle Ages, "In death man encountered one of the great laws of the species, and he had no thought of escaping it or glorifying it. He merely accepted it with just the proper

#### **From Threshold to Event, Process, and Experience 247**

amount of solemnity due one of the important thresholds which each generation always has to cross." For well over a thousand years, death was a public event rather than the private family matter it now has become. Death was visible everywhere in life; it was intermingled with life and not conceived to be in opposition to life. "Thus death was not a personal drama but an ordeal for the community, which was responsible for maintaining the continuity of the race," Aries (1981, p. 603) writes. Death was "tamed" by ceremonies "both Christian and customary" (Aries, 1974, p. 12). The dying person's bedchamber was a place that the community could and did freely enter, where "each man would discover the secret of his individuality" (Aries, 1974, pp. 51–52). That individuality was built not on the psycho-emotional terms we associate it with today, but was instead a relationship between the worldly acts and passions of a lifetime and fate. Dying well, the *artes moriendi* of the 15th century, provided the model, until the 19th century, of how a spiritual passage, a crossing of a critical threshold from life into the unknown, should unfold. Though the deathbed scene was a public drama that encapsulated the fight of good against evil for the soul, it also embodied a private, intimate relationship between the act of crossing that threshold and the dying individual: "the fate of the dying man was decided for the last time, in which his whole life and all his passions and attachments were called into question" (Aries, 1981, p. 108).

For millennia, doctors were rare at the bedside and death was not conceived in a medical idiom. By the end of the 18th century, death began to be understood as located in the body, as resulting from something that happened to the body. Foucault (1975) describes the emergence of anatomic understandings of the body together with clinical understandings of disease in his history of modern medicine's "gaze," its apprehension of relationships among disease symptoms and internal organs. Then death came to be seen not as something that arrives from outside this world, but as a disease or a natural process to be known and attended to by doctors. The dying person became the patient. Medicine made death visible to the doctor who could see everything about disease and the body. In that transformation, the dying person became alienated from knowing, in the spiritual sense of an earlier era, his own death. By the 19th century, the terms in which death was understood had shifted from religion and the invisible, fateful crossing at the deathbed to medicine, a disease process, and the analyzable body. By the mid-20th century, that understanding came to include as well the "truth" of the dying patient as witness to and creator of his own identity (Armstrong, 1987; Arney & Bergen, 1984) and the fact that the biology of death itself could be negotiated for political purposes. Death became a process that encompassed life. Dying was a form, a style of living and its end-point was open both to varieties of psychological expression and to medical debate.

In their studies of death in the modern American hospital (which followed the unprecedented rise in hospital deaths in the United States), sociologists Glaser, Strauss, and Sudnow were the first to investigate how late 20th century *dying* is organized and understood through structural features of the hospital, especially medical and nursing staff interactions with patients and families. Who can speak about death and to whom, the ways in which emotions are revealed or concealed, and expectations about the timing and certainty of death all were shown to be socially elaborated, bureaucratically determined. Glaser and Strauss (1965, 1968) found that dying had a "trajectory," a duration and shape, which was conceptually useful in knowing how the passage from life to death was constituted. The work of psychiatrist Kubler-Ross (1969), published in the same period as the sociological studies, articulated and mapped the patient's voice through the dying transition so that it could be conceptually isolated as a process that lends itself to, and in fact needs, management by health professionals. A dying person, Kubler-Ross informed us, is a self-aware being with expressive needs. *Dying* came into its late-modern form as an *experience* that could be evaluated and inflected with value by the dying person and by others.

The modern hospice movement, generally considered to have started with the founding of St. Christopher's Hospice in Great Britain in 1967, arose during that same period. Fueled by the then widely acknowledged desire for individual control over the dying experience, the psychological staging of dying, and symptom management techniques, the hospice became a means of combining modern medical knowledge and practice with an imagined tradition of family and community that was thought to be an alternative to the growing bureaucratization and use of technology found in the hospital. Although less than 20% of persons in the United States and Great Britain die in hospice programs, hospice has become the symbol of the Western idea of "a good death," that is, a patient and family-centered process in which spiritual, emotional, and psychological labor are the focus of attention and in which symptom control is in the service of personal growth and awareness at the very end of life. Hospice has become a site of "healthy dying," moral order, and ultimate individualism (Seale, 1998; Walter, 1994). Yet the elderly, for whom biological death often follows social death, and for whom dying is frequently without reflexivity, lie outside the "good death" cultural ideal.

# **DEATH AS A PROBLEM OF LIFE AND BIOPOLITICS**

The historical shift in conceptions of dying—from something powerful, metaphysical, and inevitable, to an event to stave off, an act over which one must assert control, a process one can observe, a clinical dilemma, and a technical decision—occurred gradually from the 1960s with the confluence of a number of changes in the medical and social landscape. In 1968 a Harvard Medical School committee, responding to the medical demand for a way to preserve organs for transplantation, created a new definition of death, *brain death*, in which they determined that a person crosses the threshold from life to death when there is irreversible and permanent cessation of function of the entire brain. With this new definition the artificial respirator or ventilator, which was coming into widespread use in intensive care units in industrialized countries, could keep the heart pumping and the lungs breathing so that organs would continue to receive oxygenated blood and would not "die." The Harvard committee decision was followed by the creation of The Uniform Determination of Death Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1981 (and was followed by similar legislation in European countries), which outlined the clinical criteria that determine brain death. The formal, new definition of brain death moved, blurred, and troubled the traditional boundary between life and death, a boundary which had never before been publicly questioned or clinically debated. The absence of breath and heartbeat, historically the defining features of death which anyone could note, were no longer the only, or the most comprehensive, or the correct criteria. Lock (2002) described the differential reaction to the concept of brain death in Japan and North America, illustrating how the redefinition of death was perceived as an affront to the natural and the traditional in Japan. As a result, organ transplants

were not allowed there until the year 2000, following considerable public debate.

A moral uneasiness began to appear in American and European studies of healthcare professionals who worked with organ donors. Physicians and nurses questioned whether potential donors on respirators were really dead. They sometimes noted that donors died twice—first from trauma or disease and then again when respirators were removed. The existence of dead persons kept in lifelike conditions of ongoing respiration suggested that there was more than one kind of death or that brain death was not actual, final death. Rather than specifying and clarifying the moment and conditions of death, the notion of brain death made death more indeterminate and troubling because it became an epiphenomenon of transplant technology or an event that could be decided through political deliberation (Agamben, 1998). Sharp (1995) describes health professional unease over definitions of death and how mixed messages about rights to body parts that "live on" impact the sense of self of organ recipients. In interviews with transplant and intensive care specialists and physicians who treat long-term comatose patients in North America, Britain, and Japan, Lock (2000) describes the extent of the "brain death problem" that now extends to debates about the nature of consciousness, the degree to which brain dead persons can be distinguished from corpses, and the moral ambiguity of bodies that are neither persons nor cadavers. The global traffic in organ sales (mostly kidneys) from poor live donors to more affluent buyers, studied by Cohen (1999) and Scheper-Hughes (2000), extends the anthropology of transplantation from medico-legal definitions of death and the person to the political economy of exploitation, the relationship of bodily risk and harm to survival, and the question of what constitutes ethical medical practice (Finkel, 2001).

The use of the positive pressure mechanical respirator, invented as a means for maintaining respiratory function during heart and lung surgery, quickly spread in the United States to non-surgical and non-transplant patients, including the elderly, the comatose, and the dying. On those persons life-extending technologies collided with medicine's unclear sense of its role in death. Biomedical ethics, by then a well-established professional domain as well as an intellectual field, scrutinized this place of uncertainty in its attempt to find solutions both to the uses of technologies that prolong dying or keep the "dead" alive and to the ambiguous obligations of contemporary

#### **Spaces of Violent Death 249**

clinical medicine. Timmermans' (1999, p. 53) ethnographic study of the history, politics, routinization, and rationalization of resuscitation in Western Europe and the United States shows that while resuscitation rarely saves lives, it frames death as a socio-medical failure, a roadblock "to be cleared by modern medicine." The disjunction between the societal quest for "death with dignity"—that is, a death without medical intervention to prolong dying and the regular use of life-extending/death-prolonging technologies in the acute-care hospital and emergency room setting became a central preoccupation of American, and to a lesser extent Western European, medicine by the mid-1980s (Kaufman, 1998; Muller & Koenig, 1988).

The making of post-modern or late modern subjects, described in ethnographies of reproductive, transplant, and other biomedical technologies, is explored by Kaufman (2000) in regard to persons/bodies who are betwixt and between life and death, culture, and nature. The permanent comatose condition and the institutions and practices that enable that form of life to exist are extreme manifestations of the life extension enterprise and they create further cultural remappings of the notions of life, person, and death. Shifting understandings of "natural death," "life prolongation," and "suffering," for example, impact and are informed by cultural quandaries (especially American) about approaching, negotiating, and accepting death, the value of any form of life, and what social practices constitute dignity.

A number of recent studies focus on relationships among medical care, death, the enactment of dignity, and notions of suffering in cross-cultural comparison (see, e.g., Kleinman, Das, & Lock, 1997). Farmer and Kleinman (1989) compare the stories of two persons dying from AIDS, one at a Harvard teaching hospital and the other in a poor, rural community in Haiti, to highlight ways in which the powers of biomedicine are limited to diagnosis and treatment and ignore the suffering of the dying. Gordon and Paci (1997), in a juxtaposition of the "autonomy–control" narrative of North America with the "social embeddedness" narrative of Tuscany, Italy, show how cultural assumptions underlying visions of "the good" guide medical practices surrounding the disclosure or concealment of life-threatening illness. Informed consent, self-determination, and autonomy, guiding principles of biomedical ethics that are of primary importance in the delivery of American medicine and that are now circulating the globe and gaining ascendance, seem harsh, irresponsible, and naive from the framework of the Italian narrative in which protection, tranquility, family, and relationships assume the greatest importance in the face of death. The rise, limits, and irrelevance of bioethics as a cultural paradigm for structuring problems and solutions to the end of life, the interpretation of death, and the organization and gaze of clinical medicine in general are described by Bosk (1999), Fox (1991), Kleinman (1999), and others.

# **THE SOCIAL INEQUALITY OF DISEASE DISTRIBUTION**

Seeking to move beyond the analysis of individual risk-taking behaviors and psychosocial variables in the study of epidemics, critical medical anthropologists (beginning in the 1980s) have called attention to the ways in which political economy, class, and gender create unequal vulnerabilities and responses to disease and death. Poverty, racism, and oppression are shown to shape the contours of morbidity and death statistics through the unbalanced distribution of medical services and political and economic barriers to prevention and care. In those studies, disease control programs are critically appraised. Linkages are made between global capitalism and individual affliction and between individual human agency and the structural factors that constrain it (e.g., Farmer, 1992, 2001; Farmer, Connors, & Simmons, 1996; Kim, Millen, Irwin, & Gershaman, 2000; Singer, 1998). This body of work extends the social medicine tradition of Rudolf Virchow into ethnographic practice:

Medical statistics will be our standard of measurement: we will weigh life for life and see where the dead lie thicker, among the workers or among the privileged. (Virchow, 1848, quoted in Farmer, 2001)

The social roots of mass death from disease and the conditions that place individuals at risk in the first place are structural. Power relations, an important source of disease affliction, are slow to be acknowledged in public health discourse and action.

# **SPACES OF VIOLENT DEATH: NORMAL, PATHOLOGICAL, EXCEPTIONAL**

The legal sanctioning of violence in state politics and the merging of violence and the law (Agamben, 1998) has become, according to the surge in publications beginning in the 1990s, a growing focus for anthropological work. Prior to this trend, Taussig (1984, 1987) described the ways in which "terror and torture became the form of life … an organized culture with its systematized rules, imagery, procedures and meanings … " (Taussig, 1984, p. 495), in his ethnography of the colonial "heart of darkness" of Colombia. More recently, Desjarlais and Kleinman (1994) note the worldwide rise both in conflicts between and within states and in civilian casualties resulting from nationalist struggles, ethnic rivalries, and political insurgencies. Nagengast (1994, p. 110) reports that since the end of the Cold War and the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, more than 50 ethnic conflicts are in progress, "a veritable explosion of violence with the state lending the force of arms to one side or the other." Robben and Nordstrom (1995, p. 2) state, "if we expand our definition of [war] to include the pressing conflicts in many people's lives—riots, gang warfare, tribal genocide, and forms of terror warfare such as rape and torture—then we find that the number of people directly affected by violence extends into the hundreds of millions." Death and destruction—of lives, homelands, families, identities, traditions, in short, "the death of a way-of-being-in-theworld" (Daniel, 1996, p. 68)—are the fundamental reality in examinations of war, ethnic strife, and their aftermath. They are the ground on which ethnographers stand to write about the lived experience of those who witness, suffer from, and perpetrate violence and massive death and the kind of culture(s) that an unrelenting exposure to violent death creates. Victims and victimizers are not always dichotomous; relations of power and lines of authority are not always clear (Robben & Nordstrom, 1995, p. 8).

A major theme connecting the various anthropological investigations of violence and its ramifications throughout the world is its insidiousness, its enactment in everyday life, and its effects on the routine tasks of living as well as on the personal and cultural meanings imputed to the past and the future. Political, structural, symbolic, and everyday violence are the concepts employed most in critical analyses of the devastating consequences of extreme conflict, mass death, and interpersonal aggression in order to identify particular ways in which the political–economic organization of social inequality is linked to and implicated in individual lives—both in internalized legitimations of hierarchy and in the contexts of family and community disruption and distress (Bourgois, 2001).

The ways in which violence, war, and acts of terror become embodied are of special interest to medical anthropologists (Green, 1998), who have explored the ramifications of massacres, genocides, and oppression along with their associated displacements and deprivations on memory, illness, and the body, as well as the relationship of forms of embodiment to cultural production. In a detailed analysis of a child's wish to die so others might live, Quesada (1998) provides a moving portrait of how a decade of war in Nicaragua is inscribed in the body and life of a 10 year old boy. Quesada (1998, pp. 62–64) writes that his is "a body charged with social and family responsibility … colonized through filial piety and loyalty … to the struggle not to succumb to the extreme social, economic, and physical duress" created by the impact of political upheavals on his very physicality and his rational assessment of what would be best for himself and his family. Quesada's description of one child's desire for death gives voice to the effects of fear, combat, continuous food shortages, inadequate housing, and "the space of death" (Taussig, 1984) on young victims and survivors of revolution and powerful political forces beyond their control.

Everyday violence, in the form of commonplace, expected infant death and maternal practices of passive infanticide and indifference are the subjects of Scheper-Hughes' (1992) work in the shantytowns of Northeastern Brazil, where approximately a quarter of the babies born die in infancy. Scheper-Hughes traces the ultimate sources of the extreme deprivation there to political and economic neglect perpetrated by the post-colonial state, including the police, death squads, and the medical establishment. The institutionalized and normalized practices women employ in that context of scarcity include: the withdrawal of food from babies thought to be too weak to live so that they might die more quickly; and the withholding of emotional attachment from apathetic infants so that their mothers will not mourn their loss.

The dead body is a site for delineating relationships between the person and the state and for representations of social fact. In his study of the 1995 Chicago heat wave, Klinenberg (1999, 2002) discovered how the science of the medical autopsy became the lens through which deaths "caused by natural disaster" were viewed. Journalists focused on the aftermath of the problem—the carnavalesque quality of refrigerating and storing corpses in the city center—rather than on its source—the deplorable housing conditions that endanger frail, poor,

#### **References 251**

isolated elderly, the majority of the victims. The quantity of the dead was important in the public narrative, as was the need for health, esthetics, and order in processing the dead. But the bodies remained nameless, unconnected to specific families and neighborhoods. The politics surrounding the identification and counting of the dead is taken up as well by Scheper-Hughes (1996) in her comparison of how street children in Brazil and "Black" township youth in South Africa come to be known as "dangerous" while they are alive, and how their dead bodies are de-personalized and devalued in social representation.

### **CONCLUSION**

In the context of medical technologies that simultaneously extend life and prolong dying, the commodification of poor bodies in a global economy of scarcity, debt, and demand, and the proliferation of violent conflict into everyday life, *death* and *life* enter a zone of indistinction in which biopolitics determines their precise definition (Agamben, 1998). The ways in which law, medicine, the market, concepts of the body, private life, and political existence come together in new cultural formations will continue to be a rich ground for anthropological investigation.

### **REFERENCES**

- Agamben, G. (1998). *Homo sacer*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Aries, P. (1974). *Western attitudes toward death from the middle ages to the present*. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Aries, P. (1981). *The hour of our death*. New York: Knopf.
- Armstrong, D. (1987). Silence and truth in death and dying. *Social Science & Medicine*, *24*, 651–657.
- Arney, W. R., & Bergen, B. J. (1984). *Medicine and the management of living*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
- Battaglia, D. (1990). *On the bones of the serpent*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
- Becker, G. (2002). Dying away from home: Quandaries of migration for elders in two ethnic groups. *Journal of Gerontology*. *57B*, 579–595.
- Biehl, J. G. (1999). Other life: AIDS, biopolitics, and subjectivity in Brazil's zones of social abandonment. (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1999.) Ann Arbor: UMI Dissertation Services.
- Block, M., & Parry, J. (Eds.). (1982). *Death and the regeneration of life*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Bosk, C. L. (1999). Professional ethicist available: Logical, secular, friendly. *Daedalus*, *128*, 47–68.

- Bourgois, P. (2001). The continuum of violence in war and peace: Postcold war lessons from El Salvador. *Ethnography*, *2*, 5–37.
- Cohen, L. (1998). *No aging in India*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Cohen, L. (1999). Where it hurts: Indian material for an ethics of organ transplantation. *Daedalus*, *128*, 135–166.
- Danforth, L. M. (1982). *The death rituals of rural Greece*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Daniel, E. V. (1996). *Charred lullabies*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Desjarlais, R. R. (1992). *Body and emotion*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Desjarlais, R. R., & Kleinman, A. (1994). Violence and demoralization in the new world disorder. *Anthropology Today*, *10*, 9–12.
- Douglass, W. A. (1969). *Death in Murelaga: Funerary rituals in a Spanish Basque village*. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- Fabian, J. (1974). How others die—reflections on the anthropology of death. In A. Mack (Ed.), *Death in American experience* (pp. 177–201). New York: Schocken Books.
- Farmer, P. (1992). *AIDS and accusation*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Farmer, P. (2001). *Infections and inequalities* (Updated ed. with new preface). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Farmer, P., Connors, M., & Simmons, J. (Eds.). (1996). *Women, poverty, and AIDS*. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.
- Farmer, P., & Kleinman, A. (1989). AIDS as human suffering. *Daedalus*, *118*, 135–160.
- Finkel, M. (2001, May 27). Complications. *The New York Times Magazine*, pp. 26–33, 40, 52, 59.
- Foucault, M. (1975). *The birth of the clinic*. New York: Vintage.
- Fox, R. C. (1991). The evolution of American bioethics: A sociological perspective. In G. Weisz (Ed.), *Social science perspectives on medical ethics* (pp. 201–217). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Francis, D., Kellaher, L., & Neophytou, G. (2004). *The secret cemetery*. Oxford and New York: Berg.
- Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1965). *Awareness of dying*. New York: Aldine.
- Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1968). *Time for dying*. New York: Aldine.

Goody, J. (1962). *Death, property and the ancestors*. London: Tavistock.

- Gordon, D., & Paci, E. (1997). Disclosure practices and cultural narratives: Understanding concealment and silence around cancer in Tuscany, Italy. *Social Science & Medicine*, *44*, 1433–1452.
- Gorer, G. (1965). *Death, grief and mourning*. New York: Doubleday.
- Green, L. (Ed.). (1998). The embodiment of violence. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly*, *12*, 3–7.
- Hertz, R. (1960). *Death and the right hand*. New York: Free Press. (Original work published 1907.)
- Huntington, R., & Metcalf, P. (1979). *Celebrations of death: The anthropology of mortuary ritual.* Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Kaufman, S. (1998). Intensive care, old age, and the problem of death in America. *The Gerontologist*, *38*, 715–725.
- Kaufman, S. (2000). In the shadow of "death with dignity": Medicine and cultural quandaries of the vegetative state. *American Anthropologist*, *102*, 69–83.