#### **Introduction 479**

- World Health Organization. (1991). *Rapid assessment protocol for planning condom services*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, Global Programme on AIDS.
- World Health Organization. (1993). *Rapid evaluation method guidelines for maternal and child health, family planning and other health services*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization Division of Family Health and Division of Epidemiological Surveillance and Health Situation and Trend Assessment.
- World Health Organization. (1998a). *The Rapid assessment and response guide on injecting drug use program on substance abuse*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- World Health Organization. (1998b). *The rapid assessment and response guide on psychoactive substance use and especially vulnerable young people*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- World Health Organization. (1998c). *The rapid assessment and response guide on substance use and sexual risk behavior*. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- Yamey, G. (2000). Drug companies cut HIV drug prices in the developing world. *British Medical Journal, 320*(7246), 1357.
- Zhu, T. F., Korber, B. T., Nahmias, A. J., Hooper, E., Sharp, P. M., & Ho, D. D. (1998). An African HIV-1 sequence from 1959 and implications for the origin of the epidemic. *Nature, 391*(6667), 594–597.

# **Malaria and other Major Insect Vector Diseases**

#### **Jeannine Coreil**

### **INTRODUCTION**

Anthropological research on insect vector-borne disease spans the full spectrum of theoretical and methodological approaches in medical anthropology. Important contributions to both biological and cultural anthropology have emerged in this field. Theoretical orientations reflected in the literature include ecological, ethnomedical, politicaleconomic, feminist and applied/public health perspectives. Research designs include large-scale population studies, community surveys and clinical case studies. This review will focus on malaria, the most prevalent and deadly of the tropical diseases,<sup>1</sup> with selective coverage of other diseases transmitted by insects.

Most of the work cited here was conducted in the past two decades. In 1979, Dunn noted the paucity of any behavioral science research on parasitic diseases and outlined a very general program of research, including anthropological studies (Dunn, 1979). Two decades later, Kendall and Zielinski, (1999) document substantial development of the field, including a prominent contribution of anthropological perspectives and methods. This review covers five major insect vector diseases: malaria, dengue fever, lymphatic filariasis, onchocerciasis, and Chagas' disease. These were selected on the basis of their importance as world health problems and as foci for anthropological research.

The epidemiological characteristics of these diseases are summarized in Table 1. Clinical features of the diseases will be briefly summarized. Malaria produces extreme debilitation from fever, headache, and chills, is recurrent, increases the risk of low birth weight, miscarriage, and stillbirth in pregnant women, and is particularly life-threatening in young children. Like malaria, dengue causes fever, headache, and chills, as well as body pain and skin rash. Unlike malaria it is not recurrent, although persons who have had dengue are at elevated risk for the more serious forms of dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue toxic shock syndrome. Children are particularly at risk for complications of dengue. The clinical manifestations of lymphatic filariasis are diverse, including lymphedema and elephantiasis of the leg, arm, or genitals. The most debilitating aspects the disease are periodic acute attacks of adenolymphangitis, accompanied by painful swelling of the affected area, headache, and fever. Although the common name for onchocerciasis is river blindness, this form of the disease is less common than onchocercal skin disease, a disorder characterized by lesions and depigmentation. Chagas' disease causes damage to the heart and other organs, and often goes undetected until midlife, when damage to the heart and colon causes fatal complications in 30–40% of victims.

| Disease                 | Vector         | Pathogen  | Distribution                      | People infected |
|-------------------------|----------------|-----------|-----------------------------------|-----------------|
| Malaria                 | Mosquito       | Protozoa  | Tropics,<br>Subtropics            | 300–500 million |
| Dengue                  | Mosquito       | Virus     | Africa, Tropical<br>South America | 5,000 per year  |
| Lymphatic<br>filariasis | Mosquito       | Nematode  | Tropics,<br>Subtropics            | 120 million     |
| Onchocerciasis          | Blackfly       | Nematode  | Africa, Latin<br>America          | 17.5 million    |
| Chagas' disease         | Triatomine bug | Protozoan | Central and<br>South America      | 18 million      |

**Table 1.** Epidemiology of Major Insect Vector Diseases

### **ECOLOGICAL STUDIES**

The prominence of biocultural approaches to the study of vector-borne diseases is well illustrated by anthropological research on malaria. The most notable example of this tradition is the frequently cited case of malaria and sickle cell disease in Africa (Alland, 1970; Livingstone, 1958; McElroy & Townsend, 1996; Wisenfeld, 1967). Many introductory texts use this case to illustrate the impact of culture change (introduction of agriculture) on disease ecology (malaria prevalence) and human biological adaptation (genetic selection for the malaria-protective sickle cell trait). The transition to food production in East Africa about two millennia ago was accompanied by the clearing of land, removal of forest canopy, and the exposure of wet areas to sunlight. These conditions offer ideal breeding grounds for mosquitoes, including *Anopheles gambiae*, the vector for a severe strain of malaria caused by *Plasmodium falciparum*. Mortality from falciparum malaria was high, often killing 25% of its victims. The opportune presence of a genetic mutation in the population led to selection of individuals with the abnormal hemoglobin that causes red blood cells to "sickle" and prevent reproduction of *Plasmodium* organisms, and accounts for the prevalence of this trait in African and African origin populations. The social ecology of malaria in Africa illustrates the interaction of biology and culture in the production of disease patterns.

Understanding of the interaction of biology and culture in relation to malaria was further elaborated in studies of the coevolution of certain cuisines and other malaria-protective hemoglobin variants in Mediterranean populations (Greene & Danubio, 1997). Focusing primarily on G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase) deficiency

and thalassemia, researchers have linked the cultural patterning of oxidant-containing plant food consumption to an optimal antimalarial interaction with red blood cell anomalies. In addition, it is posited that therapeutic antimalarial remedies have developed within specific cultural settings to maximize the protective effects of G6PD deficiencies.

Other anthropological work on malaria in the Mediterranean has taken a broad ecological perspective, such as the work of Peter Brown in Sardinia. Drawing upon epidemiologic, geographic, and ethnographic data, Brown describes three levels of cultural adaptation to malaria (Brown, 1998). At the level of human ecology, malaria prevalence shaped settlement patterns as well as the practice of inverse transhumance in the local subsistence system. At the level of social organization, traditional gender roles and social stratification resulted in lower exposure of women and members of the upper social class to the anopheles mosquito vector. Ethnomedical beliefs, on the other hand, prescribed certain behavioral practices that likely reduce the rate of illness relapse among people affected by malaria. Brown extends this multi-level framework to analyze the resurgence of malaria globally (Brown, 1997), identifying economic– demographic, social, and ideological factors involved in its spread.

Ecological approaches focused on a more local level have been applied to other vector-borne diseases such as dengue fever. Unlike malaria, which has a mosquito vector that breeds in large, stagnant pools of water mostly found in rural areas, the dengue vector (*Aedes aegypti*) typically propagates in periurban, artificially created small water containers such as discarded tires and household objects. Understanding the transmission and

#### **Ethnomedical Studies 481**

control of dengue thus requires a focus on communities and households. Using the concept of ethnoecology, Whiteford (1997) analyzes data from a community study of dengue fever in a poor barrio of Santo Domingo to examine the role of historical factors and political will in shaping local concepts of community participation in disease control. Focusing the analytic lens inside the household of this same community, Coreil, Whiteford, and Salazar (1997) develop a model for studying the household ecology of disease transmission. The model examines risk behavior, transmission behavior, and risk protection within three spheres of influence, that is, the social, bio-physical, and cultural environments.

One of the most comprehensive anthropological studies of a vector-borne disease is Joseph Bastien's analysis of Chagas' disease in Bolivia. Also known as American trypanosomiasis, Chagas' disease is caused by a protozoan and transmitted by the tiny, domestic triatomine bug, locally known as the "kissing bug" because of its proclivity to bite people on their faces during sleep. The disease causes irreversible cardiac and intestinal damage, has no cure, and is fatal to about 30%–40% of its victims. With about 18 million people infected in Central and South America, the disease is a major public health threat. In *The Kiss of Death* (1998), Bastien presents a multi-faceted account of the history, ecology, epidemiology, and control of Chagas' disease, describing his book as an "anthropology of the house" (p. xxiii). Careful attention is given to the ethnophysiology of the disease within the local health culture, as well as traditional preventive and curative practices. Case studies of victims and activists vividly portray the lived experience of the illness and its importance in Andean society and culture. In a chapter entitled "Culture and Political Economy of Homes," the author integrates symbolic and political perspectives on domestic housing and efforts to control the vector. The book concludes with a template for culturally contextualized control strategies that span the micro and macro intervention levels.

### **ETHNOMEDICAL STUDIES**

Ethnomedical studies, broadly defined, comprise a large proportion of anthropological research on vector-borne diseases. Numerous studies have investigated local beliefs and practices regarding specific conditions, including conceptions of etiology, pathophysiology, severity, home management, and treatment. Often such studies are conducted with specific knowledge utilization goals for planning intervention programs. Because of its global threat, ethnomedical studies of malaria are well represented in this literature. The scope of this research agenda was outlined in a chapter written by Carl Kendall entitled "Social and Behavioral Aspects of Malaria" that appeared in a 1991 Institute of Medicine's report on malaria (Oaks, Mitchell, Pearson, & Carpenter, 1991).

The failure of the 1950s era global initiatives to eradicate malaria through vector control shifted international attention to prevention and treatment (Bruce-Chwatt, 1984), with particular concern for the emergence of drug-resistant strains of *Plasmodium*. Ethnomedical studies have documented that in most endemic areas, malaria usually is subsumed under a broad category of "fever," or it may be incorporated into more than one local diagnostic category (Agyepong, 1992; Miguel, Tallo, Manderson, & Lansang, 1999; Reubush, Weller, & Klein, 1992). Understanding of the role of mosquitoes in malaria transmission is variable, with some localities recognizing alternative forms of the disease, such as a traditional category and a more modern entity involving the mosquito vector (e.g., Ahorlu, Dunyo, Afari, Koram, & Nkrumah, 1997; Lipowsky, Kroeger, & Vazquez, 1992). McCombie reviewed a large number of studies of helpseeking and treatment for malaria to identify patterns and evaluate adequacy of care (McCombie, 1996, 2002). Her review showed that the majority of malaria cases receive some type of treatment, with about half of cases involving self-care only, and about half involving use of traditional or official sector services. Traditional remedies and modern medicines (antimalarial drugs) are often used in combination. McCombie calls for the use of more systematic and rigorous methods to evaluate treatment adequacy in order to inform policy development.

Similar ethnomedical studies have been conducted on local cultural knowledge of dengue fever and its transmission. For example, in Merida, Mexico, ethnographic and survey research found that dengue was associated with mild febrile illnesses such as colds, considered transient, inevitable, and not serious in daily life. Like other mild fevers, dengue prevention was viewed as a matter of taking care of oneself once sick in order to prevent progression of the illness to a more serious state. The researchers suggest that indigenous models of prevention should be taken into consideration when designing community education programs related to dengue control (Winch, Lloyd, Godas, & Kendall, 1991).

Anthropological research on dengue has focused more closely on the organization of cultural knowledge about mosquito vectors. Studies have investigated recognition of different types of mosquitoes, perceptions of their dangerousness, and association of different insect vectors with particular illnesses. Kendall et al. (1990) applied systematic anthropological techniques to "exploratory ethnoentomology," using consensus analysis to group common household insects into categories and rank order their perceived dangerousness among Honduran informants. These cultural insights were helpful in designing a community-based vector control program. Others have identified the components of an exploratory ethnoentomologic study, including cultural domain mapping of insects, knowledge of the life cycle and ecology of mosquitoes and their association with disease, and local methods of mosquito control (Coreil, Whiteford, Salazar, & Barkey, 1991).

Ethnomedical studies of onchocerciasis and lymphatic filariasis document less awareness of the role of insect vectors in disease transmission than with malaria or dengue, although local cultural models are undergoing rapid change with the implementation of educational and control programs in many areas. In Nigeria, understanding of the role of *Simulium* flies in the transmission of onchocerciasis was very low, with most respondents either unaware of any cause for the disease or attributing the condition to sun exposure, heredity, witchcraft, excessive consumption of cola nuts, or mosquito bites (Awolola, Manafa, Rotimi, & Ogunrinade, 2000). In Ghana and Haiti, similar elements in cultural models of filariasis were found. In both areas traditional attributions of causality favored supernatural explanations, including accidental stepping on magical herbs in Ghana and walking on magical powder in Haiti. Community reactions to the disease were also similar in the two areas, with people avoiding critical comments about affected individuals for fear of getting the disease themselves (Coreil, Mayard, Louis-Charles, & Addiss, 1998; Gyapong, et al.)

# **COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION IN HEALTH PROGRAMS**

A large body of anthropological research on vector-borne diseases fits under the general rubric of community participation in health programs. Like other social scientists, anthropologists are viewed by health planners as experts on community, culture, family, gender, and other "behavioral" factors in disease. Thus anthropologists often have been engaged to conduct community assessments and ethnographic research to help plan disease control interventions. Early involvement tended to fit the prevailing mode of "troubleshooting" failed programs due to lack of community involvement (e.g., MacCormack & Lwihula, 1983). Beginning in the 1980s, however, it became normative to integrate social science research into the planning process of international health programs. Anthropologists have made important contributions to defining important elements of community participation in control programs for malaria (Manderson 1992a, 1992b) and dengue fever (Gordon, 1988; Gordon, Rojas, & Todwell, 1990).

The role of anthropological research in dengue fever control was expanded substantially by the "Integrated Community-based Aedes aegypti Control Project" (1998–90) focused on the Americas and funded by the Rockefeller Foundation (Kendall & Winch, 1989). The goal of the project was to develop model vector control programs in several Latin American countries based on the integration of anthropological, epidemiological, and entomological research. A workshop held at Johns Hopkins University in 1988 (Kendall & Winch, 1988) brought together vector control specialists, anthropologists, and other social scientists to develop an interdisciplinary research agenda for improving the design of dengue control programs. The proposed agenda included studies of the cultural construction of dengue, insects and the physical environment, individual and collective behavior related to sanitation, water and mosquitoes, and factors influencing community participation in control programs. Projects involving a number of anthropologists were conducted in Mexico, Honduras, and the Dominican Republic (Coreil et al., 1997; Leontsini, Gil, Kendall, & Clark, 1993; Lloyd, Winch, Ortega-Canto, & Kendall, 1992; Lloyd, Winch, Ortega-Canto, & Kendall, 1994; Whiteford, 1997; Winch, Kendall, & Gubler, 1992). Results of these studies are cited elsewhere in this entry.

A good example of the application of anthropological concepts and methods to the design of communitybased interventions for vector-borne diseases is found in a dengue control project conducted in Mexico. Using ethnomedical findings from formative research (cf. Winch et al., 1991, cited above), investigators implemented a public health communication intervention to increase understanding of dengue transmission, recognition of

#### **Conclusion 483**

mosquito larval production sites, and knowledge of appropriate control methods such as disposal of watercollecting containers. A comparison of intervention sites and a control group showed better outcomes for the former (Lloyd et al., 1992). A detailed discussion of the five-stage process used to develop, implement, and evaluate the intervention illustrates the importance of adapting programs to ecologic, cultural, and social differences between localities (Lloyd et al., 1994).

# **GENDER, STIGMA, AND TROPICAL DISEASES**

Scholarly and programmatic interest in the importance of gender differences in the impact of tropical diseases was bolstered by the establishment of a Task Force on Gender and Tropical Diseases within the Tropical Diseases Research division of the World Health Organization (WHO, 1996). Three core elements characterize genderfocused health research: first, women are viewed as more than productive and reproductive agents; second, women's health is situated in the larger sociocultural and political–economic context of society; and third, particularly in areas where tropical diseases are prevalent, structural factors within society frequently make women economically dependent on men and relegate them to lower social status (Rathgeber & Vlassoff, 1993). In their review of the state of knowledge regarding gender and tropical diseases, Vlassoff and Bonilla (1994) focus on malaria and onchocerciasis to illustrate the impact of a wide range of variables that differentially affect men and women, both as determinants and consequences of disease. For example, women's more frequent contact with water in general tends to expose them more often to the vectors that transmit malaria and schistosomiasis, and they bear harsher consequences from the burden of disease due to their caretaker responsibilities.

Gender research has been conducted on a variety of vector-born diseases, including malaria, onchocerciasis and filariasis. A study in Sudan documented successful recruitment of women to participate in health education and behavior change activities related to malaria control (A/rahman, Mohamedani, Mirgani, & Ibrahim, 1995). Sociocultural research related to onchocerciasis has highlighted the impact of social stigma, as well as gender differences in stigma for those affected by onchocercal skin disease (OSD), a condition characterized by disfiguring lesions, nodules, depigmentation, and rashes. The Pan-African Study Group on Onchocercal Skin Disease (1995) documented significant social stigma associated with the disease in several countries, and found a greater degree of perceived stigma among affected men than women. Studies focusing on the impact on Nigerian women, who are more frequently affected by the condition in that setting (Brieger, Ososanya, Kale, Oshinme, & Oke, 1997), show that women believe strongly that onchocerciasis has a negative effect on their fertility (Brieger, Ramakrishna, Adeniyi, Pearson, & Kale, 1987), and women with OSD married later and weaned their children sooner than women not affected by the disease (Amazigo, 1994). An experimental study of the impact of ivermectin treatment for OSD in Nigeria on perceived stigma showed no gender differences but documented a higher level of reported stigma 6 months following treatment, which the researchers attribute to the unexpected effect of having raised awareness of stigma among study participants (Brieger, Oshiname, & Ososanya, 1998).

In many parts of the world, women are more frequently affected by lymphedema and elephantiasis of the leg associated with lymphatic filariasis. This can lead to women experiencing a greater burden of stigma and disability due to enlarged legs, skin disfigurement, and difficulties with mobility, as documented for India (Bandyopadhyay, 1996) and Haiti (Coreil et al., 1998). A support group intervention designed to increase selfesteem and coping among Haitian women with filariasis documented improved quality of life and home management practices among program participants, and examined the process of indigenization of support groups in this cultural setting (Coreil, Mayard, & Addiss, 2003). In men, filariasis is most commonly manifested clinically by urogenital symptoms, including hydrocele (enlarged scrotum), and has been associated with shame and sexual dysfunction (Dreyer, Noroes, & Addiss, 1997).

### **CONCLUSION**

Anthropological research on insect vector diseases, largely conducted over the past two decades, reflects a broad range of perspectives. Biocultural approaches have been applied primarily to malaria, with ecological, ethnomedical, and public health perspectives found across all the diseases reviewed. Much of the research

#### **484 Malaria and other Insect Vector Diseases**

was stimulated by efforts to implement culturally sound disease control programs. Increased interest in macro social issues is evident in recent attention to gender and stigma in tropical diseases, particularly the physically disabling diseases such as onchocerciasis and filariasis. Future directions for research will likely enlarge the focus on the social conditions underlying vector-borne diseases, following biosocial research agenda for tropical diseases that shifts the focus "upstream" to the politics of policy development, and the organization of prevention and control services (Farmer & Becerra, 2001).

### **NOTE**

1. The delineation of such a disease-focused topic reflects the influence of biomedical nosology in defining specializations within medical anthropology. The continued relevance of the category "tropical diseases," largely composed of the vector-borne diseases, is a legacy of colonial history as well as scientific interest in exotic infections affecting poor countries. Also, while the review focuses on the work of anthropologists, it is often not meaningful to differentiate the latter from similar research conducted by social scientists trained in other disciplines. Thus, some anthropologically oriented work by non-anthropologists is included.

### **ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

The author thanks Dorothea Larsen and Marianne Sarkis for bibliographic assistance.

### **REFERENCES**

- Agyepong, I. A. (1992). Malaria: Ethnomedical perceptions and practice in an Adangbe farming community and implications for control. *Social Science & Medicine, 35*, 131–137.
- Ahorlu, C. K., Dunyo, S. K., Afari, E. A., Koram, K. A., & Nkrumah, F. K. (1997). Malaria related beliefs and behavior in southern Ghana: Implications for treatment, prevention, and control. *Tropical Medicine and International Health, 2*, 488–499.
- Alland, A. (1970). *Adaptation in cultural evolution: An approach to medical anthropology*. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Amazigo, U. O. (1994). Detrimental effects of onchocerciasis on marriage and breast-feeding. *Tropical and Geographical Medicine, 46*, 322–325.
- A/rahman, S. H., Mohamedani, A. A., Mirgani, E. M., & Ibrahim, A. M. (1995). Gender aspects and women's participation in the control and management of malaria in Central Sudan. *Social Science & Medicine, 42*, 1433–1446.
- Awolola, T. S., Manafa, O. U., Rotimi, O. O., & Ogunrinade, A. F. (2000). Knowledge and beliefs about causes, transmission, treatment and

control of human onchocerciasis in rural communities in south western Nigeria. *Acta Tropica, 76*, 247–251.

- Bandyopadhyay, L. (1996). Lymphatic filariasis and the women of India. *Social Science & Medicine, 42*, 1401–1410.
- Bastien, J. (1998). The kiss of death: Chagas' disease in the Americas. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
- Brieger, W. R., Oshiname, F. O., & Ososanya, O. O. (1998). Stigma associated with onchocercal skin disease among those affected near the Ofidi and Oyan rivers in western Nigeria. *Social Science & Medicine, 47*, 841–852.
- Brieger, W. R., Ososanya, O. O., Kale, O. O., Oshiname, F. O., & Oke, G. A. (1997). Gender and ethnic differences in Onchocercal skin disease in Oyo state, Nigeria. *Tropical Medicine and International Health, 2, i529–i534*.
- Brieger, W. R., Ramakrishna, J., Adaniyi, J. D., Pearson, C. A., & Kale, O. O. (1987). Onchocerciasis and pregnancy: Traditional beliefs of Yoruba women in Nigeria. *Tropical Doctor, 17*, 171–174.
- Brown, P. J. (1997). Culture and the global resurgence of malaria. In P. J. Brown & M. C. Inhorn (Eds.), *The anthropology of infectious disease: International health perspectives* (pp. 119–141). Amsterdam: Gordon & Breach.
- Brown, P. J. (1998). Cultural adaptations to endemic malaria in Sardinia. In P. J. Brown (Ed.), *Understanding and applying medical anthropology* (pp. 79–92). London: Mayfield.
- Bruce-Chwatt, L. J. (1984). Lessons learned from applied field research activities in Africa during the malaria eradication era. *Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 62*, 19–29.
- Coreil, J., Mayard, G., & Addiss, D. (in press). *Support groups for women with lymphatic filariasis in Haiti*. Final Report Series, Social, Economic and Behavioral Research, Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases, Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- Coreil, J., Mayard, G., Louis-Charles, J., & Addiss, D. (1998). Filarial elephantiasis among Haitian women: Social context and behavioural factors in treatment. *Tropical Medicine and International Health, 3*, 467–473.
- Coreil, J., Whiteford, L., & Salazar, D. (1997). The household ecology of disease transmission: Dengue fever in the Dominican Republic. In P. J. Brown, & M. C. Inhorn (Eds.), *The anthropology of infectious disease: International health perspectives* (pp. 145–171) Amsterdam: Gordon & Breach.
- Coreil, J., Whiteford, L., Salazar, D., & Barkey, N. (1991, March). *Field guide for ethnographic research on dengue fever: Lessons learned in the "Household ecology of Aedes aegypti control project"*. Report to Johns Hopkins University–Rockefeller Foundation, Research Program in Integrated Community Based Aedes Aegypti Control.
- Dreyer, G., Noroes, J., & Addiss, D. (1997). The silent burden of sexual disability associated with lymphatic filariasis. *Acta Tropica, 63*, 57–60.
- Dunn, F. L. (1979). Behavioural aspects of the control of parasitic diseases. *Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 57*, 499–512.
- Farmer, P., & Becerra, M. (2001). Biosocial research and the TDR agenda. *TDR News, 66*, 5–7.
- Gordon, A. J. (1988). Mixed strategies in health education and community participation: An evaluation of dengue control in the Dominican Republic. *Health and Education Research 3*,