## POST-INDEPENDENT INDIA'S ENVIRONMENT

India's environmental history debate is largely centred on forest, wildlife, and forest-dwelling communities and was mainly confined to the precolonial and colonial periods.<sup>1</sup> The other aspects of environmental history issues have got only a little attention during this period.<sup>2</sup> The post-Independent India's environmental history has not gained the same attention like that of the precolonial and colonial periods. This part of India's environmental history is more important than that of the precolonial and colonial periods due to its complex and multidimensional features. In fact, the post-Independent India's environmental issues and problems are not only multidimensional/ faceted but have become more complex due to populist politics. But unfortunately, the environmental history literature did not get due importance that it deserved except of course for a very few exemptions.<sup>3</sup> Indeed, there exists the need to analyse environmental history issues of the post-Independence period because of several dramatic changes that that have taken place during this period. Independent India's environmental issues and problems have become complex due to various factors, such as population explosion, urbanisation, slums, agricultural expansion, large quantity of application of fertilisers and pesticides, expansion of irrigation, large scale groundwater extraction, popularity of water intensive crops, growth of water pollution and air-polluting industries, and also phenomenal rise in the number of vehicles. Consequently, various developments in the agriculture industry and service sector have led to a series of serious environmental implications in the post-Independence period.

One of the most important environmental implications in India occurred due to the green revolution during the post-Independent India's environmental history. It resulted in expansion of area under cultivation and irrigation, power generation, large number of dams being constructed, over-exploitation of groundwater resources, decline of the quality of soil due to heavy use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides, etc. In other words, the green revolution has not only brought additional area into cultivation at the cost of common property resources except for the forests, but has also destroyed the fertility of the soil and quality of water in different regions of the

country. Waterlogging or salination are common phenomena in these areas.

The second most important environmental implication is the growth of urbanisation and urban agglomeration during the post-Independence period. At the time of Independence, the total population was about 3,610 lakhs of which, 624 lakh, which constitutes about 17 per cent, lived in the urban areas. In the subsequent decades, not only has the total population increased but urban population has also increased remarkably. According to the 2011 Census, the total population was about 12,107 lakhs of which 3,771 lakhs population was living in the urban areas and its proportion was about 31 per cent. Between 1951 and 2011, the total population has increased 3.54 folds whereas the urban population has increased to sixfold for the same period. As such people living in the urban areas were not the problem, but how they were living was a matter of concern. About 40 per cent of population in the urban areas was living in the slums. In fact, urbanisation is one of the major environmental concerns in the post-Independence period. It has also led to serious environmental consequences on a wide range of issues including housing, living space, kitchen, sanitation, drainage connection, drinking water, transport, school, hospital and other infrastructural facilities. In most of the cities, drinking water and drainage have become a paramount problem. Most of the cities/towns are diverting the river water from distant places or between river basins and polluting them; further discharging of sewage into the river has resulted in intensively polluting both surface and groundwater, river water and basins in different parts of the country. Take for example, Madras city. Though it was established in 1639 along the Coovam River, the river has now turned into a drainage canal and same is the case for several other rivers of the countries. For example, the national capital of Delhi is located along the Yamuna River. If you take bath in the Yamuna or Coovam River, most probably that would be the last bath of your life. That is a case for several river basins of this country.

Water is another important and core factor among environmental issues arising due to population growth, urbanisation, agricultural expansion and domestic water supply during the post-Independence period, because it is not only essential for the humans to survive but also to the production process. In other words, water is important for human beings, animals and the production process not only in agriculture but also in the industrial production process. It became a scarce resource during the post-Independence period. Consequently, water-related deaths have increased during the post-Independence period. Most rivers have been polluted due to industries, municipalities and the drainage from agricultural land. Another important factor is that the industrial pollution, which occurs largely due to dyeing and bleaching industries, tanneries, pharmaceutical industries, sago factories and other water-consuming industries, adversely affected the environment, especially in terms of surface water or groundwater or both in different parts of the country, as well as river basins during the post-Independence period.

Another important factor is that the increase in number of vehicles have caused a very severe environmental problems during the post-Independence period. The number of vehicles was very low at the time of Independence and it has increased remarkably during the post-Independence period. It is not merely the number of vehicles on road but the question of the kind of fuels they are running on is also an important factor. The number of vehicles that has led to air and noise pollution has also added to the environmental problems during the post-Independence period. However, there are several interventions since the late 1970s to regulate pollution, but they largely went in vain. In 1951, the numbers of vehicles were 306,000 and it has increased to 210,023,000 in 2015.

Given the macro picture, this chapter analyses the post-Independent India's environmental history for the last seven decades (1947–2017), in a historical perspective. This chapter consists of nine sections. The first section analyses the trends of green cover that encompasses forestry, pastoral land and other culturable waste, and the factors that influence the green cover during the post-Independence period. The second section deals with the impact of the green revolution on increasing area under cultivation, irrigation expansion, dams, wells, decline of soil fertility due to excessive use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides and other related issues. The third section analyses the trends of urbanisation and its consequences on environment not only in terms of the area and population but also as a wide range of household amenities and increasing slums. It also discusses the policies and its impact on urban environment. The fourth section studies the increasing trend of water demand among the different stakeholders and how that was managed and what were the consequences for the environment. The fifth section analyses the trend of industrial growth and its implications on environment during the post-Independence period. From the environmental point of view, there are two types of industries: water-polluting industries and air-polluting industries. The former includes tanneries, dyeing and bleaching industries, pharmaceutical industry, etc. These industries are polluting both surface and groundwater sources. The latter refers to cement, coal, power plant, etc., polluting the air in the surroundings. This section

analyses the trend of wide range of industries and their implications on environment. The sixth section explores the impacts of growing vehicles on the environment. It also looks into the air quality- and water quality-related issues. The seventh section deals with the various policy initiatives and enactment of laws by the government to protect the environment in the post-Independence period. The eighth section analyses the political economy of the post-Independence government policies and its consequences for the environment. The last section offers concluding observations.

## *TRENDS OF GREEN COVER, 1947–2017*

The green cover area has changed dramatically during the post-Independence period. It includes forestry, barren and unculturable land, permanent pastures and other grazing lands, land under miscellaneous tree crops and groves (not included in net area sown) and culturable wasteland. Forest includes the area of crops raised in the forest and grazing lands or areas open for grazing within the forests remain included under the 'forest area'. Barren and unculturable land include all land covered by mountains, deserts, etc. Permanent pasture and other grazing land include all grazing land, be it permanent pasture and meadows or not. Village common grazing land is included under land under miscellaneous tree crops and groves (not included in net area sown); however, land under casuring trees, thatching grasses, bamboo bushes and other groves for fuel, etc., which are not included under 'orchards', are classified under this category. Culturable wasteland includes land available for cultivation, whether taken up or not taken up for cultivation once, but not cultivated during the last five years or more in succession including the current year for some reason or the other. Such land may be either fallow or covered with shrubs and jungles which are not put to any use. They may be either accessible or inaccessible and may lie in isolated blocks or within cultivated holdings. The aforementioned categories are considered as green cover in this chapter.

The land utilisation area has increased during the post-Independence period from 284.32 million hectares in 1950–1951 to 307.48 million hectares in 2010–2011. At the same time, the total green cover has declined from 118.09 million hectares to 114.92 million hectares. In other words, the growth rate of land utilisation area was about 8.15 per cent between 1950–1951 and 2010–2011 whereas the growth rate of green cover has declined –2.68 per cent for the same period. In other words, the percentage of green cover to total land utilisation area was

about 41.53 per cent in 1950–1951 and it has declined to 37.37 per cent in 2010–2011 (Table 5.1). The green cover has declined despite bringing more area under utilisation during the last seven decades, except forest cover. The proportion of forest to the total green cover was about 41.53 per cent in 1950–1951 and it has increased to 62.30 per cent in 2010–2011. Whereas, the percentage of other green cover, viz., barren and unculturable land, was 38.1 per cent, permanent pastures and other grazing land was 6.69 per cent, land under miscellaneous tree crops and groves (not included in net area sown) 9.83 per cent, and culturable wasteland 22.94 per cent in 1950–1951, it has declined to 14.95 per cent, 8.96 per cent, 2.78 per cent and 11.01 per cent respectively in 2010–2011.

The other green cover, viz., barren and unculturable land, permanent pastures and other grazing lands, land under miscellaneous tree crops and groves (not included in net area sown) and culturable wasteland have made serious impact on the environment due to the green revolution. During the green revolution period, green cover other than forests was brought under cultivation. In other words, agricultural expansion has happened largely at the cost of green cover other than the forest.

The trends of green cover particularly forests can be looked at in three different phases during the post-Independence period. The first phase is till 1980s or until the enactment of Forest Conservation Act in 1980 and the second one is from 1980 to 2006 and the third and last phase is 2006 onwards till the recent years. At the time of Independence, the total forest cover was about 40.48 million hectares and it has increased to 67.46 million hectares in 1980. Though the forest cover has increased during this period, large extent of forest area was diverted for various development programmes until the 1980s. Between 1950 and 1980, on an average, 1.5 lakh hectares of forest per year was diverted for various development programmes. More importantly, till the 1980s, forest was in the state subject and there was no restriction to divert the forest for various development projects. Consequently, the states have diverted huge areas of forest. A large number of irrigation/power projects were initiated during this period.

The second phase is very important because the international agencies have insisted upon bringing more area under the forest cover. The Central Government does not have any power to regulate the diversion of forest for various development programmes until the 1980s. Due to the indiscriminate cutting and diversion of forest land, the forest was brought from State List to Concurrent List through the 42nd Constitutional Amendment in 1976.

| ╮<br>١<br>١À<br>ı |
|-------------------|
| í<br>í<br>ċ<br>í  |
| í<br>ś            |

**Table 5.1:** Trends of Green Cover in India, from 1950–1951 to 2010–2011

Table 5.1: Trends of Green Cover in India, from 1950-1951 to 2010-2011

## *Post-Independent India's Environment* 135

| (in million hectares) | ℅                | 37.37                                                   | 62.30  | 14.95                              | 8.96                                                | 2.78                                                                              | $11.01\,$                | 100.00                   |
|-----------------------|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|--------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
|                       | $2010-$<br>2011  | 307.48                                                  | 71.59  | 17.18                              | 10.3                                                | 3.2                                                                               | 12.65                    |                          |
|                       | ℅                | 37.70                                                   | 60.70  | 15.19                              | 9.27                                                | 2.99                                                                              | 11.85                    |                          |
|                       | $2000 -$<br>2001 | 305.19                                                  | 69.84  | 17.48                              | 10.66                                               | 3.44                                                                              | 13.63                    | 115.05   100.00   114.92 |
|                       | ℅                | 38.52                                                   | 57.75  | 16.51                              | 9.71                                                | 3.25                                                                              | 12.77                    | 100.00                   |
|                       | 1990-<br>1991    | 304.86                                                  | 67.81  | 19.39                              | 11.4                                                | 3.82                                                                              | 15                       |                          |
|                       | ℅                | 39.36                                                   | 56.34  | 16.67                              | $10.01$                                             | 2.99                                                                              | 13.98                    | 100.00 117.42            |
|                       | 1980-<br>1981    | 304.16                                                  | 67.46  | 19.96                              | 11.99                                               | 3.58                                                                              | 16.74                    |                          |
|                       | ℅                | 41.84                                                   | 50.22  | 22.13                              | 10.43                                               | 3.44                                                                              | 13.77                    | $ 100.00 $ 119.73        |
|                       | 1970-<br>1971    | 303.75                                                  | 63.83  | 28.13                              | 13.26                                               | 4.37                                                                              | 17.5                     | 127.09                   |
|                       | ℅                | 42.75                                                   | 42.36  | 28.14                              | 10.95                                               | 3.50                                                                              | 15.05                    | 100.00                   |
|                       | 1960-<br>1961    | 298.46                                                  | 54.05  | 35.91                              | 13.97                                               | 4.46                                                                              | 19.21                    | 127.6                    |
|                       | ℅                | 41.53                                                   | 34.28  | 32.31                              | 5.66                                                | 8.32                                                                              | 19.43                    | 100.00                   |
|                       | 1950-<br>1951    | 284.32                                                  | 40.48  | 38.16                              | 6.68                                                | 9.83                                                                              | 22.94                    | 118.09                   |
|                       | Details          | area for land<br>Reporting<br>utilisation<br>statistics | Forest | unculturable<br>Barren and<br>land | other grazing<br>pastures and<br>Permanent<br>lands | ind. in net area<br>groves (not<br>Land under<br>crops and<br>misc. tree<br>sown) | Culturable<br>waste land | Total                    |

Based on the constitutional amendment, the Government of India has enacted the Forest Conservation Act in 1980. This act promulgated that without consulting the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, the state cannot divert the land and it has also laid down that an equal amount of afforestation has to be established. Between 1980 and 2016, around 21,885 instances of diversion which totalled about 897,698.40 hectares.<sup>5</sup> Consequently, diversion of forest land has declined to around 24,936 hectares per annum between 1980 and 2016. The states like Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa, Gujarat, Punjab, Telangana, Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand have diverted huge extent of reserve forest. Most of the development activities in the modernisation process happened during third phase.

The third phase is very important due to the policies that gave importance to the populist politics at the cost of the environment. The Government of India has enacted the Scheduled Tribes and Other Forest-Dwelling Communities (Restoration of Forest Rights) Act 2006. This act extended the privileges to the tribals and other forest-dwelling communities to access forest resources without any restriction. It also empowered to initiate various development activities and the responsibilities given to the local communities. As on 31 March 2017, 45 lakh claims were made and about 30 lakh hectares were given the ownership rights.<sup>6</sup> The populist vote-bank politics paved the way not only for the ownership rights but also access to the forest resources. Until 2005, the non-tribals in the tribal/ hilly areas were portrayed as encroachers/exploiter; after 2006 they have been recognised as forest-dwelling communities and entitled to get the ownership rights as well as to access forest resources. Precisely, the green cover area has declined mainly due to diversion of forest for various development activities, grazing and other culturable waste. They have also declined due to agricultural expansion and further the threat to the green cover was due to the populist vote-bank politics.

## *GREEN REVOLUTION AND ITS ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT*

At the time of Independence, poverty level was very high and about 45 per cent of the population was living below the poverty line. The postcolonial government's prime agenda was to increase agricultural productivity in order to eradicate starvation. The government gave top priority to the agricultural sector and constructed several dams across rivers to increase irrigation and power facilities in order to enhance productivity. During the Third Five-Year Plan, the green revolution strategies have been adopted. The green revolution measures were

multidimensional: expansion of area under cultivation, expansion of irrigation, electrification in the agricultural sector, introduction of highyielding varieties, application of fertilisers and pesticides, extraction of groundwater sources through bore-well technology, etc. They have posed a great threat to natural resources. At the time of Independence, the total cultivated area was about 131.89 million hectares and it has increased to 152.82 hectares in 1959–1960. Since the green revolution, thousands of acres have been brought under cultivation. For instance, in 1970, the total cultivated area has increased to 162.27 million hectares and it has further increased to 200 million hectares in 2013–2014 (Table 5.2). At the same time, grazing land and cultivable waste have declined during this period.

The net cultivated area has increased from 118.75 million hectares in 1950–1951 to 132.94 million hectares in 1960–1961 and it has further increased to 141.43 million hectares in 2013–2014. At the same time, area sown more than once has increased from 13.15 million hectares in 1950–1951 to 19.98 million hectares in 1959–1960 and to 59.43 million hectares in 2013–2014.

| Year          | <b>Net</b><br>Area<br>Sown | Total<br>Cropped<br>Area | Area<br>Sown<br>More<br>Than<br>Once | <b>Net</b><br>Irrigated<br>Area | Gross<br>Irrigated<br>Area | Irrigated<br>More<br>Than<br>Once |
|---------------|----------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| 1950-1951     | 118.75                     | 131.89                   | 13.15                                | 20.85                           | 22.56                      | 1.71                              |
| 1960-1961     | 133.20                     | 152.77                   | 19.57                                | 24.66                           | 27.98                      | 3.32                              |
| 1970-1971     | 140.86                     | 165.79                   | 24.93                                | 31.10                           | 38.20                      | 7.09                              |
| 1980-1981     | 140.29                     | 172.63                   | 32.34                                | 38.72                           | 49.78                      | 11.06                             |
| 1990-1991     | 143.00                     | 185.74                   | 42.74                                | 48.02                           | 63.20                      | 15.18                             |
| $2000 - 2001$ | 141.34                     | 185.34                   | 44.00                                | 55.20                           | 76.19                      | 20.98                             |
| $2010 - 2011$ | 141.56                     | 197.56                   | 56.00                                | 63.66                           | 88.93                      | 25.27                             |
| 2013-2014     | 141.43                     | 200.86                   | 59.43                                | 68.10                           | 95.77                      | 27.67                             |

|  |  |  |  |  | <b>Table 5.2:</b> Selected Categories of Land Use |  |  |  |  |
|--|--|--|--|--|---------------------------------------------------|--|--|--|--|
|--|--|--|--|--|---------------------------------------------------|--|--|--|--|

(*in million hectares*)

*Source*: Government of India, *Agricultural Statistics at a Glance 2016.*<sup>7</sup>

Not only has the area under cultivation increased but also the area under irrigation has increased remarkably during the post-green revolution period. In the 1960s, the gross irrigated area was about 27.98 million hectares and it has increased to 95.77 million hectares in 2013–2014. The net irrigated area has increased from 20.85 million hectares in 1950–1951 to 68.10 million hectares in 2013–2014. Likewise, the area irrigated more than once has increased from 1.71 million hectares to 27.67 million hectares in 2013–2014 (Table 5.3). The canal irrigation has increased in the post-Independence period and rose rapidly after the

|                  | Canals |       |        |              | Wells         |                |                 |        |
|------------------|--------|-------|--------|--------------|---------------|----------------|-----------------|--------|
| Year             | Govt.  | Pvt.  | Total  | <b>Tanks</b> | Tube<br>Wells | Other<br>Wells | Other<br>Source | Total  |
| 1950-1951        | 7,158  | 1,137 | 8,295  | 3,613        |               | 5,978          | 2,967           | 20,853 |
| 1960-1961        | 9,170  | 1,200 | 10,370 | 4,561        | 135           | 7,155          | 2,440           | 24,661 |
| 1970-1971        | 11,972 | 866   | 12,838 | 4,112        | 4,461         | 7,426          | 2,266           | 31,103 |
| 1980-1981        | 14,450 | 842   | 15,292 | 3,182        | 9,531         | 8,164          | 2,551           | 38,720 |
| 1990-1991        | 16,973 | 481   | 17,453 | 2,944        | 14,257        | 10,438         | 2,932           | 48,023 |
| 2000-2001        | 15,809 | 203   | 16,012 | 2,466        | 22,566        | 11,252         | 2,909           | 55,205 |
| 2010-2011<br>(P) | 15,472 | 171   | 15,643 | 1,980        | 28,543        | 10,629         | 6,864           | 63,659 |
| 2013-2014<br>(P) | 16,115 | 163   | 16,278 | 1,842        | 31,126        | 11,312         | 7,542           | 68,100 |

**Table 5.3:** Net Area Irrigated by Source in India (from 1950–1951 to 2014–2015)

*Note:* P: Projected.

*Source:* Government of India, *Agricultural Statistics at a Glance 2016.*<sup>8</sup>

green revolution. The bore-well irrigation has also increased remarkably. The water was lifted from about a 1,000 feet depth and more. The groundwater extraction has led not only to salination but also competing deepening has led to depletion of water in the particular region. For instance, this phenomenon was common among the peninsular states.

While expanding the canal irrigation and exploiting the groundwater, the state has neglected traditional water tanks. In other words, the canal irrigation options were exhausted and the groundwater was also saturated. The only option was to restore the traditional tanks. In addition to this, water pollution has further aggravated the scarce resources.

At the time of Independence, the total net area irrigated was about 20,853 thousand hectares. Of this, 8,295 thousand hectares (7,158 government and 1,137 private) were irrigated from canals, 3,613 thousand hectares from tanks, 5,978 thousand hectares from wells and 2,967 thousand hectares from other sources. Till the green revolution period, the net irrigated area had increased marginally among the different sources except for other sources. For example, in 1960–1961, the total net irrigated areas were about 24,661 thousand hectares, of which, 10,370 thousand hectares (9,170 government and 1,120 private) from canals, 4,561 thousand hectares from tanks, 135 thousand hectares from bore-wells, and 7,155 thousand hectares from wells (Table 5.3). After the green revolution period, the net irrigated area had been increased remarkably from 24,884 thousand hectares in 1960–1961 to
68,100 thousand hectares in 2013–2014. The source of net irrigated area has increased mainly due to canals, tube-wells and other wells.

The canal irrigated area has increased from 10,502 thousand hectares in 1961–1962 to 16,182 thousand hectares in 2013–2014. It is to be noted that though the canal irrigated area has increased, the sources of private canal has declined from 1,163 thousand hectares in 1961–1962 to 163 thousand hectares in 2013–2014. Tube-wells and other wells have increased during the same period but the former one is remarkable than the latter one. In 1961–1962, the number of tubewells were about 258 thousand and it has increased to 31,606 thousand in 2013–2014 whereas other wells increased from 7,094 thousand hectares to 11,312 thousand hectares in the same period. Invariably, the sources of private canals and tanks have declined progressively during the green revolution period. The net irrigated area under private canals was about 1,163 thousand hectares in 1961–1962 and it has declined to 163 thousand hectares and 1,723 thousand hectares respectively in 2013–2014. In other words, the traditional sources like tanks lost its importance during the green revolution period.

Until the green revolution period, only a limited quantity of fertilisers was consumed. After the green revolution period, the quantity of fertiliser and pesticides consumption has increased remarkably. For example, in 1960–1961, only 292.1 thousand tonnes of fertilisers and 8.62 thousand tonnes pesticides were consumed and it has increased to 26,752.6 thousand tonnes and 55.54 thousand tonnes respectively in 2015–2016 (Table 5.4). The consumption of pesticides has reached its peak in the 1980s and after that it has declined. Excessive consumption of fertilisers has led to the decline of the soil fertility during the post-Independence period, particularly after the green revolution period. The massive quantities of fertilisers and pesticides were causing damage not only to the quality of the soil and its fertility but also to the health of the people.

|               |          |         | (in thousand tonnes) |          |            |  |  |
|---------------|----------|---------|----------------------|----------|------------|--|--|
| Year          | N        | P       | K                    | Total    | Pesticides |  |  |
| 1955-1956     | 107.5    | 13.0    | 10.3                 | 130.8    | 2.35       |  |  |
| 1960-1961     | 210.0    | 53.1    | 29.0                 | 292.1    | 8.62       |  |  |
| 1970-1971     | 1,487.0  | 462.0   | 228.0                | 2,177.0  | 24.32      |  |  |
| 1980-1981     | 3,678.1  | 1,213.6 | 623.9                | 5,515.6  | 45.00      |  |  |
| 1990-1991     | 7,997.2  | 3,221.0 | 1,328.0              | 12,546.2 | 75.00      |  |  |
| $2000 - 2001$ | 10,920.2 | 4,214.6 | 1,567.5              | 16,702.3 | 43.58      |  |  |
| 2015-2016     | 17,372.3 | 6,978.8 | 2,401.5              | 26,752.6 | 55.54      |  |  |

**Table 5.4:** Consumption of Fertilisers and Pesticides in India

*Note:* N: Nitrogen, P: Phosphorus, K: Potassium.

*Source*: Government of India, *Agricultural Statistics at a Glance 2016.*<sup>9</sup>

The green revolution has resulted in expansion of agriculture and also irrigation. The expansion of cultivated area was at the cost of the green cover and the expansion of irrigation was not only diversion of river water but also maximum extraction of groundwater. At the same time, the traditional water sources got neglected during the green revolution period. In addition to that, the application of fertilisers and pesticides has led to the decline of soil fertility in different parts of the country. To be sure, the green revolution and its impact on the environment was huge and serious, as it has brought more area under cultivation, irrigation was increased and more fertilisers were used, which has resulted in the decline of soil fertility, resulting in an overall threat to natural resources.

#### *URBANISATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES*

Most of India's urbanisation process is unplanned and it is growing on its own except Chandigarh and Pondicherry cities. During the post-Independence period, urbanisation and urban agglomeration has experienced phenomenal growth. Theoretically, growing urbanisation is one of the most prominent indicators of economic development of a given country. But actually, the question is whether it as an indicator of economic development. During the post-Independence period, urbanisation and urban agglomeration witnessed a phenomenal growth invariably in different parts of the country. For instance, in 1951, less than one-fifth of the population inhabited the urban areas and this proportion has increased to nearly one-third in 2011. Unfortunately, India's urbanisation is growing on its own without proper plan and basic amenities. According to the 2001 Census, about 618.258 lakh populations was living in the slum areas and it has increased to 654.94 lakh in 2011. In other words, about one-fourth of the urban population is living without the basic infrastructural facilities in the slums. Hence, India's urbanisation occurred largely with severe environmental problems invariably in different parts of the country.

### *COMPETING DEMAND FOR WATER*

Competing demand for water among the different stakeholders have increased during the post-Independence period. As I indicated earlier, the demand for water in agricultural sector has increased since Independence. With the growth of urbanisation, the demand for domestic water supply too has increased. Simultaneously, water requirements of the industries have also increased during the post-Independence period.

The total demand for water will increase in future among the different stakeholders. According to the Central Water Commission, the demand for water was 629 billion cubic metres (BCM) in 1997– 1998 and it has increased to 694–710 low and high demand in 2010. It is expected to increase to 784–843 BCM low and high demand in 2025. It is projected that the demand will increase further 973–1180 BCM low and high in 2050.<sup>10</sup> In the future, it is expected that the demand for water will increase in area of irrigation, domestic, industries, power, inland navigation and the requirements of ecology. The demand for irrigation was 524 BCM, it has increased to 543–557 BCM low and high demand and it will increase to 561–611 BCM low and high demand in 2025. It is projected that the demand will increase further to 628–817 BCM low and high demand in 2050. The domestic demand front will increase fourfold, industries twofold, power tenfold, inland navigation twofold and ecological needs about fourfold. Consequently, the share of agricultural sector will come down from 80 per cent to 68 per cent between 1997–1998 and 2050.

The increasing demand among the different stakeholders has put pressure on both surface and groundwater. The demand for surface water will increase from 339 BCM in 1997–1998 to 641–752 BCM low and high demand in 2050. This competing demand for the water among the different sectors has not only increased but has also aggravated due to water pollution. Consequently, water is emerging as the centre of environmental problems in the recent decades. Due to the increasing demand, water was diverted from distant places and later it was used and discharged as sewerage/effluents into the river basins resulting in polluting not only the surface water but also the groundwater during the post-Independence period.

Domestic waste water is the major part of the water pollution problem. According to the Central Water Pollution Control Board (2016), about 61,948 millions of litres per day (MLD) domestic waste water was generated from the urban areas of which only 23,277 MLD or 37.58 per cent was treated and the rest was discharged into the river and other water courses. In other words, nearly two-thirds of the urban domestic waste water are discharged without treatment. According to the report, about 25,805 MLD treatment capacities are under construction. Even if we take construction into account, only 42 per cent of the urban domestic water will be treated and rest of it will be disposed of every day. In other words, only two-fifth of the urban domestic waste water is treated and the rest of them are left untreated.11 Consequently, most of the rivers are polluted. In 2015, precisely 302 stretches have been reported to be polluted in different river basins in different states of the country.<sup>12</sup>

# *INDUSTRIALISATION AND ITS IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT*

Since Independence, industrialisation has been one of the prime agendas for the socio-economic development of the country. Several industries have been established in collaboration with the other countries during the post-Independence period. These industries have caused serious environmental problems over the years. Despite various initiatives to prevent industrial pollution, the problems continue to persist. As of 19 May 2014, around 3,266 industries were identified to be highly polluting. Most of these polluting industries are located in Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Haryana, West Bengal, Rajasthan and Jharkhand. About 82.52 per cent of the highly water polluting industries are located in around ten states. More than 50 per cent of highly polluting industries are located in four states, viz., Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat. However, out of the 3,266 highly polluting industries, 2,328 industries (71.28 per cent) of the highly polluting industries are complying with the directions of the Central Pollution Control Board. About 17.48 per cent of the industries violating norms laid down by the Central Pollution Control Board. Around, 11.24 per cent of the industries have been closed<sup>13</sup>

Of the 3,266 highly polluting industries, 1,162 or 35.58 per cent of them are discharging their effluents into rivers and lakes. However, 792 industries, which constitute 68.16 per cent are complying the parameters prescribed by the government. Around 200 industries or 17.21 per cent of the industries are not complying with the norms and about 170 industries or 14.63 per cent of the industries are closed down. About 925 industries or 80 per cent of the industries are located in the three states: Uttar Pradesh (569), Maharashtra (214) and Haryana (142). Out of the 200 industries which are not complying with the standards, 152 or 76 per cent is located in three states of Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra and Haryana. About 170 industries have been either closed down or in legal disputes.<sup>14</sup>

### *VEHICLES AND THEIR IMPACT ON ENVIRONMENT*

The number of vehicles has increased remarkably during the post-Independence period. For example, in 1950–1951 there were 306,000 vehicles and it has increased to 210,023 thousand in 2011 (Table 5.5). It is not the number of vehicles has increased but its carbon discharge is affecting the quality of air and consequently health of the people. Indeed, it is one of the potential threats to the environment.

|                             | $\cdots$ $\circ$ $\circ$ $\circ$ $\prime$ |                 |                                     |              |                          |                |  |  |
|-----------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-----------------|-------------------------------------|--------------|--------------------------|----------------|--|--|
| Years (as on<br>31st March) | All<br><b>Vehicles</b>                    | Two<br>Wheelers | Cars,<br><b>Jeeps</b><br>and Taxies | <b>Buses</b> | Goods<br><b>Vehicles</b> | Others         |  |  |
| 1951                        | 306                                       | 27              | 159                                 | 34           | 82                       | $\overline{4}$ |  |  |
| 1961                        | 665                                       | 88              | 310                                 | 57           | 168                      | 42             |  |  |
| 1971                        | 1,865                                     | 576             | 682                                 | 94           | 343                      | 170            |  |  |
| 1981                        | 5,391                                     | 2.618           | 1,160                               | 162          | 554                      | 897            |  |  |
| 1991                        | 21,374                                    | 14,200          | 2,954                               | 331          | 1,356                    | 2,533          |  |  |
| 2001                        | 54,991                                    | 38,556          | 7,058                               | 634          | 2.948                    | 5,795          |  |  |
| 2011                        | 141,866                                   | 101,865         | 19,231                              | 1,604        | 7,064                    | 12,102         |  |  |
| 2015                        | 210,023                                   | 154,298         | 28,611                              | 1,971        | 9,344                    | 15,799         |  |  |

**Table 5.5:** Total Number of Registered Motor Vehicles in India (from 1951– 1956 to 1959–2015)

*Source*: Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, *Road Transport Year Book, 2016–2017.*<sup>15</sup>

Due to the increasing number of vehicles, the demand for petrol and diesel consumption has also increased remarkably. This trend can be seen from four metro cities: Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai and Bangalore. For instance, in 1990–1991, 602,000 tons was the demand in Delhi and it has increased to 1,614,000 tons in 2010.<sup>16</sup> In other words, the growth rate was about 168.11 per cent within two decades. Invariably, among the different metros' energy demand has doubled within two decades. The demand for diesel has increased more than threefold within two decades.

### *ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION MEASURES*

During the post-Independence period, environmental protection measures can be seen in two phases, i.e., 1947–1970 and after the 1970s. Until 1947, except the reserve forests, a few regulatory mechanisms were introduced and that too it was confined to cities/ towns and those acts that have been adopted by the post-Independence governments. In the first phase, no major environmental protection measures were introduced besides adopting the colonial acts. The second phase is significant because several environmental protection measures have been implemented to tackle water pollution, industrial pollution, air pollution and noise pollution. These measures have gained momentum besides protecting a wide range of natural resources. The environmental measures can be classified into two categories—protective measures and regulatory/control measures. The former stresses on how to protect the environment, like forestry,

(*in '000*)

biodiversity, wildlife, etc., and the latter one how to regulate water pollution, industrial pollution, air pollution and noise pollution. Let us study various environmental protection measures during the post-Independence period.

# **Environmental Protection Measures, 1947–1970**

The post-Independence government has adopted most of the acts enacted during the colonial period meant to protect the environment. In addition to that prevention of water pollution was emphasised through (a) the Factories Act, 1948 and (b) the River Boards Act, 1956, till the 1970s.

## *The Factories Act, 1948*

The Factories Act, 1948, has made provisions to make an effective arrangement for waste disposal and empowered state governments to frame rules to implement this provision. The Factories Act, 1948, under the disposal of wastes and effluents, Section 12, specifies that, 'Effective arrangements shall be made in every factory for the treatment of wastes and effluents due to the manufacturing process carried on therein, so as to render them innocuous, and for their disposal.'

# *The River Boards Act, 1956*

The River Boards Act, 1956, suggested to establish a River Board and such board has to be empowered to prevent water pollution.

# **Forestry**

The post-Independence government has not changed its colonial forest policy and continued with the same practice till the 1980s. In fact, the forest land was diverted for various development purposes during the post-Independence period.<sup>17</sup> According to the Ministry of Forest and Environment (2004), about 4.3 million hectares of forest land was diverted for various development activities in the period of 1952–1980; of which, about 0.5 million hectares of forest land was diverted for river valley projects, 0.134 million hectares for industries and townships, 0.061 hectares for infrastructure development and 1.008 million hectares for miscellaneous purposes. According to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the rate of diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes was to the tune of 150,000 hectares per annum for three decades between 1950 and 1980. Until the 1980s, the post-Independence government has followed the same colonial policy to restrict the people to use the forest resources and at the same time they have diverted a vast extent of the forest for various development purposes.

Till the 1970s, the post-Independent government has not made any serious effort to protect the environment besides adapting the laws that were enacted during the colonial regime. At the same time, it has diverted forest resources on a gigantic scale for various development purposes.

## **Environmental Protection Measures, after 1970s**

Since the 1970s, the postcolonial government has taken up several initiatives to protect the environment and ecology through adopting the policies and by enacting several acts and rules on a wide range of environmental polluting issues. Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister, who pledged to protect the environment after attending the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment at Stockholm in June 1972. Subsequently, constitutional amendment, environmental protection, forest conservation, prevention of air, noise and water pollution measures, and wildlife protection acts have been enacted. The following acts have been enacted after the 1970s: Wildlife Protection Act, 1972; Water Pollution (Prevention) Act, 1974; Air Pollution (Prevention) Act; and Noise Pollution (Prevention) Act. To monitor pollution Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), an autonomous body was established in 1974. The states also established similar kind of institutions to control pollution.

# **Constitution Amendment**

Since 1976, the Constitution of India has emphasised upon the importance of environment. The 42nd Constitution Amendment Act, 1976, inserted specific provisions for environmental protection in the form of Directive Principles of State Policy and Fundamental Duties. Article 48A declares that: 'the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.' Article  $51A(g)$  says: 'to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures.'

## *Forestry*

Until 1974, the forest was under a state subject. Based on the constitution, forest was brought under the federal list subject. Based on the constitutional amendment, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, was enacted.

### Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980

The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, imposed restriction on the dereservation of forests or use of forest land for non-forest purpose without the prior approval of the Central Government. According to this act,

'non-forest purpose' means the breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for (a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms, oil-bearing plants, horticultural crops or medicinal plants; (b) any purpose other than reafforestation; but does not include any work relating or ancillary to conservation, development and management of forests and wildlife, namely, the establishment of check-posts, fire lines, wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipelines or other like purposes. This act prevented the diversion of forest land for development purposes; however, the process of diversion of diversion has continued to persist.

### *Environmental Protection Act, 1986*

The Environmental Protection Act made provisions to protect the environment as a whole, by initiation of various measures and laid down rules and penalty provisions not only for individuals but also for companies and even for government officers. According to the Environmental Protection Act, 1986: 'environment' includes water, air, and land and the interrelationship that exists among and between water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures, plants, micro-organism and property. According to the provisions of the act, the central government shall have the power to take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of the environment and preventing, controlling and abating environmental pollution.

Further, this act made provisions for the Central Government make the rules to regulate the following aspects: to make the standards of quality of air, water or soil for various areas and purposes; to fix the maximum allowable limits of concentration of various environmental pollutants (including noise) for different areas; to fix the procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances; to prohibit and restrict on the handling of hazardous substances in different areas; to prohibit and restrict on the location of industries and the carrying on process and operations in different areas; and to make rules for the procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents which may cause environmental pollution and to provide for remedial measures for such accidents.

This act also specified the penalty provisions for the contravention of the provisions of the act. According to this act: 'whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this act, or the rules made or orders or directions issued thereunder, shall, in respect of each such failure or contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, and in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention continues after the conviction for the first such failure or contravention. If the failure or contravention referred to in sub-section (1) continues beyond a period of one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years.' This act also included provisions meant punish the officers of the government departments.

### *Water Pollution Acts and Rules*

Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act was enacted in 1974. Under this act, Central Pollution Control Board and State Pollution Control Boards were established. The functions of the Central Board are: to promote cleanliness of streams and wells in different areas of the states; to advise the Central Government on any matter concerning the prevention and control of water pollution; to coordinate the activities of the State Boards and resolve disputes among them; to provide technical assistance and guidance to the State Boards; to carry out and sponsor investigations and research relating to problems of water pollution and prevention, control or abatement of water pollution; to plan and organise the training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes for the prevention, control or abatement of water pollution on such terms and conditions as the Central Board may specify; to organise through mass media a comprehensive programme regarding the prevention and control of water pollution; to collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to water pollution and measures devised for its effective prevention and control and prepare manuals, codes or guides relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents and disseminate information connected therewith; and to plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for the prevention, control or abatement of water pollution. The State Boards also has the same functions.

Failure to comply with directions within such time as may be specified in the direction shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues after the conviction for the first such failure. Whoever fails to comply with any order, and on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months but which may extend to six years and with fine, and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for everyday during which such failure continues after the conviction for the first such failure.
Every subsequent conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years and with fine.

Offences by companies, where an offence under this act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Not only company but also offence committed by any department of government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

## Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977

This act provides for a provision to impose levy and collection of a cess on water consumed by persons carrying on certain industries and by local authorities, with a view to augment the resources of the Central Board and the State Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. Under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977, 16 industries are classified as water pollution industries. Under this act, the water cess has been imposed for the different kind of water consuming industries.

## *Air Pollution Acts and Rules*

### Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981

According to Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, 'air pollutant' means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, including noise present in the atmosphere in such concentration as may be or tend to be injurious to human beings or other living creatures or plants or property or environment. According to this act, the Central Pollution Control Board and State Pollution Control Board has to exercise the powers to prevent and control of air pollution. The main functions of the Central Board are: to improve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country and to advise the Central Government on any matter concerning the improvement of the quality of air and the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; to plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; to coordinate the activities of the State and resolve disputes among them; and to provide technical assistance and guidance to the State Boards, carry out and sponsor investigations and research relating to problems of air pollution and prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; organise through mass media

a comprehensive programme regarding the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; to collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to air pollution and the measures devised for its effective prevention, control or abatement and prepare manuals, codes or guides relating to prevention, control or abatement of air pollution; to lay down standards for the quality of air, to collect and disseminate information in respect of matters relating to air pollution. The functions of the State Board also more or less same like Central Board.

As far as the penalty is concern, this act proposes, whoever fails to comply with the provisions of the act, will be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months but which may extend to six years and with fine, and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues after the conviction for the first such failure. If the failure referred to in sub-section continues beyond a period of one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years and with fine. Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this act or any order or direction issued there under, for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both, and in the case of continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand, rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention. Offences by companies and any department of government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

However, the environmental protection measures were largely confined to industrial pollution, air pollution and noise pollution problems. To control the industrial pollution common effluent treatment plants and individual effluent treatment plants have been made mainly focusing on tanneries and dyeing and bleaching industries. However, the other polluting industries did not get much attention. Even the industrial pollution control mechanism was not effective due to legal intervention as well as ineffective monitoring mechanism.

The air pollution controlling mechanism also was largely confined to the vehicles and to check the pollution limit. At the same time, it also emphasized to shift to LPG options during the last three decades and once again this was confined to the urban areas. Noise pollution control mechanism has also been fairly regulated during the last few decades.

The postcolonial government however did not pay any attention towards the major polluting components, i.e., sewerage and its treatment. Only a few cities/towns sewerage is treated and that too only in a limited extent. For example, in Delhi only 20 per cent of the sewerage was treated and the rest of the sewerage is flowing into the river Yamuna. Consequently, Yamuna River has been polluted beyond restoration.

India's environmental policy has emerged mainly in the 1970s, and was largely restricted to a few selected aspects like industrial, air and noise pollution. Though the post-Independence governments followed the same colonial act, vast areas of forests have been diverted for the various development activities. The other green cover, i.e., grazing land and unculturable waste has been brought under cultivation during the green revolution period. However, after 1980 diversion of forest land was regulated by the Central Government. Subsequently, watershed development programme, joint forestry management programme has been launched to preserve water and forest resources. Despite these initiatives, the environmental conditions have not improved due to inefficient institutional mechanisms and vote-bank politics of Indian political economy.

#### *POLITICAL ECONOMY AND ENVIRONMENT*

Since Independence, the political economy of India's development has made serious impact on the environment and ecology. Some of the political efforts have been prevented due to people's movements. For example, the government was forced to withdraw the Green Valley Projects due to people movements.

The political economy of forest policies of the twenty-first century are lying behind the vote-bank politics is for the tribals and other traditional forest-dwellers in particular. In electoral democracy, held hostage by populist politics, tribal development was by and large viewed from, the potential to generate a vote-bank facilitating the hold on power and not from a developmental and ecology and environment point of view.18 The political economy behind the enactment of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest-Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, is to regain the Congress vote-bank in the tribal belt. The act will pose a serious threat to the environmentally important forests resources and other common property resources.

The political economy of tribal development in the late 1970s and restoration of Forest Rights Act in 2006 have to be looked at from an historical perspective. To regain the tribal vote-bank that was lost in the early 1970s by the Congress Party introduced tribal development

strategy during the Fifth Five-Year Plan period and enjoyed their support until the early 1990s. Again, when the Congress Party had lost its support during the late 1990s and early part of 2000 has resulted in the enactment of restoration of Forest Rights Act in 2006. For example, in 1971 (Fifth Lok Sabha) elections, out of thirty-six parliamentary constituencies reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, Congress Party had won twenty-one seats. In 1977 (Sixth Lok Sabha) elections, out of thirty-eight parliamentary constituencies reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, Congress had won only thirteen seats.19 Consequently, to regain the vote-bank of the tribals a new strategy for tribal development was introduced. The Congress Party has reaped its fruits in the subsequent elections, particularly after the 1980s and that sustained till the early 1990s. For instance, during the 1980s (Seventh Lok Sabha) elections, Congress Party had won thirty-two parliamentary seats out of forty-one seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.<sup>20</sup> In 1984, out of thirty-eight parliamentary seats, Congress Party has won thirty-two seats.<sup>21</sup> But in the 1989 election, out of thirty-nine parliamentary seats, Congress Party has won only twenty seats.<sup>22</sup> In 1991 (Tenth Lok Sabha) elections, Congress has won twenty-nine parliamentary seats out of forty-one total reserved seats for Scheduled Tribes.<sup>23</sup> In 1996 (Eleventh Lok Sabha) elections, Congress won twenty-one parliamentary seats out of forty-one total reserved seats.<sup>24</sup> In 1998 (Twelfth Lok Sabha) elections, Congress won eighteen parliamentary seats out of forty-one total reserved seats.25 In 1999 (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) elections, Congress won only nine parliamentary seats out of forty-one total reserved seats for the tribals.26 In 2004 (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) elections, Congress won fourteen parliamentary seats out of forty-one total reserved seats.<sup>27</sup> The political economy of the tribal development strategies in the late 1970s has gained the vote-bank for the Congress and the party has sustained it for over one and half decades until it started losing during the late 1990s. The Congress Party lost its vote-bank in the tribal belt during the 1999 and 2004 parliamentary elections. To regain the confidence of tribals and their vote-bank, the Congress has introduced the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest-Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, as a rectification of historical injustice. Thus, tribal development strategies and restoration of forest rights acts were initiated to restore the lost vote-bank by the Congress during the early 1970s and late 1990s and early 2000 respectively.

The political economy of the Congress government during the 1980s has extended the incentives and facilities in favour of the private sector which has had serious consequences for the private land resources in the subsequent decades. On the one hand, the amendment in the land acquisition act has facilitated to large number of private enterprising activities as for public purposes and, on the other, the housing policies were opened to the private sector.28 During the 1980s, the political economy of these two important policies, viz., Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, and housing policies in favour of private sector have resulted in a series of implications for the private land resources. The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, has provided definitions for the 'corporation owned or controlled by the state' and for 'public purpose'. In Section 3, 'Definition' after clause (c) the following clause (cc) 'Corporation owned or controlled by the state' was inserted, and also for 'public purpose' a detailed explanation was incorporated. The amendments made in 1984 in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, ended any differentiation between acquisition for a state purpose and acquisition for a private enterprise or state enterprise by amending Section 4 of the original act to insert the words—or for a company—after any public purpose. The courts have interpreted this amendment to mean that any notification of acquisition issued under Section 4 need not specify whether the acquisition is for a public purpose or for a company. This opened the floodgates to acquisition of private land by the state for companies. And this in turn has unleashed the tribal and rural backlash that has led the government to replace the 1894 Act with an altogether new act.<sup>29</sup>

The Seventh Five-Year Plan (1985–1990) envisaged, the major responsibility for house construction would have to be left to the private sector and here government has to facilitate the development of suitable housing sites on a large scale. It emphasised that the government has to undertake land acquisition and development in the urban areas for housing and the construction activities should be left to the private sector. In other words, the government has to play an active role through developing the necessary delivery system in the form of a housing finance market and taking steps to make developed land available at right places and at reasonable prices. The first one has a major impact on the process of acquiring the private land and common property resources in general for private and company interests and the second one, largely affected the private land for private and companies' commercial motives in the name of public purpose. This policy actually opened up for the private sector to acquire private land for commercial gains in the name of public purpose. These two initiatives during the 1980s led to severe protest from the farmers in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, particularly in the non-Congress Party ruled states like West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh and Orissa while paved the way for the enactment of Fair Compensation of Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act in 2013. The Congress took up this issue and became a saviour of the farmers to regain their vote-bank in the non-Congress ruled states.

## *FOREST RIGHTS ACT, 2006*

The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest-Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, has recognised the tribals and other forest-dwellers ownership rights for their occupied land and also permitted them to collect the forest produce from the forest, besides diverting the forest for various development initiatives. This act has not only recognised the forest rights but also restored rights of tribals and other traditional forest-dwellers. According to this act, the forest-dwelling tribals and other traditional forest-dwellers who have occupied forest land as an individual or as a family or a community restricted to the area under actual occupation and shall not exceed four hectares as on before the 13 December 2005 are given the following forest rights: (a) right to hold and live in the forest land under the individual or common occupation for habitation or for self-cultivation for livelihood; (b) community rights such as nistar, by whatever name called, including those used in erstwhile princely states, zamindari or such intermediary regimes; (c) right of ownership, access to collect, use, and dispose of minor forest produce which has been traditionally collected within or outside village boundaries; (d) other community rights of uses or entitlements such as fish and other products of water bodies, grazing (both settled or transhumant) and traditional seasonal resource access of nomadic or pastoralist communities; (e) rights, including community tenures of habitat and habitation for primitive tribal groups and pre-agricultural communities; (f) rights in or over disputed lands under any nomenclature in any state where claims are disputed; (g) rights for conversion of pattas or leases or grants issued by any local authority or any State Government on forest lands to titles; (h) rights of settlement and conversion of all forest villages, old habitation un-surveyed villages and other villages in forest, whether recorded, notified, or not, into revenue villages; (i) right to protect, regenerate, or conserve or manage any community forest resource, which they have been traditionally protecting and conserving for sustainable use; (j) rights which are recognised under any state law or laws of any Autonomous District Council or Autonomous Regional Council or which are accepted as rights of tribals under any traditional or customary law of concerned tribes of any state; (k) right of access to biodiversity and community right to intellectual property and traditional knowledge related to biodiversity and cultural diversity; (l) any other traditional right customarily enjoyed by them but excluding the traditional right of hunting or trapping or extracting a part of the body of any species of wild animal; and (m) right to in situ rehabilitation including alternative land in cases where they have been illegally evicted

or displaced from forest land of any description without receiving their legal entitlement or rehabilitation prior to the 13 December 2005.

This act has also facilitated the diversion of forest land, felling of not exceeding seventy-five trees per hectare for the various developmental activities by the government subject to less than one hectare for each of the activities based on the recommendation of *gram sabha*. The listed development activities include: (a) schools; (b) dispensary or hospital; (c) *anganwadis*; (d) fair price shops; (e) electric and telecommunication lines; (f) tanks and other minor water bodies; (g) drinking water supply and water pipelines; (h) water or rain water harvesting structures; (i) minor irrigation canals; (j) non-conventional source of energy; (k) skill upgradation or vocational training centres; (l) roads; and (m) community centres. This act empowers the *gram sabhas* to initiate the process for determining the nature and extent of individual or community forest rights or both. To be precise, forest rights acts, 'empower the forest rights holder, *gram sabha* and local level institution with the right to protect, regenerate, conserve and manage any community forest resource.'30

Until the 1980s, the subject of forest was under the state list of subjects which diverted a vast extent of the forest for the various development purposes. To protect the forest, the subject was brought under the federal list through a constitutional amendment that reduced the diversion till 2007, but the populist politics undermined the conservation motives from 2008 onwards in India.

### *CONCLUSION*

After Independence, the first three decades the government did not undertake any major initiatives to protect the environment besides adopting the colonial acts. Instead of protecting the environment, the governments have encouraged the diverting the green cover. Invariably, a vast extent of forest area was diverted for the various development initiatives. Adding to that, other green cover like pastoral and other barren and cultivable land was also brought under cultivation during the green revolution period. In other words, till 1980, the green cover forest, pasture and barren and uncultivable wasteland—has declined drastically. After the 1980s, the diversion of green cover was regulated by the Central Government or Government of India.

Till the 1970s, the other environmental issues did not receive much attention. In the early 1970s, several environmental acts such as the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972; Water Pollution (Prevention) Act; Air Pollution (Prevention) Act; and Noise Pollution (Prevention) Act have been enacted. In addition to that several rules and regulations have

been framed. These acts are controlled/regulated to some extent. The technological advancement in the agrarian sector has made serious impact on the ecology in terms of soil fertility, declining water quality, etc.

However, the water polluting components of the environment like sewerage water did not draw attention. This integral aspect has proved to be a great threat to the environment not only in the urban areas but also in the rural areas. Such waste generated is polluting both surface and groundwater quality.

The post-Independent India's environmental history, issues are multifaceted, such as population explosion, urbanisation, slums, agricultural expansion, etc., and they were largely neglected during the early decades. Instead of preserving the environment, the green cover was largely diverted both for the purpose of development and agricultural expansion. In other words, within the three decades of the post-Independence period, large extents of forests were diverted and other common property lands were reduced to a negligible proportion. The other significant aspects of the environment gained attention only in the 1970s. Several acts have been enacted which were largely regulatory in nature. Adding to that political economy of the tribal and other forest-dwelling communities has further added to the growing environment problems. Without realising the importance of environment, the common property resources were exploited in the early period. The vote-bank politics in Independent India have further aggravated the India's environment crises.

# *NOTES AND REFERENCES*

- 1 For details, see Velayutham Saravanan, *Colonialism, Environment and Tribals in South India, 1792–1947* (London and New York: Routledge, 2017); Velayutham Saravanan, *Environmental History and Tribals in Modern India* (London and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018).
- 2 Velayutham Saravanan, *Water and the Environmental History of Modern India* (London: Bloomsbury, 2020).
- 3 See Saravanan, *Environmental History.*
- 4 Government of India, *Agricultural Statistics at a Glance 2016* (New Delhi: Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 2017), 352–353.
- 5 Lok Sabha Starred Question No. 221, 2 August 2016.
- 6 See Velayutham Saravanan, 'Forest Rights Act, 2006: Failure of Law or Governance?' (unpublished paper).
- 7 Government of India, *Agricultural Statistics at a Glance 2016* (New Delhi: Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, 2017), 327–328.
- 8 Ibid.
- 9 Ibid., 348.
- 10 Central Water Commission.