28

# **Industrial Policy**

Kamal A. Mitra Chenov

or an ex-colonial country like India, industrialization was a matter of priority. It has generally been argued that India's industrial policy has been extraordinarily restrictive of the private sector, particularly in big business. It is a common belief that the economic policy regime during the Nehruvian period with its 'socialistic orientation' severely hampered industrial development, in general, and that of the private sector, in particular. In this chapter, we shall subject this perception to critical scrutiny.

# ☐ INDUSTRIAL POLICY: THE EARLY YEARS

*Swadeshi* or self-reliance was a major theme of Congress policy during the national movement. Towards this direction, there was a substantial discussion in the AICC set up National Planning Committee about a substantial role for the state in the development of Indian industry.<sup>1</sup> Leading industrialists including J.R.D. Tata, G.D. Birla, and Shri Ram published, in 1944, a comprehensive 15 year plan for industrialization, popularly known as the Bombay Plan, which called for the state to play a major role in the economy, especially in areas where large quantities of capital were required and returns were likely to be delayed and low.<sup>2</sup> The British government in its own Industrial Policy Statement of April 1945 proposed that "basic industries of national importance" could be nationalized.<sup>3</sup>

There was thus a substantial national consequence for the state's intervention and regulation of industrialization, though emphasis varied, sometimes drastically, based on divergent political orientations.<sup>4</sup> Consequently, the AICC's Economic Programme Committee (EPC) headed by Jawaharlal Nehru emphasized the role of the state in its report submitted in the late January 1948. The EPC advocated the reservation of the major area of economic activity for the state including (1) new undertakings in defence, key and public utility industries; (2) units defined as 'monopolies' serving more

than one province; (3) banking and insurance; and (4) large-scale units producing/manufacturing food articles, clothing and consumer goods, and competing against the cottage and small-scale sectors. Privately-owned undertakings in these reserved areas were to be taken over within five years. The EPC also categorically proposed that "the place of foreign capital should be examined so as to ensure that the economic controls remain with the nationals of the country:"<sup>5</sup>

These radical recommendations were vigorously opposed by business lobbies spearheaded by the Association of Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) and the Federation of India Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), as well as by conservative forces inside and outside the ruling Congress party. Since the industrial policy proposals would have led to the nationalization and curbing of the industrial, trading, and banking concerns of big business, their representatives in FlCCI and ASSOCHAM as well as the foreign private capital interests represented in the latter, opposed them vigorously despite their different attitudes about the rights' of foreign capital vis-a-vis Indian capital.<sup>6</sup> As a consequence of the pressures exerted by these forces, coupled with the relative weakness of radical forces, the Industrial Policy Statement which followed substantially reduced the role of the state and took a more sympathetic position towards foreign capital.

The April 1948 Industrial Policy Statement exclusively reserved only three industries: arms and ammunition, atomic energy, and railway transport for the state. New undertakings in six other industries: coal, iron and steel, aircraft manufacture, shipbuilding, manufacture of telephone, telegraph and wireless apparatus excluding radio receiving sets, and mineral oils, were also exclusively reserved for the state, except when it found it "necessary to secure the cooperation of private enterprise". The proposed five-year period in the EPC report for the takeover of private units operating in reserved areas was not extended to ten years, but it was further stated that this takeover itself would be reviewed at the end of that period. The Statement acknowledges "that participation of foreign capital and enterprise ... will be of value to the rapid industrialization of the country", and toned down the earlier emphasis on majority Indian ownership and control.<sup>7</sup>

Significantly, big business circles including FICCI and the big businessowned financial press welcomed the new policy despite some apprehensions.<sup>8</sup> But others like K.T. Shah, who had served as member-secretary of the National Planning Committee (NPC) were very critical. Shah felt that the recommendations of the NPC which had been chaired by Nehru himself, about the role of the state, had been substantially diluted. He claimed the new policy left "the total industry ... in the hands of the capitalists" and characterized it as "a charter of exploitation for the vested interests."<sup>9</sup>

On 6th April 1949, an official statement on Foreign Investment in India was made in which the earlier policy of regulation of foreign capital was significantly changed. Foreign investors were explicitly assured that their investments would be treated on par with local enterprise and they would even be permitted to retain control of a concern "in the national interest."<sup>10</sup> Big business' were divided. While ASSOCHAM welcomed the new policy, FICer opposed. But even its prominent leader G.D. Birla openly supported the policy. In any event, severe economic constraints which compounded insufficient domestic investment forced the government to turn to foreign capital, though its leaders sought to reassure business circles.<sup>11</sup>

Ironically, from this period till early 1955, the major sections of Indian big business opposed foreign capital reminding the Congress of its *Swadeshi*  principles. At its 1953, annual meeting, FICCI actually adopted a *"Swadeshi*  resolution". In its correspondence with the government, FICCI claimed that foreign capital had created difficulties for indigenous industries and, therefore, urged that foreign capital should not be permitted to adversely affect parallel Indian industry."<sup>12</sup> Thus, the trilateral relationship between the government, foreign capital, and a large section of Indian big business changed. Whereas in the first phase, FlCCI wanted restrictions of foreign capital, in later years it, together with ASSOCHAM, wanted the government to further liberalize the entry of foreign capital. The 1956 Industrial Policy Resolution The Indian state's welcome to foreign capital did not result in a significant fresh foreign investment. The shift towards a Mahalanobis strategy in which the state played a major role in industrialization which was encapsulated in the Second Plan and which shaped the 1956 Industrial Policy Resolution, was largely a consequence of a number of political and economic factors, of which the West's refusal to provide the necessary support was a major one.<sup>13</sup> The ideological climate had also changed with the Congress adopting a "socialistic pattern" of society as its goal in its Avadi session in January 1955.

This resolution of, April 1956, provided the formal framework of the state-directed industrialization that followed. All subsequent Industrial Policy Statements have further defined industrial policy without formally superseding this original document. It divided industries into three broad categories. The first group of 17 "basic and strategic" industries was listed in Schedule A for further exclusive development by the state, except in exceptional circumstances when the support of the private sector could be enlisted. The second group of 12 industries was listed in Schedule B which was to be progressively state-owned and in which the state was generally to take the initiative in setting up new undertakings. But the private sector was to have the opportunity to develop in this field also. The remaining industries were left open to the private sector, though the state was free to enter that area, too, "when the needs of planning so require."<sup>14</sup>

The resolution dropped the earlier takeover clause, relating to private sector units functioning in reserved areas, and its flexibility was welcomed even by big business circles. G.D. Somani and a prominent businessman welcomed the new policy in the Lok Sabha as did most businessmen and the financial press. As the Birla-owned *Eastern Economist* put it, "There is nothing which should terrify private enterprise in this socialism". On the other hand, the CPI was critical of the resolution for not going far enough in extending the role of the public sector and nationalizing the private sector.<sup>15</sup>

However, the foreign exchange crisis of 1957 led to a pro-private sector interpretation of this resolution. There were also foreign pressures for a change in industrial policy. In September 1956, the World Bank President Eugene Black had written to the Finance Minister T.T. Krishnamachari that it wanted India to give "private enterprise, both Indian and foreign, every encouragement to make its maximum contribution to the development of the economy, particularly in the industrial field ... We would have to consider the pace and scale of our further loan-operation in India from time to time ... Taking into consideration the economic policies pursued by your government."<sup>16</sup> The government rejected the World Bank pressure but from the second half of 1957 onwards, reserved Schedule A and B industries were thrown open to the private sector, including foreign capital. On the other hand, a massive Soviet offer to set up a public sector pharmaceutical industry was rejected in favour of MNCs like Merck and Bayer.

In May 1961, the government in its statement on "the role of foreign capital in India's economic development", provided an "illustrative" list of 26 industries in which foreign capital would "ordinarily" be permitted to invest. Many of these were Schedule A and B industries. It was also explicitly stated that "exceptions" could be made for entry into Schedule A industries "in the public interest", and further clarified that Indian majority shareholding was not necessary in "on merits" cases.<sup>17</sup>

In September 1963, the government set up the "Industries Development Procedures Committee', popularly known as the Swaminathan Committee after its chairperson. Significantly, of the Five non-official members of the 10-man committee, four were leaders of FlCCI, including its president Bharat Ram, and one from ASSOCHAM, its president A.R. Foster. Thus, all the non-official members were representatives of Indian and foreign big business. As a consequence of the Swaminathan Committee's recommendations, the government agreed in June 1964 to give "priority treatment" in licensing eight industries, a number of which were Schedule B industries.

The Swaminathan Committee was reconstituted in August 1965, with the new presidents of FICCI and ASSOCHAM replacing the earlier incumbents. In its recommendations of February 1966, the committee concluded "that generally speaking, industries which do not involve the import of capital goods or raw materials should be exempted from the licensing provisions."<sup>18</sup> As Bhagwati and Desai, in their generally pro-private sector study of industrialization and trade policies have noted, "From an economic view-point, this criterion made no sense ... as it took into account only the direct foreign exchange requirements and ignored other foreign exchange repercussions."<sup>19</sup> One the basis of these recommendations, the government in May 1966 delicensed 11 industries, a large number of which were in Schedules A and B including iron and steel, castings and forgings, iron and steel structurals, and cement. In July more industries were delicensed, and in November 1966, 23 more items were delicensed.

Though the economic strategy enunciated by the Second and Third Plans was for the state or public sector to capture the "commanding heights of the economy", the actual implementation of the industrial policy was quite different. The ILPIC Report showed that during the Second and Third Plan periods, i.e., from 1956 to 1966, in the Schedule A industries the following proportion of licences were issued to the private sector including foreign capital: iron and steel, 42 out of a total of 46; heavy castings and forgings of iron and steel, 306 out of 312; heavy plant and machinery required for iron and steel, etc., 103 out of 106; heavy electrical plants, 58 out of 61; coal and lignite, 344 out of 390; aircraft, tow out of four; mineral oils, seven out of 10; shipbuilding, all 12; and telephones, telegraph and wireless apparatus, 17 out of 20. In Schedule B industries a similar pattern prevailed: in machine tools, 226 licences to the private sector out of a total of 235; ferro-alloys and tool steels, 58 out of 62; basic and intermediate products required by chemical industries, 184 out of 199; plastics, antibiotics, and other essential drugs, 334 out of 335; fertilizers, 42 out of 54; synthetic rubber, all three; aluminium, all 46; and other non-ferrous metals, all 87.<sup>20</sup>

This extensive private sector entry into areas generally reserved for the public sector was enabled by public sector funding. Of the medium and long-term loan assistance sanctioned by public financial institutions between 1956 and 1966, 52.6 per cent was to the large industrial sector (defined as business groups with assets of Rs. five crores or more in 1964). As the ILPIC Report summed up, "the licensing system provides considerable scope for a favour to be granted and ... these favours mostly are secured by firms belonging to the Large Industrial Sector."?<sup>21</sup>

As a consequence of this liberalization of industrial policy, the volume of foreign investments in the manufacturing sector increased from `70.7 crore in June 1948 to `630.9 crore by March 1967. It should be noted that these figures are for the book values of the investment, thus an underestimate of the actual market value.<sup>22</sup>

The liberalization of industrial policy that took place in this period, particularly, in 1956-66, was undoubtedly also, to some extent, a result of external pressures. Pressures from the World Bank, IMF, and the Aid India Consortium which culminated in the devaluation of the rupee in June 1966, must have contributed to the pro-private sector shifts in this period. The Congress regime which was able to put up some resistance to World Bank pressure in 1956, succumbed to it is 1966. By this stage, compared to 1956 the collaboration between Indian big business and foreign capital had deepened, the Congress had a new, relatively weak Prime Minister in Indira Gandhi, and these factors combined with the difficult domestic economic situation in 1965-66, was probably decisive in the shift in economic policy, both the deregulation and the virtual discarding of the policy of import substitution.<sup>23</sup>

# ❑❑ **Further Relaxations in Industrial Policy**

The changes in industrial policy were accompanied by a decline in public investment which manifested itself in lower growth rates in the Indian economy as a whole. The growth rate in the manufacturing sector that had increased in the fifties and sixties, declined thereafter despite the continued liberalization of industrial policy.<sup>24</sup>

The virtual dereservation of Schedule A and B industries was given an official sanction in industrial policy decisions taken on 18, February 1970, seventeen industries, which were specifically stated to exclude the reserved industries were specified as "core" and heavy industries in which Indian and foreign big business were normally expected to invest. A number of these industries were in fact Schedule A and B industries.<sup>25</sup> The same year saw the coming into force of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act, which was supposed to curb monopolistic practices. Though an MRTP Commission was set up, references to it under the Act were to be made by the government, and its clauses were sufficiently diffused so as not to significantly hamper big business growth.<sup>26</sup>

By February 1973, further additions were made to the 'core' sector list with the Appendix I industries totalling 19 and including those earlier reserved for the public sector. The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) was enacted with the explicit objective of conserving and properly utilizing foreign exchange. It did not explicitly refer to the regulation of foreign capital. Under FERA companies with more than 40 per cent foreign equity would require permission from the Reserve Bank of India to continue their activities. Foreign companies were to be allowed to retain upto 74 per cent of equity only if they brought in sophisticated technology and/or exported substantially, but this was given liberally even in low technology areas.<sup>27</sup>

The result of the operation of the MRTP and PERA Acts was the continued growth of large Indian and FERA companies. Of the top 100 largest private sector companies, the assets of the FERA companies increased from a 28.05 per cent share in 1967-68 to 30.93 per cent in 1977-78; in absolute terms the increase was from `760.72 crore to `1938.18 crore, i.e., by 141.64 per cent. During the same period, the share of large Indian companies decreases from 71.94 per cent to 69.07 per cent, though their assets increase from `1950.61 crore to `4101.67 crore, i.e., by 100.43 per cent.<sup>28</sup> The Sachar Committee (the high-powered committee on companies and MRTP Acts) noted that only some 9.5 per cent of the effective applications received by government under Sections 21, 22, and 23 of the MRTP Act (pertaining to increased production by MRTP companies) between 1st June 1970 and 31st December 1977, were referred to the MRTP Commission. The Central government approved 74 per cent of the applications.

Between 1969 and 1975, the total assets of the top twenty business groups registered under the MRTP Act increased by 83.7 per cent. The Sachar Committee, whose members included leading industrialists like D.C. Kothari (ex-President, FICCI) and Keshub Mahindra (ex-President, ASSO-CHAM), acknowledged that "these figures ... show that the Act has not stifled the growth of the economy. The central government has been quite liberal in allowing expansion or the setting up of new undertaking(s) (by the MRTP groups)."<sup>29</sup>

The Janata Party government that came to power continued these liberalized policies. On 31st December 1977, Industrial Policy Statement dropped the goal of a socialistic pattern barely a year after the 42nd constitutional amendment had enshrined socialism in the preamble. It further liberalized the investment procedures for foreign capital, dropped the price preference for the public sector, increased the areas for private investment, and reduced the reservations for the samaIl-scale sector.<sup>30</sup>

# ❑❑ **Liberalizations in the 1980s**

Mrs. Gandhi's government on her return to power in January 1980 further liberalized industrial policy. In February, Vice-President Hidyatullah criticized India's earlier industrial policy and called for an open entry of MNCs into the country. In May a more liberal approach towards FERA was announced allowing MNCs to retain higher levels of equity than earlier agreed upon. On 23rd July another Industrial Policy Statement, again formally based on the earlier 1956 Industrial Policy Resolution, was announced. This one, too, like its predecessor dropped all references to the socialist goal. The role of the public sector was explicitly reduced to 'building the pillars of the infrastructure' in contrast to its earlier role of capturing lithe commanding heights. Undertakings in all Appendix I industries were permitted *"automatic"* expansion upto 25 per cent of licensed capacity.<sup>31</sup>

The negotiations for the IMF loan in 1981 led to further pressures for liberalization.<sup>32</sup> In April 1982, this "automatic" expansion was further liberalized to permit industrial units to claim higher capacity upto an additional one-third over the highest production achieved in any of the five years ending 1981-82, as the basis for a further expansion of another 25 per cent. For MRTP/FERA companies this provision was restricted to Appendix I items. In 1984, this expansion was one again permitted. The effect of these successive amendments to the original "automatic" capacity expansion scheme was to regularize illegally created excess capacities (i.e., capacities in excess of those licensed), thus rewarding those who had violated industrial policy. Moreover, the cumulative effect of these expansions rendered "substantial expansion" (SE) licences wholly unnecessary since undertakings were permitted to virtually double their production.

After the return of the Congress (I) government in October 1984, further concessions were made. In December 1984, the licensing procedures for MRTP companies were streamlined. Starting from January 1985, a "broadbanding" scheme was extended to a large number of industries. Broadbanding was originally introduced in machine tools industry in July 1983, which permitted manufacturers full flexibility to produce items similar to those for which they had a licence. In 1985, this scheme allowed entrepreneurs in a large number of industries including those in Schedules A and B to diversify their production. Though earlier relaxations, permitting diversification, had reduced the necessity for "New Article" (NA) licences under the Industries Act, the broadbanding scheme rendered these licences unnecessary.<sup>33</sup>

The 1985-86 Budget increased the asset limit for registration under the MRTP Act from `20 crore to `100 crore. Twenty-five broad groups of industries were also delicensed.<sup>34</sup> These included industries listed in Schedules A and B. Though this liberalization was not to extend to MRTP and FERA companies, since a large number of big business or foreign-controlled companies were not registered under the MRTP and FERA Acts, they were able to avail of these concessions. Furthermore, the exemption limit for the purposes of licensing was continuously increased from `5 lakh in 1951 to `5 crore from April 1983.

From 1985, the process of liberalization accelerated. Petroleum and natural gas exploitation (a Schedule A industry) was opened to foreign investors, even by reversing decisions taken by an earlier Congress (I) government, e.g., in the HBJ pipeline case. In the Assam accord that year between the government and AASU, it was stated that the proposed refinery in Assam would be set up in the private sector. The electronics policy announced in March explicitly welcomed the entry of FERA companies into the industry. The bulk of the industry was put outside the purview of the anti-monopoly sections of the MRTP Act, a substantial portion was delicensed, and the import of technology was freely permitted. Understandably, these changes were welcomed by the large private sector.<sup>35</sup>

In June the same year, the new textile policy virtually abolished the distinction between the mill, powerloom, and handloom sectors, as well as removing the distinction between natural and synthetic fibre for licensing purposes. Thus, the remaining constraints on the growth of the mills were virtually removed, the manufacture of polyester fibre and filament was virtually delicensed (and their excise duties sharply reduced), and by treating all sectors at par, the protection for the smaller powerloom and handloom sectors was in effect jettisoned. The policy statement promised to eliminate, phase out or at least "modify" all controls.

As a consequence of such policy changes, the number of foreign collaborations increased sharply from 526 in 1980 (then a record) to 740 in 1984, with a significant proportion of these in the public sector.

Throughout the latter part of the eighties, the liberalization process continued with the same speed. More industries including those in Schedules A and B were delicensed, industries earlier reserved for the public sector or the small-scale sector were thrown open to the MRTP and FERA companies. The MRTP Act and FERA were further liberalized, and industrial licensing provisions were further relaxed. All this was done in pursuit of the official objective of maximizing growth, exports and foreign investment, by reducing unnecessary controls. Despite resistance by the Left parties and lobbies of smaller business, the liberalization process continued unabated.

# ❑❑ **Industrial Policy Changes Since 1991**

The Union Budget for 1991-92 further accentuated the liberalization process. Concessions in industrial licensing policy had preceded it, but them Finance Minister Manmohan Singh announced some major concessions which were further amplified in the Industrial Policy Statement of 24 July 1991. Like the earlier statements, this one also claimed to be based on the 1956 Industrial Policy Resolution. But it made far-reaching changes in industrial policy. Instead of the 17 Schedule A and 12 Schedule B industries earlier reserved for the public sector, only eight industries listed in Annexure I were reserved for the public sector. Yet, though 'mineral oils' was one of these reserved industries, petroleum (other than crude), and its distillation was one of the 18 industries listed in Annexure II for which licensing was still required. Similarly, coal and lignite were common to both lists, effectively dereserving them at the outset. All other industries were delicensed including MRTP and FERA companies subject to their being 25 km from the standard urban area limits of cities with populations exceeding 10 lakh according to the 1991 Census.

Thirty-four groups of industries including a number of them earlier reserved for the public sector like metallurgical industries, boilers and steam generating plants, electrical equipment, telecommunication equipment, transportation, industrial machinery, agricultural machinery, industrial instruments, inorganic fertilizers and chemicals were listed for automatic approval of foreign technology agreements and for investment by companies with 51 per cent foreign equity. Thus, basic and strategic industries that Nehru and his contemporaries believed should, because of the adoption of the socialistic pattern of society as the national objective, as well as the need for planned and rapid development, to be in the public sector,<sup>36</sup> were to be automatically handed over to Indian big business and the MNCs.

While sharply diminishing the role of the public sector, the new policy statement also promised the disinvestment of equity share capital in "selected (public sector) enterprises". It also stated that "chronically sick" public enterprises would be referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (as a prelude to their closure or privatization). But, the public enterprises were in that period increasingly subject to reduced budgetary support which often caused their sickness. Further, the shift towards foreign capital had led to a sharp fall in the demand for public sector products, making them less viable. On the other hand, in 1990-91 the termlending financial institutions lent `19, 385 crores to the private corporate sector, while the latter realized only `4, 130 crore from capital issues. Since the promoters share was only a fraction of the latter figure, this indicates the extent of public funding of the private sector.

Critics, including those in Parliament, argued that the concessions in the budget and in the Industrial Policy Statement were geared to the conditionalities of the IMP-World Bank and part of the structural adjustment programme (SAP). Ironically, similar SAP-oriented policies had been sharply criticized by Manrnohan Singh himself when he was Secretary-General of the South Commission.37 But industrialists, Indian and foreign, and their lobbies like FICCI, ASSOCHAM, and CII (Confederations of Indian Industry), welcomed these changes and asked for further concessions. Since then most of the multilateral financial institutions have recognized that the industrial policy and other economic policy changes starting in 1991 were part of the structural reform process.<sup>38</sup>

In August 1991, a substantial expansion of an existing unit and the production of new articles was allowed without a licence. Procedures for foreign technology agreements including hiring of foreign technicians were simplified, so that permission was automatic subject to some conditions. While the investment limit (value of plant and machinery) for registration as small-scale sector units had been raised to `60 lakhs, and that of ancillary and export-oriented units to `75 lakhs in April, the limit for tiny enterprises was more than doubled from `2 lakhs to `5 lakhs. Procedures for foreign investment were also simplified. One-time additional imports of capital goods or balancing equipment for broadbanding and capacity enhancement were also allowed.

In October 1991, foreign imports, subject to certain conditions was automatically approved. In December, the amount of foreign exchange available for industrial units for import of technology and capital under the Technical Development Fund Scheme every financial year, was increased from Rs. three crores to Rs. five crores. The list of industries in Annexure III (which listed industries for automatic approvals of foreign technology agreements and for approvals for 51 per cent foreign equity) was expanded that month and again in June 1992.

In May 1992, foreign brandnames/trademarks were allowed in the domestic market. This was followed by foreign companies being allowed to increase their equity share to 51 per cent at share prices determined by the shareholders, without any prior government approval. In July, the earlier conditions imposed on industrial approvals including export obligations, financial management of MRTP/FERA companies, foreign exchange neutrality and prohibiting access to domestic financial institutions, obligations to set up joint sector units by State Industrial Development Corporations in association with private promoters, captive use of certain items of manufacture, and the prohibition of merchant sales, were all withdrawn.

In April 1993, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs decided to remove automobiles, white goods, and leather from Annexure II, the list for compulsory licensing. Later the same year, it was decided to guarantee foreign investors in the power sector a minimum return of 16 per cent in dollar terms. This unprecedented profit guarantee, it is estimated, would triple the unit cost of electricity. As critics have pointed out, substantially less generous terms would have made public sector power companies economically viable. MNCs, including those with no prior experience of oil exploration, were invited to invest in proven oil-bearing areas already explored by the ONGC. According to one commentator, the estimated profit in one oilfield would be 278 per cent over five years. Consequently, MNCs would profiteer while the ONGC is starved of funds for capital investment.<sup>39</sup>

The Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC) inquiry into the stock scam has indicted the foreign banks as being responsible in large measure for the illegal speculation in the stock market and has unanimously recommended punitive action against them.<sup>40</sup> As some of the Opposition members of the JPC have pointed out, the stock scam is a consequence of the deregulation and liberalization of the economy. The unprecedented statement by the British High Commissioner in India that Dr. Manmohan Singh's continuation in office as then finance minister despite his resignation is necessary for the economic reform process, and the absence of any official protest over this foreign interference in India's internal affairs, is indicative of the influence India's creditors now have. The removal of G.V. Ramakrishan from the chairpersonship of the Securities Exchange Board of India (SEBI), apparently in response to pressures from stockbrokers, appears to be the latest instance of how an honest officer seeking to protect public interest can be removed by forces unleashed by the current liberalization process.

# ❑❑ **Disquiet in Indian Business**

In late September 1993, a group of 12 leading industrialists including Keshub Mahindra, Rahul Bajaj, Hari Shankar Singhania, and B.K. Modi met in Bombay to pressurize the government to create "a level playing field" that would enable Indian industry to compete on equal terms with foreign companies. Rahul Bajaj, a leader of this group which has come to be known as the Bombay Club, put business fears very picturesquely; "For 45 years the government tied our hands behind our backs. Now they want to throw us to the wolves". Vijay Kalantri, President of the All India Manufacturers Organisation (AIMO) warned that the drive to attract foreign capital was turning Indian entrepreneurs into mere traders, who would be "permanently saluting multinational corporations."<sup>41</sup>

D.H. Pai Panandiker, a former Secretary-General of FlCCI, summarized the Bombay Club's grievances which were later supported by FICCI<sup>42</sup> He noted that in a one year period till September-October 1993, 34 MNCs had increased their equity shares to 51 per cent. Of these only corn products paid more than the market price; the rest acquired these shares "at hefty discounts", a fact that Pai Panandiker found "amazing". According to him "Colgate-Palmolive (bought) at 92 per cent discount, ABB 87 per cent, Bata India 84 per cent. Indian Shaving Products at 82 per cent ..." On the other hand, of the Indian companies only the Vyasa Bank matched the MNCs discount norms. Indian Rayon, Nahar Spinning, and Punjab Concast, according to him, got discounts of approximately 45 per cent.

Pai Panandiker noted that Indian companies could not obtain finances from the banks against their shares as collateral, and that the Companies Act restricted inter-company investment. Like the Bombay Club members, he pointed out that customs duties were higher on raw materials and components than on the final commodity, thereby discriminating against domestic production in favour of jmports. Public sector pricing policies were also making raw materials dearer than imports. He also alleged dumping of goods by foreign countries, especially China. Thus, Pai Panandiker concluded, "the playing field in tilted against Indian companies which, with many of the restrictions still intact, have to fight world giants."<sup>43</sup>

Barua and Varma have calculated that Colgate-Palmolive by buying 11.3 million shares at `60 each when the market price was `700 (i.e., at a discount of `640), made profits amounting to `723.2 crore or \$231.05 million.<sup>44</sup> Since influential segments of big business were so distressed, Dr. Manmohan Singh was constrained to admit that Indian companies were too small compared to the MNCs and that their requirement for help to grow was legitimate.<sup>45</sup>

As the process of structural reform and the liberalization industrial policy continues, the contradiction between MNCs, on the one hand, and sections of Indian big business, and medium and small business, on the other, are likely to sharpen. At that stage, the political pressure on government against some of the industrial and other economic policy changes will mount. However, in view of the economic stranglehold of foreign creditors including multilateral financial institutions are likely to (unofficial estimates put India's external debt at over \$95 billion), any substantial change in industrial policy will not be easy.

# ❑❑ **MNCs and the Indian Economy**

The actual performance of the MNCs have disapproved the assumptions of government policy. MNCs have avoided significantly supplementing domestic capital. For instance, Chaudhuri found that in the case of the then 50 largest MNC affiliates in India, only 5.3 per cent of the growth during 1956- 75 was financed by foreign sources.<sup>46</sup> Similarly, Kumar and Chenoy found that the eight leading MNCs affiliate in the drug industry financed only 13.51 per cent of the total equity capital.<sup>47</sup> Union Carbide India Ltd. (UCIL) raised as much as 72.4 per cent of its equity through bonus issues, even though its parent company held 50.9 per cent of its equity.<sup>48</sup>

MNC investment has also been justified on grounds of foreign exchange earnings through exports. An RBI study found that the operations of foreign subsidiaries between 1964-65 and 1969-70 resulted in a net outflow of `684 crore of foreign exchange. The study also revealed that wholly and majority-owned foreign firms had a larger negative trade balance than firms with only minority foreign participation.<sup>49</sup> UCIL's net foreign exchange deficit was `6.81 crore in 1981, rose to `9.51 crore in 1982, and jumped to `16.62 crore in 1983.<sup>50</sup>

A major justification for foreign investment is that it brings in modern and sophisticated technology. But this is not quite the case. In the first place, any technology transfer through MNCs is a 'private' transfer, from the parent MNC to its affiliate or collaborator. Secondly, as the National Committee on Science and Technology has found: "The price one pays for foreign technology (either as a lump sum or a continuing combination of royalties, divided repatriations, technical fees, etc.) is not in any way 'fixed' by (the) market for such a technology. The market is a monopolistic one and the price of technology is a matter of bargaining between the potential supplier and his client."<sup>51</sup>

Thirdly, few MNC affiliates significantly invest in research and development to develop the indigenous infrastructure for imported technology, or to indigenize the same. Out of the 118 foreign subsidiaries in India in 1980, only 32 had research establishments recognized by the government. And of these, only 11 applied for any patents in 1978-82.<sup>52</sup>

Fourthly, the technology transferred is often hazardous as the Bhopal gas tragedy of December 1984 starkly demonstrated. The leakage of 45 tonnes of MIC from the plant, which caused thousands of deaths and affected the health of lakhs, was the consequence of the transfer of obsolete and ill-designed plant equipment, as well as an extremely dangerous production process not used anywhere else in the world, including in Union Carbide's other plants. While other plants producing MIC-based pesticides used up MIC continuously during the production process, UCIL chose to store upto 60 tonnes of this extremely poisonous and unstable chemical. The safety equipment was grossly inadequate and this was known to Union Carbide since at least 1982.<sup>53</sup> Another MNC, Johns-Manville Corporation, at one time the largest asbestos producing company in the USA, produced 50,000 tonnes of asbestos cement pipes and sheets annually in its affiliate Shree Digvijay Cement Company's Ahmedabad plant. Since asbestos dust inhalation is known to cause various types of cancer, its production dropped markedly in advanced countries like the USA and Sweden in the 1980s. But because of domestic pressures, MNCs have taken to transferring hazardous or polluting processes to the Third World.<sup>54</sup> The World Bank's chief economic adviser Lawrence Summers issued a memo (since withdrawn) advocating the transfer of environmentally polluting industries to the Third World, on the grounds that these countries have areas less polluted than those in the west.

MNCs have been known to produce commodities banned in their home country. For instance, in the drugs and pharmaceutical industry MNC affiliates have exported or produced locally in India drugs banned in their own country, by making full use of the weak regulations, which over the last decade have been further dismantled.<sup>55</sup> All this is not to say that MNCs should not be allowed entry into economies such as India, but only to highlight the need for transparent regulations to ensure that these companies do not flout the national interest in their quest for profits.

# ❑❑ **Conclusion**

These examinations of the evolution of industrial policy in India has shown that economic policies were neither socialist nor anti-big business at any stage. During the Nehruvian period, from 1947-64, private sector including big business and foreign investors were accommodated, even at the cost of deviating from stated policy objectives. A major pro-big business and proforeign capital shift began in the late sixties after the 1966 devaluation of the rupee and increased in the seventies. The pace of liberalization and deregulation further accelerated in the early period of the Rajiv Gandhi regime. Thus, the popular contention that the industrial policy was very restrictive of a large enterprise is not borne out. Facts indicate the virtual opposite: the industrial policy frame discriminated in favour of large industry, both Indian and foreign.

The structural adjustment programme (SAP) process initiated by the P.V. Narasimha Rao government and identified with Finance Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh since 1991 and now Prime Minister is, therefore, only a culmination of an earlier trend. It is, however, clear that this open door policy is markedly different from the Nehruvian policy, as the denationalization of the petroleum and gas industry, among others, highlights. For reasons of political legitimation recent policy announcements (like the 1991 Industrial Policy Statement) have claimed a Nehruvian heritage, but this is mere political rhetoric.

Yet the major decisions underlying the formulation and implementation of industrial policy at all stages were basically political. These reflected the ruling regimes' political choices, which in turn were influenced by the then prevalent political balance of forces. Future developments in industrial policy will also reflect the political realities, both national and international, of the time.

#### **Notes and References**

1. The arrest of the Congress leadership in 1942 and their preoccupation with the national movement did not allow the National Planning Committee (NPC) sufficient opportunity to bring out a final consolidated report. But reports of various sub-committees brought out by the NPC's Secretary K.T. Shah provide sufficient indication of the dominant thinking in nationalist circles. See for instance, *Report*