#### **Overview of the Culture 729**

- Last, M. (2000b). Children and the experience of violence: Contrasting cultures of punishment in northern Nigeria. *Africa, 70.3*, 359–393.
- Lewis, I. M. (1991). *Women's medicine: The zar-bori cult in Africa & beyond*. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press for the International African Institute.
- Mortimore, M. (1989). *Adapting to drought: Farmers, famines and desertification in West Africa*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Newman, P. (2000). *The Hausa language: An encyclopedic reference grammar*. New Haven: Yale University Press.
- Nicolas, G. (1975). *Dynamique sociale et apprehension du monde au sein d'une société Hausa*. Paris: Institut d'ethnologie.
- Nicolas, J. (1972). *Ambivalence et culte de possession: Contribution à l'étude de bori Hausa*. Paris: Editions Anthropos.

- Paden, J. N. (1975). *Religion and political culture in Kano*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Ross, P. J., Etkin, N. L., & Muazzamu, I. (1991). The greater risk of fewer deaths: An ethnodemographic approach to child mortality in Hausaland. *Africa, 61.iv*, 502–512.
- Ross, P. J., Etkin, N. L., & Muazzamu, I. (1996). A changing Hausa diet. *Medical Anthropology, 17*, 143–163.
- Schmaling, C. (2000). *Maganar hannu: Language of the hands. A descriptive analysis of Hausa sign language*. Hamburg: Signum Verlag.
- Schram, R. (1971). *A History of the Nigerian Health Services*. Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.
- Wall, L. (1988). *Hausa medicine: Illness and well-being in a West African culture*. Durham NC: Duke University Press.

# **Hmong in Laos and the United States**

#### **Kathleen A. Culhane-Pera, Dia Cha, and Peter Kunstadter**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Miao or Meo (considered derogatory by Hmong).

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Hmong are a distinct ethno-linguistic group who originated in China and who migrated into northern Southeast Asia during the 19th century. After the end of the "Secret War in Laos" in 1975, many Hmong fled to Thailand and then were resettled around the world, including the United States. Most Hmong in the United States speak two closely related dialects of the Miao–Yao language: White Hmong (*Hmoob Dawb* or *Moob Dlawb*) and Green Hmong or Blue Hmong (*Hmoob Ntsuab* or *Moob Lees*). These two groups were traditionally distinguished by their dialect, dress, housing style, and other cultural differences.

The Hmong diaspora is extensive, with over seven million in China, one million in Southeast Asia (Schein, 2000), and almost 16,000 in France, Canada, French Guyana, Australia, and Argentina (Rice, 2000). According to the 2002 Census, 169,428 Hmong live in the United States, with most in California, Minnesota, and Wisconsin (Pfeifer, 2002). However, Hmong community leaders feel the U.S. Census 2000 undercounted the Hmong and estimate that 227,217–268,747 live in the United States (Hmong National Development Links, 2001).

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

#### **History**

Hmong myths suggest Hmong lived in northern China and migrated into southern China. Early Chinese historical records indicate that Hmong were lowland irrigated rice farmers. Resisting the political control and population pressures of the Han Chinese, many ended up in the mountainous areas of central and southern China. Some Hmong migrated into the highlands of northern Southeast Asia in the mid-1800s. In the first half of the 20th century, French administrators in Laos granted opium-growing concessions to some but not all of the Hmong in Xieng Khouang province. This was one basis for the split between Hmong who allied themselves with the French and the Americans after 1954 and those who allied themselves with the Pathet Lao and northern Vietnamese.

From the 1960s through 1975, many Hmong were recruited by the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to fight on the side of the Royal Lao government against the communist Pathet Lao and Vietnamese in the "Secret War in Laos" (Warner, 1999; Weldon, 1999). Hmong suffered many casualties and great economic disruption during the war. After the collapse of the U.S. side, more than 100,000 Hmong fled to Thailand (Robinson, 1998; Yang D., 1991). Some emigrated to the United States starting in 1975, but some were not resettled until the end of the 1990s. Tens of thousands of Lao Hmong remain in Thailand with unresolved immigration status, and approximately 10,000 Hmong were repatriated to Laos (Cha & Chagnon, 1993; Cha & Small, 1994; Kirton, 2002).

## **Economy**

The 20th century economy of Hmong in Laos was based on subsistence swidden (slash and burn) cultivation of upland dry rice, vegetables, and maize, with opium as a medicine and as a cash crop in some areas. They also raised pigs and chickens for food and horses for transport. Large multi-generational patrilineal extended families cooperated economically in subsistence production. Other than the activities of the CIA and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), there was no wage labor and no Hmong village-based commerce. Very few Hmong received any formal education or became fluent or literate in Lao, French, or English (Yang D., 1991). Thus few Hmong refugees had skills or basic knowledge that was appropriate for employment in modern Western industrial, market, and service economies and only a small proportion of middle-aged and older adults have been employed in wage work outside the house. In the 1980s to 1990s, some Hmong were self-employed farmers or gardeners, especially in California, but many have depended on welfare programs for income and for health services. Many adults work in menial jobs, such as janitorial and factory work, often working two jobs or interchanging day and night shifts so parents can care for their children. However, many of the younger generation have become educated and have entered the mainstream U.S. economy (Lo, 2001; Mills & Yang, 1997; Yang & Murphy, 1994).

## **Social and Political Organization**

Membership in exogamous patrilineal clans is the major organizing principle of Hmong society. Traditionally Hmong lived in large multigenerational patrilineally extended family households that were economic and ritual units. Elder or middle-aged men led households and groups of closely-related extended families. Clan members had some obligations to provide each other with support, such as shelter (Cooper, 1984; Tapp, 1986), and had a strong influence in ethnic identity (Leepreecha, 2001). Political organization was limited to the village level. Village leaders were usually the heads of the largest and economically most influential families. French colonial authorities recognized some of these leaders and gave them positions in the local administration, but Hmong villages retained their autonomy. During the war, some Hmong men became high-ranking military officers in the Royal Lao Army (Quincy, 1995).

In the United States, housing and economic conditions preclude forming large household units, but relatives often live in close proximity. Most Hmong still follow rules of clan exogamy, but some do break the traditional taboos. Some clans have expanded the assistance functions of clan membership, to other functions, such as encouraging higher education (Hones & Cha, 1999). Elders still tend to occupy leadership positions, leading important rituals and influencing important decisions including medical care (Cha, 2000; Hones & Cha, 1999; Pfeifer, 2002). Former military leaders often continue to lead, acting as heads of social welfare organizations that are often based on clan or Laotian region affiliation and attempting to serve as spokesmen for an increasingly heterogeneous "Hmong community." As the younger generation become educated and acquire professional qualifications, they are replacing the elders as political leaders. Some Hmong organizations, including Christian church groups, cut across the traditional kinship or regional lines and serve a variety of social welfare and community development purposes. At a national level, Hmong have several organizations for political lobbying, and for staging conferences to discuss various issues (Hmong National Development Links, 2001).

## **Religion**

Traditional Hmong religion is animistic, with beliefs in spirits (*dab*), ancestor worship (*dab niam txiv pog yawg*), multiple souls (*ntsuj plig*), reincarnation, incantations for blessing, curing, or cursing, and selection of spiritually appropriate locations for houses and graves. The most powerful spirits, including the Master of the Universe, are believed to live in the sky; lesser spirits dwell on earth, or underground (Lemoine, 1986; Morechand, 1968). In Laos, Hmong learned about Buddhism from lowland ethnic

#### **The Context of Health 731**

Laotians and learned about Christianity from Catholic and Protestant missionaries (Barney, 1957; Capps, 1994). About 25% of the Hmong in the United States are Christian, having converted in refugee camps or having accepted the religious affiliation of their immigration sponsors (Capps, 1994).

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: HMONG HEALTH CONDITIONS IN LAOS AND THE UNITED STATES**

There is no systematic record of Hmong health conditions in Laos, but data collected from Hmong refugees in the United States suggests that infections and parasitic diseases predominated in Laos, and that wartime trauma was also a leading cause of injury and death. Reproductive histories collected from Hmong women in Merced, California in 1987 suggest that infant mortality of children born in Laos was around 120 per 1,000 live births, declined to about 90 per 1,000 for children born in refugee camps in Thailand, and fell to about 9 per 1,000 among children born in the United States (approximately the same as the U.S. infant mortality rate) (Kunstadter & Kunstadter, 1990).

Historically, Hmong in Laos had access mostly to their traditional system of healing. Modern preventive or curative health services were not available until USAID established a few hospitals in Laos and trained some Hmong military medics and nurses in the 1960s (Weldon, 1999). Modern health services were provided in refugee camps in Thailand. There were conflicts between Hmong refugees and a fundamentalist Christian organization that provided medical care in Ban Vinai, the largest Hmong refugee camp in Thailand (Bouvier, 1994; Wright, 1986). Thus some Hmong refugees associated modern health care with coercion, an idea that has been reinforced by several notorious cases of court-ordered treatments (Culhane-Pera, 1989; Fadiman, 1998). Occasional major conflicts between Hmong and health care providers have received wide attention in the media, especially related to surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy, and sustained medical treatments for tuberculosis (Arax, 1994; New York Times, 1994; Snyder & Kunstadter, 2001).

Changes in environment, risk behavior, and the availability of modern health services in the United States have resulted in changes in Hmong health and health-seeking behavior. While child mortality has declined dramatically, health of adults appears to be deteriorating. Comparisons of self-reported survey data from Hmong in Fresno CA with non-refugee Hmong in Thailand (Kunstadter P., unpublished data 1997) indicate the U.S. Hmong adults age 40 and above have three times as much illness including about 20 times as much hypertension, 20 times as much diabetes, 13 times as much depression or mental distress (all differences significant at *p*0.001); and similar rates of gastrointestinal ailments. Fresno Hmong parents reported twice as many respiratory ailments, and approximately the same rate of gastrointestinal ailments for their 0–4-year-old children than did Thailand Hmong parents. Analysis of Hmong death certificates in Fresno County between 1980 and 2001 (Kunstadter & Vang, 2002) revealed significant reductions in deaths of all ages from infectious diseases while deaths of adults 40 years and older from degenerative diseases have increased. There were marked reductions in proportions of deaths of young children with increased proportions of deaths in adults 40 years of age and older over this period. Deaths associated with external injuries and violence (motor vehicle accidents, drowning, suicide, and homicide) increased, especially for those aged 10 to 39. There were no significant gender differences in proportions or causes of death.

Improvement of child survival among infants born to Hmong refugee mothers, who are generally poor, have no education, have high fertility, and short birth intervals, is similar to reports of an "epidemiological paradox" among Hispanic migrants to the United States (Markides & Coreil, 1986). The apparent deterioration of the health of older Hmong in the United States is similar to reports of increases in cardiovascular diseases and diabetes among Japanese and Samoan migrants to the United States and some Native American groups (Baker et al., 1986). In all of these populations the increase in degenerative diseases appears to be associated with a decline in physical activity and changes in diet (increases in consumption of fats, sugars, and total calories). The similarity in rates of gastrointestinal ailments reported for all ages among Fresno and Thailand Hmong suggests that despite the availability of protected water supplies and sanitary waste disposal in the United States, hygienic conditions related to spread of these diseases might not have improved. The decline in infectious diseases as causes of death, especially among children, suggests that public health measures (immunizations and environmental sanitation) and modern curative medicine for acute illnesses have had important effects on the U.S. Hmong population.

Unlike some other groups, Hmong in the United States do not seem to have increased their consumption of tobacco greatly as compared with Hmong in Southeast Asia, but they may have increased frequency and amount of alcohol consumption. There is an apparent increase in the amount of violence directed at self or other Hmong (Hmoob Thaj Yeeb, 1998) as well as an increase in gambling addiction (Zander & Xiong, 1996). These socially dysfunctional behaviors are indicators of mental distress probably related to stresses of social adjustment. Depression and posttraumatic stress disorder have impaired people's adjustment to the U.S. (Westermeyer, 1988; Westermeyer, Lyfoung, & Neider, 1989; Westermeyer, Neider, & Vang, 1984). Mental distress and depression contribute to poor physical health, and compound the difficulty in following modern treatments for chronic diseases—along with the lack of traditional knowledge about chronic diseases requiring long-term therapies.

# **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

The Hmong have several traditional healers who continue to influence the community's health beliefs, values, and practices in Southeast Asia and the United States (Cha, 2000; Culhane-Pera & Xiong, 2003; Kirton, 1985; Lemoine, 1986; Spring, 1989; Thao X., 1986).

#### **Shamans**

Shamans (*tus ua neeb*) are generally men, but women shamans are also known. There are two main types of shamans: *muag dub* (covered face) and *muag dawb* (uncovered face). The *muag dub* shamans are chosen by the shaman's helper spirits (*dab neeb*), go into trance while wearing a black or red cloth over their face, and enter the spirit world in order to battle the offending spirits, aided by their helping spirits. In contrast, the *muag dawb* shamans are not chosen by spirits, and do not heal while in a trance, so do not cover their faces with cloths (Chindarsi, 1976; Cooper et al., 1996; Lemoine, 1986).

*Tus ua neeb* perform a wide range of ceremonies for people in need of spiritual healing, as determined by themselves, other healers, or family members. They perform preventive rituals such as soul calling (*hu plig*) at New Year celebration and tying strings on wrists (*khi tes*); diagnostic rituals and therapeutic ceremonies (Bliatout, 1986; Cha, 2000; Cooper, 1996). To ward off spirits in healing and preventive ceremonies, shamans may attach strings on sick people's wrists (*khi tes*) or ankles (*khi hlua*), or place necklaces, bracelets, or anklets on sick people made of three twisted metals (or three twisted strips of red, white, and black cloth that represent three metals). The shaman's power varies depending on how much they have studied or learned, their innate abilities, and the power of their helping spirits. Additionally, their success is influenced by the match of the shaman's inherent power (*hwj huam*) and the patient. If the shaman's power is stronger than the patient's power, the shaman's healing efforts are more likely to be successful (Cha, 2000).

## **Herbalists**

The *kws tshuaj* are herbalists who diagnose illness and dispense herbal medicines. They are usually women who acquire their knowledge apprenticed to an older female relative. The *kws tshuaj* are guided in diagnosing disease and prescribing medicines by their helping spirits (*dab tshuaj*) whose altar is beside the household altar to a main house spirit (*dab xwm kab*). Sick people or their family members bring spirit paper money and incense for the *dab tshuaj*. Herbalists burn the offerings to inform the spirits that people have come for assistance and to ask for their spiritual guidance when gathering the appropriate healing herbs (Cha, 2000; Cooper et al., 1996; Rice, 2000; Thao X., 1986).

In the United States, herbalists dispense dried herbs (*tshuaj qhuav*) they receive from Southeast Asia or China, fresh herbs (*tshuaj ntsuab*) they cultivate from Asian plants, and medicines they collect in the wild or obtain from botanical gardens. Herbalists also distinguish between "wild" herbs (*tshuaj qus*), which are forest plants and "tame" herbs (*tshuaj nyeg*) which are domestic plants. Additionally, the *kws tshuaj* may know other diagnostic or healing techniques, such as *hu plig*, *zaws hno*, *kav*, *nqus*, *hno koob* that are described below. Some *kws tshuaj* specialize in specific areas, such as fertility or childbirth (Cha, 2000; Cooper et al., 1996; Rice, 2000; Spring, 1989; Thao X., 1986).

#### **"Magical" Healers**

The *kws khawv koob* are "magical" healers. They are usually men who learn their skills and obtain their connections with spirits (*dab khawv koob*) as an apprentice to an experienced healer. There are various types of *khawv koob*, each with specific rituals that use metal, water,

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 733**

incense, and chanting. The *kws khawv koob* diagnose and treat people with ailments such as burns, broken bones, foreign bodies in eyes, vomiting, babies' chronic nocturnal crying, children's febrile illnesses with rash (*ua qoob*), children's fright (*ceeb*), bleeding, and other illnesses caused by evil or wild spirits. Their powers and abilities vary widely and some have extraordinary powers (*muaj leej*) (Cha, 2000; Cooper et al., 1996).

#### **Other Healers**

The *tus hu plig* are ordinary men and women (not necessarily healing specialists such as shamans) who have gained the knowledge and skills to return people's wayward souls. They can return souls that have left people's bodies when the person was frightened or when the souls ware abducted by spirits and they can secure souls to bodies during preventive ceremonies, such as during New Year's celebrations or prior to a long journey. They help people with soul loss as identified by themselves, other traditional healers, or by a household diagnostician. They have varying power and abilities. Some perform basic ceremonies where they chant, entice the soul with eggs and chickens, tie strings to wrists that secure the soul (*khi tes*), and interpret the soul's return. Others perform additional, more elaborate ceremonies (Cha, 2000; Chindarsi, 1976; Cooper et al., 1996).

Ordinary people have healing knowledge that is not recognized as specialist knowledge. Many women know about herbal medicines, without being an herbalist. Some people know how to divine the presence of spiritual problems (*tsawv qe* and *nchuav qe*). Some people know how to massage the abdomen and extremities, and then to gently pierce the skin with a needle to release illness, built-up wind, or bad blood (*zaws hno*). Others apply ointment on the skin, then rub with a silver coin (coining or dermabrasion *kav*), or apply suction to the skin with a cup (cupping or moxibustion *nqus*) to bring the illness to the skin's surface in order to release toxins, wind, and stress. Some people massage specific neural pressure points to stimulate blood flow and relieve muscle strain (*xais ceeb*) and others pierce the skin with needles, akin to acupuncture (*hno koob)* (Cha, 2000).

#### **Changes in the United States**

Hmong in the United States continue to conceive of health in a traditional holistic way, which integrates the body and its souls and perceives natural, supernatural, social, and personal causes of illness. Science classes, advanced studies in nursing and medicine, health care providers, and conversion to Christianity are influencing ideas about sickness such that people have varied concepts of illness and treatment. People continue to seek the assistance of traditional therapies, as well as other healers. However, there are several important factors that impede traditional healers. There are constraints that limit the use of traditional methods, such as difficulty in obtaining medicines; restrictions on fires in hospitals and communities; injunctions against butchering of animals in cities (Arax, 1995); limits on noise; and conflicts between the divergent nature of traditional and modern medical practices. Also, fewer people are learning traditional healing methods. In addition to these constraints, fewer people believe that traditional healing methods are efficacious, due to the influences of formal education, modern medicine, and Christianity. Hmong families also seek assistance from non-traditional healers, such as Christian ministers and priests; traditional healers of Cambodian, Lao, Vietnamese, Chinese, and Thai ancestry; as well as Hmong and non-Hmong licensed health care professionals (Cha, 2000; Culhane-Pera & Xiong, 2003).

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Traditional Hmong classification of illness can be divided into four classes: natural, supernatural, personal, and social (Culhane-Pera & Xiong, 2003; Helman, 2000; Thao, X., 1986).

## **Natural Etiologies: Illnesses and Treatments**

Hmong traditional ideas about natural etiologies include imbalance of metaphysical forces, germs, genetics, behaviors, constitution, and accidents (Culhane-Pera & Xiong, 2003). Metaphysical ideas similar to the Chinese concept of *yin/yang* indicate that the balance of natural elements is essential to health and that an imbalance causes disease. People get sick from hot or cold, dry or wet, windy or calm weather, and particularly from weather changes with increased wind or air pressure. Foods or water that are

#### **734 Hmong in Laos and the United States**

thermally hot or cold or that are traditionally classified as hot or cold, can cause illness when people's bodies are thermally or metaphorically out of balance. Small creatures that are observable (lice or parasites) or unobservable (microorganisms) can cause infectious diseases. New "American" germs that cause diseases that Hmong were unaware of in Laos can be particularly worrisome. Hmong traditionally believed that some diseases run in biologically related families and may also affect women who marry into a family. Pregnant women's behaviors can cause congenital birth defects. Susceptibility to disease is related to bodily constitution: people with bad fat and blood, weak immunity, heavy and weak bones rather than light and strong bones, flabby muscles rather than firm muscles, people who are skinny and/or emaciated rather than fat, are more likely to get sick (Xiong & Culhane-Pera, 1995). Hmong also believe that chemicals, including pesticides, fertilizers, horticultural medicines, and Yellow Rain (chemical weapons to which they believe they were exposed to in Laos) can cause a wide range of diseases.

Naturally caused illnesses are diagnosed by physical appearance and symptoms and by history. They are treated by massage, cupping, coining, poking with needles, herbal medicines, and, in America, by physical therapy, chiropractic, or osteopathic manipulation and the whole range of modern medical care, including surgical operations and pharmaceutical preparations (Culhane-Pera & Xiong, 2003).

## **Supernatural Etiologies: Illnesses and Treatments**

Hmong distinguish between five types of supernatural problems (Cha, 2000; Cooper et al., 1996; Culhane-Pera & Xiong P., 2003; Lemoine, 1986).

**Souls (***ntsuj plig***).** Souls (*ntsuj plig*) can make people sick in many ways, with soul loss (*poob plig*) being the most common. Wandering souls may go off by themselves and not be able to find their ways back; may be caught in dreams; or may leave after an emotional trauma, such as being frightened from a fall, an attack, or seeing someone die. Reincarnated souls may leave if they are enticed by seductive spirits, stolen by evil spirits, or being reincarnated. Other types of problems with souls include a child's soul being unhappy with its parents, clan, or name; or a reincarnated soul wanting a grievance from a previous life remedied or a debt from a previous life settled. The soul who guards the grave may make family members ill if the grave is disturbed or if nondisintegrating elements are in the body, coffin, or grave.

**Shaman's helper spirits (***dab neeg***).** People become sick when shaman's helper spirits (*dab neeg*) chose them to become a shaman, and they recover when they accept the responsibility of becoming a shaman. Shamans must maintain good relationships with their helping spirits; if they do not thank their helping spirits or offend the spirits by performing rituals not consistent with spirits wishes, they may get sick.

**Tame and wild spirits (***raug dab***).** Even though they usually protect people, many types of tame or domestic spirits (*dab nyeg*) and wild spirits (*dab qus*) cause illness. Tame spirits include the ancestral spirits and the seven household spirits that reside in houses. Families honor and feed them with spirit money and food during special ceremonies. In turn, the spirits protect families from evil spirits or warn them of impending doom. However, if families neglect their responsibilities, or if spirits need something from families, then spirits communicate their need by making someone sick.

Wild spirits live outside the house. They can cause illness, seizures, or death by disturbing or stealing people's souls. People may inadvertently disturb the land or water where spirits reside, thus inviting wrath. Evil spirits may purposefully seek out people to cause death and destruction. Some spirits sit atop sleeping people and squeeze the breath out of them. Also, souls of dead who were not properly buried and cannot find their ancestors in the afterworld may cause illness, as a plea for assistance. Souls or ghosts that have not achieved reincarnation because of the suicide or violent death of their previous owners, may entice other people to die in similar ways. In the United States, interactions with wild spirits seem to occur less frequently than in Laos. People speculate that spirits are scared away by electricity. Still, spirits in lakes cause drownings, roaming ghosts cause car accidents, and evil spirits cause suffocation (diagnosed as Sudden Unexpected Nocturnal Death Syndrome).

**Sorcery (***raug pob zeb, nyuj ciab***).** People who are motivated by hate or revenge to harm others can hire black magic specialists to send stones, bones, or other objects to lodge in others. Sorcery was rare in Laos, and seems to be even less common in the United States.

**God and sin (among Christian Hmong).** Christian concepts of supernatural etiologies vary by denomination, but include sinful thoughts, words, and actions, as well as God's displeasure.

Treatments for the above supernatural etiologies include soul-calling ceremonies (*hu plig*), shaman rituals (*ua neeb*), releasing black magic, Christian prayer, as well as modern medicines or operations in addition to specific supernatural treatments. Generally, Christians pray or ministers lay on hands instead of performing traditional ceremonies, although Catholics may be more likely than evangelical Christians to integrate traditional spiritual healing with Christians prayer healing.

## **Social Etiologies: Illnesses and Treatments**

Stress and anxiety of day-to-day life as farmers in the highlands of Laos or as refugees in American society can cause illness. Human conflicts, such as between generations and genders, can cause illness. Mocking a sick person may result in having that same illness, and teasing a handicapped person can result in children being born with that same disability. When people curse each other, the gods can hear the dispute and cause the guilty person to be harmed. Women who do not revere their husband or parents-in-law can have a difficult time at childbirth.

Treatment requires resolving intra-personal stresses, interpersonal conflicts, and ritually removing the strength of the words said in curses. Medication may also ease pain and disability, but the illness may not be completely cured without repairing the rift in social relationships.

## **Personal Etiologies: Illnesses and Treatments**

Personal behaviors can affect one's health. Using tobacco, opium, or alcohol can cause weakness and a range of illness. Accidental injury can cause impairment immediately after the accident, as well as years later. Not following health promotion proscriptions can make people sick (but too much medicine, even if it has been medically prescribed, can also cause illness, and some modern medicines are known to have side-effects). Frying spicy odiferous food when children have fevers may cause children to become sicker. Not following specific restrictions in eating, sex, and physical activity during their postpartum month may cause women to suffer from headaches, arthritis, infertility, or prolapsed uterus. Treatments are often aimed at the physical ailment, with massage, poultices, Hmong medicines, or pharmaceutical medications bringing relief. Changing underlying behaviors may also be important, such as stopping tobacco or opium consumption.

#### **Medical Decision Making**

Traditionally, the sick person is passive, staying in bed and letting family members provide care—feeding, clothing, bathing, and making treatment decisions (Culhane-Pera & Xiong P., 2002). Family members use many sources of information to identify the illness, its cause, the best healer, and best therapy. They may consider the sick person's symptoms, bodily signs, and prior events (such as trauma or conflicts); they may generate ideas about potential causes; they may perform diagnostic divination procedures; and they may consult clan and community members before deciding on which healers to consult or which therapies to employ. The vast majority of illnesses are initially considered to be caused by natural etiologies and are treated accordingly, but if people are chronically ill, seriously ill, or have some significant historical event, then supernatural etiologies are considered, and supernatural prevention or treatments are pursued. Any illness event can have multiple explanations for causation.

While this traditional sick role and family based decision-making persists, in the U.S. there are changes. Some individuals will tell the family what they want to do; some will make medical decisions without the family approval; and some will even take actions without informing the family. Some individuals shun while others embrace modern modalities, including operations, medications, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy. People may still consider the above cultural information, but other issues are also relevant: religious orientation, insurance availability, language services, previous experiences with invasive therapies, and relationships with and reputation of the healer/ provider (Cha, 2000; Culhane-Pera et al., 2003).

When considering treatments, family members evaluate both risks and benefits. Often times, people who follow the traditional animist perspective are concerned about the spiritual risks of invasive procedures as well as the physical risks. Souls can be frightened and leave the body during an operation and during anesthesia. People can be reincarnated with physical disabilities related to loss or destruction of tissues from operations performed on their spiritual ancestor. Also, metal staples or metal prosthesis placed in the body during operations can cause the soul that stays with the grave to make living family members sick. These dangers may influence people to refuse life-saving or reparative surgical operations (Mouacheupao, 1999; Westermeyer & Thao, 1986).

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

#### **Sexual Identity**

In traditional Hmong society, gender was interwoven with the division of labor and considerations of social worth. Both men and women worked in the fields and at home. Women were responsible for child rearing, cooking, weaving, embroidering, and animal husbandry. Men were responsible for clearing land, creating tools, building houses, making decisions, maintaining and overseeing clan rituals, and supervising family matters. Men also took an important part in child rearing. Generally, men had higher social status and more power than women although women gained power as they grew older and had larger households to manage (Cooper, 1984; Donnelly, 1994; Tapp, 1986; Thao C. T., 1986). Also, there was cultural variation, such that some wives had more power than their husbands, related to their recognized intelligence, ability to manage money, treat illnesses, or make decisions. Generally, at marriage, women left their natal family and lived with their husband's family. Marriage had both brideprice and bridewealth components. The groom's family gave money (*nqi mis nqi hno*) to the bride's family, compensating for the family's economic loss and emotional hardship, and illustrating their promise to love and take good care of the bride. The bride's family sent a dowry with the bride, consisting of clothes and silver, for her contribution to her new household. Women were generally considered to be worth less than men (*tsis muaj nqis*), as they were raised always knowing that they would one day leave the family. Changing gender relations and women's increasing power in the household is causing social conflict (Her & Heu, 2003; Lyfoung, 2003).

Women were at a disadvantage with regard to courtship and marriage. Traditionally, girls were expected not to initiate courtship, and they were enjoined not to openly express their preference for a husband. This is changing in the United States, as some women and teenage girls initiate courtship and express their desires about potential husbands. Newly married daughters-in-law (*tus nyab*) had little power in their husbands' families, performed many chores, and had to adjust to customs and manners of their new families (Cooper, 1984; Donnelly, 1994). Men could discipline their wives physically, in order to teach them and help them conform to familial expectations. If women were mistreated, they could appeal to their male family members for assistance, and if abused, women could ask their male family members to bring civil charges (*ua plaub*) against their husband and his family (Donnelly, 1994; Ovesen, 1995). In the United States, domestic violence continues to occur, and is possibly even escalating, as recently publicized cases of murders and murder–suicides illustrate (Haga & Her, 2001).

Hmong consider marriage a way of life. Traditionally, every individual was expected to marry and raise a family, as Heaven created women and men to love, care for, and help each other (Thao C. T., 1986). Traditional forms of betrothal included marriage by parental arrangement and bride capture, but agreement between groom- and bride-tobe and elopement were more common ways of marrying. Levirate was practiced in a few cases if an older brother died leaving a widow with young children. Most marriages were monogamous, but polygyny occurred (Kunstadter, 2003). In the United States, people are choosing their mates more often, and arranged marriages are becoming rare.

Traditional sanctions against divorce were strong for women (Cooper, 1984; Donnelly, 1994; Lyfoung, 2003). Young couples and couples with problems were repeatedly counseled against divorce. Divorced women brought shame upon their families and were characterized as having moral defects. Divorced women were almost always separated from their children, who belonged to their former husband's clan and stayed with their father. Usually there were strong economic and religious constraints on divorce for women, because they had limited means of independent livelihood. They had already been separated at the time of marriage from their parents' ancestral and household spirits, and the divorce separated them from their husbands' ancestral and household spirits. Those who did not re-marry often returned to live with their natal families, but they could not sleep in the same room with their father's household and ancestor spirits, and could not be included in the clan rituals. If they were seriously ill, they were not allowed to die inside their father's house, and could not receive funeral rituals that connected them with ancestral spirits. In the United States, divorced women may become Christians, or their families

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 737**

may ask Christians to conduct the funeral. While the divorce rate is low in traditional society (Thao C. T., 1986), current literature indicates an increase in the United States (Strohl, 2000).

#### **Reproduction**

In traditional society, the purpose of sex was for reproduction, and reproduction is for both economic reasons and for continuation of the patrilineal links with ancestral spirits. Hmong traditionally prefer large numbers of children for economic and social reasons (Kunstadter, 2002). Additional hands in agricultural fields result in enhanced family income and needed assistance in times of trouble and old age. In Thailand, the total fertility rate was 8 in 1987, which may have been similar to the number in Laos. Fertility rates remained high in California in the 1990s (Kunstadter et al., 1993).

#### **Contraception**

Traditionally, most couples did not use deliberate methods of contraception but accepted children as fate (*hmoov*) determined. It was believed that if a woman did not deliver the pre-determined number of babies, she would be reborn as a woman to deliver these infants. Birth spacing was increased by near universal and prolonged breast-feeding. If contraception was used, women secretly obtained herbal medicines that could cause sterility from herbalists. Herbalists were familiar with abortifacients, although the extent of their use in Southeast Aia and the United States is not known. It seems that abortifacients were used sparingly, given the danger of hemorrhage and death; women and their husbands had to agree about taking the medicine.

In the United States, some people are choosing to limit the number of children although many people are concerned about side-effects of Western methods of contraception, from changing normal hormonal cycles to increased weight to cancer. Most people prefer *caiv*, which has multiple meanings: natural family planning, or withdrawal, or abstinence. Decision-making about contraception varies, influenced by people's acculturation and education levels; most men decide alone, many men and women decide together, and some single or married women make the decision alone (Kunstadter, 2003; Spring, 2001; Spring & Luchongvu, 2003). Over the past 25 years in the United States, surgical abortions have increased, as people have found the procedure more acceptable over time. Some people voice concerns about consequences of denying the infant soul's desire for life, and of performing multiple abortions on women's health.

#### **Sexual Pleasure**

In traditional society only heterosexuality was approved, as reproduction was the purpose of sexual intimacy (Thao C. T., 1986). Homosexual relationships were generally unknown, although in the United States some homosexual relations are being recognized. However they are apparently still very strongly disapproved of, as witnessed by the recent suicide of a lesbian couple in Fresno California. Generally, intercourse in the "missionary position" took place with clothes on, in a bed that contained sleeping children. No kissing, foreplay, oral sex, or verbal sexual expression occurred during lovemaking. Men initiated sexual advances and took the lead in sexual intercourse, and women were not to display any sexual eagerness. Men and women did not discuss sexual pleasure with each other, but men would discuss with men, and women with women (Symonds, 2003).

Sexual modesty was the traditional cultural norm especially for women. Sanctions against public displays of affection—such as extended conversation and any physical contact, even shaking hands—were implicit. While premarital sex was strongly discouraged especially for young women, it happened often, with ensuing pressures for marriage. Extra-marital affairs were permissible for men, but prohibited for women (Donnelly, 1994; Trueba, Jacobs, & Kirton, 1990). In the United States, social sanctions are more relaxed; couples can hold hands and otherwise openly express their feelings in public. Premarital sex and ensuing marriage is still common. Men's accusations of their spouses' sexual affairs are a common reason cited for marital discord, divorce, and domestic violence (Haga & Her, 2001; Strohl, 2000).

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Traditionally, pregnant women followed their usual work activities. Modest, they did not inform anyone about the pregnancy until people noticed. They were instructed to avoid some activities (*caiv*) for the well-being of their pregnancy (reaching above their heads could cause a miscarriage), health of their baby (cutting cloth in their bedrooms could cause a cleft palate), and easy deliveries (being disrespectful to in-laws could cause a difficult labor). There were no traditional midwives who followed women through their pregnancies. If abnormal events occurred—such as vaginal bleeding or premature labor then herbalists, message therapists, or shamans were consulted (Spring et al., 1995; Rice, 1997, 2000).

In Southeast Asia, women gave birth at home, attended by their mothers-in-law and husbands. Women pushed while squatting, with their husbands supporting them. If problems occurred, families sought assistance from elderly experienced women or men for medication to ease the delivery, massage to turn the baby, chanting to call the baby's soul, or appealing for spiritual assistance. After delivery, the placenta (or baby's shirt *lub tsho menyuam*) was buried under the earthen floor (by the ancestral post for a boy and under the bed for a girl). If the couple preferred a specific gender for the next baby, a ritual could be performed on the placenta before burial (Symonds, 2003).

Traditional proscriptions (*caiv*) during the postpartum month assured the mother's immediate and longterm health as well as her breastmilk supply. Women ate only thermally and metaphysically "hot" foods (rice, eggs, and chicken cooked with herbs). For the first three days after delivery, women sat by fires on beds of grass wearing hemp skirts. For the first month, women did not perform household duties; were not sexually active; did not visit other people's houses; and covered their heads and bodies so the wind would not enter their joints. These healthy proscriptions ensured the flow of lochia, restored their metaphysical "balance," and protected them from spirits (Symonds, 2003). Since women had lost "hot" blood, they must only eat hot foods; cold foods could make their blood clot inside and make them infertile; and cold wind could enter their joints and cause old-age pains, such as arthritis. Also, if they ventured outside, evil spirits could visit them and cause hemorrhage and death, or if they visited other people's houses, the spirits accompanying them could cause other people to hemorrhage.

In the United States, women usually obtain prenatal care from physicians or midwives in the second trimester. Women's motivation may be more for ease of entering the hospital for deliveries in order to obtain needed birth certificates, or for assistance after birth such as from the WIC program than for desire for a healthy pregnancy. Some women refuse to have blood drawn, have pelvic exams, or take prenatal vitamins as a result of modesty and traditional prohibitions on anyone except a husband touching a woman's genitals, for fear of harming themselves, their fetus, or having large babies, and difficult deliveries. Many women want fetal ultrasounds for reassurance about the baby's well-being, and for knowledge of the baby's sex (Bruce & Xiong, 2003; Spring et al., 1995).

Most women deliver in hospitals in the United States, but some women deliver at home either because the labor and delivery occurred too quickly to get to the hospital or because they stayed home to avoid conflicts with hospital personnel. While most women lie down, some may squat if labor is difficult. For decades, many women have resisted obstetrical interventions, such as rupture of membranes, internal monitors, medicine for induction, medicines for pain relief, or Cesarean sections. Recently use of pain medications is on the increase, as is acceptance of interventions. Placentas have been taken home for burial, but this practice is virtually abandoned, due to difficulty of burying placentas under floors in modern dwellings (Symonds, 2003).

Most women follow some of the traditional postpartum proscriptions. Women eat "hot" foods, wear hats, cover their bodies, and refrain from sexual intercourse in order to ensure that the blood flows out of the uterus so they will not become infertile or crippled with arthritic pains. Families object to nurses and doctors vigorously massaging the postpartum uterus, as women fear resulting problems will occur, such as infertility, pelvic pains, abdominal pains, and cancer (Culhane-Pera, 2003; Spring, 2001; Spring et al., 1995). Other proscriptions are not followed strictly. As breast-feeding is no longer the norm, proscriptions to insure breastmilk are no longer important. And nearly universal bottle-feeding has ended the biological influence of breastfeeding on birth spacing and fertility rates.

#### **Infancy**

Traditionally, at three days of life family members welcomed a newborn infant by calling the soul (*hu plig*) and bestowing a name (*tis npe*) (Symonds, 2003). Today, animists continue these practices while Christian families have altered or abandoned this ceremony, depending upon their denomination. Traditionally, breast-feeding mothers cared for their infants, with their families' assistance. In the United States, the vast majority of infants bottle-feed so family members can care for babies while mothers return to school or work (Culhane-Pera, Naftali, Jacobsen, & Xiong, 2002; Tuttle & Dewey, 1994, 1996).

#### **Health Through the Life Cycle 739**

Multiple births are a blessing. Birth defects are caused by fate (related to events in infants' or parents' previous lives) or by mothers' actions while pregnant, or by a curse. While the ideal is to have equal numbers of boys and girls, people prefer boys, since boys stay with the family and girls marry outside of the clan. Mortality risk is equal for girls and boys, indicating that boys are not given preference over girls such that girls are at risk of increased mortality (Kunstadter et al., 1993).

There were many traditional health promotion and disease prevention activities. Infants fed on-demand; they wore silver necklaces, ornately decorated hats, and bright bracelets with bells to please their souls; and wore amulets to ward off frightening spirits. Parents refrained from unpleasant words that could upset the infant souls and from praising children, a practice believed to attract evil spirits. Parents did not wash fontanels, the location of a soul; and they cut infants' hair to protect from fright of thunder (Culhane-Pera, unpublished ethnographic research). Many of these activities persist today, except some Christians who refrain from engaging in all animist practices. Some adults are concerned about childhood vaccinations causing pain, fever, illness, and disability, and refuse vaccines until children are older and less vulnerable to side-effects (Xiong & Culhane-Pera, 1995). Several Hmong children died in measles epidemics in California and Minnesota in 1990 from inadequate vaccinations (Henry R., 1999).

Traditional Hmong practices for sick children included *khawv koob* for fevers with rashes; *ua ceeb* for fright or startle; *nqus qe nyiaj* to reduce fevers; herbal medicines (solutions and poultices) for various illnesses; and pharmaceutical preparations from the United States and Asia. In the United States, parents also take children to see physicians. While desiring medications, and accepting intravenous fluids, families have concerns about adverse effects of venipunctures, lumbar punctures, and operations on their children's health. Conflicts between families and physicians have sometimes resulted in court-ordered treatments for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures (Brunnquell & Kuracheck, 2003; Culhane-Pera, 1989; Culhane-Pera & Thao, 2003; Fadiman, 1998; New York Times, 1994; Plotnikoff, 2003; Snyder & Kunstadter, 2001).

#### **Childhood**

A general philosophical orientation toward childrearing is characterized by *hlub*, a loving permissive attitude (Culhane-Pera, Naftali, Jacobsen, & Xiong, 2002; Xiong Z. B., 2000). As children become older and gain more responsibilities, parents are more likely to discipline them, which can include physical punishment. The perception is that sexual abuse was rare in traditional society and that child abuse occurred more often for orphans and step-children. Social workers in the United States note that probably more child protection orders have been brought against parents for neglect (allowing children to have too much independence) than for abuse.

Some diseases are especially significant in Hmong children: (1) Hepatitis B: all infants need Hepatitis B vaccines, and infants of carrier mothers need to be tested for immunity (Franks et al., 1989; Gjerdingen & Lor, 1997; Poss, 1989). (2) Measles: a 1990 measles epidemic in Minnesota hit Hmong children, as they had a low immunization rate (Henry R. R., 1999). (3) Milk anemia: a high rate of iron-deficiency anemia in toddlers is related to a diet heavy in cow's milk and low in solid foods (Culhane-Pera, Naftali, Jacobsen, & Xiong, 2002). (4) Thalassemia: a genetic disorder of hemoglobin, thalassemia can be fatal (Choy et al., 2000; Yang P., 2000). (5) Baby bottle tooth decay: prolonged and frequent sucking of milk in a bottle leads to tooth decay as well as ear infections (Tuttle & Dewey, 1994, 1996). (6) Lead toxicity: Exposure to lead results from ingesting lead paint chips in older homes, and when given a Chinese red powder as medicine (MMWR, 1993). (7) Obesity: obesity in Hmong children is increasing, probably due to over-bottlefeeding, over-eating, and under-exercising (Gjerdingen et al., 1996).

#### **Adolescence**

Traditionally, teenagers had much work responsibility and little freedom beyond the household and extended family (Xiong Z. B., 2000). While there were no traditional "rites of passage," teenagers were encouraged to marry when they had accomplished agricultural and domestic life skills. The expectation to assume adult responsibilities was high, and discipline tended to be strict. While premarital intercourse was tolerated, sexually active teenagers were expected to marry. Conflicts in the United States are resulting from tensions between parental demands for conforming to traditional values and youth's desires for increased freedom. Parents feel their traditional values are being disrespected, and teenagers feel parents are not realistic in U.S. society (Wheeler, 1998). Parental concerns are compounded by the high rates of pre-marital intercourse, sexually transmitted diseases, gangs, and use of tobacco and drugs. External injuries and violence are leading causes of death for adolescents and young adults in Fresno California, and the rate is increasing (Kunstadter & Vang, 2002).

## **Adulthood**

In Laos and the United States, middle-aged adults have the most responsibility for children, aging parents, and society at large. Men are active in leading society, and increasingly gain respect as they become elders. Women also have increased status, with increased influence over family matters, and may have some community influence especially if their husbands are clan leaders (Donnelly, 1994).

In Southeast Asia, adults suffered from infectious diseases, accidents, and other ailments. In the United States, the "modern" diseases of diabetes, hypertension, strokes, heart attacks, and cancers are on the rise. Many suffer from these ailments, and are challenged to respond to these chronic and life-threatening conditions.

## **The Aged**

Traditionally, elders—people older than 50 years of age were respected for their opinions and life experiences, and enjoyed a reduced work load. Usually youngest sons and their wives were responsible for the aged, including providing care as they became infirm. This continues in the United States, although elders' opinions and life experiences may be less relevant to their children and grandchildren than in Southeast Asia, and more elders live alone or in nursing homes. Their health issues include the modern diseases, as well as degenerative diseases (arthritis, osteoporosis, blindness, and deafness).

## **Dying and Death**

Death is understood as a transition from the world of the living to the world of the spirits and as a preparation for the next reincarnation (Symonds, 2003). Living family members continue to revere, remember, and appease ancestral spirits with offerings. Nonetheless, family members will engage in many actions to heal sick family members, including traditional and modern healing options. A "good death" occurs without pain and at home, surrounded by the loving family who attend to physical needs and visited by friends and relatives who give them encouraging words about their long life. In addition, a good death occurs in the company of ancestral spirits while wearing traditional clothes, and with the chance to impart their last words to the family (Vawter & Babbit, 1997).

Traditionally, at death family members wailed their grief and washed the body before dressing it in multiple layers of ancestral clothes. Funerals of un-embalmed bodies lasted up to 9 days, depending on the deceased's social importance, with many rituals. Burial occurred in a place chosen by geomancy rules for good luck. Rituals continued at the gravesite every day for 3 days, with a final ritual to release the soul at 13 days. In the United States, animists still wail and conduct traditional funeral ceremonies, whose details have changed to adapt to current social, economic, and political realities. Christians conduct prayer services with songs and sermons, and do not wail (Bliatout, 1993).

# **REFERENCES**

- Arax, M. (1994). Cancer case ignites culture clash: Hmong parents refuse to agree to court-ordered chemotherapy for teen-age daughter. *Los Angeles Times* Nov. 21, v113, pA3, Col 1.
- Arax, M. (1995). Hmong's sacrifice of puppy reopens cultural wounds: Immigrant shaman's act stirs outrage in Fresno, but he believes it was only way to cure his ill wife. *Los Angeles Times* Dec. 16, v114, pA1.
- Baker, P. T., Hanna, J. M., & Baker, T. S. (1986). *The changing Samoans: Behavior and health in transition*. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Barney, G. L. (1957). Christianity and innovation in Meo culture: A case study in missionization. Unpublished MA thesis, University of MN.
- Bliatout, B. T. (1986). Guidelines for mental health professionals to help Hmong clients seek traditional healing treatment. In Glenn L. Hendricks, et al. (Eds.), *The Hmong in transition*. New York: Center for Migration Studies.
- Bliatout, B. T. (1993). Hmong death customs: Traditional and acculturated. In D. P. Irish, K. F., Lundquist, & V. Jenkins-Nelson (Eds.), *Ethnic variations in dying, death and grief: Diversity in universality*. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.
- Bouvier, B. (1994). Hmong need more respect. (Letter). *Bangkok Post*, August 19.
- Bruce, H., & Xiong, C. (2003). Pregnancy complications. In K. A. Culhane-Pera, D. E. Vawter, P. Xiong, B. Babbitt, & M. Solberg (Eds.), *Healing by heart*. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.
- Brunnquell, D., & Kuracheck, S. (2003). Children with high fevers. In K. A. Culhane-Pera, D. E. Vawter, P. Xiong, B. Babbitt, & M. Solberg (Eds.), *Healing by heart*. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.
- Capps, L. L. (1994). Change and continuity in the medical culture of the Hmong in Kansas City. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* (new series), *8*(2), 161–177.