# Vivekanand: Cultural Nationalism

*Amiya P. Sen*

… he was no politician, he was the greatest of nationalists.

*Sister Nivedita*

I am grateful to the lands of the West for the many warm hearts that received me with all the love that pure and disinterested souls alone can could give, but my life's allegiance is to this, my motherland and if I had a thousand lives, every moment of the whole series would be consecrated to your service my countrymen.

*Swami Vivekanand*

## The Man and His Work

In the annals of modern Indian thought, there have been but few individuals whose life and thought have been open to such diverse interpretations and who themselves were inclined to continuously redefining or reformulating their lives and their objectives. Swami Vivekanand (1863–1902) rejected political praxis and yet the Sedition Committee Report of 1918 listed him among the individuals who instigated young men and women to wage war against the British Empire. Indeed, young revolutionaries, when apprehended by the police, were found to carry on their person, a pocket edition of the Gita and public addresses delivered by the Swami. Especially after his first visit to the West (1893), his followers were often undecided on whether to call him a speculative monk or a social crusader. Some found in him a fiery patriot, interpreting his zeal for Vedanta as only a philosophical gloss that somehow hid from public view the political project of an advancing Indian nationhood. On the other hand, Vivekanand himself, and several of his admirers, have emphasized his decision to stay away from organized politics. One of his closest followers, Sister Nivedita (1867–1911), found the Swami to be intensely patriotic without also being political, which sets us wondering if it was not so much the ends as the methods adopted by contemporary Indian politics that Vivekanand disagreed with. Paradoxically, again, the Swami has been seen in many quarters as one of the key founders of modern Hinduism though in his day he remained defiant and quite scathing in his attack on traditional Hinduism. Possibly such polarized and polemical perspectives on the Swami have followed from only selective aspects of his life and work being highlighted at specific points of time. In the early 1890s, when he toured the West to procure material support for India's social uplift, his mission was often interpreted as one that aimed at countering the excesses of materialism. During that tour, the Hindu orthodoxy of Bengal questioned his credentials (as a Kayastha) to represent Hinduism; only a few years later, during the Swadeshi agitation, this Kayastha sanyasi was to become the iconic representation of political militancy and resurgent Hinduism.

Such polarized assessments of the Swami, however, should not obscure the fact that he was himself known to shift ground several times. Vivekanand himself contributed no less to the specious theory about a grossly 'materialist' West in serious need for 'spiritual' messages from the East. Also from an engaging activism, he is known to have disputed the very rationale for work and human intervention. It is paradoxical that an individual who publicized the universalistic or pluralistic face of Hinduism should have also contributed substantially to essentialise that term. Arguably, modern Hinduism was more easily defined after Vivekanand than before him. Whereas Rammohan Roy was perhaps the first modern Indian to consciously employ the word 'Hinduism',1 its ideological constituents attained some fullness only with Vivekanand.

As a philosopher, Vivekanand was not very original. He was, however, an eager learner, never ashamed to admit that he had either changed or outgrown his earlier views. Perhaps some of his inconsistency arose from the fact that he was, on the whole, an indefatigable but impatient crusader who was wary of public criticism and rapidly lost interest or hope in the face of tardy progress. All the same the quality that never deserted him even amidst adversity of ill-will was his deep attachment to his country and countrymen—a pressing concern for their social and spiritual welfare. In a sense, the 'idea' of India took cohesive shape only with Swami Vivekanand—an idea often movingly expressed through tears and toil, a genuine empathy for the poor and the humble and, above all, by drawing attention to the underlying unity of human life and the common human predicament.

While there would be, at first sight, many Vivekanandas, an empathetic understanding of his life and work will only reveal the inter-penetration of seemingly opposite categories. For the Swami, spiritual awakening was never entirely removed from the social; the edification of the soul and self were but two dimensions of the same human revolution. It was thus that he came to view older problems from new perspectives. Although belonging to a traditional order of monks, Swami Vivekanand was no ordinary ascetic. Even before he journeyed to America, the Swami was an enigma to several fellow Indians. Several friends and admirers who met him during this time have expressed wonder at the sight of a Hindu monk who unabashedly puffed at his cigars, took great interest in French music and continental cuisine and could reproduce verbatim, passages from the *Pickwick Papers.* And while he came down heavily on certain aspects of modern civilization, Vivekanand was indeed a very modern figure. For one, he believed that movement and change were signs of life and stillness, of decadence and death. Hence he believed that a tradition, rather than be fossilized in time, would have to be interpreted afresh in keeping with new social and historical requirements. Secondly, he was deeply enamoured of the idea that change first occurred in the minds of men before they could take the shape of earthshaking events. Man-making was therefore, his overarching mission in life, his mantra.

#### Life and Times

Though Swami Vivekanand lived and worked for less than forty years, his life ought to be judged not by its length but its richness and intensity. It was also a difficult life, a good part of which was spent in hardship and self-denial, and it was committed to a cause that con sumed it prematurely.2

Vivekanand (pre-monastic name, Narendranath Dutta) was born into an upper-class, Kayastha family of north Calcutta. His father, Biswanath Dutta, a successful lawyer by profession, was a man of eclectic tastes and progressive views on social matters. He respected social conventions and took under his care many poor relatives, much against the wishes of his own family. At the same time, he was courageous enough to ensure that his wife was taught elementary English by members of the European Zenana Mission. Biswanath's wife, Bhuvaneshwari Devi, was a deeply pious woman who taught her young son the virtues of austerity and self-control. In personal character, the child Narendra was strong and fearless, opting to face danger his friends and companions avoided. More important though, was that the heroic cast of Narendranath's personality hungered for greater love, support and recognition. In some measure, he found this hunger assuaged by his mother but it was more his guru, the Bengali mystic, Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa (1836–86) who managed to address this. It was in reality Ramakrishna, more than anyone else, who made Narendra aware of his potential greatness and the historic mission that he was to play in life.

At first glance the educational background of Narendranath looks far from extraordinary. He was an average student but with a deep interest in contemporary Western philosophy, particularly the Utilitarians, Comte, Mill and Spencer. Apparently, he also developed some interest in debate and discussion for he is known to have joined the Freemasons Lodge and for a time, the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj. Though initially influenced by the agnosticism of J. S. Mill and the Scottish Common Sense philosophers, Narendra hesitated to throw overboard his conceptions of God and religion. Instead, he wondered if these too were not matters that had to be better understood and made an integral part of ones experiences in the world. There is a popular story to the effect that when he was still a college student, Narendranath called on prominent residents of Calcutta, eager to know if they had come face to face with God. As it turned out, all but one said that they had not. The sole exception, incidentally, was none other than Sri Ramakrishna.

The bonding between these two ecstatic souls grew rapidly through the years 1881 to 1884, only to be ruptured by the untimely death of Biswanath Dutta. This event was to be a turning point in the Dutta family fortunes. Biswanath's wanton generosity left behind huge debts and unscrupulous relatives found this an opportune time to press claims for share in the family property. Sadly, Narendra himself could not secure a suitable job; it was a time when out of consideration for the family, he had to pretend to having eaten at a friend's place when, in truth, he had not eaten all day. The news of Narendra's misfortunes soon reached the temple complex of Dakshineswar where Sri Ramakrishna served as a priest. Ever anxious about the well being of his young charge, the saint fervently prayed to the Divine Mother, the goddess Kali. Perhaps it is this great love and tenderness that the Master showed, together with the traumatic experiences of bereavement and family-feuds that deepened the spiritual quest in Narendra. In this, however, Sri Ramakrishna played no small part. It was he who constantly worried about the young man's moral and spiritual state, seizing every opportunity to remind him that a great life such as his should not be wasted in marriage and domestic chores. Of all his young devotees, Sri Ramakrishna chose Narendra alone for initiation into the mysteries of Advaita Vedanta, a part philosophical, part mystical viewpoint that took all differentiation in this world to be only relatively real. Man, in this view, was no different from Reality or God; it was just that his delusions did not allow him to gauge this supreme truth. It was this philosophical monism that Swami Vivekanand later attempted to translate as a gospel of universality and social egalitarianism.

The Vivekanand we are more familiar with emerged around 1890. Following the death of Sri Ramakrishna in 1886, the eleven men that he had initiated into *sanyas* tried to organize themselves into a monastic order and for a time lived in a dilapidated old house in north Calcutta that served as a monastery. Thereafter, most went their own ways; some set out on pilgrimages, others to work for socially useful projects. Narendranath himself left the monastery sometime in 1890, little realizing at the time that it would be seven long years before he would be reunited with his brother-disciples. The Swami's wanderings at the time have often been given the name of *parivrajya,* the unsettled itinerary of a Hindu ascetic who was allowed to camp at one place for only brief periods. In truth, Vivekanand's own tours during this time were different in as much as it was not always personal salvation that he was seeking but familiarity with a country and its people with whom he had not been closely acquainted. In some ways like Gandhi who came after him, Vivekanand tried to feel the pulse of India, to reflect more critically on what elements fashioned the lives of his people or what sentiments moved them. On these tours, predictably, he found grinding poverty, disability and disease. What worried him more though was the weight of ignorance and superstition that had gripped the popular mind and only further aggravated their mental and physical afflictions. In the Swami's view, what his countrymen needed most was the gift of knowledge, in both its secular and its spiritual forms. While secular knowledge enhanced knowledge of the phenomenal world, a spiritual awakening was no less important, for it restored self-belief in man and made him aware of his potential greatness. On these tours, Vivekanand reflected deeply on how best he might serve his country and it occurred to him that rather than blame religion for the several ills plaguing the country, as unkind critics were apt to do, religion itself must be made practically useful and a source of strength. Thus, rather than be preoccupied with the journey of the human soul, religious figures themselves could take elementary education to the masses. There was a time when the Swami seriously considered forming a band of young sanyasis who could instruct villagers in useful knowledge and basic science.

However, it also occurred to Vivekanand that ambitious projects such as his could not rest entirely on indigenous will or support. He undertook the journey to America because, at the end of his extended tours, he was convinced that Indians could not be persuaded to provide the necessary manpower or resources for their own upliftment. By this he was only underscoring the fact that it was far easier to move his own countrymen once the ruling races themselves had been won over. Also, similar to Rammohun's beliefs, the Swami was staunchly converted to the idea that India's problems could be overcome only by embracing other peoples, their methods and their ideals in a constructive spirit. Much before he left for the West, Vivekanand thus alerted his countrymen of the serious need to examine how the 'engine of society' worked in other countries, to keep free and open communication with what was going on in the minds of other nations if they themselves wanted to be a nation.3

It is now commonplace that his opening speech at the Parliament of Religions (Chicago, 11 September 1893) made Swami Vivekanand an instant celebrity. His handsome face and exotic dress attracted crowds, his profound knowledge of Indian and Western philosophy impressed fellow delegates and scholars and the American press gave him consistently good coverage. On arrival back home in early 1897, the Swami received a hero's welcome with enthusiasts even forcing the train carrying the Swami to unscheduled halts. However, success also brought with it much bitterness and opposition. The Hindu orthodox were scandalized by the Swami's open defiance of taboos regarding food and drink and even some of his brother-disciples resented the 'outlandish' procedures he introduced such as waking up residents of a *math* by the ringing of the morning alarm. In the West, some erstwhile followers accused him of living off donor's money. Despite recurring health problems and mounting opposition, Vivekanand pushed on with his long-standing ideals. In 1897, he started the Ramakrishna Math and Mission at Belur, appropriately facing Dakshineswar across the river Hooghly. Two years later, he set up the Advaita Ashram in the Himalayas. By the close of 1899, he set sail for his second journey to Europe and America, a journey that lasted a little more than a year.

In effect the year 1900 marks the end of Vivekanand's active life and career. Sometime that very year he had the premonition that he would not survive the next three years. Around this time too, patriotism and the zeal for social work increasingly gave way to monastic solitude and the quest for salvation. 'Amen', he wrote to an American friend in June 1900, 'I have given up all thoughts about India or any land. I am now selfish, want to save myself.'<sup>4</sup> The more disturbing thing though was his going back on the very need for human mediation, a retreat from a world determined by human effort and enterprise to one that could be understood only as some inscrutable divine play: '… work always brings evil with it. I have paid with bad health … and work? What is work, who shall I work for? I am free, I am Mother's child. She works, she plays, why should I plan?'<sup>5</sup>

By the early months of 1902, he was mostly bedridden. Austerity and meditation now took up more and more of his time; he also found new delight in walking the lawns of Belur Math in the company of his pets and personally feeding poor construction workers at the site. He died on the 4th of July the same year.

### Vivekanand and Problems in Contemporary India

Very little of what Swami Vivekanand wrote or spoke about was unrelated to his concern for India and fellow Indians. Much of this concern, as we have earlier noted, developed during his extensive tours of India, travelling through barren country roads and crowded market places and from being hosted in both princely chambers and poor quarters. These wanderings, one has to say, left a paradoxical effect on Vivekanand. Through these he came to appreciate the immense diversity of Indian life on the one hand while on the other they also revealed to him the underlying oneness of human problems. Human contentment, he realised, was not always a matter of class and the unlettered were often, in their own ways, happier than the mighty and the affluent. Conversely, spiritual talk could not be palatable to empty stomachs. The solution therefore lay not merely in self-knowledge but in an empathetic understanding of the other who may be besieged by a different set of problems. Over time, he also came to realize how grossly inadequate bookish learning was to the practical necessities of life, not least of all in the sphere of religion. 'Haribhai', he once confessed before a brother-disciple, Swami Turiyananda, 'I am still to understand anything of your so called religion … but my heart has expanded very much and I have learnt to feel'.6

Personal experiences gained at the time left a deep impact on Swami Vivekanand and forced him to change his received wisdom, often radically. For one, they taught him to mistrust the rich more than the poor. At Khetri, after being refused food by wealthy residents, a hungry Vivekanand gratefully accepted coarse *chapatis* offered by a humble cobbler. 'Thousands of such large hearted men live in lowly huts' he was to later remark,' and we despise them as low caste and untouchables!'

Experiences gained elsewhere made the Swami more receptive to cultures other than his own. Though initially shocked by the polyandrous habits among the Tibetans of the lower Himalayas, Vivekanand subsequently came to appreciate the need for empathy and caution in dealing with different social arrangements.<sup>7</sup> More importantly perhaps, he saw the impropriety of judging the habits or customs of other peoples by standards not their own.

Within the larger question of contemporary India and her problems, Swami Vivekanand focused on two critical and interrelated issues. First, there was the morbidly exploitative nature of British colonial rule and second, the several social ills endemic to indigenous society.

Vivekanand, as it is only too well known, distanced himself from organised politics and repeatedly cautioned his followers from giving any political tilt to his message.8 In part this may be attributed to anxieties about the newly started Ramakrishna Math and Mission that did later come under some police surveillance. However, his basic objection seems to have been directed against the mendicancy of the early Congress but even more so, the general un-preparedness of his countrymen for a meaningful political revolution. 'The Congress should boldly declare India to be free', he reportedly told his brother Mohendranath Dutta, 'of what use is it to wail like women?'<sup>9</sup> Of course, it was good to have a body like the Congress than have none at all. All the same, no radical change in the political status quo would occur so long as the masses themselves had not been awakened first.<sup>10</sup> A few thousand graduates, as the Swami aptly remarked, did not make the nation.<sup>11</sup> A successful anti-colonial upsurge then required deeper changes in the way people thought or rather, the manner in which they had been taught to think. Colonial rule, observed Vivekanand, had hypnotised the Indian mind and taken away from it all vestiges of dignity and self-belief. The mind, therefore, had to be de-colonised first before it could be made more responsive to freedom.12

Though averse to attaching any political significance to his messages, Swami Vivekanand did deem it fit to publicly expose the injustice and indignities perpetrated by the British rule. Unlike some Congress leaders of his day, he had not the opportunity and perhaps even the talent to develop powerful economic critiques of colonialism. On the other hand, he was perceptive enough to use his knowledge and understanding of contemporary events to detect what foreign rule could do to a country and its people. It was here, he felt, that Japan and India offered contrasting examples. In one case, the government was national, pro-people and able to enforce the important distinction between Westernization and choosing to modernise along western lines.13 In the other, such a distinction could not be as sharply enforced as the ruling class itself was alien and had not interests of the country at heart. In the case of Japan, it had been possible to graft the material and scientific aspects of modernity best exemplified by the West upon the richness and continuities of the indigenous tradition. In the case of India, the very nature of colonial rule sometimes made it difficult to separate constructive borrowing of Western ideals from a reactive xenophobia. All conquests of one people by another were an evil, asserted Vivekanand<sup>14</sup> and British colonialism more so because of its parasitic nature and functioning. 'No good can be done when the main idea is blood sucking' the Swami wrote to an American friend.<sup>15</sup> Regrettably, the British never made India their home or identified themselves with Indians. This, incidentally, was never the case with the imperial Mughals. Shah Jehan would turn in his grave on being called a foreigner.16

The recurring perpetration of evil and wrongdoing, the suspension of basic civic liberties in colonial India pained the Swami:

For writing a few words of innocent criticism, men are being hurried to transportation for life; others imprisoned without trial and nobody knows when his head will be off. There has been a reign of terror in India for some years; English soldiers are killing our men and

#### 100 Amiya P. Sen

outraging our women—only to be sent home with passage and pension at our expense. We are in a terrible gloom—where is the Lord? 17

Here, it would be important to remember that the Swami attributed the problems of contemporary India as much to her own shortcomings as the inhuman exploitation by her rulers. Over a long period of time, Indians had suffered at the hands of her conquerors because they had naively overlooked the fact that material growth and development was no less critical to the health of a civilization as the ecstasy of spirit. For centuries Indians had preferred to keep themselves in isolation, unconcerned and oblivious of the phenomenal developments taking place in the world outside. The Hindus, in particular, had been doomed, observed Vivekanand, the day they had invented the word '*mleccha*'.18 Seen from this perspective, British rule could not have been an unmitigated evil. It had broken down old barriers of the mind and of social cohabitation and forced India to re-establish her contacts with the wider world. The pundits who insulated themselves and fellow Indians from external influences and raised objections to foreign travel were now made to sit up and realize that India was but a very small part of the world.19 Happily, India had once again become the meeting ground of various ideas, some no doubt petty and merely profit oriented but some truly noble and emancipating. In some respects, the Swami granted, Indians were no match for the European or American. The latter were aesthetically more sophisticated, physically stronger and energetic, greatly advanced in industrial production, and more adept in the art of governance. They were indeed like the *asuras* of Hindu mythology, whose virility and self-belief often put even the gods to shame. However, having argued thus, Swami Vivekanand also claimed that a nation's true worth could not always be measured in terms of her military might or material development. Each nation or civilization had its defining feature, its characteristic quality and it was there that her genius had to be located. 'Political greatness or military power will never be the mission of my race,'20 argued Vivekanand though fully aware that in his day no nation or peoples were secure without these. Here perhaps lies his critique of Western aggrandizement, of putting power to wrong uses. Also implicit in this argument is the Swami's rather tendentious stereotyping of people and cultures. Vivekanand assumed, quite wrongly, one would have to say, that the West could be understood only through the language of politics and India, through speculative philosophy. In truth, these were really born out of his patriotic attempt at defending his country against uncharitable criticism, to accept her as she was, with all her follies and failings. In Vivekanand's scheme of things, the emergence of India as the spiritual teacher of humanity was only one way of restoring her rightful place in the collectivity of nations. It was important, therefore, that India be seen to give back to the world treasures worth more than what she had herself received. 'We will not be students always but teachers also', he wrote, 'There cannot be any friendship without equality and there cannot be any equality when one party is always the teacher.'21 This is precisely why he may have found the humble petitioning of the Congress rather demeaning for the collective nation:

The highly educated and prominent men among you form themselves into societies and clamour at the top of their voices 'O English rulers, admit our countrymen to the higher offices of the state, relieve us of famines and so on. This rendering of the air day and night with the eternal cry of 'Give' and 'Give'. The burden of all this speech is to give to us, give more to us …22

The solution to India's pressing problems, Vivekanand felt, lay in broadening the social base of nationalism by creating a greater bond of empathy between classes. This bonding together as a nation, he suggested, would more effectively come about through a sensitive handling of everyday social problems. The Congress, preoccupied as it was with the nascent nationhood, had somehow come to acquire the facile belief that political goals could somehow gloss over glaring socio-economic evils. This is the critical question he posed in a letter of December 1899:

… in the days of famine and flood and disease and pestilence, tell me where your Congressmen are? Will it do to say 'Hand over the government to us?' … if there be two thousand people working in several districts, wont it be the turn of the English to consult you?<sup>23</sup>

In the raging debates of the day, Vivekanand apparently took the side of those who had come to believe that political freedom was strongly contingent on the removal of social inequities. No amount of politics would bear fruit until the masses had been educated, fed and adequately cared for:

The whole difference between the West and the East is this: They are a nation and we are not, i.e. civilization, education here is general, it penetrates into the masses. The higher classes in India and America are the same but the distance is infinite between the lower classes between the two countries … When one great man dies, we must sit for centuries to have another; they can produce them as fast as they die … why so? Because they have such a bigger field of recruiting their great ones, we have so small … Educate and raise the masses and thus alone a nation is possible … The whole defect is here: The real nation who live in cottages have forgotten their manhood, their individuality. Trampled under the fool of the Hindus, Mussalman and Christian, they have come to think that they are born to be trodden under foot by everybody who has money enough in his pocket. They are to be given back their lost individuality. They are to be educated.24

For the upper classes, the Swami also advocated the greater spread of technical education and programmes of economic self-reliance and self-help. These were precisely what the educational institutions under the colonial regime discouraged as their principal aim was to produce an army of lowly paid clerks.<sup>25</sup>

In his time, Swami Vivekanand was indeed to produce a sharp criticism of contemporary Indian society. His speeches and writings, strongly anti-Brahmin at times, held saints and *sadhu*s to be no less responsible for the inhuman persecution of the masses. He refers, for instance, to the 'diabolical barbarism' of the traditional priestly class which allegedly had molten lead poured into the ears of the s*hudra* found listening to the sacred word (*shruti)*. 26 The Swami came down heavily on a society that permitted parasitic Brahmins to suck the life-blood of the people and turned a blind eye to the spectacle of millions subsisting only on the flowers of the *mahua* tree. He was apparently unhappy too with social reformism of the day being essentially an upper caste/class affair that took up for consideration, issues that affected that stratum of society alone. The issue of widow marriages, for instance, that whipped up great fury and passion in the Hindus in India did not really affect the lives of over seventy per cent of Indian women.27 Sadly too, the methods adopted by these reformers were wantonly destructive. They were keen to destroy rather than constructively build practical and useful alternatives for their perspectives on existing ideas and institutions were heavily tainted by the West which itself had little understanding of these.

Vivekanand also doubted the efficacy of social legislation in a situation where the authority to make laws was not in the hands of the people. 'First create the power, the sanction from which the law will spring', he advised, 'The Kings are gone; where is the new sanction, the new power of the people?'<sup>28</sup> Ill conceived and thoughtless reform campaigns, the Swami feared, damaged the social fabric of India, setting classes and communities against one another. In this matter, one has to say, Vivekanand's caution bordered on conservatism. It set agendas but not a time-table for meaningful social change which in a sense went against his own belief that social issues, to a considerable extent, had to be prioritised against the political. Perhaps the Swami was seized with fear, whether real or imagined, of a violent class war being unleashed in the name of social change. The secret of success, in his opinion, lay in working along the line of least resistance. Thus, the solution to the caste problem in India was not to bring down the higher castes or classes to the lower level but to raise the lower up to the higher.29 Vivekanand believed that this could be accomplished through mass education (including a greater emphasis on the Sanskrit language)30 and the language of class harmony. Appropriation of upper class culture by the masses was a safer way of levelling caste differences.31 His advice to friends and fellow-workers, therefore, was to socially raise the depressed *jatis* by investing them with the sacred thread.32 To Swami Akhandananda, a fellow disciple working among the labouring poor in Rajasthan, he repeatedly cautioned against instigating the poor or in any way abusing the moneyed classes.33

#### Vivekanand and the Revitalization of Indian Life

Both in his time and in ours, Swami Vivekanand has been seen to provide new impulse to older messages, to bring back dormant elements in the Indian tradition to fullness and life. Thus, the strongly humanistic message in his writings and speeches is not unprecedented in the Indian tradition and Vivekanand himself admitted to modelling his ethical activism on the lines of the Buddha. Likewise, the Vedantic message he tried disseminating in India and the West has deep philosophical roots in Sankara and other pre-modern thinkers. And yet, few thinkers of his time could as passionately and innovatively restate the old and fewer still were able to back their convictions by experiences drawn from actual life. Unlike his own guru, Sri Ramakrishna, Vivekanand did not feel that moral activities in this world were only a preparatory step to higher spiritual ends. Rather, in his treatise *Karma Yoga* (1896) and the London lectures collectively called 'Practical Vedanta', the Swami seems to drive a wedge between moral responsibility as born out of some religious feeling as that which was autonomous and self-procreating. In modern India, Swami Vivekanand is perhaps the first figure to suggest that a moral life may be successfully detached from any conceptions of god and religion. At another level, he appears to have used religion and moral sensibility quite interchangeably. Vivekanand once told Sakharam Ganesh Deuskar, a man of radical leanings 'Sir, as long as a dog of my country remains without food, to feed and take care is my religion, anything else is either non-religion or false religion'.34 He understood and admired philosophical brilliance; on the other hand he does not hesitate to tell us that purely by itself, this could not bring about a human revolution. Acharya Sankara was brilliant but had not the compassion, the heart of the Buddha. With Vivekanand therefore, Advaita Vedanta was not simply hoary metaphysics but a gospel that could be given tangible social meanings. An attempt to project Vedanta as quintessential Indian philosophy had indeed begun with Rammohun Roy. However, where the Raja's efforts had largely been textual and exegetical, Vivekanand in his passionate and provocative speeches seems to have more effectively pressed home the point that the task of the Vedanta was to break down privileges. 'The idea that one man is born superior to another has no meaning in Vedanta; that between nations, one is superior and the other is inferior has no meaning … put them in the same circumstances and see whether the same intelligence comes out or not', he quipped.<sup>35</sup> Here what the Swami seems to be suggesting is that inequalities were not endemic to individuals or institutions; they were, more often than not, a reflection of the circumstances they had been placed in. Also, a claim such as this when made by an individual who called himself a *Vedantin* is indeed astonishing for historically, the construct of spiritual democracy had not necessarily given way to the social. Though he was a theorist of philosophical non-dualism, Acharya Sankara, in his everyday life, was an orthodox Brahmin.

In Vivekanand's reading of Vedanta, one also detects the reassertion of India's pluralistic culture. Vedanta, in this view, allowed people to reach the same goals through different paths.36 He was not quite comfortable with the word 'tolerance'. 'Why should I tolerate? Toleration means that I think you are wrong and I am just allowing you to live ….' 37

Implicit in this plea is his proud defence of India and Indians against unkind and impatient critics. That plan alone was practical, the Swami felt, which did not destroy the individuality of cultures or institutions and yet revealed a point of union with others. Just like the doting mother, aware of her child's failings but unhappy at the neighbour's complaints, Vivekanand was unsparing in his criticism of India but much too proud to take this from Western critics:

… if foreign friends, you come with genuine sympathy to help and not to destroy, God speed to you. But if by abuses incessantly hurled against the head of a prostate race … you mean only the triumphant assertion of the moral superiority of your nation, let me tell you … the Hindu will be head and shoulders above all other nations in the world as a moral race.38

Present day scholarship is apt to regard Vivekanand as the forerunner of Hindutva. This is not perhaps an accurate description considering his great respect for all religions and great reluctance to be drawn into organized politics. It is nonetheless true that several elements from his life and message are open to appropriation by Hindu right wing activists. In hindsight, it appears as though his plans for the social emancipation of the lower castes were in response to threats posed by Christian and Muslim proselytisation. Vivekanand rejected the commonplace theory that Hindus had been converted to Islam at the point of the sword and yet showered praise on the Sikh gurus for readmitting converts into Sikhism.39 Above all, he worried over the reported decline in the numerical strength of the Hindus. For him, every man going out of the Hindu pale was not only a man less but an enemy the more.40 Further, his preoccupation with the question of Indian 'unity' led him towards some tendentious assumptions. For one, he believed that the Indian identity could somehow be aggregated or essentialised. Here, he anticipates some later day Hindutva theorists in deliberately conflating the terms 'Hindu' and 'India'. The word Hindu, he argued, could be said to cover not only Hindus but also Mahommedans, Christians, Jains and other people.<sup>41</sup> 'Educated Mahommedans are Sunnis, scarcely to be distinguished from Hindus', he once told a correspondent of *The Times.*42 Again, when thinking of a common scripture for India, Vivekanand preferred the Vedas43, oblivious of the fact that he himself had once identified these as an authority recognized by the Hindus alone.<sup>44</sup>

Another idea that present day Hindutvas would find attractive in Vivekanand is his rejection of the theory of an Aryan invasion into India. He was, on the whole, quite unconvinced about a possible racial separation between 'Aryans' and 'Dravidians'. The division in so far as he could see, existed in the matter of language, not race.45 When touring south India, he was indeed offended at the claims made by one Dr. Sundaram Pillai that the Dravidians were indeed outside the framework of Hindu polity.<sup>46</sup>

Rather than label the Swami as an ascetic or activist, reformer or conservative, patriot or prophet, it is more reasonable to accept that perhaps he was all of these. Vivekanand's life and work belie the commonplace assumption that politics and religion were two entirely different worlds, completely unbridgeable. No doubt he too became a victim of the Hindu rhetoric of the day that maintained that in India, politics had to be expressed in the language of religion.47 However, beneath this rhetoric there remained the belief that no human scheme of spiritual emancipation could be fruitful without liberal and public-spirited activity. Vedanta, as Swami Vivekanand himself was once to observe, could be meaningful only in a free country.<sup>48</sup> For him, patriotism virtually began at the grass roots, with the resolution of everyday problems, not contrived and clamorous agitation. Freedom, in his view, essentially rested on the perceptions of the self and the world; the central reality for the individual in every case was the internal one. It is because he would not see political subjection to be a limitation of man's spirit and innate freedom that Vivekanand also did not perceive any contradiction between patriotism and religious prophecy.

For the future reconstruction of the country, Vivekanand consistently stressed the value of committed work and entrusted this largely to the youth. For him, young men and women represented not just unbounded energy and enthusiasm but also greater integrity and innocence. It did not really matter if this youth was also somewhat irreverent; they could still impart to the burgeoning national project, strength of the body and of the mind. Vivekanand who spoke at