# Unit 6 Development of Indian Society

# **Development of Indian Society**

**17**

Th e etymological defi nition of sociology is the 'science of society', that is, the study of the web of human interactions and interrelations. Since all human beings on this planet do not act in like manner; therefore, there have come to exist diff erent types of societies with diff erences of usages and customs, modes of action, forms of authority, and means of control. Th e term 'Indian society' signifi es its own peculiar characteristics, which briefl y put, are traditionalism, secularism, universalism, and spiritualism.

Society as such has no origin. It emerged spontaneously and followed its own line of development. It passed through several stages of evolution before reaching its modern complex form. Existing societies are on diff erent stages of development. Human society has advanced from a savage state to a civilized state. Th e process of development of society has not been the same everywhere on this planet nor has it been similar throughout the course of human history. Generally speaking, society has passed through three stages of development tribal, agrarian, and industrial.

# **PRIMITIVE SOCIETY**

It is diffi cult to say anything defi nite about the earlier period of Indian society, as there are no written records available about it. Th e historians have only speculated about the original inhabitants of India on the basis of anthropological sources. According to them, there were six major racial elements in the population of India: Negrito, Proto-Australoid, Mongoloid, Mediterranean, Western Brachycephals, and Nordic. Of these, the fi rst three are the older residents whose descendents are found in diff erent parts of India. Th e latter three are said to have arrived later. Th e Nordics were the last major ethnic elements to arrive in India who made a profound impact on its culture and society.

Th us, the primitive society of India consisted of ethnic elements, that is, tribal people. Th ey were nomads and lived in caves. Life was indeed very diffi cult because they wandered from place to place in search of food and shelter.

Even today, there are many comparatively inaccessible hill and forest· regions where primitive tribes are sheltered from the presence of more advanced populations. Th ese regions are scattered throughout the country. In the north-east part including Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, and the northern parts of Uttar Pradesh, the main tribes are Lepcha, Mishmi, Garo, Khasi, Naga, Kuki, Chakma, etc. In the middle part are the hilly areas in between the Narmada and Godavari rivers. Th e main tribes are Gondas of Madhya Pradesh; Bhils of Rajasthan; Santhals, Mundas, Singhbhum, and Uraon of Chhota Nagpur; and Saura, Bonda, Kharia, and Kondh of Orissa. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Hyderabad, Mysore, and Travancore-Cochin areas are included in the southern part. Th ese areas are inhabited by Toda of Nilgiri, Chechu and Kurokan of Hyderabad and Jobha, Nicobari, Ongoo, and Shopan of Nicobar and Andaman islands. Th ese tribes follow diff erent customs and traditions. For example, Khasi tribe believes in adelphic polyandry wherein the wife of the eldest brother is considered the wife of all the other brothers. Th e younger brothers are not allowed to marry a diff erent wife. Th e Nagas, Gondas, and Todas believe in polygamy, wherein a man marries several women. Likewise, the rules of divorce diff er. Th e tribal people are religious in their outlook and believe in totemism, magic, and fetishism.

Th roughout the Muslim rule in India, no attempts were made by the Muslim rulers to draw the aboriginal tribes into the habitat of Hindu society. Th e Hindus also did not feel any courage to impose their beliefs, norms, and values upon them. Th e British rulers followed the policy of systematic exploitation of the tribal land. In most cases, the right to exploit jungles, land revenue collection, and zamindari rights were given to the outsiders. After the attainment of independence, the Government of India adopted the policy of isolationism—certain tribal areas were excluded from the main state and placed under a special administrative machinery; for example, North-East Forest Alliance was established as one area and excluded from the state of Assam. In some cases, regions inhabited mainly by aboriginal tribes were notifi ed as scheduled areas for which the governor of the state had a special responsibility.

About 30 million more or less primitive people are spread unevenly all over the country, and there seems to be no immediate prospect of their absorption within any of the larger sections of the population. It may also be remarked that the aboriginals themselves are divided into numerous ethnic groups based on race, language, and culture. As the most ancient population element in the subcontinent, they belong to very archaic racial strata. In the present state of Indian society, there is very little likelihood of any substantial integration involving people of basically diff erent social groups, although some eff orts both at the constitutional and administrative level are being made to promote the welfare of scheduled tribes. Th ere are special provisions (Articles 16, 19, 16, 164,338, 339, 275, 330, 244, 332, 334, 339, 342, and the 5th and 6th schedules in the Indian constitution) seeking to remove the social disabilities and safeguard their rights as citizens of India. Th ere also exists the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to study socio-economic and other relevant circumstances relating to off ences against persons belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and to recommend remedial measures. Development schemes to raise their level of living have also been initiated. Th e North-Eastern Hill University at Shillong in Meghalaya is doing its bit in spreading education in the state where until not long ago human sacrifi ce to propitiate, a mythical gigantic snake, was not infrequent. However, whatever progress under the impact of urbanization and industrialization might have been made, there can be no doubt that for a long time to come, most tribes will persist as groups of distinct racial characteristics alienated from the cultural mainstream of India. Th e situation in tribal areas is disturbing. Th e rise of insurgency in the northeast, like militancy in Jammu and Kashmir, is a serious problem being faced by the government.

# **SOCIETY IN ANCIENT INDIA**

As we have studied above, the earliest men lived in relatively small bands who formed diff erent tribes on the basis of family and blood ties. Th eir life was simple and their economy consisted of seed and root gathering, of hunting and fi shing. Th ey were religious people in their outlook and believed in mythological gods and goddesses. In course of time, man acquired skill and knowledge in domestication of plants and animals, which laid the foundation of agrarian society. Man founded villages and thereby created the need for new forms of social structure and social control.

**Vedic period:** Social life in Indian society of early times was broadly based on the Varnashram system, under which men were classifi ed into four broader classes (varnas) according to the nature of functions to be performed by them. Th ese four classes were (i) Brahman (the scholarly class performing religious rites and teaching), (ii) Kshatriya (the ruling class responsible for the administration and defence of the kingdom), (iii) Vaishya (the trading class that carried trade and agriculture), and (iv) Shudras (the servants and slaves for menial work).

Another important factor regulating social life in ancient India was a series of sacraments, ' Samskaras', which mark the various stages of the human life; for example, related to birth like Garbhadhan (relating to conception), Namkaran (name giving ceremony), Annaprashan (fi rst feeding of a child), Mundan (head shaving), Karanvedh (piercing the ears); related to education like Vidyaramobha (entering the Ashram of Guru, i.e., school), Upanayan (wearing yajnopavit, i.e. a sacred thread to be hung over the left shoulder and diagonally down the right arm), Vedarambha (learning Vedas); related to marriage like Saptapadi (taking seven steps around the religious fi re), Kanyadan, (gifting away the girl as bride), Mangalya-Dharma (wearing the mangal sutra); and related to death like Daha Sanskara (cremation), Asthi-sangraha (collection of ashes), Asthi-visarjan (immersion of ashes in the holy Ganges) and Pind-dan (off ering to ancestors).

Th e ancient Indian society was marked by strong in-group feeling wherein the force of traditional mores and religious precepts was more dominant. Crime was rare, and informal pressures and social sanctions were suffi cient to maintain peace and order. Th e life patterns of the people were fi xed and the production relations between the diff erent classes were stabilized. Occupational mobility was unknown and the people lived a simple and peaceful life. Th ey were free from mental confl icts and were hard working and sincere. Since there were not many special organizations, family was the only organization to perform the tasks of child rearing and social security. It was patriarchal in nature. Women enjoyed high status. No religious ceremony was considered complete without the presence of Ardhangini (wife).

**Post-Vedic period:** In the post-Rigvedic period, the varna ashram system acquired the form of caste system based on the element of birth. Th e Brahmans considered themselves superior to Kshatriyas, whereas Vaishyas were considered inferior to Kshatriyas. Shudras came to be regarded as untouchables. Th e caste system is, thus, an institution of Hindu society having originated in India. Th e women also did no longer enjoy the status that they enjoyed in the Rigvedic period. Rituals and superstitions spread their network. During the course of time, Brahmans lost their respectable place in society and became covetous, corrupt, and cheats. Th rough myths, rituals, and superstitions they befooled the people and collected money in the name of propitiating the angry gods, curing the incurable diseases, and bringing health and happiness in the family. Th e Aryan religion lost its purity and degenerated into dogmatism, fatalism, supernaturalism, animism, and ritualism. Against

the background of the evils that crept in Vedic religion and aff ected the social life of the people, Lord Mahavira and Lord Buddha propagated their faith known as Jainism and Buddhism, respectively, in the sixth century BCE. Th is period is known as the era of religious transition in ancient India. Here it may be mentioned that India in these times was politically divided into numerous small and big republics or kingdoms always eager to extend their boundaries. It was not a single united state with a central government.

**Mauryan age**: Th e Mauryan age (321 BCE–185 BCE) marks a new era in the ancient Indian history. For the fi rst time, political unity was established in India under a king— Chandragupta Maurya. According to Megasthenese, Mauryan society was divided into seven classes of (i) Brahmans and philosophers, (ii) farmers, (iii) soldiers, (iv) traders and artisans, (v) herdsmen and hunters, (vi) junior offi cers, and (vii) king's ministers, advisors, and judges. Th e people led an honest life. Th ey were people of good conduct. Slavery and sati systems did not exist. However, polygamy was practised, and girls could be purchased to serve as wives.

**Post-Mauryan age**: Mauryan period from 200 BCE–300 CE saw the rise of many states all over the Indian subcontinent. Some were small, whereas others were large. Th ree dynasties, Sunga, Kanvas, and Satavahan, ruled over those states. Th e importance of Sunga dynasty lies in the fact that during their period great progress was made in the fi elds of Hindu dharma, Sanskrit language, literature, and art. Manusmriti was written during this period. Eff orts were made to reinforce the Varna ashram system of Hindu religion. Th e Brahmans were restored their superior status, whereas Shudras lived in pitiable conditions. Several foreign classes entered in and settled in India. Th ey were the Bactrian Greek (also called the Indo-Greeks), the Parthians, the Shakas, and the Kushanas. Th ese foreigners became a part of the population of India and were recognized as a part of the Kshatriya class. An important result of this contact was that a number of new ideas on religion, art, and science entered into various aspects of Indian life. Intercaste marriages, child marriage, Anuloma and Pratiloma marriages were prevalent during the post-Mauryan period. Th e widows, however, did not enjoy respectable place.

**Gupta period:** Th e advent of Gupta dynasty marks another landmark in the development of Indian society. It ruled the country from 335 CE to 467 CE. Th e Gupta period is called the golden age of Indian history. Th e following are the important features of social life in the Gupta period:

**(i)** Th e caste system took deep roots. Th e Brahmans were considered the purest and most respectable caste. Th e priestly functions could be performed by them only. However, there was fl exibility in the matters of marriage, occupation, and food. Pratiloma and Anuloma marriages were not forbidden. King Rudrasen, a Brahman, married the daughter of Chandra Gupta II. Th ere were examples of marriages with foreigners. Th e prince of Ikshwaku caste married the daughter of Shakya caste. Th e restrictions on occupation also were not rigid. Brahmans and Kshatriyas could adopt an occupation regarded inferior to their caste occupation. Th e Vaishyas followed the occupations of goldsmith, carpenter, blacksmith, and farmer. Untouchability started spreading its wings. According to Fa-Hien, the Chandals (untouchables) had to live outside the town, separated from the rest of the town people. Th ey were regarded so impure that high caste people did not even look at them. Most of the people were vegetarians, though non-vegetarian food was also allowed on special occasions.

**(ii)** Th e slavery system also existed, though only under exceptional circumstances. People were captured as slaves. Th e prisoners of war and the losers in the dice worked as slaves; but their life was not made miserable and they were not tortured.

**(iii)** Th e joint family system was an inseparable part of Indian social life. Th e eldest male member used to be the owner of the family property. He was bound by the rules laid down in Smritis in the matter of his rights and duties.

**(iv)** Th e women occupied an honourable position. Th e wife was not the slave of the husband. She had equal rights and led an independent life. Child-marriages and widow marriages were also prevalent in Gupta period. Chandra Gupta II himself married the widow of his brother. Th e widows led a life of simplicity. Sati system also existed. Th e wife of Gopalraj—the army chief of Bhama Gupta, became sati on his death. Purdah system did not exist.

**(v)** Th e people were law abiding and honest. Th ey lived in peace with each other. Religious sacrifi ces were held, but not as often as in Vedic times. It was a period of religious toleration. In the Mauryan period, Buddhism got royal patronage, but the Gupta kings were staunch followers of Hindu religion, which made it a powerful religion. However, they equally respected other religions also.

After the end of Gupta period, India fell prey to foreign invasions that destroyed its unity and created chaos and turmoil all around, and the Indian society got affl icted with numerous social evils.

# **INDIAN SOCIETY DURING THE MEDIEVAL PERIOD**

During the medieval period, the Indian society of ancient times retained its basic social structure, although here and there some changes crept in due to the policies followed by the rulers of this period. After the death of Harsha (647 CE), chaos, confusion, and anarchy prevailed in the country. Th e unity of Harsha's empire disappeared and small independent states sprang up continually at war with one another. Most of these states in the north were ruled over by the Rajput kings (800 CE–1200 CE) who were brave, courageous, patriotic, and generous. Women occupied a respectable position in the Rajput society. Swayamvar and Johar were the two great virtues of their women. Th ere was no 'purdah system'. Th e caste system became rigid, which prevented national integration. Th e Rajputs were followers of Hinduism. Many beautiful temples of the Hindu gods and goddesses were built by them. Agriculture continued to be the main occupation of the people who led a happy life. Th e economic and administrative system of the Rajputs was based on the pattern of feudal system. Th e kingdom was divided into jagirs held by jagirdars who quarrelled among themselves and often revolted against the ruler.

In the south, the two important dynasties were those of Rashtrakutas and Cholas. Both of them were great patrons of temples. Th e Rashtrakuta ruler king Krishna I built the rock-cut Kailash temple at Ellora. Th e biggest and most perfectly built temple of south India is perhaps the Brihadeshvara temple at Tanjore built by the Chola ruler Rajaraja I in honour of Lord Shiva in 1011 CE. Th e Brahmans were the most respectable class of the Chola society. Th e people followed Hinduism and worshipped the Hindu gods. Shankaracharya and Ramanuja were the two great religious teachers of this period—the former preached the Gyan Marg while the latter preached the Bhakti Marg.

Th e period from 1001 CE to 1526 CE was the period of political turmoil and invasions during which Muslim warriors invaded India either to plunder it or conquer territories. Mahmud of Ghazni was the fi rst Turkish invader who carried 17 raids in the course of 25 years (1001 CE–1025 CE). His invasion on Somnath temple in, Kathiawar in 1025 CE was the fi ercest one. He successfully destroyed the sacred and the richest temple of the Hindus and took away hundreds of maunds of gold, silver, and costly jewels. Th e Hindus have not yet forgotten the invasion which is cited in the

Ayodhya case. Th ereafter, Muhammad Ghori attacked India in 1175 CE and captured Multan, Peshawar, Sialkot, and Punjab. Subsequently he defeated Prithviraj, the bravest ruler in north India, which marked the end of Rajput rule in northern India.

Muhammad Ghori is regarded as the real founder of the Muslim empire in India.

Th e Muslim rule in India aff ected Indian society in several ways:

**(i)** Th e society became divided into three main groups: Kings, nobles, and high men formed the upper class. Th ey lived a life of luxury. Th e other group was that of the middle class, which consisted of traders, offi cers, etc. Th ey led a simple but comfortable life. Th e third was the lower class, which consisted of farmers, artisans, and labourers. Th ey were poor people who worked hard to earn their livelihood. Th ere arose social classes with diff erent modes of living, later leading to class struggle.

**(ii)** Th e position of women deteriorated. Th ey could not move freely. Purdah system, child marriage and sati system became common features.

**(iii)** Varna ashram system of ancient Hindu society degenerated into caste system, which acquired rigidity and became a closed system out of which none could go out and none could come in.

**(iv)** Th e Mughal kings, except Aurangzeb, generally followed the policy of religious toleration and communal unity, which brought the Hindus and the Muslims closer and infl uenced the customs of each other. Th e Sufi saints had many Hindu followers. Th e Dargah of Hazrat Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti at Ajmer is a place of pilgrimage for Hindus as well. Likewise, the Bhakti movement laid stress on common bonds of humanity. Th e ideas of Sufi sm and Bhakti movement created tolerance among the people—both Hindus and Muslims.

**(v)** Th e Mughal rulers made great contribution in the cultural fi eld. Urdu was born as a language which was a mixture of Persian and Hindi languages. Th is brought mutual interaction between the Hindus and the Muslims who also adopted the style of dress, food habits, and other family pursuits of one another, music became an intermixture of Indian and Persian styles and developed in various forms like Th umri, Khayal, and Ghazal. Th e classical music received great impetus. Some new instruments were invented to enrich various forms of rhythm. Likewise, in painting the Persian and Hindu styles got mixed. Th e magnifi cent buildings built by Mughal emperors were pieces of architectural grandeur. Th e culture of Indian society was thus greatly enriched during Mughal rule. It may be noted that Hindu rule was never completely wiped out from India.

# **INDIAN SOCIETY DURING BRITISH RULE**

Th e British entered India as traders, but soon became its ruler. Th e main aim of British rule in India was to consolidate its empire and continue its hold over the country. With this end in view, they did not interfere much with the social life of the Indian people, their customs and traditions, their family structure and norms, and their modes of living. Whatever administrative or legislative measures were undertaken by them was to please the social reformers or to consolidate their hold over India.

Before 1857, the year of First War of Independence, popularly known as the Great Indian Mutiny or Sepoy Mutiny , the British Government did some commendable work in the fi elds of social reforms. In 1829, Lord Bentinck declared the practice of sati illegal—a demand put forward by Raja Ram Mohan Roy. It was declared that anyone who instigated, inspired, or forced a woman to immolate herself as sati, would be punished by death. Likewise, female infanticide was also declared illegal in 1802 and was made punishable by death. Th e banning of sati practice caused the problem of widow remarriage, which was prohibited under Hindu law. Under the pressure of social reformers like Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Ranade, and Bhandarkar, the Government passed a law in 1856 that allowed the widows to remarry. Th e marriageable age of boys was raised to 18 years and that of girls to 14 years in order to suppress child marriage. Th e practice of human sacrifi ce, sacrifi cing little children to appease gods and goddesses, was also banned in 1846. Th e above steps of the British Government were, however, taken as interference in their social life by the people, thereby creating discontent and unrest, which became one of the causes leading to the Revolt of 1857.

Th e British prestige had suff ered a lot during the Great Rising of 1857. As such, many changes took place in the British policy towards India. One such change was the policy of non-interference in the ancient customs and usages of the Indian people and to follow the policy of religious tolerance. Consequently, British Government gave up its policy of social reforms after 1857. Whenever social reformers raised their voice against the prevailing social evils, the British Government remained silent, which was, however, unfortunate from the viewpoint of ridding Indian society of its social evils. It may, therefore, be said that the British policy in this regard after 1857 was worse than before the reform movements.

A brief reference to the social reformers of the nineteenth century, who felt the need for removing irrational social and religious practices that were hampering the unity and progress of Indian society, may help in better understanding the Indian society during British rule. Raja Ram Mohan Roy was the fi rst great social and religious reformer of the nineteenth century. He spearheaded the movement to eradicate social evils pertaining to women. He founded the Brahmo Samaj in 1828. Th rough it he preached the worship of one god. He was against idol worship, superstitions, rigidity of the caste system, meaningless customs, and the domination by the Brahmans. Th e Brahmo Samaj actively fought against child marriage and polygamy. It worked for the education of girls, remarriage of widows, and abolishing of the purdah system and played a major role in removing many long-held prejudices and orthodoxies of Indian society. In Maharashtra, a movement called Prarthna Samaj similar to Brahmo Samaj was started by R. G. Bhandarkar and Mahadev Govind Ranade. It preached the principles of Brahmo Samaj, worked for the welfare of the backward and oppressed classes, and also laid great stress on female education. Gopal Krishna Gokhle also joined it. He founded the Servants of India Society. Jyotiba Phule was the founder of Satya Shodhak Samaj in 1848, which worked for the upliftment of the oppressed classes. Phule condemned the caste structure and attacked the supremacy of the Brahmans. He even started the practice of performing the marriage ceremonies without the Brahman priests.

It may be noted that throughout the span of Indian history south India was never directly aff ected by the political upheavals caused by the series of invasions. It was north India that bore the brunt of foreign invasions. As such the social structure in south India remained more or less unchanged over the centuries; one in which the Brahmans occupied a dominant position. Th e coming of the British did not change the situation very much. Still some enlightened personalities like Sridharubu Naidu, Kandakuri Veera Salingan, and Sri Narayana Guru condemned the superstitions and orthodoxies of Hindu society, propagated belief in one supreme god, and advocated widow remarriage. Sri Narayana Guru who was born into the Ezhava family carried on a crusade against the oppression of the Ezhava—who were considered to be outcastes. He advocated one caste, one god, and one religion for all. He fought for the right of untouchables to worship in Hindu temples. It may also be noted that south is the home of wealthy temples. Th eir wealth was controlled by the priests. Th e reformers

of south India wanted public control of temple funds. Th ey also campaigned against the Devdasi system under which young girls were dedicated to temples who were eventually made victims of exploitation.

**Arya Samaj** was established by Dayanand Saraswati who was born in 1824 in a Brahmin family in Morvi, a small princely state in Kathiawar, Gujarat. He questioned the meaningless ritual, worship of idols, and the caste system. He launched a vigorous campaign against Brahman priesthood. His philosophy was, 'Go back to Vedas'. According to him, all knowledge was preserved in the Vedas, and their study alone could solve all the social problems in the Indian society. He preached against social inequalities. He believed that women were equal to men and they should be provided education and not be married off before the age of 16. He was strongly in favour of widow remarriage and condemned untouchability. He founded the Arya Samaj in 1875 to revive Hinduism and reorganize the Hindu society. He started the Shuddhi Movement and brought back to Hinduism many people who had embraced either Islam or Christianity. He opened the doors of Arya Samaj to the Shudras and the depressed classes. He opposed purdah system. Arya Samaj became a social movement and did useful work. Arya Samaj mandirs were built for its followers to perform 'yagya' and hold religious functions. Also, a number of educational institutions were set up to provide education consisting of both traditional learning and western scientifi c studies. Th e Arya Samaj played a very positive role in the fi eld of social and religious reforms. It was quite popular in north India.

**Swami Vivekanand** (1863–1902) was the disciple of Ramakrishna Paramhansa. His address to the World Parliament of Religions in Chicago in 1893 was universally acclaimed as a brilliant discourse on Hindu religion, which removed some of the wrong notions that existed in the Western minds about Hindu religion and its culture. He founded the Ramakrishna Mission in 1896 to propagate the message of his 'guru' and work for the social good. He preached against superstition, narrow-mindedness, and weakness in all forms. He condemned caste system, ritual ceremonies, and dogmas. He urged the people to imbibe the spirit of humanism, equality, liberty, and social service.

Th e religious and social reform movements in the second half of the nineteenth century played a vital role in awakening the people of India and make them conscious of the need to eradicate social evils. All the social reformers attacked caste system and emphasized the need for improving the status of women and removing the evils pertaining to them. Movements for temple entry of untouchables, removal of long-held taboos and social evils began to spread across the country. By an Act of 1872, intercaste and intercommunal marriages were made legal. Th e eff ective age for marriage of girls was raised to 12 years by the Age of Consent Act, 1891. Th e Sharda Act of 1929 raised the marriageable age of girls to 14 years and that of boys to 18 years. Steps were also taken to promote women education, and women schools and colleges were established. Even medical colleges were set up for women. Th e Lady Duff erin Fund was set up for training women as doctors, nurses, and midwives.

It may also be pointed out that the political leaders who played a pioneering role during the freedom movement were social reformers as well. Th ey awakened the people against social evils and exhorted them to fi ght against them. Th e names of Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Lala Lajpat Rai, and M. K Gandhi are notable ones.

**Bal Gangadhar Tilak** was a revivalist. He was eager to revive all that was good and glorious in India's culture. He realized that the social order in India necessitated a drastic change, but the change must be from within. It must not be Western import. He condemned religious orthodoxy and dogged adherence to customs. He was also hostile to bring about social reform through bureaucratic legislation. He considered it sheer humiliation that the Hindus should pander before bureaucracy and request them to make social laws, thus exhibiting their inability to do so. He did not like social reforms to be imposed from above.

**Lala Lajpat Rai** rendered social and humanitarian service through Arya Samaj and the ' Servants of People Society'. He devoted himself to the cause of removal of untouchability and the emancipation of the depressed classes. He established All India Achhut Uddhar Sabha for their uplift. As an Arya Samajist he was opposed to the inequities in the name of the caste. He regretted that, in India, the reformers are working against heavy odds for they have to contend against prejudice and ignorance without absolutely any help from the state.

**M. K. Gandhi** or popularly called Gandhiji was opposed to dogmatism. He did not preach harking back to primitive or paganism. Rather he stood for a strenuous, dynamic, and morality-oriented life, which involved quest of the good of one's soul and the eradication of wrong and injustice. According to him, religion is always within us and has to be evolved out of us. Although Gandhiji felt inspired by all the religions of the world, yet Hinduism had profound infl uence on his mind. However, he did not accept every word of Hindu scriptures. He did not subscribe to the pernicious and cruel system of untouchability, nor did he believe in the caste system. He fi rmly believed that an ideal social order could be evolved on the basis of the ancient Varna ashram system interpreted in the real sense of the term. Th is system does not presuppose any hierarchical gradation of occupations; all are treated as equal and a profession is taken as a means for performing one's duty towards society. Th e upliftment of women was an important part of the national movement under the leadership of Gandhiji.

From the above account, it is thus clear that the main role in the fi eld of social reforms during British rule in India was played by social reformers and political leaders of the nineteenth and twentieth century.

#### **Growth of Middle Class**

Generally speaking, in societies there are usually two classes—kings and subjects, patricians and plebeians, feudal lords and vassals, upper and lower classes, capitalists and proletariat, masters and slaves, haves and have nots, rich and poor, lords and commoners, and the like. An important development in Indian society during the nineteenth century was the emergence of a new social class, that is, the middle class. It was the consequence of a two-fold process—the destruction of the old ruling class, on the one hand, and the rise of the new groups of landholders, businessmen, and intellectuals, on the other. Th e destruction of the old upper class was the direct result of the British conquest, the formation of the business class a by-product of European business enterprise, and the growth of the landholding and intellectual groups was due to the establishment of British administration and introduction of Western education. In other words, the creator of the Indian middle class was the British rule.

Th e new social class—the middle class—had its conspicuous appearance in the three major cities of Kolkata, Mumbai, and Chennai. Th is class was a hotchpotch of several groups performing various functions in connection with trade, commerce, and administration. It included the following groups:

**(i)** Th e merchants, agents and proprietors of modern trading fi rms, excluding those at the top.

- **(ii)** Th e salaried executive and offi cers including technical and supervisory staff .
- **(iii)** Th e main body of civil servants and other public servants excepting those at the top.

**(iv)** Th e members of the principal recognized professions, salaried or otherwise, such as lawyers and doctors, lecturers and professors, writers and journalists, etc.

**(v)** Th e body of well-to-do shopkeepers including accountants and other offi cers employed in the joint stock concerns.

**(vi)** Th e holders of the middle grades of proprietary tenures of land.

**(vii)** Th e group of rural entrepreneurs engaged in plantation industry.

**(viii)** Th e main body of clerks, assistants, and other non-manual workers below the management level.

Th e middle class stood between the capitalist and the working class and formed a composite intermediate layer consisting of a wide range of occupational interests, but bound together by a common style of living and behaviour pattern. It stood for liberal democratic values. Th ey imitated the ways of foreign rulers by learning their education, and thereby reaping the economic benefi ts of the new social and economic structure. Th is class constituted the modern Indian intelligentsia who played an important role in the fi eld of social reforms and the contemporary political history. As described earlier, they organized various progressive socio-reform and religious-reform movements in the country.

#### **Rural Conditions During British Rule**

Th e Indian society is agrarian in nature. About 75 per cent of India's population lives in villages and follows agriculture as their main occupation. Any study of Indian society cannot, therefore, ignore the study of Indian villages and village economic structure.

At the outset it may be said that British rule in India destroyed the village economy, its mores and customs, peace and simplicity, self-suffi ciency and homogeneity. India in ancient times was known as a 'Golden Bird', which today lies at the bottom of poverty among the countries of the world. Poverty is more pronounced in the rural areas than in the urban ones. In ancient India, there were no landlords or intermediaries. King's offi cers used to collect land revenue directly from the peasant-owners. Th e farmers were provided all facilities regarding irrigation. In times of natural calamities the land revenue was remitted. Besides agriculture, the other economic pursuits were animal husbandry and small-scale manufacturing. Th ere was integrated system of living. Production was need oriented and not for marketing. Th e economic relations were of informal type. Th e manufacturers, workers, and consumers were personally known to each other.

During the early middle age, agriculture remained the main feature of Indian economy. Animal husbandry acquired a prestigious position. Th e prosperous farmers, rich people, and kings, all of them used to have animal wealth in ample measure. Th e cow was regarded sacred and was even worshipped. Diff erent kinds of metals also came to be used for making implements, jewellery, and utensils. Weaving and other handicrafts became the common occupations done mostly by women or assisted by them. Foreign trade also increased. It may, however, be noted that some tyrant kings in between and foreign invaders did plunder the country's wealth and exploited the peasants. Th e land revenue policy also diff ered from king to king. If a king was benevolent, peasants felt respite, but if he was autocratic, the peasants felt suppressed. Th ere were both good and bad kings in the dynasties that came in and went out during the medieval age. A positive feature of the Indian society was that the quarrels and discords in society were seldom based on religious diff erences. Th e Hindus and Muslims had adopted one another's culture in terms of customs, language, dress, and mode of living. Th ere were no mosque–temple disputes.

Th e history of modern period in India began after the Battle of Plassey (1757), which laid the foundation of the British empire and paved the way for the British mastery over the whole of India. As told above, the British government had adopted the policy of non-interference in the religious and social matters of people in India. Whatever social legislation was enacted by it was due to the pressure of reform movements launched by social reformers. In regard to agrarian matters, there were three main land-revenue systems: (a) Th e permanent settlement (b) Th e ryotwari settlement, and (c) Th e mahalwari settlement. Th e permanent settlement was introduced by Lord Cornwallis who became the Governor General of India in 1786. He fi rst introduced a decimal settlement in 1790, which was made permanent in 1793. Under this system, the zamindars who had purchased the right of revenue collection through highest bid in 1790 became the permanent owners of the land. Th us, from revenue collectors they became landlords and the ownership of rights became hereditary. It is called Zamindari system and prevailed in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Northern Sarkars, and Oudh. Under the Ryotwari system adopted in 1820, there were no intermediaries. Revenue was collected directly from the cultivators called 'ryats'. Th e rate of revenue, one half of the produce, was levied for a period of 30 years after which, it could be revised. Th e cultivator had a right to his land. It was introduced in Karnataka, Mysore, Mumbai, and Chennai. Th e mahalwari settlement was introduced in the 1830's in western UP, parts of Madhya Pradesh, and Punjab. A system of common ownership of land prevailed in group of villages or mahals. Th e head of a 'mahal' was called 'talukdar'. He was responsible for collecting the revenue from the villages. Revenue under all these three systems was fi xed arbitrarily, and was not fi xed in accordance with the productivity of the land. Th ere were rigid rules of collection and no remission was granted even during times of monsoon failure or fl oods. Th e Indian movie *Lagaan* depicts it very brilliantly.

Th e revenue system during British rule gave a boost to landlordism. While the government and the landlords prospered, the peasants suff ered. Th e rates of revenue were high and in case of failure to pay it, their lands and belongings could be auctioned. Th e peasants used to raise loans from money lenders at high rate of interest, which landed them in perpetual indebtedness. Th e peasants under the British rule lived a life of penury, indebtedness, and impoverishment. In fact, the British government was least concerned with the well-being of the peasantry class, nor was it interested in introducing agricultural reforms. Th e Zamindari system caused immense harm to the nation. It may also be mentioned that during the British rule there were numerous famines. Indian agriculture mainly depended on monsoon, so whenever the monsoon failed, famines followed. In the second half of the nineteenth century, there were nearly 20 famines, which ravaged diff erent parts of the country. According to the British writer William Digby, nearly 28 crore people lost there lives during the famines from 1854 to 1901. Th e worst famine of 1943 caused the death of nearly 30 lakh people in Bengal. In short, during British rule, peasants were oppressed by zamindars, agricultural production was low, rural people lived a life of utter poverty, the crafts and cottage industries collapsed, and the whole village economy and agriculture got shattered.

#### **Industrial Development**

A notable feature of Indian society during British rule was the growing distance between Muslims and Hindus. As mentioned above, the Hindus and Muslims lived peacefully during the Muslim rule in India. Th ey had adopted the customs, manners, and food habits of each other. Th e language Urdu was a mixture of Persian and Hindi languages, which was read and spoken by Hindu families also. Th ere were no Hindu–Muslim clashes during the reign of Muslim rulers. Some of the Muslim rulers even married Hindu women who were given royal status in the family. Th e British, in order

to check the growth of Hindu–Muslim unity, followed the policy of 'divide and rule'. Th e growth of Muslim nationalism was the creation of British rulers who lost no opportunity to encourage separation tendencies among the Muslim community and their leaders during the course of freedom movement. A permanent political association called All India Muslim League was formed in 1906. Separate electorates were introduced by the Indian Communal Act of 1909. After some years, the two nation theory was propounded, ultimately leading to the partition of India in 1947.

We may also briefl y look into the industrial scene during the British rule. India in ancient and medieval period was known for its handicrafts and skills. Indian economy was not only self-suffi cient but also produced goods for export. Indian textile fabric, cotton, silk, and other goods like salt and indigo were exported to Europe and other parts of the world. Th e British rule adopted a policy of neglect and indiff erence towards the Indian cottage and small-scale industries and did not give any protection to them. Under the impact of Laissez-faire policy and industrialization, the Indian artisans suff ered. Faced with the giant-like machines and market competition, they were forced to abandon their ancestral crafts and join the rank of workers in the factories. Slowly and gradually all Indian industries suff ered, and consequently the artisans were adversely aff ected and forced to abandon their professional trade. By 1880, the decline of handicrafts was an accomplished fact.

Industrialization and urbanization under British rule brought about great changes in the social structure and norms of the Indian society. Th e traditional patriarchal and joint family system was replaced by modern nuclear family system. Th e villagers fl ed to cities and became workers in factories. Th ey lived in slums where they did not have proper living conditions. A new class of industrial workers arose which later formed their unions for the betterment of wages and improvement of their living facilities. Th e growth of trade unions marked a new beginning in the industrial relations. New classes of capitalists and workers divided society between the 'haves' and 'have-nots'. Political parties came forward to take up their cause and fi ght against the British rulers to get them better facilities and wages. Factory laws were passed to regulate their working conditions. But in spite of all this, the British government's policy was pro-industrialists. Th e life of workers continued to be a virtual hell, as was the life of peasants.

It may not, however, be denied that industrialization under British rule did bring in some good results. Industrialization increased production, and necessities of life became easily available. People were encouraged to exert themselves utmost for earning money. Th e development of the means of transport and communication like railways, roads, and telegraphs facilitated contacts among the people and made it easier for the village people to move to towns and sell their produce and goods at better price. Th is also helped in the exchange of ideas and breaking down class, caste diff erences. Th ey travelled together in the railways and buses and worked as co-workers in the factories. Th ey co-operated with one another and worked shoulder to shoulder. Th erefore, the setting up of industries during British rule did help in economic advancement of India and loosening the control of traditional customs.

To sum up, the Indian society during the British rule was marked by impoverishment of peasants, exploitation of factory workers, bondage of labour, birth of communalism, destruction of village economy, decay of joint family system, lack of community feeling, predominance of individualism, growth of mercantalism, and loss of moral values.

# **INDIAN SOCIETY DURING THE POST-INDEPENDENCE PERIOD**

India got independence from the British rule on 15 August 1947 after a long freedom struggle. Th e Indian leaders of freedom movement professed high ideals regarding social regeneration. Some of these ideals were social justice, economic equality, secularism, democracy, national integration, and rural development. Th e successive governments have done a lot to bring in reforms in social and economic fi elds through legislation and other means. Th us, a number of laws have been enacted in the social fi eld—the chief ones being Hindu Marriage Act and Divorce Act, 1955; Hindu Succession Act, 1956; Hindu Guardianship Act, 1956; Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978; Marriage Laws Amendment Act, 1976; Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961; Commission of Sati Act, 1987; Maternity Benefi ts Act, 1961; Equal Remuneration Act, 1976; Women's and Children's Institution (Licensing) Act, 1960; Untouchability Off ences Act, 1955; etc. In the economic fi eld, the main enactments are Factory Act, 1948; Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948; Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961; Civil Mines (Conservation and Safety Act, 1952; Minimum Wages Act, 1948 and 1961); Bonus Act, 1955; Fatal Accidents Act, 1955; Employee's State Provident Fund Act, 1952; Employee's State Insurance Act, 1948; Maternity Benefi ts Act, 1961; Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947; Indian Trade Unions ( Amendment) Act, 1960; Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; Industrial Disputes Banking and Insurance Company Act, 1949; etc. For rural development, the main laws passed are Zamindari Abolition Act, Land Ceiling Acts, and Consolidation of Holdings Act. Agriculture is a state subject. Th e 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act, 1993 revitalized the Panchayati Raj. Besides, a number of developmental programmes and schemes have also been initiated along with the programme of national awakening through diff erent agencies of public opinion.

Despite all what has been done and achieved, the fact remains that Indian society today is faced with serious problems such as social, economic, and political, and fi nds itself in a state of social disorganization. Ours is a diseased society needing urgent treatment to regain its health so that its diff erent parts may perform their roles properly.

**Decay of family:** Family forms the nucleus of society. Th e joint family system, a feature peculiar to Hindu society, which performed numerous social functions, is collapsing and has given way to nuclear families in the urban society. Th e joint family fostered social virtues and worked as a social insurance company for the old, sick, and handicapped. Th e modern society is today faced with the problems of the aged, widows, and abandoned children. Th e control of elders has loosened, and now not only the grown-ups but even children insist on their choices in matters of food, entertainment, and education. It is called generation gap. Th ere is change in ideas about marital fi delity and extramarital relations. Women are rebelling against male supremacy. Th e problems of well-educated couples in the form of tension, bitterness, and maladjustment have come to the fore. Love marriages and divorces are no longer a rarity. Even the rural families are not an exception. Self-indulgence in place of self-denial, self-seeking in place of social service, and materialism in place of religious consciousness has led to sapping the very basis of marital harmony. Th e statistics regarding divorce do not fully represent the volume of marital discord in India.

Th e dowry system is another problem facing the Indian society. Girls remain unmarried for long years because the parents are not fi nancially well-off to manage the dowry demanded by the parents of the boy. Sometimes the girl herself or her father commits suicide. Th e parents often commit theft, forgery, or misappropriation to arrange for dowry. Due to the dowry system, the parents are sometimes compelled to marry the girl to a man who is almost fi t to be her father. In some cases girls have shown courage in refusing to marry a boy whose parents asked for dowry, but such cases are exceptional. Along with dowry, the huge amount spent in marriage celebration and making it more showy destroys its solemnity. Th e Government of India enacted a Dowry Prohibition Act in 1961, but it is observed more in breach than compliance. Even our leaders—political and social—have not lagged behind in asking for huge dowry and putting up a costly show at marriage time to exhibit their status and wealth.

Th e modern Indian family has, thus, failed to eff ectively play its role of socialization and to exercise social control. Th e Indian home is riddled with economic tensions, sexual laxity, parental confl icts, and marital disorders. Th e old restraints of religion and morality have lost their control, and observance of family traditions has become a mere formality.

It may, however, be noted that women in the modern Indian family are in a better position than their counterparts in ancient India. Th ey have now been liberated from the drudgery of the kitchen and the burden of bearing and rearing up a number of children. Th e birth control methods and legalized termination of pregnancy have made sexual life tension free. Women have taken the place of man in every sphere including civil services, business enterprises, media, and army. Th ey have been chief ministers and governors of the states. Mrs Indira Gandhi has been the Prime Minister of India. Th ey are political leaders in their own right. Th ey actively participated in the freedom movement of India. Under the Panchayati Raj system, 30 per cent of seats are reserved for women in the elected bodies. Th e Hindu Marriage Act and Divorce Act, 1955; the Hindu Succession Act, 1956; and the Hindu Guardianship Act, 1956 have removed the several disabilities Indian women suff ered from. Th e daughter has an equal right of share in the self-acquired property of father. Th e Government has also implemented numerous schemes and programmes for their economic development, education, and awareness. A number of voluntary organizations are working for their upliftment and social betterment. However, the number of cases of sexual harassment, rape, molestation; attack on their modesty, illegal traffi c in women and other crimes is increasing day by day which have made them insecure and apprehensive of their honour and dignity.

**Casteism:** Now, we come to the caste system, another peculiar feature of the Indian society. Caste system is a part of Hindu religious order and enjoys the sanction of scriptures. Although untouchability has been made unconstitutional and there has also been intermixture of castes under the impact of urbanization and industrialization, yet caste remains, particularly in the villages, the strongest feature of the social life. Th e older generation still thinks in old caste terms. Intercaste marriages are exceptional, which take place generally in the case of love marriages. In the villages, such marriages are not welcomed; often the young boy and girl who who marry outside their caste are exiled from the village or otherwise punished. One has to still depend very largely on one's caste for help in critical periods of one's life, like marriage and death. Th ere are caste associations and caste dharamshalas for particular castes. Political parties are named after castes. Th e elections in India are contested very much on the basis of casteism. Th e voters are asked to vote for the candidates of their caste and the elected representatives work more for their caste welfare than for general welfare. Political parties sponsor only such candidate from a particular constituency whose caste is the most numerous in that area. Casteism persists in government services where seats are reserved for diff erent castes—scheduled castes, backward castes, and other backward classes. In order to get a job or a seat in a professional college, one sometimes even manages a false caste certifi cate. Caste journals have made their appearance. Caste institutions have been given legal freedom to maintain their respective identity in the name of minority. Th us, Indian democracy has in practice encouraged rather than discouraged the caste system. Attitudes of exclusiveness and distrust between one caste and the other still exist. Th e recent atrocities on Harijans by landed aristocracy in Bihar and other places point out to our failure to solve the problem of casteism. Th e supreme court judgement in the Mandal case has revitalized casteism in acute form, divided the nation into the so called forward and backward classes and opened up new vistas for internecine confl icts disintegrating and made backwardness a vested interest. It has replanted the poisonous weed of casteism. To sum up, the post independent society in India has failed to shed off its casteist character.

**Rural society:** India is a country of villages. Accordingly, social disorganization in rural society implies disorganization of Indian society. In the villages of today the community life has disappeared. Th e unifying bonds have disappeared. Mercantile culture has invaded social relationships. Th e community consciousness has been replaced by groupism and selfi shness. Th e incidence of litigation has gone very high. Th ere have been instances of burning of Harijans alive and cases of rapes and murders of Harijan women have been reported from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. Th e Panchayati system has collapsed under the weight of political interference and caste politics. Th e reservation of seats for women in the Panchayat has not raised the status of rural women; rather they have become pawns in the game of political dice and lost their modesty. No doubt, several schemes and programmes of rural development have been undertaken by the government and numerous facilities made available in the fi elds of education, economic development, transport, communication, and agriculture. Th ey have, however, benefi ted the large farmers and political leaders. Th e majority of villagers are still leading the life of poverty and deprivation. Th e Indian village of today is no longer the abode of gods and goddesses. It has become an arena of political rivalry and centre of dishonest pursuits.

**Urban society:** If the rural society of free India has become the arena of political rivalry and centre of dishonest pursuits, urban society has become the home for mafi a, sex traffi ckers, and criminals. Incidences of juvenile delinquency, raping, gangsterism (criminal gangs committing extortion and abduction), and moral depravity (illicit sex, sexual harassment, traffi c in women) are constantly increasing. Every sphere of urban life is fraught with corruption, moral antagonism, unhealthy economic competition, and religious and caste hatred. Th ere is scarcely any trace of community life and feeling of fellowship. People are divided on regional, communal, and economic basis. Th ere are wide gaps between the living styles of the rich in posh colonies and the poor in the slum areas. Th ere is no social intercourse between the diff erent class groups. Although numerous amenities and facilities have been provided to the urban dwellers, yet there is shortage of housing, drinking water, electricity, and even consumable goods. Alcoholism has become a norm of urban life and the trade of prostitution has become a fl ourishing trade. Th e casino culture has crossed the limits of decency. In view of the increasing crime rate and crowded vehicular traffi c, the city life has been rendered unsafe and insecure. Th e murder of old people in the cities has become a frequent phenomenon. Th e condition of law and order has become serious with no guarantee of the safety of the life and property of people. In short, the modern urban society in India suff ers from absence of primacy relationships, predominance of individualism, lack of community feeling, non-existence of family life, low morality, development of lopsided personality, artifi cial life, and last but not the least, environmental degradation.

To conclude, social change is a natural phenomenon. No society remains completely static. Th is is true of all societies—primitive as well as civilized, western or Indian. Th e speed of social change is not uniform in every society. Sometimes it occurs so slowly that it goes unnoticed. Before 1947, there was less industrialization in India, after 1947 India has become more industrialized. Th erefore, the speed of social change after 1947 has been faster.

Th e ancient Indian society was simple and peaceful, whereas the modern society is complex and tension-ridden. If the former was homogeneous, the latter is heterogeneous. Whether the changes brought about in the Indian society during the course of history amount to progress is a debatable question. Some consider the modern civilization as failure in spite of the many technological development, big industries, and imposing dams and grand villas. Th e fact remains that in India the evils of unemployment, crime, poverty, and disease have increased. More marriages break now than yesteryears. Th e family bonds have loosened. Th e social evils like drug addiction, dowry system, prostitution, alcoholism, child exploitation, sexual violence, atrocities on Harijans, illicit sex,

 casteism, and delinquency have increased manifold. We are today politically hypocrites, economically corrupt, socially dishonest, and morally unfaithful. Nobody would deny that we have marched ahead in technology and that there are now more opportunities available for personal development than before. However, in the face of multitudinous defects in our social conduct and social problems facing the society, it would be diffi cult to maintain that we have progressed. Development is not necessarily progress.

# **QUESTIONS**

- 1. Briefl y describe the development of Indian society through the ages.
- 2. Mention briefl y the contribution of social reformers in the resurgence of Indian society.
- 3. Th e ancient society in India was peaceful, simple, and religion-oriented. When and how did it lose its peaceful social character?
- 4. What changes have taken place in the Indian society during post-independent period?
- 5. In what sense was the British rule responsible for the decay of Indian society?
- 6. Despite the technological development, the Indian Society remains a diseased society. Discuss.
- 7. Describe the main social evils the Indian Society suff ers from.