#### **Overview of Culture 599**

- Hartono, D., Romdiarti, H., & Djohan, E. (1999). *Akses terhadap pelayanan kesehatan reproduksi: Studi kasus di kabupaten Jayawijaya, Irian Jaya*. Jakarta: PPT-LIPI.
- Hayward, D. (1980). The Dani of Irian Jaya before and after conversion. Sentani: Regions Press.
- Heider, K. G. (1970). *The Dugum Dani*. Chicago: Aldine.
- Heider, K. G. (1972). The Grand Valley Dani pig feast: A ritual of passage and intensification. *Oceania, 42*(3), 169–197.
- Heider, K. G. (1976). Dani sexuality: A low energy system. *Man, 11*(2), 188–201.
- Heider, K. G. (1979). Grand Valley Dani: Peaceful warriors. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
- Hull, T. H., & Hartono, D. (1999). Culture and reproductive health in Irian Jaya: An exploratory study. *Development Bulletin, 48*, 30–40.
- Ingkokusumo, G. (2000). *Sexually transmitted illness: Perception and health seeking behaviour among the Dani men, in Wamena Jayawijaya District, Papua Province, Indonesia*. Master thesis, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2000.
- Kirsch, S. (2002). Rumour and other narratives of political violence in West Papua. *Critique of Anthropology, 22*(1), 53–79.
- Kostermans, A. J. G. H. (1969). A New Guinea cinnamon used as a contraceptive. *Reinwardtia, 7*(5), 539–541.
- Lokobal, N. (1992). *Keberadaan dan peranan perempuan-laki-laki pada suku Dani di Irian Jaya*. Wamena, Irian Jaya.
- Lokobal, N. (1994). *Catatan singkat antropologi kesehatan*. Wamena, Irian Jaya.
- Muslim, Z. (1995). *Masalah kekurangan gizi di kabupaten Jayawijaya*. Wamena, Irian Jaya.
- O'Brien, D. (1969). *The economics of Dani marriage: An analysis of marriage payments in a Highland New Guinea society*. Doctoral dissertation, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
- O'Brien, D., & Ploeg, A. (1964). Acculturation movements among the Western Dani. *American Anthropologist, 4*(2), 281–292.

- Pavert, J. van de (1986). I Ma Wusan, A purification ritual amon the Dani of West Irian. UNITAS, *59*(1), 5–154.
- Peters, H. L. (1975). Some observations of the social and religious life of a Dani-group. *Irian, 4*(2), i–vi, 2–199.
- Ploeg, A. (2001). The other Western Highlands. *Social Anthropology, 9*(1), 25–43.
- Pontius, A. (1977). Drawings of the body with phallocrypt contraptions of Baliem Valley Dani in West New Guinea: Clues for means of population control? *Journal of the American Medical Women's Association, 32*(6), 203–211.
- Senis, J. (1995). Epidemiologi infeksi neisseria gonorrhoea dan STD lain di lembah Baliem, Irian Jaya. *Medika*, 77–79.
- Shankman, P. (1991). Culture contact, cultural ecology, and Dani warfare. *Man (n.s.), 26*, 299–321.
- Srini, S. (1999). *Analisis faktor-faktor yang mempengaruhi tingkat pemanfaatan pelayanan antenatal oleh suku Dani di kecamatan kurulu kabupaten Jayawijaya*. Master thesis, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, 1999.
- Sudjito, M. C. (1987). Management of cerebral malaria in the Karubaga primary health center, Jayawijaya District. *Irian*, *15*, 11–17.
- van Baal, J., Galis, K. W., & Koentjaraningrat, R. M. (1984). *West Irian: A bibliography*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Foris.
- WATCH (1994). *1992 Project Report*. Jayawijaya, Irian Jaya.
- World Bank (1991). *Indonesia: Health planning and budgeting*. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
- Yahya, S., & Roesin, R. (1990). Indonesia: Implementation of the health-for-all strategy. In E. Tarimo & A. Creeve (Eds.), *Achieving health for all: Midway reports of country experiences* (pp. 133–228). Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
- Yasukhogo (2000). *Laporan hasil studi kwantitatif atas pengetahuan, sikap dan perilaku sehubungan dengan PMS dan HIV/AIDS dikalangan PSKJ dan klien, Wamena*. Jayapura: PATH (Program for Appropriate Technology in Health).

# **British**

#### **Ian Shaw and Louise Woodward**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Great Britain, United Kingdom—component countries: England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Britain is an island nation geographically separated from France (and the rest of Europe) by the 22-mile stretch of sea called the English Channel. The dominant language is English, but Welsh is now enjoying a revival assisted by a recent devolution of government and the formation of a Welsh Assembly. Celtic is still spoken in a few remote parts of Scotland. Also there are some identifiable parts of major cities (linked to immigration) where the English may be a second language of use. Britain is a part of the European Union.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The population of the United Kingdom is estimated at 58 million (the 2001 Census began reporting findings in

November 2002). Population density is toward the Midlands and the south-east of England with some areas in the north of Scotland very sparsely populated. However, there are some demographic drifts back to the countryside, particularly by the affluent middle class. Historically, England "annexed" Scotland, Wales, and Ireland into a United Kingdom by the 18th century, though much of Ireland gained independence in the 1960s. The British have been described as a "martial race," though this may be more a reflection upon Britain's history of Empire than an accurate description of current culture. Football (soccer) is the national sport.

Religion is predominantly protestant with the established Anglican Church of England and the Presbyterian churches of Scotland and Wales. However, Catholicism is a minority religion, and immigration has raised the profile of the religions of the Indian Subcontinent. Religious tolerance is high, with tolerance generally being cited as a cultural trait—though this does break down from time to time. For instance, the current influx of asylum seekers is seen as a major social and political problem. The influence of religion generally has weakened since the 1960s, which marked a rise of secularism, though there are links between Catholicism and nationalist politics in Northern Ireland. The economy has moved from predominantly manufacturing to predominantly service-based, with the main period of change and restructuring taking place during the 1980s. Globalization has had an impact on family and community ties, with particularly the middle class becoming more mobile, not just within Britain, but globally.

## **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

There are four main demographic trends in Britain: a decline in fertility; an increase in dependency of the population; changes in family structure; and increased labor mobility.

A post-war "baby boom" occurred in the late 1940s and 1950s, which was followed by a "baby bust" in the late 1960s (Rimmer & Wicks, 1985). The present birth rate is less than half that of the "boom years." There has been a dramatic increase in the number of people over the age of 65 in the United Kingdom. Between 1901 and 1991 this number grew from 1.8 to 9 million (Shaw & Shaw, 19933). There is longer life expectancy for all age groups. Improvements in nutrition, medical services, housing, and work conditions have all contributed to this. The population of those over the age of 75 increased by a factor of 4 over the period 1901–1991 (Shaw & Shaw, 1993). The proportion of the population that is elderly (and the dependency ratio) is not set to "peak" until 2024. The elderly are the major consumers of health and social services and there is concern about how to fund state welfare, which is funded on a "pay as you go" basis, financed through general taxation. As an example, since 1983 state pensions have been linked to the cost of living rather than the average wage.

There have also been substantial changes within marriage. One in four will end in divorce on current trends. One third of all new marriages involve at least one partner who has been married before. One of the consequences is a rise in the population of single-parent families. The current estimate is 1.5 million single-parent families in Britain, and there are concerns about the issues arising from this for child poverty (poverty is used here as a relative rather than an absolute concept). The generally improving social status of women is recognized as important in determining their health outcomes. Also, women are more likely than men to invest the household's economic resources in their children's health and education.

Another key demographic effecting health within the United Kingdom is that of labor mobility. In 2000, approximately 84% of the British population lived in England. The years 1981–2000 have seen significant changes in geographical migration. Geographically, people have moved away from their homes for employment, subsequently reducing their available social capital. With the transition to the "nuclear family," people no longer have the traditional "family" as an institution of care. In contemporary society, people move geographically, which means it is unlikely that an individual will see the same doctor (general practitioner—GP) over a long period of time. The concept of the "family doctor" no longer exists, and unlike years gone by where the doctor was traditionally viewed as both a medical practitioner and also a friend, visiting a GP nowadays is strictly a consultation process. Accompanying these changing social and geographical conditions is a process of self-medicalization of individual problems. The role of medicine in society is now part of an ongoing social process in which health and illness are made relevant for aspects of

#### **Medical Practitioners 601**

everyday life. Personal problems are seen as becoming more medicalized with, for example, an increase in the prescriptions for anti-depressants.

Improvements in life expectancy in Britain have been attributed to access to clean water; effective sanitation systems; waste disposal services; safety precautions in food preparation and storage; increasing nutrient intake, especially following improvements in agricultural technology and productivity, for example; nutritionally fortified and higher-yielding crops; and environmental management. One issue affecting life expectancy is inequality between social classes. There is a significant relationship between social and economic position and health. People in unskilled occupations and their children are twice as likely to die prematurely in comparison with professionals. Similar gradients in mortality by social class are apparent for nearly all causes of death (Fox & Benzeval, 1995). Men in social class 5 lost 114 years of potential life per 1,000 of the population against 39 years in class 1. Such differences are not so marked amongst the elderly (Butler & Calnan, 2000). Data on social variation on patterns of morbidity show similar gradients. For example, age standardized long-standing illness rates for people who are unemployed are over 70% higher than for those who are employed. Also, various indicators such as body mass index, lung function, and blood pressure vary according to social class (Fox & Benzeval, 1995). This situation is mirrored across much of the Western world; however, economic inequality appears to be growing more quickly in Britain than in any other advanced industrial society (Butler & Calnan, 2000).

Britain has a National Health Service (NHS) that was formed on July 5, 1948, to provide a public health service "from the cradle to the grave." This service is organized and financed in ways that promote the values of equity and fairness and has been described as "the jewel in the crown" of Britain's welfare state. At the heart of this is the belief that good healthcare is a fundamental determinant of people's capacity to succeed in life and that as such, it should be free to those who need it. The NHS has been funded predominantly out of general taxation and based upon the principle that access to services should be determined primarily by medical need. A part of the role of the NHS is to combat health inequalities by improving access to those who most need it and by working with local authorities to improve environmental and other determinants of health. There is a strong commitment to the NHS by the Labour Government. The cost of the NHS is currently around 7.4% of gross domestic product (GDP). The target is to increase its budget to 10% of GDP over the next five years, to bring health spending in line with that of the United Kingdom's European neighbors.

Environmental issues within Britain also have an impact upon health. In the last 15 years, concerns have been raised regarding pollution, for example, hazardous waste, pollution in rivers and bathing waters. In more recent years, public concern about health has expanded to incorporate the importance of quality food production. Traffic congestion, noise, fumes, climate change, and air pollution have also increasingly become issues closely linked to health in the public mind. Economic conditions affecting health are significant in terms of access to formal healthcare and provision of services. An aging population is a key characteristic of the United Kingdom and has significant economic implications. Subsequently, as the population is living longer and birth rates are lower, there are fewer people in employment. The number of people in the tax base has consequently reduced, impacting on the economic resources available for health, though not public and political commitment to the NHS.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Medical practitioners in the United Kingdom are overwhelmingly employed and trained by the NHS. The service is organized into two sectors: primary and secondary care. Primary care includes health professionals such as GPs, who receive clients from within the community with undifferentiated and undiagnosed problems. The GP will, in many cases, be the first contact an individual has made regarding his or her condition. GPs serve the entire local community in their areas. Nurse practitioners serve the local community in a similar way to GPs. Primary care nurse practitioners decide upon the priority of patient needs by performing a full assessment of healthcare needs, thereby determining a patient's health status. Some patients may simply need to remain under the care of the nurse for treatment, whereas others will require consultation with the GP. Here, the patient has the opportunity to consult with either a GP, a nurse practitioner, or both. The role of the nurse practitioner is set to be given full consideration in extending his/her role to reflect that of the GP. However, while the nurse practitioner has a wide range of skills, knowledge base, and ability to deliver specific aspects of care at present, they may need to be supplemented by a specialist. This may be a district nurse, health visitor, another primary health care nurse, community psychiatric nurse, counsellor, or clinical nurse specialist working in an acute care setting. Essentially the expertise of the primary care nurse practitioner is becoming more akin to that of a GP. They have the ability to operate as a specialist generalist offering care to patients with a wide range of needs.

Secondary care is a specialized service. Patients are generally referred by their GP to a secondary service for continued more specialized care. The number of secondary services provided is vast and covers a plethora of specialities, ranging from adult intensive care, blood disorders and diagnostic hematology, to disability medicine, healthcare of the elderly, and mental health. This service is generally hospital-based, although not in all cases, such as the Community Outreach service that serves people suffering with long-term and enduring metal health difficulties. Essentially, this is a mobile service that offers treatment and service provision within the client's home.

Secondary care services are led by specialist consultants within given medical areas, but the largest group of practitioners within this service is nurses. In recent years, a blurring of professional roles has developed. For example, nurses now are seen to take on more clinical responsibility. This includes professionally autonomous decision-making; screening patients for disease risk factors; developing, with the patient, a care plan; and he/she has authority to admit or discharge a client from his/her own caseload to other healthcare providers. Nurse prescribing is under consideration.

## **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

The biomedical paradigm and its classification of and theories about illness and treatments is dominant. However, this approach has been "modernized" with increasing acceptance amongst health practitioners of the more behaviorally oriented multiple-risk-factor model. This emphasizes the interaction between behavioral risk factors and biological/genetic factors in the causation of disease. The importance of structural and environmental factors is also becoming increasingly recognized in etiology and classification (Butler & Calnan, 2000).

There is strong medicalization in some areas, particularly childbirth and unhappiness. Births are increasingly taking place in a hospital environment, with the incidence of cesarean sections showing a sharp increase in recent years. The incidence of depression in the United Kingdom has also increased from virtually nil in 1950 to "epidemic proportions" today, with one in four people visiting a GP said to be suffering from depression (Shaw & Middleton, 2001). This also illustrates that "lay beliefs" in Britain are heavily influenced by professional (often biomedical) paradigms—namely, that people may seek medical responses to social problems. Common sense understandings are imbued with professional rationalizations. In British society, biomedicine not only has provided a basis for the scientific study of disease, it has also become Britain's own culturally specific perspective on disease; that is, its folk (common sense) model (Engel, 1977). "Lay beliefs" are tied up with the certainty of diagnosis and the legitimacy afforded by taking on medical rationality. It has even been argued that there are no indigenous cultural developments in Britain that are not informed by an expert (if not biomedical) conceptual framework (Shaw, 2002). This can lead to increasing demands for healthcare services as new improvements in technology and pharmacology lead to increasing public expectations of health services. The use of "complementary medicine," particularly herbal medicine, aromatherapy, and Chinese medicine (such as acupuncture), which is not available as a part of the NHS and has to be purchased privately, is also on the increase.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

In the 1870s in Britain, two-thirds of women would have had five or more children. In the 1920s, two-thirds of women would have had two or fewer children. The proportion of families with two children has almost doubled over the last century. Now, less than one family in six has three or more children. The proportion of childless marriages has also continued to grow (Parker, 1990). This illustrates a long-term decline in fertility in Britain, despite a "baby boom" in the decade following World War II. Reasons for this decline include: women are having children later in life, many for career reasons; greater availability of birth control and a widening of the legal grounds for abortion since the 1960s has given women more control over conception; more women are working and may find difficulties in looking

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 603**

after children; marital breakdown is increasing; job security is decreasing (there may be a reluctance to have children in an insecure lifestyle); and women's attitudes have moved away from their traditional image of mother and housewife. An increasing number of live births are taking place outside of marriage (31% in 2001—about a half of these to cohabiting couples). Also, two groups of women have had an increase in fertility—middle-class women in their 30s, and teenagers of working-class parents. This latter group is the cause of considerable concern and the focus of current social policy.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

There are social class differences in attitudes toward pregnancy. For those in the "middle class", it is becoming increasingly the norm for a first pregnancy to take place in the woman's 30s. This is less the norm for lower socioeconomic groups, and teenage pregnancy is becoming less unusual in areas of the cities where there are high rates of unemployment. Abortion is legal up to 24 weeks unless the fetus is regarded as having a severe impairment, in which case it can occur at any time with a supportive medical judgment. People regard miscarriage as a "loss" and a time for expressions of sympathy and support. Pregnancy and childbirth are heavily medicalized in Britain. The development of in-vitro fertilization (IVF) and other fertility treatments has led to service demands upon the NHS. Such services are viewed as a right of citizenship (Shaw, 2002). There is still stigma associated with infertility, but this has reduced significantly in recent years. Similarly, pregnancy and childbirth are regarded as times of risk, both by the medical professions and by many women themselves. Pregnancy is monitored regularly by health professionals, both by midwifery services in the community and by regular ultrasound scanning of the developing fetus and examination in a hospital setting. Smoking and drinking alcohol are regarded as activities that put the fetus at risk and there is a strong stigma associated with any engagement in such activities during pregnancy. Friends and family can be particular agents of "social order" in this respect. Indeed, there has been some work suggesting that such restrictions on the activities of the pregnant woman lead to a sense of losing control over her own life (Bowen, 2001). The vast majority of births, 98%, take place in hospital. Less than 8% of births in Britain are without any medical intervention and a higher percentage of these are associated with home births. There is government concern over the increasing number of cesarean births in recent years (Lane, 1995). Healthy newborn babies delivered in hospital are generally allowed home after 2–3 days, though mothers can opt to stay in hospital for longer if they wish.

#### **Infancy**

Infancy is not a clearly defined category in Britain. However, there is a general view that infants are those between the ages of birth and 5, at which point they start primary school. Infancy is generally broken down in the public mind into three categories: baby, toddler (from taking first steps to developing the ability to run, skip, and jump—the term is derived from the "toddling" walk of the child), and childhood. Health Visitors monitor the initial development of the baby. Health professionals heavily promote breastfeeding, and most mothers will breastfeed for the first 18 weeks (the period of paid maternity leave allowed from work, though many employers offer additional unpaid leave, some up to a year). Subsequent development is monitored by GPs, who carry out immunization. Infants are immunized at the ages of 2, 3, and 4 months against tetanus, diphtheria, whooping cough, hemophilus influenzae type B (HiB), and polio. At 12–18 months they receive vaccination against measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR), which they are also vaccinated against a second time at between 3 and 4 years when they will also receive additional vaccinations against diphtheria, tetanus, and polio. Vaccination take-up is high, over 80%, although the MMR take-up has dropped below this level in some areas in the last year over fears of links between the combined vaccination and autism. This has resulted in isolated outbreaks of measles during 2002. If taken ill, children will usually expect to receive separate specialist secondary care services.

There is little government support or provision of day care for children under the age of 3 in Britain. Childcare facilities do, of course, exist, and are run by private individuals, companies, and by local authorities. Extended families, where in existence locally, may also play a part. The cost of day-care varies across Britain, but £25 per day—2002 prices—(approximately US\$36) is a good guide. This means that the low-paid or those with more than one child not living in an extended family relationship where there is support from those retired, may be financially better off if one parent remains at home. Labor mobility has reduced the number of available family members locally who could take on a childcare role. The main caretaker is usually the mother. The state does provide free preschool (during the school term only) for children aged 4 (or aged 3 if in an area defined as having poor educational performance). Children start full-time education from age 5.

In post-modern Britain, many of the social contacts that parents have may be other parents whose children attend the same day care.

### **Childhood**

Childhood in Britain is a period of both protection and exclusion. Children's lack of competence in the highly specialized differentiated world of adult activity in this country provides an explanation for children's exclusion and the protectiveness that accompanies it (Mayall, 1996). It is true to say that the daily lives of children are structured through the organization of their parents' time (particularly when both parents work), although childhood is also a time when there is protection from the world by social and economic provision. Schooling from the age of 5 has the dual role of providing the education to enable them to function in the adult world and to protect them during the day while their parents are at work. Childhood is also seen as a time for developing interpersonal skills and relationships as well as providing creative space of their own. Particularly in early childhood, children's imagination is actively fostered by adults—Santa Claus really does come down the chimney and Mickey Mouse really does live in Disneyland. There is a desire amongst parents to extend this period of innocence as long as possible.

#### **Adolescence**

There is no legal definition of adolescence in Britain. The Children Act of 1989 covers everyone from birth to age 18, the legal age of consent. Legally, children are deemed to have the capacity to tell right from wrong from the age of 14. However, this age of legal responsibility was recently reviewed following concerns raised by the murder of the toddler Jamie Bulger by two children who were 10 and 11, and by other cases (including a rape committed by an 11 year old). There is still a presumption of incapacity for children between the ages of 10 and 14 in Britain. However, legally, children in this age bracket can be deemed to have, what is quaintly termed, "mischievous discretion." Here it is for the court to decide in individual cases whether the child knew the consequences of his/her actions and knew right from wrong.

In the mind of the general public the "lay distinction" between children and adolescents is in some sense distinguished by the direction of protection. Children need to be protected from dangers in society, whereas society needs to be protected against the dangers posed by adolescents. This is in part a perceptual, rather than a real issue as groups of adolescents playing or moving around the streets is not uncommon. However, in some, particularly inner city areas, school truants have been linked to crime and vandalism, particularly in the popular press. Mugging and theft for/of mobile phones, in particular, has strong links with adolescent age children (mainly adolescents stealing from other children), as does "joy riding" (fast driving in stolen cars). As a policy response the government has re-enforced the principle of parental responsibility. Parents are liable for fines imposed upon their children, and recent proposals have been made to impose reductions on the receipt of state benefits for parents whose children are truant from school.

Inoculation continues into later childhood, with children aged between 13 and 14 years receiving a Heaf test for tuberculosis and a BGC (Bacillus of Calmette and Guerin) vaccination if indicated. Also, children aged 15–18 receive a booster inoculation to protect against tetanus, diphtheria, and polio.

### **Adulthood**

Health-related issues in adulthood are varied, and in recent years a shift in emphasis has taken place to a demand for the right to be healthy. As society has become adept at problem-solving within the medical realm, a discourse has developed in which health is seen as a basic human need and medical care is perceived as a basic human right. Related to this is the notion of individual responsibility, which is partly reflected nowadays in the attention given to self-help and complementary therapies; aromatherapy, massage, shiatsu, yoga and relaxation, and acupuncture, for example, have all become popular alternative forms of therapy. Within adult mental health creative therapies, such as art and horticultural therapies, are a developing area. In conjunction with this is the increasing number of fitness centres within the United Kingdom and increasing numbers of people attending them. Gender-related issues

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 605**

include concern about menopause and hormone replacement therapy (HRT), which has received mounting attention. Concerns have also been raised regarding the over "medicalisation" of this natural change within a woman's body, whereby women are seen more sexually and socially obsolete, and medically and emotionally out of control. Studies show that HRT prevents osteoporosis and may significantly reduce the risk of coronary artery disease, but they also indicate that HRT may increase a woman's risk for breast cancer.

Domestic abuse in the United Kingdom, either physical or verbal, is becoming recognized as a health issue for a significant minority of women and children. Most women experiencing domestic violence are not identified in medical records. Abusive relationships are still very much seen as a "private" affair, one where intervention has unclear boundaries. Women's services within mental health is a developing area, concentrating upon a service that identifies the unique needs and demands of women, including safety within in-patient and residential settings. In particular, motherhood and mental health is now a recognized area of need, including post-natal depression. Men's health has, in recent years, been receiving attention both in the media and in the academic literature. The demarcation between the health of a man and that of a woman, however, is that men's health is more closely associated with culture (and work) and women's, with nature (and health). Prostate cancer has become an area of concern for men; 22,000 men in the United Kingdom are newly diagnosed with this each year. The incidence of testicular cancer has doubled in the past 20 years. Depression also is widespread but more often goes unrecognized as a condition in men than it does in women. Furthermore, the effects of alcohol on the body are becoming an increasing medical concern within both genders; young women now drink more frequently than ever. Unequal access to medical care within society tends to be the experience of those individuals suffering from a mental health condition, rather than being unequal in terms of gender. Inequalities exist also in terms of social, economic, and environmental disadvantage. Despite overall improvements in health, the gap between socially disadvantaged and affluent sections of the population has widened. A significant movement within healthcare taking place at present is the recognition and need to involve users at all stages of their care. This spans the whole NHS to ensure the needs of clients are met, and a more pro-active role in their treatment is taken by clients.

#### **The Aged**

"The aged" are structurally defined in Britain with mandatory retirement at age 65, when the state retirement pension is also payable. However, those aged 65 in Britain often do not see themselves as elderly and generally reserve that phrase for those aged 75 and over. Life expectancy and general health have increased for all age groups and the numbers aged over 80 is increasing every year. Because of the good health of those in their late 60s, the government is currently considering introducing flexibility on retirement age. This is important because a longer retirement means that more resources are required to fund it. A more flexible retirement age would also provide more scope for individual choice in this respect.

Income in retirement is linked to income in working life. Although there is a state pension, it provides a very basic income and the expectation is that this will be used to supplement a private or employment-based pension scheme. The current focus on "welfare to work" itself tends to exclude those who have retired. Quality of life in retirement, and social status, is still linked strongly to income.

The elderly are the major consumers of Britain's NHS. There is an association between incapacity and increasing old age; those over 80 consume 27 times the health and social care resources as those between the ages of 14 and 44. Those over 75 are also heavy drug users, with an average of 12 prescriptions per year (Glennerster, 1997). The major medical problems of the elderly are related to their age: age-related healing and visual impairment, cognitive impairment, and cerebral vascular diseases and associated dementia. There are also skeletal problems resulting from arthritis and osteoporosis, which give rise to mobility issues. Some of these diseases and problems can be found in those younger than 65, but the incidence increases with age and concerns with mobility are particularly focused upon those over the age of 75. Labor mobility has meant that there is less likelihood of the children of the elderly living locally to them, and consequently, there is only limited practical support that the elderly can expect to receive from family members. This places increasing reliance upon primary health and social care services.

#### **Dying and Death**

Attitudes toward death within Britain have undergone something of a change over the years. Now viewed less as part of the natural birth–life–death cycle, death is increasingly viewed as the result of a pathological condition, caught up in medicine and disease. Although the dominant religion in Britain remains Protestant, the rise in secularization and the decline in religious influence and practice has led to an increased fear of death as an "end." This may be linked to the increased value placed on health in British society. Regardless of what condition a human is suffering from, attitudes toward death mean that it must be fought at all costs. The concept of euthanasia is an extremely political area. Although voluntary euthanasia is illegal in the United Kingdom, there are conflicting views concerning this. GPs are allowed to administer a potentially lethal dose of pain killing drugs to relieve pain and suffering, but with no intention to kill. This has been both a political and moral high ground in recent years. Public concerns sway between accepting voluntary euthanasia as a personal choice, and freedom to help people die in dignity and pain free. Other attitudes raise concerns that any system of legalized killing would be open to abuse. This sits very closely with treatment of those suffering from long-term, life-threatening illnesses, such as cancer and HIV/AIDS. Hospice or palliative care services are offered to the individual, which for some may mean living in a cared environment whilst "waiting to die." The type of care offered by these services is predominantly focused upon pain control to develop a quality of life for the person during the final stages of the illness. Included within hospice care are family support and bereavement services.

Bereavement within Britain is taken as an expected process a person will enter after losing someone to death, and is an acceptable process for an individual to experience. This is often a long and complex ordeal, especially with the loss of children or unexpected loss, and is often dealt with over a period of time, and for some, with the aid of supporting voluntary organizations. There are also now specialized services, such as the National Association of Widows, the Gay Bereavement Project, and Jewish Bereavement counseling. The attitudes toward the the loss of a child are seen as the most traumatic and profound of all losses. Parental loss of a child is seen as psychologically and biologically the same following the death of a child at any age, from miscarriage to adulthood.

Suicide within Britain is seen not as an act of will but rather as influenced by an individual's mental capacity. Someone who attempts suicide is in need of help, and there are services available to help address this.

The body is treated respectfully following death. It will be taken to a chapel of rest, either at the hospital (if that is where the person died) or to a funeral director. The body is then subsequently transported for purposes of cremation or burial. Cremation is becoming the more usual means of disposal of remains in Britain. A religious service will be held at the chapel and/or church prior to cremation or burial.

## **REFERENCES**

- Bowen, K. (2001). *Infant feeding: Maternal choice or social control?* Unpublished Master by research and thesis dissertation, University of Nottingham, U.K.
- Butler, J., & Calnan, M. (2000). Health and health policy. In J. Baldock, N. Manning, S. Miller, & S. Vickerstaff (Eds.), *Social policy*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Engel, G. L. (1977). The need for a new medical model: A challenge for biomedicine. *Science, 196*(4286), 120–135.
- Fox, J., & Benzeval, M. (1995). Perspectives on social variations in health. In M. Benzeval, K. Judge, & M. Whitehead (Eds.), *Tackling inequalities in health: An agenda for action* (Chap. 2). London: Kings Fund.
- Glennerster, H. (1997). *Paying for welfare*. London: Harvester.
- Lane, K. (1995). The medical model of the body as a site of risk: A case study of childbirth. In J. Gabe (Ed.), *Medicine health and risk*. Oxford: Blackwell.
- Mayall, B. (1996). *Children, health and the social order*. Milton Keynes, U.K.: Open University Press.
- Parker, G. (1990). *With due care and attention*. London: Family Policy Studies Centre.
- Rimmer, L., & Wicks, M. (1985). The challenge of change: Demographic trends, the family and social policy. In H. Glennerster (Ed.), *The future of the welfare state*. Aldershot, U.K.: Gower.
- Shaw, I. (2002). How lay are lay beliefs? *Health, 6*(3), 287–299.
- Shaw, I., & Middleton, H. (2001). Recognising depression in primary care, *Journal of Primary Care Mental Health, 5*, 2, 24–27.
- Shaw, I., & Shaw, G. (1993). Demography, nursing and community care: A review of the evidence. *Journal of Advanced Nursing, 18*, 1212–1218.