#### **Introduction 125**

- Lock, M. (1998). Perfecting society: Reproductive technologies, genetic testing, and the planned family in Japan. In M. Lock & P. Kaufert (Eds.), *Pragmatic women and body politics* (pp. 206–239). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Lock, M. (2002). Utopias of health, eugenics, and germline engineering. In M. Nichter & M. Lock (Eds.), *New horizons in medical anthropology: Essays in honour of Charles Leslie* (pp. 239–266). Reading, UK: Harwood Academic.
- Lock, M., & Kaufert, P. (1998). *Pragmatic women and body politics*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Martin, E. (1987). *The Woman in the body: A cultural analysis of reproduction*. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
- Nichter, M. (1996). Pharmaceuticals, the commodification of health, and the health-care medicine use transition. In M. Nichter & M. Nichter (Eds.), *Anthropology and international health: Asian case studies* (pp. 265–328). Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach.
- Nichter, M. (1998). The mission within the madness: Self-inititated medicalization as expression of agency. In M. Lock & P. Kaufert (Eds.), *Pragmatic women and body politics* (pp. 327–353). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Nichter, M. (2001). The social relations of therapy management. In M. Nichter & M. Lock (Eds.), *Critical interpretations of globalized health knowledge, policies, and practices: Festschrift in honour of Charles Leslie*. Amsterdam: Gordon & Breach.
- Oakley, A. (1980). *Women confined*: *Towards a sociology of childbirth*. New York: Schocken Books.
- Oakley, A. (1984). *The captured womb: A history of the medical care of pregnant women*. New York and Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
- Ong, A. (1988). The production of possession: Spirits and the multinational corporation in Malaysia. *American Ethnologist, 15*, 28–42.
- O'Neil, J., & Kaufert, P. (1990). The politics of obstetric care: The Inuit experience. In P. Handwerker (Ed.), *Birth and power: Social change and the politics of reproduction* (pp. 53–68). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- O'Neil, J., & Kaufert, P. (1995). Irniktakpunga!: Sex determination and the Inuit struggle for birthing rights in Northern Canada. In F. D. Ginsburg & R. Rapp (Eds.), *Conceiving the New World Order* (pp. 59–73). Berkeley: University of California Press.

- Pigg, S. L. (1997). Authority in translation: Finding, knowing, naming, and training "traditional birth attendants" in Nepal. In R. E. Davis-Floyd & C. F. Sargent (Eds.), *Childbirth and authoritative knowledge: Cross-cultural perspectives* (pp. 233–262). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Pigg, S. L. (2002). Too bold, too hot: Crossing "culture" in AIDS prevention in Nepal. In M. Nichter & M. Lock (Eds.), *New horizons in medical anthropology: Essays in honour of Charles Leslie* (pp. 58–80). Reading, UK: Harwood Academic.
- Rapp, R. (1999). One new reproductive technology, multiple sites: How feminist methodology bleeds into everyday life. In A. E. Clarke & V. L. Olesen (Eds.), *Revisioning women, health and healing: Feminist, cultural and technoscience perspectives* (pp. 119–135). New York and London: Routledge.
- Rapp, R., Heath, D., & Taussig, K. (2001). Genealogical disease: Where hereditary abnormality, biomedical explanation, and family responsibility meet. In S. Franklin & S. MacKinnon (Eds.), *Relative matters: New directions in the study of kinship*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Romalis, S. (1981). *Childbirth: Alternatives to medical control*. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Rose, N. (1994). Medicine, history, and the present. In C. Jones & R. Porter (Eds.), *Reassessing Foucault: Power, medicine and the body*. London: Routledge.
- Sargent, C. F. (1989). *Maternity, medicine, & power: Reproductive decisions in urban Benin*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. (1992). *Death without weeping: The violence of everyday life in Brazil*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Sullivan, D. A. (2001). *Cosmetic surgery: The cutting edge of commercial medicine in America*. London: Rutgers University Press.
- Swartz, L., & Levett, A. (1987). Political repression and children in South Africa: The social construction of damaging effects. *Social Science and Medicine, 28*, 741–750.
- Szasz, T. (1961). The Myth of Mental illness. New York: Harper & Row.
- Young, A. (1995). *The harmony of illusions: Inventing post-traumatic stress disorder*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Zola, I. (1972). Medicine as an institution of social control. *Sociological Review, 20*, 487–504.

# **Phenomenology of Health and Illness**

#### **Gay Becker**

### **INTRODUCTION**

The last quarter of the 20th century has seen a shift in the social sciences, especially in anthropology, from objectified descriptions of the body in health and illness to subjective, in-depth explications of the body as lived. The experience of health and illness has been a central theme in medical anthropology in particular, and has been mirrored in other social and health science disciplines as well, including sociology, philosophy, nursing, and social medicine (Benner, 1994; A. Frank, 1995, Toombs, 1987, 1993; Turner, 1992, 1996; Williams & Bendelow, 1998). This shift in how health is viewed by social scientists is part of a broader interpretive turn within the social sciences that has heralded a focus on experience of all sorts. Within this interpretive, phenomenological realm, medical anthropology and cultural anthropology have been closely entwined since the rise of this perspective. In cultural anthropology Bruner (1986, p. 5) has characterized the anthropology of experience: "Lived experience … as thought and desire, word and image, is the primary reality."

Illness can be seen as one type of experience. A variety of terms have been used to describe work that falls within the domain of the phenomenology of health and illness, including lived experience, embodied experience, and bodily distress. Some of this work examines experience, or sensation, within the immediate cultural context, while other work seeks to connect experience with its political and economic implications. What all of this work has in common is an emphasis on how some sort of distress is experienced and expressed through the body and in everyday life. Thus, a key element of a phenomenological approach is not only on experience but on the meanings that attach to that experience, as well.

The phenomenology of health and illness encompasses many topics within medical anthropology such as healing, death and dying, and violence, to name only a few. In this entry I will touch on work in a wide range of areas, including relevant work in cultural anthropology that cross-fertilizes with medical anthropology.

## **THEORETICAL AND METHODOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES**

The roots of the current emphasis on the phenomenology of health and illness lie in the field of philosophy. Numerous philosophers have addressed questions that are phenomenological in nature, including Dilthey, Hegel, Husserl, Heidegger, James, Merleau-Ponty, Peirce, Sartre, and Shutz. Central to the phenomenological approach has been an effort to incorporate notions of culture into phenomenological constructs. The term *phenomenology* refers to the distinction introduced by Kant between *phenomena*, which are the appearances of reality in consciousness, and *noumena*, which are the things-in-themselves, independent of consciousness (Bidney, 1973). The term itself was first used by Hegel in his *Phenomenology of Mind* in 1807, a record of the "spiritual anthropology of man derived from a comparative study of the history of human culture" (Bidney, 1973, p. 110).

Edmund Husserl, widely credited with the rise of phenomenology, viewed all modern philosophy as originating in the Cartesian Meditations. He regarded the task of philosophy as providing a view to understanding how an autonomous philosophy and science are possible, and sought to develop a rigorous science of transcendental phenomenology. Unlike Descartes' temporary suspension of the certitude of existence implicit in the experience of the world, based on the Cartesian ego who doubts the existence of the world, Husserl viewed this suspension as a permanent attitude toward the world in which the existential world was reduced through the "phenomenological reduction." He used this concept to describe a basic phenomenological procedure of bracketing all judgments about the ontological nature of perceived objects and reducing what is given in cognitive experience to the essentials of its form (eidetic reduction), ultimately bracketing the knower him or herself, and leading to transcendental reduction (Husserl, 1960). (For anthropological discussions, see Bidney, 1973; M. Jackson, 1996; Watson & Watson-Franke, 1985).

The concept of the lifeworld, or *lebenswelt*, introduced by Husserl, is the world as given in experience prior to critical reflection, the world as experienced, including the experience of the world of nature as well as the world of culture (Husserl, 1970). Husserl gave ontological priority to the lifeworld over the world of theoretical thought and explanations (*Weltanschauung*) in an effort to make philosophy more responsive to the demands of human life and to break down the division between explanatory models and everyday life (M. Jackson, 1996, p. 13). In addressing the lifeworld as he formulated phenomenological sociology, Schutz (1967) developed the concept of intersubjectivity, which refers to what is common to individuals. Arguing for the critical place of the lifeworld in ethnography, M. Jackson (1996, pp. 7–8) describes it as "that domain of everyday, immediate social existence and practical activity, with all its habituality, its crises, its vernacular and idiomatic character, its biographical particularities, its decisive events and indecisive strategies, which theoretical knowledge addresses but does not determine." In developing his theoretical approach in medical anthropology, Kleinman (1992, p. 172) has coined the term, "local moral worlds" to capture the lived experience of the lifeworld.

#### **Phenomenology of the Body 127**

The concept of radical empiricism, as discussed by James and Husserl, includes cultural phenomena. In radical empiricism, experience of the essence of a cultural phenomenon is combined with experience of subjective existence to yield the meaning of the phenomenon in the life of the subject (Bidney, 1973, pp. 126–127). In applying radical empiricism to anthropology, M. Jackson (1989, p. 3) differentiates radical empiricism from traditional empiricism by the emphasis in the former on intersubjective experience, stressing the importance of the ethnographer's interactions with those he or she lives with and studies, and clarifying the ways in which anthropological knowledge is grounded in practical, personal, and participatory experience in the field as much as in detached observations.

Embodiment, as one aspect of phenomenology, can be construed both as a method and also as an emerging theoretical perspective in anthropology. Merleau-Ponty (1962) viewed phenomenology as a method, with embodiment as one aspect of that method. Embodiment refers to being, to living through the body, to the state of being embodied. Merleau-Ponty attributes a transcendental function to the body-subject: the body is the basis of the constitution of the human world. He refers to automatic bodily functioning as the preobjective self, a culturally constituted way of being-in-the-world. In interpreting Merleau-Ponty's work, Dillon (1991, Preface, p. xv), observes: "the body contributes to the world we live in but the reverse is also true: the world contributes to the constitution of our body." Bourdieu's work (1977, 1984, 1990) represents a shift from a focus on the body as a source of symbolism to an awareness of the body as the locus of social practice. Recent work in anthropology examines embodiment and social practice (for example, A. Becker, 1995; G. Becker, 1997, 2000; Csordas, 1990, 1993, 1994a, 1994b, 1997; Desjarlais, 1992a; Devisch, 1993; G. Frank, 2000; M. Jackson, 1989, 1996, 1998; Roseman, 1991; Stoller, 1989b, 1995, 1997).

### **PHENOMENOLOGY OF THE BODY**

Accompanying the interpretive turn of the last 25 years has been a growing emphasis on the body as a topic of social investigation. The work of Mauss (1935) has been rediscovered in this shift, with his conceptualization of habitus, the way social structure leaves its imprint on individuals through bodily training. Mauss maintained that bodily sensations and movements are affected by culture through acquired habits and somatic tacts. Elias's (1939/1978) work on the social development of bodily comportment and physical correctness was both a complement to and demonstration of bodily processes described by Mauss.

Today the body is a central focus of work in medical anthropology. The first step in addressing the body is to differentiate between representations of the body and the experiencing body. Turner (1992, p. 43) notes that anthropologists were traditionally concerned primarily with using the body as part of a social classificatory scheme rather than with understanding the phenomenology of the lived body, emphasizing how the body is represented and how culture is "inscribed" on the body rather than focus on the lived body. Scheper-Hughes and Lock (1987) captured a shift in the emerging emphasis on the body when they identified three bodies, or three different theoretical approaches and epistemologies: phenomenology (individual body, the lived self), structuralism and symbolism (the social body), and poststructuralism (the body politic). (For reviews of literature on the body, see Csordas, 1999; A. Frank, 1990; Lock, 1993; Lock & Scheper-Hughes, 1993; Scheper-Hughes & Lock, 1987; Turner, 1991, 1992.)

Concurrent with the interpretive turn that began some 40 years following the work of Mauss and Elias, anthropologists began turning in greater numbers to embodiment as a theoretical framework for the study of experience, and a wealth of literature has subsequently emerged on the experiencing body. A number of theoretical developments have emerged in phenomenological anthropology. Csordas (1994a, 1994b) articulated an approach grounded in Merleau-Ponty's concept of embodiment, which he designated *cultural phenomenology*, to refer to the synthesis of embodied experience and cultural meanings. In his extrapolation of Merleau-Ponty's concept of embodiment, Csordas emphasized its particularly anthropological application, viewing as a basic premise the necessity of understanding the body as the existential ground of culture, and that to use this model one must take "embodied experience [as] the starting point for analyzing human participation in a cultural world" (Csordas, 1993, p. 135).

Interrogating what is meant by experience has been one aspect of the development of a phenomenological approach. Although there is an extensive literature on the anthropology of experience (for example, Turner & Bruner, 1986), questions of what constitutes experience have recently been revisited by Desjarlais (1996), who

#### **128 Phenomenology of Health and Illness**

questions whether "experience," as used by most social scientists, is a universal phenomenon. Tracing what experience has meant to social scientists, he concludes that it has come to convey "an aesthetic of integration, coherence, renewal, and transcendent meaning—of tying things together through time" (p. 87), and juxtaposes this characterization with the disjointed existence of mentally ill, homeless people.

Taking the embodiment construct beyond the individual into social collectivities has been an important feature of recent work in anthropology. Csordas (1993, pp. 137–139) has argued that embodiment forms the intersection between individual and collective experience, combining it with Bourdieu's understanding of the habitus as an unself-conscious orchestration of practices: "embodiment need not be restricted to the personal or dyadic micro-analysis customarily associated with phenomenology, but is relevant as well to social collectivities." This idea has also been developed by numerous ethnographers (see, for example, A. Becker, 1994, 1995; G. Becker, 1997, 2000; Csordas, 1994b, 1997; Desjarlais, 1992a; Devisch, 1993; Roseman, 1991; Scheper-Hughes, 1992; Stoller, 1995).

The use of metaphor has been an important focus of anthropological work. According to Fernandez (1974), metaphors frame and structure meaning: they have the ability to bind the past and future together and the ability to give the impression of coherence or "return to the whole" when exploration of the metaphor is fulfilled. The body is metaphor's ground: body metaphors provide a way to communicate bodily sensation, as well as social, cultural, and political meaning (G. Becker, 1997; M. Jackson, 1989). M. Jackson (1983, 1989) developed the idea of metaphor as praxis in his work on the Kuranko, and the embodied nature of metaphor has been explored by medical anthropologists (G. Becker, 1997; Csordas, 2000; Kirmayer, 1992; Low, 1994).

The linkage between embodiment and narrative has also received considerable attention in anthropology. The embodied aspects of narrative as expressed through the life story have received in-depth treatment by G. Frank (1979, 2000) and by Watson and Watson-Franke (1985). An overall approach to biography in anthropology has been rooted in phenomenology (Langness & Frank, 1981). Csordas (1994a) has drawn on Merleau-Ponty's (1962) idea that language is one way of disclosing the phenomenological essence of embodiment, to suggest that the body be placed in a paradigmatic position complementary to the text rather than subsumed under the text metaphor; by doing so, body and textuality can be viewed as corresponding methodological fields, a suggestion also made by Stoller (1994). Similarly, M. Jackson (1996, p. 39) views narrative as a form of being as much as a way of saying, a crucial and constitutive part of the ongoing activity of the lifeworld. Kirmayer (1992) calls attention to the inescapable circularity between the order of the body and the order of the text, or narrative. Although narrative can be understood as only a partial expression of experience, it does provide one avenue for the exploration of emotion and the inchoate (G. Becker, 1997). Addressing the experience of illness and its narrative expressions has been a particular focus of phenomenological work, in particular individuals' efforts to reconcile or make sense of suffering (Ablon, 1999; G. Becker, 1997; Bluebond-Langner, 1996; Crossley & Crossley, 2001; Farmer, 1988; A. Frank, 1995; Garro, 1992; B. Good, 1977, 1994; Gordon, 1990; Gordon & Paci, 1997; Kleinman, 1988, 1992; Kleinman & Kleinman, 1994; Mattingly, 1998; Mattingly & Garro, 2000).

The literature on performance uses theories of embodiment and narrative in anthropology in its discussions, but these works emphasize the performative aspects of embodiment rather than embodiment itself. Performances are viewed as constituting action, that is, they are a tangible expression of embodiment (G. Becker, 1997; Bruner, 1986; Laderman & Roseman, 1996; Palmer & Jankowiak, 1996; Stoller, 1994). Work on performance is relevant to a larger discussion of phenomenology as it links to imagination, and several streams of research have been identified that contribute to a theory of performance (Csordas, 1996). (For examples of phenomenological work that emphasize performance see Csordas, 1997; Laderman & Roseman, 1996; Roseman, 1991; Stoller, 1989a, 1995.) Examined as a cohesive body of research, phenomenological emphases on narrative, metaphor, performance, and the bridge to social collectivities represent a rich, cohesive, and rapidly expanding assemblage of scholarship in medical anthropology.

## **ETHNOGRAPHIC USES OF THE LIVED BODY**

The body, as it is culturally conceptualized, directly affects understandings of self, and ultimately of health and illness. In keeping with Merleau-Ponty's (1962)

#### **The Body in Distress 129**

concept of being-in-the-world as culturally constituted, phenomenologically oriented ethnography has examined the body as cultural and its implications for self and society. In *Do Kamo* (1979, p. 24), Maurice Leenhardt's study of the Canaque, one of two early ethnographies written from a phenomenological perspective (see also Levy-Bruhl, 1979), the Canaque "fails to delimit his body and to circumscribe it to separate it from the world." The body is mythic, a support for the "living one," and is linked to all the person's relatives, "attached by all the fibers of his being to the group" (1979, p. 94). Leenhardt suggests that it was only with the coming of missionaries and their religion that the Canaque recognized the body and thus the self, or person, as individual. A. Becker (1994, 1995), studying Fiji Islanders, observes a similar community orientation of the body, in which the body is the responsibility of the feeding and caring microcommunity, and its form consequently shows the work of the community rather than of the self. She notes that body shape not only suggests personal abilities, but reflects connection to the social network and its ability to nourish, as well. Desjarlais (1992a, pp. 31–32), in describing a Yolmo shaman in Nepal, notes that he not only *has* a body, he *is* a body, and thus feels, knows, tastes, acts, and remembers. Among the Yolmo, the imagery of the body parallels the workings of Yolmo social groups. Embodied esthetics of everyday life encompass Yolmo epistemology (how one goes about knowing self and other) and the local ethos (dominant cultural styles of experiencing and expressing felt experience) (Desjarlais, 1992a).

Such views of the body contrast with the individualized body of U.S. society and its linkage to sense of self, with its emphasis on individual responsibility, thinking rather than feeling, and bodily control (G. Becker, 1997). Myerhoff's (1978, p. 1) classic work, *Number Our Days*, opens with an ode to bodily knowledge, with the words of Basha, an old Jewish woman living in California: "Every morning I wake up in pain. I wiggle my toes. Good. They still obey. I open my eyes. Good. I can see. Everything hurts but I get dressed. I walk down to the ocean. Good. It's still there. Now my day can start. About tomorrow I never know. After all, I'm eighty-nine. I can't live forever." This statement is a direct illustration of Csordas' (1993, p. 138) term, somatic modes of attention, which he defines as "culturally elaborated ways of attending to and with one's body in surroundings that include the embodied presence of others." Csordas' (1994b) work on the Charismatic Renewal in the United States is a testament to this U.S. emphasis on self, in which self processes operate within an organized ritual system. A. Becker (1994) contrasts these differing emphases: whereas the cultivation of the body is an expression of self in the United States, in Fiji it is the cultivation of social relations that is given emphasis.

Examination of the role of sensory perception has been one focus of a phenomenological approach (Stoller, 1989b), and in particular with respect to health and illness, including music and everyday sounds (Chuengsatiansup, 1999; Daniel, 1991; Desjarlais, 1992a; Kleinman, 1995; Roseman, 1990, 1991; Stoller, 1996). Chuengsatiansup (1999, p. 281), in a study of Kui women in Thailand, introduces a new theme into work on sensory perception, with an emphasis on how power relations of domination embedded in everyday sounds create a specific form of illness experience among politically vulnerable people.

### **THE BODY IN DISTRESS**

Understanding of oneself and one's world begins with the orderly functioning of the body (G. Becker, 1997). This known body has been described by Leder (1990) as "the absent body" that is taken for granted. But when the body and embodied knowledge become disordered through physical or emotional distress, the body is experienced in its immediacy, whether through pain, physical or emotional discomfort, or even through the absence of expected bodily feeling, such as Sacks (1984) and Murphy (1987) have described for their own experiences. Examining the body in distress has been a central motif in the burgeoning phenomenologically based literature in medical anthropology on a wide range of topics (for example, G. Becker, 1997; B. Good, 1994; Gordon, 1990; Gordon & Paci, 1997; Jenkins & Valiente, 1994; Kaufman, 1988a, 1988b; Kleinman, 1988, 1992; Kleinman & Kleinman, 1991; Ots, 1990, 1994; Pandolfi, 1990; Scheper-Hughes, 1992).

Illness disrupts embodied knowledge. G. Becker (1997) observes that when a serious illness occurs, sense of bodily wholeness disintegrates and individuals struggle to recreate a sense of bodily continuity in order to restore meaning to life. This disruption of takenfor-granted embodied knowledge challenges one's known and seemingly predictable world. Suffering arises not only from the experience of bodily disruption but from the effort to articulate that disruption, as well (G. Becker, 1997). The difficulty of putting suffering into words is especially noted in the literature on chronic pain (Garro, 1992; M. J. Good, Brodwin, Good, & Kleinman, 1992; J. Jackson, 1994; Kleinman, 1992). Phenomenological approaches have also been used to interpret the experience of specific illness syndromes such as nervios (Low, 1994), susto and fallen fontanelle (Castro & Eroza, 1998), and calor (Jenkins & Valiente, 1994).

Phenomenologically oriented work emphasizes the relationship between the esthetics of the known body and healing. Desjarlais (1992a, 1992b, p. 1105) demonstrates how healing by Yolmo shamans is directly tied to the experiencing body and "works to reinstate a visceral sense of harmony, completion, and vitality." Similarly, Roseman (1990, 1991) and Devisch (1993, 1996) trace embodied understandings of selves directly to healing practices, especially to dance forms, while Boddy (1988) finds that women regenerate sense of self and recontextualize experience through a diagnosis of possession and participation in curing rites such as trance. (Other phenomenological studies of healing include Briggs, 1996; Csordas, 1994b, 1996; Laderman & Roseman, 1996; McCallum, 1996.)

Considerable phenomenologically oriented work has been done on the interface between the lived body and biomedicine. A phenomenological approach highlights disjunctures between the practice and philosophy of biomedicine and the experiencing body, and especially the effects of these encounters on people in delegitimizing or destabilizing bodily knowledge and experience (for example, G. Becker, 1997, 2000; Becker & Kaufman, 1995; Estroff, 1991; M. J. Good et al., 1992; B. Good, 1994; Gordon & Paci, 1997; Kaufman, 1988b; Kleinman, 1988; Mattingly, 1998; Mattingly & Lawlor, 2001; Rhodes, McPhillips-Tangum, Markham, & Klenk, 1999; Toombs, 1987, 1993; K.Young, 1997). For example, K. Young (1997) provides a detailed description of how biomedicine intervenes and disregards the known body, and Mattingly (1998) demonstrates how therapeutic plots reshape people's understandings of their bodies and their health. This body of work also addresses the construct of resistance (Kleinman, 1995) and illustrates how people resist biomedical interpretations and how they act on their own behalf (G. Becker, 1997, 2000; Becker & Kaufman, 1995; Kleinman, 1988; Mattingly, 1998; Root & Browner, 2001). Most recently, a phenomenological approach has been applied to biotechnology (G. Becker, 2000; Csordas, 2000; Goslinga-Roy, 2000).

### **THE GENDERED BODY**

Phenomenological perspectives on the gendered body and feminist perspectives, with their emphasis on gender practices as sites of political struggle and critical agency, have coalesced in the recent past to produce work in medical anthropology. Rethinking the gendered body has entailed a feminist critique of philosophical phenomenology. Feminists argue that there is an implicit bias in classic phenomenology, that the body in question is the male body, and that the phenomenology portrayed is one of maleness; in response, they have developed new conceptualizations that greatly expand the usefulness of the phenomenological approach for ethnography (for example, Bigwood, 1991; Butler, 1989, 1993, 1997; Davis, 1997; Grosz, 1994; I. Young, 1989).

Feminist standpoints with perspectives on embodiment can be found in work on people's everyday lives, as well as in work specific to general health, reproductive health, and sexuality. Lee (1999) views the struggle of Chinese women with fat and fatigue as women's attempt to straddle two moral worlds, by trying to satisfy traditional expectations while simultaneously subscribing to new images of womanhood, resulting for these women in being disempowered. G. Becker (1997, 2000) applies a phenomenological approach to gender to demonstrate how societal ideals about gender pervade the lived body and the political and economic consequences when women and men discover infertility and turn to reproductive technologies. Embodied knowledge is reshaped through the use of technology, but at the same time, technologies become instruments of gender performance (G. Becker, 2000). Goslinga-Roy (2000), in studying embodied experience and surrogacy, illustrates how a notion of embodiment as ending at the skin enables the abstract language of ownership that frames surrogacy debates. She develops the idea of biographical embodiment to address how embodiment extends beyond the individual body. (Other phenomenologically oriented work on gender includes Behar, 1993; Behar & Gordon, 1995; Davis, 1997; G. Frank, 2000; Green, 1999; Inhorn, 1994, 1996; Scheper-Hughes, 1992; Shuttleworth, 2000, 2001, in press.)

### **THE BODY OF DIFFERENCE**

Since its inception in medical anthropology, a phenomenological approach has been applied to the study of

#### **Embodied Memory in Studies of Age and Terror/Violence 131**

physical difference and disability with great originality, by challenging conventional ideas about the body and about what being "normal" means. For example, Ablon (1984) has pointed out that the dwarf body is different but not disabled: dwarfs experience their bodies as complete and normal. G. Frank (1986, 2000), in her phenomenological life history study of a woman who was born without arms or legs, questions a view of this woman as missing body parts and describes how she asserts her fundamental normalcy. Other phenomenological work that addresses difference or disability include blindness (Ainlay, 1989), deafness (G. Becker, 1980; Preston, 1994), post-polio syndrome (Kaufert & Locker, 1990; Scheer & Luborsky, 1991), mobility impairments (Luborsky, 1995; Murphy, 1987), and disability more generally (Luborsky, 1994; Zola, 1982).

These works challenge not only societal ideas about physical difference or disability but hegemonic ideals about gender and sexuality, as well (see also Ablon, 1996; G. Frank, 2000). Shuttleworth (2000, 2001, in press) combines phenomenology with a post-structural approach to explore the experience of severely disabled men seeking sexual intimacy, while Willis, Miller, and Wyn (2001) develop the construct of gendered embodiment in their work on the differential meanings of cystic fibrosis for young men and women.

## **EMBODIED MEMORY IN STUDIES OF AGE AND TERROR/VIOLENCE**

The temporal dimension of people's lives plays an important part in understanding embodied health and illness. Phenomenology is less concerned with establishing what actually happened in the past than in exploring the past as a mode of present experience (M. Jackson, 1996, p. 38). People's historical experiences of their bodies is expressed through embodiment (Connerton, 1989). Memory not only reflects personal, subjective experience, it is socially constructed and present oriented, reshaping experience (Halbwachs, 1992). Lambek (1996, p. 235) suggests that memory be viewed as a cultural practice. Memories are powerful symbols of the self (Csordas, 1994b), permeated by people's views of how life has been and should be (G. Becker, 1997). Memories can be seen as incomplete, reshaped interpretations made in an effort to create a world that makes sense (Becker, Beyene, & Ken, 2000b). Memory is thus a critical aspect of embodiment.

Several distinct realms in medical anthropology in which embodied memory plays a central role are in the distressed body (discussed earlier), the lived experience of aging, and the experience of terror and violence. Phenomenological approaches to the aging body address the body both in health and in illness (G. Becker, 1994, 1997; Gadow, 1986; Hennessy, 1989; Rubinstein, 1989, 1990). In old age, embodied knowledge represents the accumulation of a lifetime of self-understanding. Kaufman (1986) characterizes this process among elders in the United States as "the ageless self." Luborsky (1995, p. 1457) notes, "The experience of present-day impairment is infused with a sense of being seamlessly connected to past, present, and future experiences and identities, both actual and idealized or expected." For those who have been healthy most of their lives, embodied knowledge is of a healthy body, but culture-specific views inform bodily expressions (Lamb, 2000; Mimica, 1996). Rubinstein (1989, 1990) found that for frail elders in the United States, their long-time homes had become embodied extensions of themselves.

Current infirmities represent obstacles to be worked around but also signal the approach of the end of life and bring about the contemplation of death, a phenomenological process that is rooted in the body and its memories (G. Becker, 1997, 2002). These processes are mediated through biographical work, for example after a stroke (Kaufman, 1988a, 1988b), or following the onset of blindness (Ainlay, 1989). The intimate connection between memory and preparation for death has been examined in work on a variety of cultural groups (G. Becker, 1994, 2002; Becker, Beyene, & Canalita, 2000; Becker et al., 2000b; Desjarlais, 1992a, 1992b; Myerhoff, 1978). Questions about embodiment have also been addressed for memory loss (Chatterji, 1998; Herskovits, 1995).

Embodied memory is a critical component of trauma arising out of terror and violence. Those memories refract the world through a lens altered by fear and mistrust and by physical and emotional pain (Daniel & Knudsen, 1995; Green, 1998). Traumatic memories revise the world people experience as an unspeakable, hostile, and deathridden place; the experiencing body becomes the site of conflicted memories, encompassing the need to remember as well as the desire to forget (Becker et al., 2000b).

A burgeoning literature has recently emerged in medical anthropology that addresses the complexity of embodied violence (Green, 1998), including, for example,

#### **132 Phenomenology of Health and Illness**

the effects of fear on widows in war-torn Guatemala (Green, 1999); martyrdom in Palestine (Pitcher, 1998); crimes against women in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina (Olujic, 1998); the effects of war and deprivation on children (Quesada, 1998; Scheper-Hughes, 1992); human rights politics in Tibet (Adams, 1998); terror warfare in Mozambique (Nordstrom, 1998); the cultural revolution in China (Kleinman & Kleinman, 1994); the experience of violence and its aftermath for Tamils (Daniel, 1994, 1996; Gronseth, 2001); the aftermath of genocide in Cambodia (Becker et al., 2000b; Hinton, 1998); rape in the United States (Winkler, 1994); and violence among HIV drug users (Bourgois, 1998).

## **FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THE POLITICS OF HUMAN SUFFERING**

Although the phenomenology of health and illness has been a central strand in medical anthropology's development over the past 25 years, in recent times there has been a decided shift in emphasis, away from studies that are limited to immediate experience and toward studies that encompass the political and economic ramifications of human suffering. M. Jackson (1989, 1996) and Abu-Lughod (1991) have used phenomenology to challenge basic constructs associated with Western thinking by questioning their relevance for cross-cultural work. M. Jackson (1996, p. 18) asks how might European thought (such as phenomenology) address a non-European world, and how might phenomenology outstrip its European origins by revalidating the everyday life of ordinary people and thus contribute to cross-cultural understanding, with direct implications for subaltern studies. Examples of such work include a focus on the toll in human suffering created by conflict, war, and hegemonic structures (Bourgois, 1995; Bourgois & Schonberg, 2000; Daniel, 1996; Das, Kleinman, Ramphele, & Reynolds, 2000; Das, Kleinman, Lock, Ramphele, & Reynolds, 2001; Farmer, 1996; Kleinman, Das, & Lock, 1997; Scheper-Hughes, 1992); an emphasis on collectivities, resistance, and action (G. Becker, 1997, 2000; Csordas, 1993, 1994b; Green, 1999; Ong, 1995; Root & Browner, 2001), the effects of public policies (Becker, Beyene, & Ken, 2000a), and recommendations for the alleviation of suffering in specific situations (Ablon, 1999; Bluebond-Langner, 1996).

In conclusion, conceptions of what constitutes a phenomenological approach in medical anthropology have emerged within a short period of time, with many theoretical developments. There has been a burgeoning of work in a great variety of directions. As medical anthropologists rethink and reshape the phenomenology construct, further theoretical developments are likely to be concentrated increasingly on the linkages between embodiment, the political subject, and political and economic effects, in both their global and local contexts.

### **ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

Preparation of this chapter was supported by grants R37 AG1114 4 and RO1 AG14152 from the National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Aging.

### **REFERENCES**

Ablon, J. (1984). *Little people in America*. New York: Praeger.

- Ablon, J. (1996). Gender response to neurofibromatosis 1. *Social Science & Medicine, 42*, 99–109.
- Ablon, J. (1999). *Living with genetic disorder: The impact of neurofibromatosis 1*. Westport, CT: Auburn House.
- Abu-Lughod, L. (1991). Writing against culture. In R. G. Fox (Ed.), *Recapturing anthropology: Working in the present*. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research.
- Adams, V. (1998). Suffering the winds of Lhasa: Politicized bodies, human rights, cultural difference, and humanism in Tibet. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 12*, 74–102.
- Ainlay, S. (1989). *Day brought back my night: Aging and new vision loss*. London: Routledge.
- Becker, A. E. (1994). Nurturing and negligence: Working on others' bodies in Fiji. In T. J. Csordas (Ed.), *Embodiment and experience: The existential ground of culture and self*. (pp. 100–115). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Becker, A. E. (1995). *Body, self, and society: The view from Fiji*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Becker, G. (1980). *Growing old in silence*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Becker, G. (1994). The oldest old: Autonomy in the face of frailty. *Journal of Aging Studies, 8*, 59–76.
- Becker, G. (1997). *Disrupted lives: How people create meaning in a chaotic world*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Becker, G. (2000). *The elusive embryo: How women and men approach new reproductive technologies*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Becker, G. (2002). Dying away from home: Quandaries of migration in two ethnic groups. *Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences*, *57*B, S79–S95.
- Becker, G., Beyene, Y., & Canalita, L. (2000). Immigrating for status in late life: Effects of globalization on Filipino American veterans. *Journal of Aging Studies, 14*, 273–291.