## **I**

There are two major arguments that appear to have shaped our thinking on ethics in governance: first, 'the publicness' of public administration is fully articulated if the administrators remain sensitive to their ethical commitments of contributing to the public well- being. This is easier said than done, given the political complexities in which administration is located. There has been a continuous decay in the traditional moral code as a result of 'the falling away' from religious belief. What appears to have significantly dented public administration is a decline in three moral qualities in relation to the conduct of governance, which are: 'optimism, courage and fairness tempered by charity'.1 This is elaborated further by Dwight Waldo in seeking to conceptualize public morality in governance. By providing a list of 12 obligations,2 Waldo defined 'public morality' as:

(1) obligation to the constitution, (2) obligation to law, (3) obligation to nation or country, (4) obligation to democracy, (5) obligation to organizational–bureaucratic norms, (6) obligation to profession and professionalism, (7) obligation to family and friends, (8) obligation to self, (9) obligation to middle- range collectivities, (10) obligation to public interest or general welfare, (11) obligation to humanity or the world, (12) obligation to religion or God.

Given the contextual nature of public administration, one has also to be careful in articulating 'public well- being', which is subject to change in view of new demands on governance. Since public administration is constantly being reinvented, it is theoretically impeding and empirically inconceivable to think of a universal model capable of providing a meaningful explanation of the reality.

 The second argument relates to the hegemonic presence of corruption in public administration all over the world. Regardless of various controlmechanisms, corruption is 'a particularly viral form of bureaupathology', which is 'debilitating' and also 'contagious'.3 This needs to be treated before it causes devastation to the organization. One can possibly think of specific administrative steps that evolve internally, but may not be adequate to conclusively root out the sources of corruption in administration, because of the prevalence of a wellentrenched mindset supporting deviation from established norms of public morality. Administrative reform is transitional, if not futile, unless it is backed by meaningful efforts at changing the overall political environment in which administration is grounded. So what it means is the dialectics of change involving administration and the socio- economic milieu, each shaping the other.

 The elaborate discussion of ethics in governance in India demonstrates that the issue has 'a much wider import than what happens in the different arms of government [and] . . . an across- the-board effort is [thus] needed to fight deviations from ethical norms'.4 Reiterating that mere internal intervention cannot be conclusive in eradicating the source of the administrative ills, the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, like its first counterpart, attributes the decline of ethical values in administration to the overall decadence of moral values in India's politics since independence. Besides the pernicious impact of colonialism on independent India's administration, there is no denying that public governance has become a casualty, largely due to its appropriation by narrow, partisan and sectional interests. Nonetheless, there have been serious endeavours in recent times not only to identify the sources of decadence, but also to devise mechanism for arresting such a decline. One can possibly refer to the political institutions like the Election Commission or the Supreme Court of India, among others, which have taken several steps since the late 1980s in an attempt to eliminate the sources of the abuse of power by the powerful. Similarly, the civil society clamour for cleansing the political system is another seriously pursued endeavour to challenge corruption in public life. These attempts shall yield results in a conducive environment because 'in the long run', as the Santhanam Committee concludes, 'the fight against corruption will succeed only to the extent to which a favourable social climate is created'.5 Ethics in governance is thus a goal that will remain elusive unless it is conceptualized and articulated in the overall political environment that critically influences Indian administration and its voice.

## **II**

The idea of constitutional morality holds the key to comprehending ethics in governance, where ethics is understood as critical moral values shaping a specific mindset, and being appreciative of responsibility and accountability. Given the fact that, in democracy, public functionaries are 'trustees of the people',6 the former is dialectically connected with the latter. The authority exercised by those in governance is thus not arbitrarily exercised, but is conceptually drawn from public interests. For a morally sensitive political order, appropriate laws and rules need to be made, and the public functionaries are also to be imbued with the required moral values, allowing the system to remain viable. The concern for public well- being is a key to perfect governance, which is conceivable if those responsible for governance are also made aware of their constitutional

obligations when in power. This is possible in two ways: on the one hand, an alert citizenry will not allow them to be deviant; on the other hand, stringent laws will be uniformly applied if the charge of the abuse of authority is proved beyond doubt. Laws are undoubtedly effective preventive instruments provided they are not short- circuited by the intervention of political bigwigs. It is true that punitive measures are restraining devices; they also create an environment in which civic virtues for upholding constitutional values are nurtured. The basic purpose is to generate an impulse for constitutional morality as perhaps the most reliable shield against an ethics deficit in governance. This was a belief that B R Ambedkar held dear even as early as when he presented the 1950 Constitution of India to the nation. It was John Dewey of Columbia University who provided him with ideological support in favour of his argument for social democracy, which was wider in connotation than political democracy. Like his academic mentor, John Dewey, Ambedkar also believed in the supremacy of constitutional values in democratic political systems. Mere codification of laws was not enough, as Ambedkar argued, unless 'there is public conscience to behave in accordance with Constitutional provisions [which] is more important that the Constitution itself '. In continuation of the argument, he further stated that 'the principles of democracy are for the people to respect the system of formation of Government, observance of laws, habit of independent thinking and observance of laws of the majority'.7

 What was critical for the survival of democracy was civility, a Dewey conceptualization that Ambedkar held dear while discharging his historical role. It called for tolerance, restraint and mutual accommodation in public life. Civility was thus 'a moderating influence which acts against the extremes of ideological politics'.8 In his perception, without civility, 'democracy becomes defunct' and he was also aware that the lack of a living democratic tradition in India was a serious deterrent in the context of rigid caste hierarchy. To transform a society of caste and communities into one of citizens was not an easy task. Nonetheless, he fulfilled his role by seeking to create 'a sense of constitutional morality' while defending his liberal agenda.9 Here too, Ambedkar was indebted to a classicist, George Grote,10 whom he quoted extensively in his speech of 4 November 1948 in the Constituent Assembly. Institutions of governance in a democracy, felt Grote,

lose salience [unless] there is diffusion of constitutional morality, not merely among the majority of any community, but throughout the whole . . . since any powerful and obstinate minority may render the working of a free institution impracticable, without being strong enough to conquer ascendancy for themselves.11

#### By constitutional morality, Grote meant

a paramount reverence for the forms of constitution, obedience to authority acting under and within these forms, yet combined with the habit of open speech, of action subject to definite legal control and unrestrained censure of those in public authorities . . . with a perfect confidence amidst bitterness of party contest that the forms of constitution will not be less sacred in the eyes of his opponents than his own.12

 This long quote from Grote's writings was surely an aid to Ambedkar when he defended a liberal democratic framework of constitutional governance in India, though he was aware that it was difficult to instil a sense of constitutional morality in India because democracy which 'complements constitutional morality . . . is only a top- dressing on an Indian soil which is essentially undemocratic'.13 In the absence of constitutional morality, the operation of the constitution, no matter how carefully written, 'tends to become arbitrary, erratic and capricious'.14 How to make the constitution an effective instrument of governance in such circumstances, asked Ambedkar? He was in favour of detailed provisions in the constitution to scuttle efforts at derailing it and challenging the fundamental constitutional values from which it derived its sustenance. In his defence, he thus argued that 'one can take the risk of omitting from the Constitution details of administration and leaving it for the Legislature to prescribe them . . . if the people are saturated with Constitutional morality such as the one described by Grote'.15 As is evident, Grote provided Ambedkar with an intellectual justification for a liberal constitution in a context in which basic liberal values of human dignity were brutally bypassed in favour of perhaps the most ruthless form of social segregation. So, the idea of constitutional morality was a powerful device which allowed Ambedkar to knit together liberal constitutional principles despite strong opposition by the Gandhians in the Constituent Assembly, who insisted that 'instead of incorporating Western theories the new Constitution should have been built upon village *panchayats* and district *panchayats*'.16

 For constitutional morality to put down organic roots, Ambedkar insisted on obedience to

constitutional methods of achieving our social and economic objectives [which meant that] we must abandon . . . the method of civil disobedience, non- cooperation and satyagraha [because], when constitutional methods are open, there can be no justification for unconstitutional methods . . . and the sooner these unconstitutional methods are abandoned, the better for us.17

The Gandhian Satyagraha was, according to him, a form of coercion. This is an assessment that probably reflects serious political differences that Ambedkar had had with Gandhi since the 1932 Poona Pact that deprived the Untouchables of separate electorates in the *Government of India Act 1935*. The defence for his opposition to Satyagraha was based on his commitment to constitutional morality, which was a key to the success of the constitution. As one who was influenced by Edmund Burke too, Ambedkar was also convinced that violence could never be a permanent solution to human problems because 'the forceful subjection of any community always leads to resentment [which was enough] . . . to cause a severe dent to the democratic ethos'.18 Ambedkar thus provided a typical

liberal solution by suggesting that the issues of discontent could be resolved by a strong legal system along with the desire to sort out differences through dialogues and deliberations. Besides being appreciative of fundamental democratic means, Ambedkar also found in constitutional morality a powerful means to contain the decline of ethics in governance. For him, constitutional morality acquired organic roots in democracy because the latter creates an environment in which public functionaries cannot afford to ignore the public, since they owe their existence to them. So, once democracy is strengthened whereby the public voice gets reinforced, the chances of misuse of governance are likely to be less. The argument insisting on empowering the citizens as perhaps the most effective challenge against the ethics- deficit can easily be substantiated with the consolidation of public opinion in contemporary India against corruption per se, and particularly against the forces thriving on corruption. Constitutional morality may not be adequate to contain corruption because it draws on the individual inclination towards ethics- driven conditionalities; but a nation- wide democratic movement involving people cutting across social barriers, as was witnessed recently in the wake of the 2011 Anna Hazare campaign, nurtures not only a mass drive for opposition to corrupt practices, but also creates an environment in which demands for ethics in governance are forcefully made. It is therefore fair to argue that sustained campaigns against the misuse of public authority is perhaps the best option to organically create a proactive mindset which will be a deterrent against deviant acts by those involved in governance. This is also an ideologically meaningful design, in which the idea of constitutional morality is as critical as the challenges by the masses for evolving an environment that insists on obedience to fundamental ethical values by the public functionaries while in governance.

## **III**

Civil society is now integral to governance. That it is a contested terrain adds a new twist to its relationship with governance. Civil society, just like the state, is a site of power relations. So the tendency to treat civil society as benign is theoretically misleading and empirically wrong. Civil society cannot be depoliticized, simply because one cannot wish away the contradictory relations along class, caste or gender axes, for instance, along which it is articulated. Furthermore, civil society can never be a universal category since it is specific to historical circumstances. Hence the assumption of shared meaning seems to be futile for two reasons: first, since civil society is specific to the cultural context of the country in question, it cannot be translated comfortably into other languages and social milieux; second, in many state- directed economies, where the state played a key role in development and governance, civil society may not be an accepted partner simply because it has no antecedent, in the sense that organizations outside the state were always a suspect. In a nutshell, what it suggests is the difficulty in conceptualizing civil society as a universal category, because the history of state–society relations differs profoundly from one society to another.

 As argued in the book, ethics and governance is enmeshed in a very complex manner in which the former determines the shape of the latter and is also shaped in the process. Dialectically construed, this interrelationship is a very useful conceptual aid to comprehend how ethics is built and articulated in public governance. There is no denying the fact that fundamental codes of ethics cannot, at all, be compromised; otherwise, governance will just become an act of personal aggrandizement. In today's context of mass awakening, as the 2010–12 Arab Spring shows at the global level and the 2011 Anna Hazare campaign in Delhi articulates the message at the national level in India, those in governance cannot afford to be indifferent to the public demands. This is a new environment, in which governance is not merely governmental, but a design that is both marketdriven and civil society- induced. Market redefines citizens as clients or consumers, while civil society expands the public sphere by including a whole range of civic actions that hardly figured in the bureaucratic model of public administration. Civil society is also the arena in which social movements become organized. Representing diverse and even contradictory social interests, civil society is a space that generally articulates responses reflecting the social base, constituencies and thematic orientations of the concerned group.19 The civil society can thus be most effective in governance by mediating between citizen and state, by articulating the citizen's interests to government, by inculcating participatory norms and by restricting government by citizen involvement in its day- to-day functioning. Drawn from the shared accountability of stakeholders, the new governance paradigm secures accountability by reducing discretion or delegation in public bureaucracy through collaborative governance. This also makes participation meaningful and effective, in the sense that the involvement of the stakeholders in the decision making brings about changes in the organizational structure from a hierarchical, centralized form to a more decentralized and flexible form for enhancing self- management.

 The growing importance of civil society in governance can be traced back to three sources: first, civil society is critical in reducing 'the governmental overload', especially in the developed countries where governments were downsized to achieve the goal; second, the role of civil society is justified as pertinent in governance in the World Bank's 'good governance' policy of aid- conditionality, focusing on transparency, human rights and accountability; third, civil society gains salience in the developing countries because the state- directed development paradigm fails to a large extent to eradicate poverty and also to contain the emergence of 'an insensitive' and also mechanical bureaucracy. Civil society contributes to the consolidation of decentralized bottom- up people- centric grassroots governance. It works in two complementary ways: on the one hand, there seems to be a growing realization that wider social space is available outside the governmental institutions for autonomous social action; as a result, the dependency syndrome (or dependence on government) seems to have, on the other hand, evaporated and people are drawn into the processes of development, no longer as 'mere target groups', but as active participants, shaping the course of development. In the changed environment, civil society organizations, commonly defined as non- governmental or voluntary organizations, are crucial aids to governance especially in areas such as the environment, human rights, gender and transparency in public administration, to name a few. Civil society is thus not only a powerful force against governmental excesses but also a site for people's participation in the development process. In that perspective, civil society makes participation in governance people centric and also development oriented.

# **IV**

One of the core issues of governance reform is accountability of those involved in public affairs.20 Lack of accountability defeats the primary goal for which governance is seen as an appropriate model in public administration. In most of the developing countries, this deficiency results in 'misguided resource allocation and arbitrariness and corruption in government [that] have deterred private sector investment and slowed growth and poverty- reduction efforts in numerous settings'.21 Historically, the liberal- democratic set- up evolved basic mechanisms of accountability such as ministerial control, parliamentary debate, legislative committees, media security and the ombudsman system. In recent times, there have been some major changes – a sort of paradigmatic shift – in the mode of public governance under the rubric of 'new public management', 'reinventing government' or 'reengineering government'. In essence, what is being advocated is a market- centred, neo- liberal approach to governance under which its objectives are shifted to economic growth and productivity, and its normative standards are redirected toward efficiency, competition, profit and value for money. The standards that are being set for public governance are those of business management. This marks a radical departure from the traditional norms and objectives of governance as enhancing human progress, maintaining law and order, removing poverty and unemployment, providing public welfare, ensuring impartiality and equal treatment, safeguarding citizens' rights and guaranteeing justice and fairness.

 A critical evaluation of accountability in the context of the World Bank's strategy of governance reveals the extent to which this idea is linked with the contemporary neo- liberal agenda of the developed world. In the entire gamut of World Bank- inspired thinking on administrative reform, accountability is a most crucial dimension. The primary concern here is to do away with 'dysfunctional and ineffective public institutions – broadly defined to include all institutions that shape the way public functions are carried out – [that] are seen to be at the heart of the economic developmental challenge'.22

# **V**

Accountability, though simple sounding, is an extremely complex concept. Traditional public administration considered it basically as an internal organizational issue, seeking to bring about a congruence between top- down policy and bottom- line implementation. There have been many constitutional and institutional changes to enhance public accountability of government agencies. In the developed countries initially, and later in the developing nations as well, the philosophy of 'new public management' has undergone a radical change, although the focus has continued to remain on the 'management'. For the developing 'third world' in the grip of serious debt crisis, the World Bank came out with the new 'good governance' prescription with its accompanying microaccountability and macro- accountability formula. Institutional capacity- building became the central point and the Bank's primary objective has been to promote sound development management by removing, as far as possible, the possibilities of 'capture' of benefits by the socially powerful. This is of crucial significance, because the third world has inherited a colonial administrative model that is hard to destroy. Administrative hegemony has been further reinforced by a powerful socio- economic elite that is as keen as the administrative class to 'privatize' government. Accountability- enforcing institutions such as the legislature and the judiciary are too distant and cumbrous to bring about any real pro- people accountability climate in governance. Decentralization has been formally (constitutionally) assured and philosophically celebrated. But the grassroots institutions are yet to grow as autonomous institutions in a hostile and vertically divided caste- ridden Indian society, which is being complemented by a centralizing administration and inequitable resource distribution. Accountability has thus remained so far, in any variant, a managerial concept for application by 'external' managers, be it the internal organizational managers or outside donors like the World Bank. This runs contrary to what is critical to democratizing administration by empowering people. Nonetheless, it has raised new issues in the debate on accountability, which is not merely structural but also sociological, involving those who matter in a specific administrative context.

 The question that is now being raised by quite a few social activists and civil libertarians is: can there be, as an alternative, a people's campaign for transparency and accountability? One such example of a search for grassroots accountability is the Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS), which is just one or many such people's organizations growing up in different parts of India to transform public administration into a truly people's administration. To quote the proceedings of the MKSS, the effort has been to transform the demand for a right to livelihood, wages and employment into a demand to know from the government agency/*Panchayat* how much money was allocated and where and how it was spent. It was aptly articulated in the slogan: '*Hamara paisa, hamara hisab*  [Our money, our accounts]'. Through people's awakening, the institution of *Jan sunwaii* or public hearing turned out to be an effective forum where the people could speak and be heard. 'The public hearings on development expenditure at the *Panchayat* level have', argue the main architect of the MKSS campaign, 'led to a crystallization of issues and given a tangible quality to the abstract notion of transparency and the right to information'23 From the very modest beginning in the villages in Rajasthan, the success of MKSS has been a source of inspiration to activists in India and throughout the world. It led to 'the genesis of a broader

discourse on the right to information in India'.24 After dithering over this issue for years, the central government finally introduced the Freedom of Information Bill in Parliament on 25 July 2000. The bill was certainly a significant step in the process of democratization though Madhav Godbole apprehended that the 'the bill, as presented in parliament, [was] hardly [adequate] to bring transparency to issues of governance'.25 This bill finally became the Freedom of Information Act, 2002 that has now been replaced by the RTI, which seeks

to provide setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, the constitution of Central Information Commission and State Information Commission and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.26

 The Right to Information is derived from part III of the Constitution of India guaranteeing freedom of expression under Article 19. Hailed as the Magna Carta of freedom,27 this Act is the codification of a right that empowers citizens to requisition information within a specific time frame of 30 days. As a 'path to *swaraj*',28 as the act is characterized in the media, this is an important pillar of democracy in ensuring 'transparency' and 'accountability'. There are, however, doubts about the extent to which this Act will help the people in getting the information they seek, despite the institution of the Central Information Commission and State Information Commission, because 'of the typical colonial mindset of the bureaucracy' which, by denying access to information to the people, seems to sustain its hegemony in public administration. The validity of the *Official Secrets Act 1923*, even after the passing of the RTI Act, seems to be puzzling though the Act suggests punitive measures to check 'the errant officers' that will hardly be effective unless the mindset is less 'bureaucratic' and more 'developmental'.

# **VI**

As the unearthing of scam after scam reveals, there has been a massive ethics deficit in governance. Public authority is being misused for personal enrichment. Despite being challenged, those abusing authority are hardly restrained. The situation does not seem to be as dismal as it is made out, in view of the growing civil society activism as an antidote to malpractices in governance. There are occasions when parliamentarians raise the issue, that have always been addressed by reiterating the importance of creating a vibrant political culture, opposed to tendencies towards appropriating public machinery for personal gain. There is a serious lacuna in this argument because (a) it cannot be done overnight and (b) those who insist on developing a fair culture are also allegedly involved in malpractices, as shown in Chapter 6. As a result, the concern that the parliamentarians had shown did not appear to have evoked a positive response from the stakeholders. However, the parliamentary decline seems to have been matched by the ascendancy of other political institutions of Indian democracy. For instance, the President, Supreme Court of India and the Election Commission have, among others, shown a remarkable resilience in upholding some of the intrinsic constitutional values that are critical to ethics in governance. It is now increasingly being felt that these important political institutions have a role in reversing the trend, by being true to the value system that the founding fathers had left for posterity. This argument is sought to be substantiated below by assessing the role of these selective constitutional institutions in events when the constitutional propriety was infringed.

 India's President no longer remains an ornamental head of state. In the context of the decline of single- party rule, the first citizen of the country seems to have redefined his/her constitutional role by being more pro- active than before. Article 53 of the Constitution vests 'the executive power of the Union . . . in the President'; as constitutional head of state he/she is expected to act as an agent of the political executive, namely the council of ministers or cabinet. The rise of coalition government and the spread of corruption – in the political executive, legislatures and civil services – have created a legitimate space for other constitutional functionaries, including the presidency, 'to act as guardians of fairness and constitutional balance'.29 That the President was not a mere 'rubber stamp' was evident when the late K R Narayanan prevented the Uttar Pradesh Governor Ramesh Bhandari from arbitrarily dismissing the Kalyan Singh- led BJP government and replacing it with Jagdambika Pal's Congress–Samajwadi coalition. Bhandari dismissed the Singh government without giving the chief minister an opportunity to prove his majority on the floor of the assembly, which Narayanan thought was both 'unconstitutional' and 'partisan', designed to help the ruling United Front–Congress in the forthcoming election.30 A landmark Supreme Court judgment 'reinstalled' the BJP government, justifying K R Narayanan's intervention for constitutional propriety since there was 'widespread disenchantment . . . with the excessive use of the President's rule for partisan purposes'.31 Similarly, Narayanan's reluctance to endorse the decision of V C Pande, the Bihar governor, to appoint the Nitish Kumar- led minority government immediately after the 2000 state assembly election would have led to a serious constitutional crisis had Nitish Kumar not resigned. The fact that the Rabri Devi- led RJD coalition won the vote of confidence 'intensified the clamour against the governor's precipitous and apparently partisan action'.32 President A P J Abdul Kalam's refusal to approve the 2006 Office of Profit bill when it was sent to him after its endorsement by both houses of parliament redefined the role of this institution in the changed socio- political environment. Although the President had no alternative but to grant assent once the bill was approved by the parliament for a second time, the episode is nonetheless reflective of the growing independence of India's highest constitutional authority. Three important principles were consolidated in the wake of this controversial office of profit episode: first, the underlying principle debarring the holder of an office of profit under the government from being a member of parliament is drawn on a foundational

principle of the doctrine of separation of powers, namely, that there should be a demarcation of authority and power between executive and legislature to avoid 'misappropriation of authority and power' by these two wings of government. The famous 1973 Kesavananda Bharati judgment of the Supreme Court endorses this principle as part of the Basic Structure of the Constitution of India. Second, the President's reluctance to approve the bill is also suggestive of the fact that there should be uniformity in interpreting the law as regards the office of profit. In fact, given the Supreme Court ruling on this, there is no scope for different interpretations and, as the top judicial institution in the country, the Supreme Court is constitutionally authorized to enforce uniformity in this regard. Finally, by sending the bill back to parliament for reconsideration, the President also upheld the judicial sanctity of the criteria that the Supreme Court devised to settle the controversy. These criteria are: (a) it must be a post, created by and under the control of the government, (b) the appointee to the post should also be under governmental control, (c) the holder of the post must be entitled to some profit or benefit other than compensatory allowance, whether he/she takes it or not, and (d) there is power/authority attached to that position that can be exercised by the holder.33 It is true that the controversy was finally resolved not by following the judicial wisdom, but by political considerations. Nonetheless, this episode established beyond doubt a healthy trend, which is constitutionally creative and politically challenging in so far as the institutions of governance are concerned. The bill was therefore a significant intervention in redefining the political, which is located in the institutions that had creatively responded to the issues, perhaps linked with the deepening of democracy by meaningful participation of 'the people' in the political processes.

 Similarly, the Supreme Court in the famous Bommai judgment of 1994 radically altered the complexion of the debate on the basic structure of the constitution. Critical of the indiscriminate application of Article 356 to dismiss the duly elected state governments, the Supreme Court came out heavily against the Union government. B R Ambedkar was confident, as his statements in the Constituent Assembly endorse, that Emergency provisions in the Constitution of India would rarely be invoked and, as Indian democracy matured, the need to do so would be less compelling, reducing Article 356 to 'a dead letter'. However, by 1994, this provision had been applied more than 90 times, the Supreme Court noted, and thus made this Article 'a death letter', rather than 'a dead letter', as the founding fathers foresaw. The judgment put to rest all speculation regarding the 'delicate balance of powers in a federal polity' by saying that 'federalism envisaged in the Constitution is a basic structure. . . . The state *qua* the Constitution is federal and independent in its exercise of legislative and executive power'. It is true that the Constitution prefers an arrangement that is tilted in favour of the centre. But that does not mean that 'the States are mere appendages of the Centre. Within the sphere allotted to them, States are supreme. The Centre cannot temper with their powers'. Simultaneously, by clarifying the constitutional status of the States, the judgment also redefined the role of the President who is not a mere stooge of the Union Government by underlining that

the provision requires that the material before the President must be sufficient to indicate that unless a proclamation (under Article 356) is issued, it is not possible to carry on the affairs of the state as per the provisions of the Constitution. It is not every situation arising in the State but a situation which shows that constitutional government has become an impossibility, which alone will entitle the President to issue the proclamation.34

B R Ambedkar was right when he suggested that growing democratization would make the Emergency Provision redundant. The Supreme Court is certainly an important component in this process. By creatively interpreting the constitutional provisions, the top court contributed to the redrawing of the basic contours of Indian federalism that have, with their roots in the 1935 constitutional structure, evolved organically out of an engagement with the constantly changing social, economic and cultural milieu. The Bommai judgment is a watershed, perhaps the most significant, in the evolution of an organic federalism in India, which is surely a break with the past.

 The revival of the Election Commission as a political watchdog is a remarkable development, supporting the growing democratization of Indian politics. Established in 1950, the Election Commission was set up as a constitutional agency and entrusted, according to Article 324 of the Constitution, with the task of superintendence, direction and control of all national and state level elections.35 The Commission holds substantial power in so far as the procedural aspects of the elections are concerned. In fact, it derives its strength from the code of conduct, formulated by the political parties participating in the election generally by consensus. There is no doubt that, by its sincere involvement in the processes of elections, starting from the preparation of the voters' roll to the declaration of the poll outcomes, the Commission has played a critical role in redefining politics in today's India. The role of the Commission in the state election in West Bengal in 2006 is illustrative here: with the announcement of the dates of elections, the Commission took control of the election machinery of the state in an unprecedented manner. First, it took ample care to revise the voters' roll, since the incumbent Left Front government was charged with manipulating the voters' list. The Election Commission found a large number of them in various districts. During the clean- up operation, the observer found an alarmingly huge number of false names36 in the list of voters, and struck them off. Hence the charge seemed authenticated and the media thus attributed the sustained electoral victory of the Left Front to 'the bogus voters'. Second, following its success in Bihar in holding a free and fair election under the strict surveillance of the state- controlled coercive forces, the Commission decided to conduct the poll on five fairly dispersed dates, stretching over almost two months. The Commission requisitioned police and paramilitary forces from outside the state, simply because the state police did not appear to be reliable. Because the dates were dispersed, it was possible to get adequate numbers of them to supervise the voting on the day of election. It was a remarkable election in West Bengal, which was held under the strict control of an Election Commission that implemented its

authority strictly in accordance with its constitutional obligation to Indian democracy.37 Although the electoral outcome brought back the incumbent Left Front government to power, unlike in Bihar where a new government was installed replacing the government that held power for more than 15 years, the Commission provided critical inputs to the processes of democratization by empowering the ordinary voters, who now became part of 'the movers and shakers' of Indian democracy, who can be ignored only at the cost of the political parties seeking political power. In other words, the voters are not merely seasonal participants; they have also been made to feel their importance in political processes that hardly mattered so far in their everyday life.

## **VII**

The study is both exploratory and explanatory: exploratory because the purpose here is to understand the context in which the ethics deficit is so well entrenched that India's resilience as a constitutional democracy seems be fast disappearing; explanatory because, on the basis of an analytically drawn exploratory exercise, the study provides an explanation, linking the decline of ethics in governance with India's overall moral decadence, visible everywhere. There is a historical reason, since one cannot deny the pernicious impact that colonialism had in India's development trajectory and, similarly, the granting of excessive discretionary power to those holding public authority in the wake of the Licence– Quota–Permit Raj. The system that had emerged not only contributed to an arrogant civil service, it had also created circumstances for abuse of authority. Despite having understood the complex roots of corruption in India, the 1964 Santhanam Committee did not go beyond suggesting the creation of a Central Vigilance Commission, besides strengthening the system of internal accountability in the line of Weberian thinking. Corruption did not subside to the extent that was expected. The 1975 internal Emergency was the pinnacle in the sense that the abuse of public authority for biased ideological gain reached its zenith. As shown in Chapter 6, the 1977 Shah Commission report graphically illustrated how public authority was abused to deny citizens of their basic fundamental rights. What it confirms is the fact that a powerful state may not always work as an antidote to the tendencies contributing to the ethics deficit; instead, it created, as demonstrated by the Santhanam Committee and Shah Commission, a propitious environment for corruption to spread its tentacles.

 The situation did not seem to have changed in the new environment of economic liberalization. There have been innumerable instances where even the ministers were involved in plundering public money for partisan gains. The state seemed to have been helpless or complicit with those misusing their authority as public personnel. Like the J P movement that successfully challenged the atrocious Emergency regime that Indira Gandhi led, the 2011 Anna Hazare India-Against-Corruption campaign raised a powerful voice against those who had no qualms in bending, if not bypassing, rules and regulations for personal enrichment. Despite having charged the emotions, the Hazare movement, unlike the J P campaign, failed to achieve the goal; nonetheless, it was a fruitful campaign because it once again catapulted corruption as a core issue in the public domain. Despite being critical of the parliamentarians for their deviant behaviour, Hazare approached, rather ironically, the same set of parliamentarians to create a Leviathan- like Lokpal by approving the Jan Lokpal Bill. The Lokpal is still a distant goal though a law to that effect was passed in 2013. What is significant here is the fact that the role that Hazare played cannot be so easily dismissed, since he created a mass momentum against corrupt politicians who seem to have been accustomed so far to not taking into account the public mood, especially in between elections. The idea is changed now, to a significant extent, and those in public authority are aware that there is a price, perhaps a heavy price, if the code of ethics is violated by them while fulfilling their well- defined constitutional obligations.

 The study also confirms that the abuse of authority for personal benefits can never go unchallenged, especially in a democracy that thrives out of a very intense civic engagement. Whenever attempts were made, as the past has shown, to thwart public institutions, there have been serious public protests. A custodian of democratic values, an alert citizenry always puts hurdles, if not checks, in the way as soon as efforts towards misappropriating public authority are made. This is the lesson of history. Examples from India – starting from the 1974 J P movement to the 2011 Anna Hazare drive for a strong Lokpal – have proved the point beyond doubt. In recent years, there may not have been nation- wide campaigns against corruption, as was seen in 2011, though one can refer to innumerable instances showing that the abuse of authority usually provokes immediate opposition, because of the citizens being always vigilant. The purpose here is not to provide a detailed account of the scams that India confronted in recent years, but to conceptualize the dialectics involving corruption and citizens. As it has been argued, corruption is integral to governance, though it can be considerably contained if the citizens discharge their role effectively by being tuned to the fundamental ethos of democratic governance. This can be done in two complementary ways: on the one hand, tendencies towards overrunning the available institutions of authority need to be checked by applying the existing laws without discrimination or favour; on the other hand, simultaneously, serious efforts are to be made not only to create but also to sustain and consolidate a social climate appreciative of a fundamental code of ethics for articulating democracy in governance. What is critical here is the idea that corruption can never be effectively contained by legislative means unless they are supported by a propitious social climate, because this is where the mindset is built. As shown in this book, given the relentless efforts by both official agencies and civil society in India, the situation seems to be changing, with the corrupt and deviant being taken to task, suggesting perhaps a significant transformation in the social climate as well. This is most enlightening, since the idea that corruption is not insurmountable appears to have gained ground in contemporary India.