## **An Enchanted—and Endangered—Frontier**

Not many people in the Western world, or even in Asia outside the Indian subcontinent, had paid much attention to Sikkim before 1963. But the marriage in that year of the *maharajkumar*, or heir to the throne, of Sikkim, Palden Thondup Namgyal, to Hope Cooke, a 23-year-old college student from New York, changed all that. The wedding took place in the Sikkimese capital Gangtok on 20 March. Cooke was led by two Buddhist lamas and accompanied by a 'fanfare of trumpeting, 10 ft-long Himalayan horns, braying conch shells, and booming bass drums' into the Tsuklakhang Royal Chapel and Monastery, where her husband-to-be was waiting.<sup>1</sup> Monks did not attend the wedding ceremony itself, as marriage would lead to birth and rebirth, which are to be avoided in accordance with Buddhist cosmology. The hall was lit with butter lamps and Tibetan prayer flags fluttered from tall bamboo poles outside. Among the guests were robed Sikkimese dignitaries as well as the US ambassador, John Kenneth Galbraith, and some other foreign diplomats from New Delhi.

Hope reminisced about the wedding in her autobiography *Time Change*: 'The TV and magazine photographers running around the crowd are bowled over by all the colour and beauty'. And there were

groups of Nepali men in bright red tunics and jodhpurs, playing widely curled horns, Sikkim guards in scarlet jackets and striped kilts…Nepali and Sikkimese women wearing different national dress, who move around together, conscious of their impact on the photographers. Sound as well as sight overwhelms one, and the movie crews with audio equipment rush from the Sikkim Police Bagpipe Band to the Indian Army Band, which has been lent for the occasion to the various villagers performing on drums and horns.2

On 2 December, less than eight months after the wedding, Thondup's father, Tashi Namgyal, the ruler of Sikkim, died. Thondup was the new

maharaja and Hope his royal consort. But the actual coronation had to wait for an auspicious time and date to be set by the court astrologers: 9.22 a.m. on 4 April 1965. The coronation attracted even more attention from the outside world than the wedding had done. Andrew Duff wrote in his excellent book about Sikkim, quoting Martha Hamilton, an Englishwoman who was there, 'The newspapers found ever more ways to romanticise Sikkim. "Americans are well aware that Monaco is touched by Grace," an editorial in the *Washington Post* read, "now Sikkim is radiant with Hope." Messages from Queen Elizabeth II and from Dean Rusk, the US Secretary of State, were proudly displayed in official programmes.'<sup>3</sup>

Thondup, however, was cautious, well aware of Sikkim's dependence on India. He said in his speech to the assembled guests, who included Indira Gandhi, then the minister for Information and Broadcasting, 'We recall with profound affection the memory of Jawaharlal Nehru, a true and steadfast friend of Sikkim, and we have confidence that the Government of India will continue to hold out to us the hand of friendship'. He then went on to say that, 'ours is a small country, but we have pride in our institutions, our way of life and cultural heritage', thus emphasizing that Sikkim had its own, distinct national characteristics.<sup>4</sup>

Thondup and Hope had met at the bar at the Windamere Hotel in Darjeeling in 1959 when she was a teenage student. He, then a widower for almost three years, was there to see his two sons at a boarding school in the town. He was nearly twice her age, but they were drawn to each other. They kept in touch after she returned to New York to continue her studies at the Sarah Lawrence College. Two years later, they were engaged and then the wedding took place in 1963 with pictures of the colourful ceremony appearing in glossy magazines, primarily in the US but also in other countries. They were referred to as the 'King and Queen of Sikkim', and it all seemed like a fairy tale come true. The Western media loved it, haunted by the setting of the romance: a small kingdom in the Himalayas with breathtaking scenery, where the people practised a form of tantric Tibetan Buddhism, and the mountains were replete with giant butterflies, pandas, and four hundred species of wild orchid.<sup>5</sup> It was exoticism at its best—or worst.

But what was Sikkim, really? An independent kingdom, as most Western publications preferred to describe it—or merely the last of the princely states, which had not yet been fully integrated into the Indian

Union? Neither description would have been correct in the 1960s. But Sikkim was indeed once an independent kingdom and much larger than it is today. The area was settled in the thirteenth century by Tibetan herdsmen and swidden-cultivating Lepchas, but it was not until the seventeenth century that it came to resemble a state with its own administration. The first ruler is believed to have been Phuntsog Namgyal, who, in 1642, was consecrated as the first *chogyal* (king) of Sikkim. His ancestors came from Kham in eastern Tibet. Along with his lamas, Phuntsog converted the Lepcha people to Buddhism. He appointed 12 ministers to his government, all of whom came from the Tibetan-related Bhutia community, and another 12 men from the Lepchas were made heads in the same number of newly created, local administrative units. He also founded the Namgyal Dynasty, which continued to rule the country into modern times.

Some modern Tibetologists have questioned this official history, arguing that Phuntsog and his successors ruled over a much more loosely constructed entity, and that it was British expansion into the Himalayas in the early nineteenth century (and thus a foreign threat to Sikkim's sovereignty) that led to efforts to re-imagine Sikkimese history in 'an attempt to define Sikkim as a nation'.<sup>6</sup>

Whichever version of Sikkimese history one chooses to believe, Sikkim was a separate kingdom when the British arrived on the scene and it did once include the Chumbi Valley in present-day Tibet. It stretched westward to the Arun River in Nepal and southward to northern West Bengal, although the extent of Sikkimese influence over those areas waxed and waned with advances and retreats resulting from the chogyals' wars against their Nepalese and Bhutanese neighbours. Lots of territory was lost to the Nepalese Gorkha rajahs, but some of it was restored to Sikkim under two treaties signed in 1816 and 1817, the first between the British East India Company and the Nepalese and the other between the British East India Company and the chogyal of Sikkim.

The arrival of the British brought fundamental changes to Sikkim. In 1828, a group of East India Company officials, having settled a conflict between Nepal and Sikkim, found a place in the southern Sikkimese highlands which they deemed suitable for the location of a sanatorium for British servicemen and invalid servants. Seven years later, in 1835, a strip of territory was acquired for that purpose from the ruler of Sikkim, and the construction of a hill station began, which was named Darjeeling after a

local monastery called Dorjeling ('the place of the thunderbolt') in Tibetan. More land was obtained after conflicts between the chogyal and the British —and, more importantly, between the British and the neighbouring state of Bhutan. By the early 1860s, the entire area of what today constitutes Darjeeling District of West Bengal was in British hands, including the important trading town of Kalimpong.

Under yet another treaty, this time signed in Tumlong in March 1861 between Sidkeong Namgyal, the chogyal, and Sir Ashley Eden representing the British, what remained of Sikkim became a de facto British protectorate. Subsequent civil and ecclesiastical friction, an invasion by Tibetan forces, and claims of Chinese suzerainty over Sikkim prompted the British Crown to annex the entire kingdom more formally as a protectorate in 1889.<sup>7</sup> A road and even a railway were built to Darjeeling, connecting the area with Calcutta, the capital of Britain's Indian Empire. Tea was introduced to the highlands and even to the plains below.

John Claude White, a British engineer, photographer, and later, author, became the first political officer for Sikkim, and, the first political officer for Sikkim residing in Gangtok. He had a magnificent mansion built, from where he reorganized the administration and chaired the council that advised the chogyal. That building is what became India House after 1947 and today serves as the residence of the governor.

Under British rule, Sikkim had a status similar to that of the other princely states and the ruler came to be referred to as 'maharaja', not 'chogyal'. The official India Office List names Sikkim as a 15-gun salute state along with 17 other principalities, among them Jaisalmer, Alwar, Kishangarh, Rampur—and Bhutan, which was also included in the dependencies of Britain's Indian Empire. But Sikkim was a frontier state, which the British treated somewhat differently from the other princely states.

The immediate problem after 1889 was that Sikkim was underpopulated for Britain's designs for the region. It only had about 30,000 inhabitants, and manpower was needed for the construction of roads and portering of goods.<sup>8</sup> But there was a simple solution to that: the importation of labour from Nepal. According to Nari Rustomji, the Indian civil servant with perhaps the strongest attachment to the northern frontier areas, 'While it would be an overstatement to hold that the British deliberately and actively engineered the Nepalese immigration into Sikkim, there is no

doubt that, in the earlier years, and particularly under the stewardship of Claude White, the first political officer of Sikkim, they encouraged and happily connived at it.'<sup>9</sup>

While labour was needed and few Sikkimese would want to be drafted into road construction crews or build houses in Gangtok and other towns being developed, the influx of Nepalese into Sikkim would also, Rustomji noted, be

the surest guarantee against a revival of Tibetan influence. The Nepalese were mostly Hindus and their language was Sanskrit-based. Their culture and way of life had closer affinity with India than with Tibet…it was assumed by the British that settlement of a large bulk of an essentially Hinduoriented population in Sikkim would preclude the risk of its looking northwards to Tibet for direction and support.10

Claude White's successors as political officer were more restrained when it came to encouraging Nepalese immigration, but the process he had set in motion could not be stopped. More Nepalese arrived and, already by the early twentieth century, they outnumbered the native population of Tibetan and Lepcha stock. Laws were passed to prevent the immigrants from owning land, but the influx continued unabated anyway. Many Nepalese also became engaged in various businesses. Francis Younghusband's military expedition to Lhasa in 1904 had opened Tibet for trade. Younghusband's troops had crossed the border at Jelep La Pass, which now became the main gateway for trade and other exchanges between Tibet and British India. Sikkim flourished in a way its eastern neighbour Bhutan, which remained isolated, did not. (The British political officer in Sikkim was also responsible for Bhutan as well as Tibet, although it was much bigger and an independent country.)

Then came India's independence and, on 5 December 1950, 'the President of India and His Highness the Maharaja of Sikkim' signed an agreement according to which 'Sikkim shall continue to be a Protectorate of India and, subject to provisions of this Treaty, shall enjoy autonomy un regard to its internal affairs'.<sup>11</sup> The government of independent India became responsible for the defence of Sikkim as well as all its external relations, 'The Government of Sikkim shall have no dealings with any foreign power … [and] the Government of Sikkim shall not import any arms, ammunition, military stores or other warlike material of any

description for any purpose whatsoever without the previous consent of the Government of India.'<sup>12</sup>

The maharaja could remain. But, just in time for Thondup's coronation, India agreed to his proposal to have the title changed to the old designation of chogyal. His wife, Hope Cook, became *gyalmo* (queen consort) and would now be addressed formally as 'Her Highness Hope La, the Gyalmo of Sikkim'. That was the beginning of the trouble. The very presence of Hope gave Sikkim a higher international profile. She brought Sikkimese handicrafts to New York, where they were exhibited and sold. Invitation cards were sent out in the names of 'Their Majesties the King and Queen of Sikkim'.<sup>13</sup> During her frequent trips to the US, she gave interviews to American journalists about her fabled kingdom in the Himalayas. The University of Kentucky produced a detailed contour map of 'the Kingdom of Sikkim'.

The international attention Sikkim received after 1963, and new signals from the palace in Gangtok, had an impact on the internal political scene as well. The Sikkim Guards were revived, the civil service was reorganized as a more formal hierarchy, and traditional features of Buddhist justice were incorporated into a partly new judicial system. A national anthem was composed and sung at official ceremonies where the national flag was prominently hoisted atop government buildings.<sup>14</sup> Demands were raised for Sikkim to issue its own postage stamps and passports, to be able to trade abroad on its own terms, and receive direct aid from countries other than India. Political parties, among them the pro-palace National Party, even began to ask for a revision of the 1950 treaty with India. 'We must remain Sikkimese,' its leader Netuk Tsering stated. 'There can be no merger with India, Tibet, Bhutan or Nepal.'<sup>15</sup>

In India, suspicions of Hope and her intentions had grown, and apprehension turned to fury when she, as early as 1966, that is, only a year after the coronation, wrote a controversial article for a local academic journal called the *Bulletin of Tibetology.* She argued that the 1835 treaty 'gave Darjeeling to the British for use as a sanatorium but had not intended an outright grant'. The British, Hope wrote, 'simply assumed the grant was outright and had begun to administer the area…as part of their Indian possession'. By implication, Darjeeling belonged to Sikkim, not West

Bengal. All the land that belonged to the chogyal and others, she argued, 'could have "usage" only', not actual ownership.<sup>16</sup>

Hope was probably not prepared for the reaction to her article. According to her, it 'stirred up a hornet's nest. "Sarah Lawrence girl claims Darjeeling for Sikkim." "American Trojan Mare in Gangtok." "CIA agent in borrowed plumage." "American wife plans missile base." The Indian reaction was vituperative, and I was remorseful, scared.'<sup>17</sup> She also noted that, 'afterwards, whenever the Indian papers wrote about Sikkim's wish for treaty revision, my article was trotted out as a further damning black mark against the country. The newspaper attacks seemed to be calculated to appear whenever any Sikkimese official was going to Delhi for talks.'<sup>18</sup>

Whether she was ignorant or simply naïve is hard to say, but she did indeed stir up a hornet's nest with her article and other antics, making it impossible for India to even consider a revision of the 1950 treaty, and this, at a time when the Chinese threat was becoming more intense. She could not have chosen a more inappropriate time to publish her article about Darjeeling and to encourage steps which were perceived as attempts to gain more independence from India.

But it was not entirely her fault that the bureaucrats in India House and New Delhi were not, to say the least, pleased with those moves. The Indian journalist Sunanda K. Datta-Ray, although a friend of the chogyal, wrote in his book *Smash and Grab: The Annexation of Sikkim*, 'The *Chogyal* was probably responsible for aiming at styles that denoted sovereign status internationally but Hope was the outsider, so she was blamed.'<sup>19</sup> And Hope was the one who had attracted international attention to an until then littleknown corner of the world.

In spite of fears of the Chinese opening yet another front in the Himalayas during the 1962 War, there was then actually no fighting at the Sikkimese border. But according to a now declassified CIA report, compiled on 6 November 1962, as war was raging in NEFA and Ladakh, 'The Indian Army is increasingly concerned about a Chinese build-up in the Chumbi Valley opposite Sikkim'.<sup>20</sup> India sent troops to reinforce the small contingent of Indian Army personnel already stationed in Sikkim, which it had the right to do under the 1950 treaty.

Rustomji, who served as *dewan*, or the equivalent of a prime minister, of Sikkim between 1954 and 1959 noted in his book *Enchanted Frontiers* that

the Chumbi Valley, a thin strip of Tibetan land between Sikkim and Bhutan, was historically part of Sikkim. 'Its inhabitants had close affinities in language, dress and social custom, with the people comprised within Sikkim's present day boundaries.'<sup>21</sup> It had also, because of its milder climate, been the summer headquarters of the Sikkimese ruler. But after the 1959 invasion of Tibet, Rustomji wrote, the Chinese took care 'to occupy the Chumbi Valley in strength lest the Sikkimese should harbour dreams of revising old claims'. The Chinese also 'accelerated the processes of "de-Tibetanizing" by deputing leading people of the area and brighter lights of the younger generation of China for "cultural integration".'<sup>22</sup>

What had been 'an enchanted frontier' when Rustomji was in Sikkim in the 1950s became, shortly after he had left, a tense and endangered frontier. The first skirmish with the Chinese PLA occurred even before the 1962 War. On 20 September 1960, a PLA patrol intruded into Sikkimese territory near Jelep La and, when the Indian side wanted to discuss the border between Sikkim and Tibet as part of the overall talks about the frontier, the Chinese said that, the issue did 'not fall within the scope' of those discussions.<sup>23</sup>

Tension escalated after the 1962 War as the Chinese amassed even more troops into the Chumbi Valley. In January 1963, the Chinese accused India of having built pill-boxes, communication trenches, and sentry posts to 'the southeast, northeast and north of Nathu La', demanding that India should dismantle all structures set up on 'Chinese territory.' India refuted the claim.<sup>24</sup>

All that had happened was that a new road had been built from Gangtok to Nathu La, a pass north of Jelep La, in 1958, at a time when cross-border trade between Sikkim and Tibet was still being conducted. But the Agreement on Trade and Intercourse between Tibet Region of China and India, which was concluded in 1954, expired on 6 June 1962, and, at a time when tension was mounting along the frontier, there was no interest on either side to have the agreement extended. All kinds of cross-border traffic were halted and the border was sealed. Indian troops had since then been stationed at the pass to guard the frontier, and possibly also to keep an eye on Chinese troop movements in the Chumbi Valley on the other side.

Chinese provocations continued in 1964. In August, a Chinese patrol intruded into Nathu La and on three occasions in December, Chinese

soldiers were seen on the Sikkimese side of the pass. After the first incursion in August, China issued a statement 'refuting the rumours the Soviet Union fabricated in collusion with India that China had made "intrusion" into Sikkim'.<sup>25</sup> That was to become the standard line from the Chinese whenever there was an incident along the border—and there were many in the 1960s.

The Chinese, probably to annoy New Delhi, had also sent a condolence message on the death of Tashi Namgyal in 1963, and a congratulatory note on the April 1965 coronation of Thondup directly to Gangtok instead of forwarding it through the Indian government, which was responsible for Sikkim's external relations. This was perceived as a recognition of Sikkim's independence, and showed that China disapproved of Sikkim's status as India's protectorate.<sup>26</sup>

Only a few months after the coronation, war broke out between India and Pakistan. It had begun with a confrontation in Rann of Kutch in Gujarat in the beginning of the year, which ended with a ceasefire brokered by Britain in June. Likely encouraged by what Pakistan saw as a favourable outcome, about 30,000 Pakistani soldiers dressed as locals crossed the Line of Control in Kashmir in the first week of August. Fighting erupted with the Indian security forces who, for the most part, drove them back. Pakistan's response was a massive attack on 1 September 1965 across the Line of Control in Kashmir and the bombing of Indian airfields in an offensive codenamed 'Grand Slam'. But the belief that the Indian Army would crumble under the onslaught was short-lived. On 6 September, the Indian Army crossed the international border in Punjab and came within striking distance of Lahore.

The war witnessed some of the largest tank battles since World War II. The Indian Army had recovered from the defeat by China in 1962 and now had more men and weaponry. Although the Pakistan Army did occupy some positions inside India, Operation Grand Slam was not going as planned and expected. China had to come to the rescue by threatening to open a new front in Sikkim. If China could occupy a corridor between Tibet and East Pakistan via Sikkim, Darjeeling, and Siliguri, the entire northeastern region of India would be cut off from the rest of the country.

China began by sending protest notes to the Indian Embassy in Beijing, followed by an ultimatum on 16 September. It alleged that Indian troops had crossed the Sikkim-Tibet border and built fortifications on the other

side. This was not a new claim, but the timing was no coincidence and, if India would not comply with the request within three days, China would take action. The note did not say exactly what would happen after those three days, but it was a provocation India could not ignore. China made it clear that it would 'strengthen its defences and heighten its alertness along the border' and that a chain of consequences would follow due to the 'criminal and extended aggression by the Government of India'.<sup>27</sup>

The objective was clear, as China openly linked its actions on the Sikkimese border to the ongoing war between India and Pakistan. China's Foreign Minister Chen Yi, on a visit to Karachi on 4 September, had declared its support for the 'just struggle of the Kashmiri people' who were resisting 'India's tyrannical rule'.<sup>28</sup> China was on Pakistan's side because it had only acted in self-defence against Indian aggression, the minister suggested.

China was forced to extend its three-day ultimatum when the UN intervened and Secretary General U Thant held meetings with Pakistan's President Ayub Khan and the Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri. Ayub Khan could not afford to let the war continue, as his forces were being crushed. China then issued a new note on 19 September, declaring its 'willingness' to put off the time limit to before the midnight of 22 September. The note also stated that the Chinese government 'gives all out support to the people of Kashmir in their struggle for the right of selfdetermination…and to Pakistan in her just struggle against Indian aggression'.<sup>29</sup>

On 20 September, a PLA unit moved into position at the Dongchui La pass and opened fire on the Indian soldiers there. The following day, another PLA unit began firing at Indian positions at Nathu La. But it was too late for China to launch a new war against India. The UN Security Council passed a resolution demanding that India and Pakistan cease hostilities and withdraw all their soldiers back to the positions they had held before 5 August. This was accepted by India as well as Pakistan, leaving China in limbo. A late response from Beijing came in the shape of a bizarre note claiming that India has withdrawn the intruding troops within the specified time limit set by the Chinese government, and had 'dismantled these military works of aggression'. But since then, the note alleged, 'Indian troops, attempting to stage a come-back, have continued repeatedly to cross the boundary for reconnaissance, and even launched

armed attacks against the Chinese frontier guards. It is perfectly clear that India has been using Sikkim's territory to commit ceaseless intrusions and provocations against China and create tension on the China-Sikkim boundary.' The note went on to remind people of the 'fact' that it is 'well known' that India had launched 'a massive attack on China' in October 1962'.<sup>30</sup>

India's Prime Minister Shastri could perhaps have extracted more concessions from Pakistan when he signed the deal brokered by the Soviet Union in Tashkent on 10 January 1966. That is debatable, but the appointment of Indira Gandhi as India's new prime minister definitely marked the beginning of a new and more assertive India. She was not going to tolerate any more provocations from China.

China did not attack, but, in July 1966, its troops opposite Nathu La installed six powerful loudspeakers blaring out propaganda at the Indian troops stationed at the pass. In August, loudspeakers were also put opposite Jelep La. Huge portraits of Mao Zedong were erected at both border passes, facing the Indians. But it is doubtful those manoeuvres had any impact on the morale of the Indian soldiers. The nuisance value was greater, as the noise from the loudspeakers may have deprived the soldiers of some sleep.

Small-scale incursions by the Chinese continued as well. Then, open confrontation broke out when, on 11 September 1966, the Indian troops announced over loudspeakers that they had no intention of intruding even one millimetre into Tibet. After the announcement was made, the Indian troops began putting up barbed wire along the border on the southern side of Nathu La. The Chinese then opened fire with automatic rifles and lightmachine guns, killing and wounding several Indian soldiers. The Indian side returned fire and the Chinese upped the ante by firing 76mm and 122mm cannons. The Indians responded with their artillery, killing and wounding at least 36 PLA soldiers.

The Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated in a note given to the Indian Embassy in Beijing on 12 September, 'Do not misjudge the situation and repeat your mistake of 1962…the Chinese People's Liberation Army will certainly deal a crushing blow at any enemy who dares to invade us'.<sup>31</sup> But the Indian soldiers had not crossed into Tibet, nor had they vacated any of their positions along the border. This was not 1962 and the Chinese probably came to realize that after the exchange of fire at Nathu La.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the situation in Sikkim was becoming untenable for India: China was encroaching from the north; to the south of the Himalayan watershed, a second threat was posed by the Sikkimese ruler's quest for more independence; and then there was Naxalite activity in the strategically important Siliguri Neck just below the hills of Darjeeling. There were also intrigues within the Sikkim elite that had a destabilizing effect on the situation in this sensitive frontier area. Hope was certainly not a CIA agent, as some Indian tabloids had suggested. But she did not fit into Sikkimese society—and began to feel it. According to Datta-Ray, 'Hope's dream of queening it in the Himalayas cut off the *Chogyal* from his throne's traditional supporters and isolated him from Sikkimese society'.<sup>32</sup>

Hope had to compete for relevance with two other influential women: Thondup's sister Coocoola and Elisa-Maria Langford-Rae, the Scottish wife of Lhendup Dorji, a local landowner-turned-politician who came from an old Lepcha family. Nari Rustomji observed that 'Princess Coocoola saw in Hope a rival to her hold over the Prince, and Hope, in her turn, as soon made it clear that it was she, as Queen, who was the First Lady'.<sup>33</sup> Hope's contacts with powerful American senators prompted Coocoola to demonstrate to her brother that, 'she too was no less stalwart a champion of her country's cause. Her statements to the world press served however only to worsen the Prince's already sullied relations with the Indian authorities.'<sup>34</sup>

While the Indian journalists were speculating about Hope's possible CIA contacts, they forgot that it was Coocoola who had befriended American agents in Kolkata during and after World War II. But she was in her late teens and early twenties at that time and the agents she knew had most certainly already retired from active duty. Probably her main accomplishment in the U.S.A. was to arrange for two Sikkimese women to represent Sikkim at the Associated Country Women of the World conference in New York in 1967, a non-event for most Americans.

But there were concerns in India about possible American designs for Sikkim that could not be dismissed as tabloid gossip. After China's first nuclear test in 1964, a most peculiar, joint Indian-American espionage mission was undertaken in the Himalayas. The plan was to install a terrestrial communications device, powered by a nuclear electrical generator, on the top of Nanda Devi, a 7,816-metre peak in northern India, from where any unusual seismological activity in Tibet or Xinjiang would

be registered. The generator, known as System for Nuclear Auxiliary Power (SNAP) 19C consisted of five elements—a hot fuel block, radioactive fuel capsules placed in its core, thermoelectric generators mounted around it, insulation material, and the block's outer casing.<sup>35</sup>

It was not a bomb and could not explode unless equipped with a trigger. But the device was powered by radioactive material, which could be harmful to humans who came close to it, and it was not meant to be lost somewhere on a remote mountain top. But that was exactly what happened. Because of bad weather, most of the equipment had to be abandoned during the first attempt to scale Nanda Devi. Today, half a century later, the generator is still at large in the vicinity of the mountain.

Indian interest in co-operating with the Americans in espionage missions—and to support the Tibetan resistance—decreased considerably after that affair. The U.S.A. could afford to take a hard line on China, but India was becoming weary of the consequences of provoking its northern neighbour. China's involvement in the wars in Nagaland and its interest in the Naxalite uprising were warning signals that India could not ignore. While the Dalai Lama and his government-in-exile were allowed to remain in McLeodganj, Indian support for the armed Tibetan resistance declined in the late 1960s. Mustang, not Chakrata in northern India, became the main stronghold for the American-supported Tibetan guerrillas.

With India adopting a more pragmatic approach towards China—and, at the same time, forging a close relationship with the Soviet Union—it was not impossible that Sikkim, especially if it gained more independence, could become a new base for American operations in the Himalayas. Whether those concerns were warranted or not is hard to say, but they certainly played a role in determining India's attitudes towards attempts to gain more independence for Sikkim. Hope, of course, was the weak link there, a gullible American lady who took pride in calling herself 'Her Majesty' and 'Queen'—and who was decidedly anti-Indian.

But Hope was far from safe on her throne and constant palace intrigues in Gangtok further weakened her power and influence. A far more formidable foe than her sister-in-law Coocoola was Langford-Rae. Her husband held the patrician honorific *kazi*. So, she took the title of *Kazini* of Chakung, a town in west Sikkim from where her husband's ancestors came. The kazi belonged to a group of people who were frustrated with Sikkim's

'byzantine electoral system', and with the kazini by his side—and more often behind the scenes—began to advocate for a more democratic order. 36

In 1953, Thondup's father Tashi had introduced a mild form of constitutional monarchy with a State Council and an Executive Council. But the system was based on a Party Formula, whereby the seats in the State Council would be divided equally among the Bhutia-Lepcha and Nepalese communities, which meant that the constitution made the approximately 75 per cent Nepalese majority of the population equal to the 25 per cent Bhutia-Lepchas. This complicated voting system was replaced with an even more intricate method in 1958 and, in 1967, the strength of the State Council was raised from the initial 18 to 24, with the six additional seats to be nominated by the chogyal.<sup>37</sup>

There was widespread opposition to this undemocratic system, a movement that India encouraged because it would undermine the power of the chogyal, his American wife, and the nationalistic noblemen who supported them. India's involvement increased after a controversial election in January 1973, in which the pro-palace National Party won nine of the 18 contested seats. The two opposition parties, one of which was the kazi's Congress Party, claimed that vote rigging had taken place and demanded that the officials who were responsible for it be arrested. The demands were not met, and anti-chogyal demonstrations, some of them violent, were launched in Gangtok. A temporary solution was found in May, when the chogyal, India's Foreign Secretary Kewal Singh, and representatives of the political parties agreed to introduce a more democratic system. Under the agreement, the chief executive, or the head of the administration, was to be an Indian.<sup>38</sup>

Palace power was falling apart rapidly—and so was Thondup's marriage to Hope. There was infidelity on both sides and, on 15 August, she left with her son and daughter for New York. India's Independence Day was being celebrated in Gangtok. The writing was on the wall, and, in the 1974 election, the first that was really democratic, kazi's Congress Party routed the National Party by capturing 29 of the 32 seats in the new Assembly. One of the first resolutions it passed when it met in May was to reduce the powers of the chogyal. In June, some members of his Sikkim Guard tried, though unsuccessfully, to prevent the elected assembly members from entering the building where they were going to meet. On 4 September, the

Indian parliament, the Lok Sabha, voted in favour of making Sikkim an 'associate state'.

Beijing perceived this as an Indian takeover of Sikkim and China's foreign minister, Qiao Guanhua, lashed out against India in a speech before the UN General Assembly on 2 October 1974. He also seized the opportunity to condemn the Soviet Union: 'The Indian Government's annexation of Sikkim has aroused the opposition of the Sikkimese people as well as the Indian people and met with condemnation by India's neighbours and world public opinion. The Soviet propaganda organs alone sing praises of India. This shows that the Soviet revisionist socialimperialism is the boss behind the scenes of Indian expansionism.'<sup>39</sup>

With the kazi as Sikkim's first democratically elected chief minister and the kazini by his side, events unfolded briskly. On 10 April 1975, the Sikkim Assembly decided to abolish the institution of the chogyal. Thondup was confined to his palace where he remained under virtual house arrest. Four days later, a referendum was held and an overwhelming majority voted for a final merger agreement with India. On 23 April, the Lok Sabha voted to make Sikkim the 22nd state of the Indian Union, a decision that went into effect on 16 May.

Predictably, the Chinese condemned the moves. On 29 April, the Chinese government issued a statement saying that it 'solemnly states once again that it absolutely does not recognize India's annexation of Sikkim and firmly supports the people of Sikkim in their just struggle for national independence and in defence of state sovereignty against Indian expansionism'.<sup>40</sup>

But there were few signs of any such 'struggle' by 'the people of Sikkim'. The relatively smooth merger of Sikkim with the rest of India occurred during the rise of the country's new external intelligence agency, the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW). As opposition to the rule of the chogyal was mounting, it sent agents to Gangtok, Mangan, Namchi, and Gyalshing, the headquarters of the then four districts of Sikkim, where they collected information and, India began supporting the opposition from behind the scene.<sup>41</sup> According to researcher Asoka Raina, RAW operatives established a close relationship with people who were opposed to the monarchy and in favour of a more democratic and representative government.<sup>42</sup> And it was not difficult for RAW to reinforce the idea that

the chogyal had to go. Even the ethnic composition of Sikkim was heavily against the old monarchy. According to the 1971 census, the Nepalese formed an overwhelming majority of 134,000, with the Lepchas numbering only 25,000, and the Bhutias along with the related Tsongs made up about 23,000.<sup>43</sup>

Although achieved without military intervention, Sikkim could be seen the second major success achieved by India's security services. The first was scored during the much more violent creation of Bangladesh in 1971. India supported the freedom struggle launched by the Mukti Bahini fighters who wanted East Pakistan to break away and form an independent country, and RAW saw here a golden opportunity to secure the country's eastern frontiers, including the strategically important Siliguri Neck and the Sikkim corridor to the Tibetan frontier.

After the Indian intervention in the war, *The Sunday Times* of London reported in its 12 December 1971 issue, 'It took only 12 days for the Indian Army to smash through on its way to Dacca [Dhaka], an achievement reminiscent of the German *Blitzkrieg* across France in 1940. The strategy was the same—speed, ferocity, and flexibility.'<sup>44</sup> On 16 December, the Pakistan Army surrendered and, under international pressure, on 8 January 1972 Pakistan was forced to release the leader of the freedom struggle, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, who had been arrested in March 1971 and flown to West Pakistan, where he was kept in solitary confinement. Now, he returned in a plane provided by the British Royal Air Force to Dhaka, where a million people were waiting to greet him. East Pakistan had finally become the independent nation of Bangladesh.

The Bangladesh operation also helped New Delhi's security services locate and apprehend insurgent leaders from India's northeast who were based in Dhaka. Among them were Thinoselie Medom Keyho, who, together with Thuingaleng Muivah, had led the first Naga mission to China in 1967 and Neidelie, another member of the top leadership of the Naga National Council (NNC). The Mizo rebel chief Laldenga, who was also based in Dhaka at the time, managed to escape along with several of his men across the border to Myanmar. He later made it to Karachi in Pakistan with the help of the Pakistani consulate in Sittwe in Myanmar's Rakhine State.

The loss of their bases in erstwhile East Pakistan prompted the Mizo rebels to take the Chinese up on the offer of support Laldenga had received

when he visited Beijing in 1968 and 1970. The first batch of rebels that reached China in early 1973 had left the Mizo Hills in mid-1972, and, like the Nagas before them, trekked through Myanmar's Kachin State to Yunnan. It was only later, when Bangladesh turned from friend to foe, that the Mizos and other northeastern rebels were able to re-establish training camps and other hideouts in the forests of the Chittagong Hill Tracts in Bangladesh. But by then, RAW had agents and informants in all of India's neighbouring countries, certainly including Bangladesh, regardless of whether an anti-India or an India-friendly party was in power.

When RAW was formed in 1968, its first officers came from the external wing of the Intelligence Bureau and the Special Branch of the police. The first chief, Rameshwar Nath Kao, had belonged to the colonial Imperial Police, which was renamed the Indian Police Service after independence in 1947. As the agency grew, recruits were taken from the police, the military, and the civil service while many were also graduates from India's universities. Basically, RAW grew out of the old establishment and its more modern offshoots.

By sharp contrast, China's intelligence services were formed during Mao's revolutionary struggle and the stormy decades before the Communist victory in 1949. The CCP was formed when, in the last week of July 1921, Mao and 11 of his comrades met in a nondescript, grey brick building on Rue Wantz (now Xingye Road) in the French Concession in Shanghai. In those days, the city consisted of three sections, each with its own administration and law enforcement. The French Concession was the most lightly policed, and therefore the safest place in the city for a band of dissidents to meet. The International Settlement, where the British and the Americans dominated, was too tightly controlled with Sikh policemen brought in from India patrolling the streets, while Shanghai's native, Chinese-run part of the city was in the hands of the KMT, which at that time was not the Communists' enemy—but was nevertheless a rival force that could not really be trusted.

Until 1927, the CCP and the KMT had actually constituted a United Front, but the relationship began to sour after the death of Sun Yat-sen in 1925. Chiang Kai-shek, his successor as the KMT supremo, was a staunch anti-Communist allied with the Green Gang of Du Yuesheng, nicknamed Big-Eared Du, Huang Jinrong, better known as Pock-Marked Huang, and other gangsters in Shanghai. Pock-Marked Huang also happened to be a

senior officer in the French gendarmerie in Shanghai, which enabled him to carry out his criminal activities with near impunity. The CCP, on the other hand, gained a considerable following among the urban proletariat in Shanghai, China's most industrialized city, which, according to Marxist doctrine, should be their main power base.

The Communists were becoming powerful, threatening the KMT's tenuous hold on the city's administration. But Big-Eared Du came to the rescue of his old comrade Chiang Kai-shek. He mobilized hundreds of his and Pock-Marked Huang's hijackers, kidnappers, bodyguards, pimps, masseurs, manicurists, pick-pockets, gunmen, hawkers, waiters, and beggars, dressed them in blue and wrapped a band marked with the Chinese character for 'labour' around their arms. Guns were provided by Chiang's high command.

The attack began an hour before dawn on 12 April 1927, as the mobsters attacked a building where the Communist workers' militia were headquartered. The pickets surrounding the building were cut down in a hail of machine-gun fire. Other Communist offices and buildings were attacked as well, and, before the end of the day, seven hundred trade unionists were killed. It took eight truckloads and several hours to cart away the dead and the litter. With them went the last of the alliance between the KMT and the CCP. 45

The bloody crackdown in Shanghai in 1927 crippled the CCP and forced it to shift its main area of operation from the city to the countryside where the vast majority of the Chinese people lived. It was going to be a peasants' revolution, not a struggle led by the urban proletariat, which anyway was too small to rely on for someone who wanted to seize power in China.

The CCP was revived by the mutiny among some of the KMT's troops in Nanchang and the subsequent formation, on 1 August 1927, of the Chinese Workers' and Peasants Red Army, the forerunner to the PLA. Although based mainly in the countryside, it still had to rely on information collected in the cities. The crackdown, and the Communists' struggle to survive, thus led to the strengthening of the CCP's intelligence capabilities.

According to China scholar David Chambers, the role of intelligence was actually crucial in preserving the CCP from extinction through the difficult years of the 1920s and early 1930s. Reliable intelligence enabled the Communists to stage the successful breakout from Jiangxi that began the Long March in 1934 as well as to penetrate the KMT's political and

military establishment, which made the eventual seizure of power possible.<sup>46</sup> A close eye was also kept on dissident voices within the Party, which led to a climate of fear within their own ranks.

Before the 1949 communist takeover, the CCP had two intelligence agencies, Shehui Bu (the Social Bureau) and the Qingbao Bu (the Intelligence Bureau). This complex intelligence and security apparatus was headed by the notorious Kang Sheng between 1939 and 1946. He was, however, relieved of his command and stripped of other key posts when Mao and the top party leadership realized how much damage he had done to the Party with a 'Rectification Movement' in the early 1940s. Kang's campaign became especially vicious in 1943, when he detained over a thousand alleged 'spies' and 'enemy agents'. Among them were wellknown intellectuals who had helped build the Party. Between 40,000 and 80,000 Party members were expelled and many of those went insane, while others committed suicide, either by hanging or drowning themselves in rivers or wells.<sup>47</sup>

But even with his ouster as intelligence chief, Kang remained a trusted member of Mao's inner circle and remained a close confidante of the Chairman after the Communist takeover. In November 1949, China's new rulers established the Ministry of Public Security, a new entity that was supposed to take over the internal counterespionage and security duties of the Shehui Bu, which would then be abolished. But, in practice, the Shehui Bu remained operational inside China until 1953, possibly until as late as 1954.

The system turned out to be too unwieldy. So, in 1955, the Investigation Department of the Chinese Communist Party (ID/CCP) was established as the principal civilian intelligence agency with the Second Department, the General Staff Department of the PLA in charge of military intelligence duties. Reigning over all this was a body called the Central Intelligence Committee, about which very little is known.<sup>48</sup>

Those sweeping changes came after yet another purge within the CCP. Chen Bo, once called by Mao 'the Sherlock Holmes' of Yan'an' for his able intelligence work, was accused of being a British spy and a KMT agent. In 1950, he was dismissed from his post as head of the Security Department of Guangdong province, and imprisoned for more than 20 years. Yang Fan, who had collected intelligence that facilitated the

relatively peaceful takeover of Shanghai in May 1949 and later ran the city's counterintelligence operations, was sacked in 1951 and accused of being a KMT agent. Yang was imprisoned in 1955 and not released until 1978. Pan Hannian, a former CCP deputy intelligence chief who had led operations against the KMT in the early 1930s and against the Japanese during World War II, was arrested in 1955 and charged with having been a spy for the KMT as well as for Japan. He died in prison in 1977. According to Chambers, '[Pan] was the headline victim of an intelligence purge in which 800–1,000 cadres received compulsory job transfers, demotions or lengthy prison sentences, some committing suicide to avoid interrogation'.<sup>49</sup>

Perhaps fearing repercussions from other senior Party cadres he had purged in 1943 but which had then returned to power, Kang withdrew from public life after the Communist victory in the Chinese civil war, which enabled him to stay clear of the power struggles of the early 1950s. But then he re-appeared in 1956, now in charge of 'foreign relations', which meant meeting representatives of foreign fraternal parties and going on overseas trips. His first foreign visit was to East Germany in March as head of the Chinese delegation to the Third Congress of the ruling Socialist Unity Party. At home in China, he arranged to travel frequently with Mao, which gave him renewed access to the Chairman. Then, Kang became, of course, one of the masterminds and most brutal inquisitors of the Cultural Revolution in the 1960s and 1970s. He even led a thorough purge of the ID/CCP, which in March 1967 was placed under military control before being absorbed by China's military intelligence apparatus two years later.

Chaos reigned as Kang went berserk, accusing people of past and present 'crimes' such as being members of a 'Japanese Special Service Clique' during the 1937–45 war with Japan, and, in more recent years, of the 'Soviet Revisionist Special Service Group' or the 'Shielding the Hidden US-Chiang Kai-shek Organisation Group'.<sup>50</sup> The then ID/CCP de facto chief Zou Dapeng committed suicide with his wife, herself a senior intelligence operative, rather than having to face the kind of interrogation he had endured in the hands of Kang's men during the so-called Rectification Movement in 1943. In Shanghai, over 1,000 cadres from the Public Security Bureau, which would be the equivalent of the special branch of the police in most countries, were placed in custody and 147

were murdered during investigations of what was termed 'their past conduct'.<sup>51</sup>

It is somewhat of a mystery that this seemingly fatuous security apparatus with its chequered past was able, before, during, and after the 1962 War, to collect such precise intelligence about the Indian border and indeed about the situation beyond it. Before the war, India's more conventional intelligence services, as Lieutenant General Brij Mohan Kaul puts it, 'compared unfavourably'<sup>52</sup> with their Chinese counterparts. But Mao did succeed, most likely because it was of paramount importance for him to become the undisputed leader of China and the Third World. Moreover, India was seen not only as a geopolitical rival but also an enemy because it granted asylum to the Dalai Lama in 1959 and allowed him to set up base in McLeodganj, from where he continued to advocate Tibetan independence. Here, good intelligence work was needed. Cool heads prevailed and a distance was apparently kept from paranoid accusations against real and imagined 'enemies' within the CCP, which were rampant at the time, tearing the Communist establishment apart.

Beside the more traditional security services, a crucial role in China's intelligence gathering operations as well as outright subversive activities on behalf of the authorities was played by the International Liaison Department of the CCP Central Committee (ILD/CCP). Divided geographically into ten different bureaus, the third was responsible for India, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Nepal, Indonesia, and Malaysia. According to a declassified CIA report, its initial duties consisted of 'finding, investigating and eventually supporting pro-Chinese splinter groups and malcontents, encouraging them to form so-called "Marxist-Leninist" parties in opposition to pro-Soviet "revisionist" parties'.<sup>53</sup> In this task, the CIA stated, the Department provided 'funds to keep the promising groups active, and offering political and organisational training on Chinese soil where it was deemed profitable'.<sup>54</sup>

Before the Cultural Revolution, the ILD's activities were supervised by Deng Xiaoping, Peng Zhen, and Liu Shaoqi, which meant that its entire leadership was purged in the mid- and late 1960s, after which it was replaced by a group of PLA officers appointed and controlled by Kang Sheng and his wife Cao Yi'ou, an equally rabid ideologue. According to the CIA, it was not until late 1970 that a new kind of ILD began to take

shape with the reappearance of several veteran members who had been missing during the Cultural Revolution. Shen Chien, a civilian who had been put in charge by Kang, was sidelined and, the CIA noted,

Kang's own disappearance shortly afterwards left a leadership vacuum. This was filled by Keng Piao [Geng Biao], Peking's [Beijing's] ambassador to Albania, who returned in January 1971 and was named to head the ILD in March. During this period, the military presence which had dominated the ILD was reduced.55

The 'new' ILD emerged at a time when the Cultural Revolution was running out of steam, and more infighting erupted within the CCP. After the clashes with the Soviet Union on the River Ussuri in March 1969, Mao's then right-hand man, Lin Biao, was at the height of his power. He was the one who had initiated the publication of Mao's famous *Little Red Book* and played a dominant role during the Cultural Revolution. But then, unexpectedly to most observers in the outside world, he died in an air crash in Mongolia on 13 September 1971. What actually happened is still unclear, but in the official version of events, Lin Biao, his wife Ye Qun, their son Lin Liguo, and six subordinates were supposedly on their way to the Soviet Union following a failed coup attempt against Mao in China.

The circumstances of the alleged plot as well as the crash remain hazy to this day. The official Chinese version says the plane ran out of fuel. According to conspiracy theorists, however, the plane was shot down by a missile fired by either Soviet or Chinese forces. But a report on the crash compiled by Mongolia's intelligence agencies with help from Soviet experts after the crash suggests it was due to pilot error. The plane's three engines were not damaged before the crash, which would have been the case if it had been fired upon. The plane slammed into the ground at a speed of between 500 and 600 kilometres per hour, and the resulting explosion was followed by a fire that burned for a 'long time', the report said, suggesting there was plenty of fuel on board.<sup>56</sup>

It was at this time that the Indian intervention in East Pakistan, which led to the formation of Bangladesh, occurred—and it is worth noting that Islamabad got only limited support from Beijing in that conflict that was tearing Pakistan apart. According to another classified report compiled by the CIA after the Bangladesh war,

In fact, China did much less for Pakistan in 1971 than they had done during the Indian-Pakistani war of 1965. This time the Chinese avoided diversionary actions on the Indian-Chinese border. In contrast

to 1965, they kept their border patrolling down, avoided moving bombers into Tibet, and made only pro forma protests of alleged Indian violations well after the event. In this way, the Chinese reduced any Indian concern about Chinese intervention—concern which, the Chinese reasoned, might induce New Delhi to allow the Soviets an enlarged role in South Asia.57

Another plausible reason for the Chinese inaction could be problems at home. The leadership in Beijing was shattered by the sudden death of Lin Biao, and Mao himself is said to have been depressed and become a recluse after the possible betrayal by someone who until then had been considered his anointed successor. Mao turned to some of his old comrades, ultraleftists whom he had denounced in the past. Wang Hongwen, a 38-year-old cadre from Shanghai, was brought to Beijing and made CCP vicechairman. But Mao was ailing, and his wife, Jiang Qing, was in charge when he was unable to provide the CCP with any kind of coherent guidance. She brought in propaganda specialists Zhang Chunqiao and Yao Wenyuan—and the quartet later became known under the pejorative label 'The Gang of Four'. They saw Deng Xiaoping with his—by CCP standards —moderate views as the main threat to their grip on power. He was asked to take part in a series of self-criticism sessions, admitted to a number of ideological mistakes, and Mao, siding with his wife and her three companions, asked the CCP's Central Committee to 'discuss Deng's mistakes thoroughly'.<sup>58</sup>

At that time, the top leadership was getting decimated as one revolutionary veteran after another died. The first to pass away was the notorious Kang Sheng. He died of bladder cancer on 16 December 1975, and the official media spared no praise at his funeral. Kang was 'a proletarian revolutionary, a Marxist theoretician, and a glorious fighter against revisionism'.<sup>59</sup>

Zhou Enlai and Mao had been too weak to attend, and of those two, Zhou died first. He suffered from bladder cancer as well, and it took his life on 8 January 1976. Mao was absent, but Deng Xiaoping, who was on his way back into power, delivered a speech at this state funeral on 15 January. The death of Kang was probably not mourned by many, but in April, huge crowds gathered in Tiananmen Square in Beijing to honour Zhou. They openly criticized the Gang of Four, and indirectly, therefore, even Mao himself. The police, and later, security forces, intervened in this rare show of unauthorized public discontent.

Then came Mao's turn. He died on 9 September of the same year. His last public appearance had been on 27 May, when he had received the visiting Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. After the death of the old Chairman, his official portrait was hung on the wall of the main gate at Tiananmen with a banner reading 'Carry on the cause left by Chairman Mao and carry on the cause of proletarian revolution to the end'.<sup>60</sup>

Inevitably, an intense power struggle followed the death of the old Chairman—and it was time for Deng to make his final comeback. Mao had appointed a loyal follower, Hua Guofeng, as his successor, but he was weak and unable to keep the fragmented CCP together. The first to come under attack was the Gang of Four. Before the end of the year, they were purged, arrested, and later put on trial.

Deng who had been in and out of power since the Cultural Revolution, was finally the new strongman by 1980. Hua was replaced by Zhao Ziyang as premier in 1980 and as CCP chief by Hu Yaobang the following year. Both were Deng supporters. Hu exonerated over three million people who had suffered during the Cultural Revolution. Zhao was one of the driving forces behind the new, more open economic policies that were launched in the early 1980s. The Mao era with its rigid ideologies and fanatical policies seemed to be over.

The return of Deng also heralded a new era in China's foreign policy. The Three Worlds concept was still very much alive, but now with a different tone and emphasis. 'China, though a big country, has never sought a special position in the third world. It is not the leader of the third world, not now and never will it be, because such a thing runs counter to the principles of China's relations with foreign countries.'<sup>61</sup> And China now sought friendly relations with as many foreign countries as possible. This was a definite departure from Mao's Three World theory, according to which friendly relations could be upheld even with capitalist nations if the common enemy was the Soviet Union, but where 'the people of the world support each other in their just struggles62…the peoples of all countries are rising. A new historical period of struggle against US imperialism and Soviet revisionism has begun'.<sup>63</sup>

Cynics would argue that China under Deng began to aspire to become a global political and economic superpower rather than a revolutionary model for 'the oppressed masses' of the world. Chinese support for

revolutionary movements in Asia gave way to business deals and trade agreements. Deng did indeed live up to his image during the Cultural Revolution as a 'capitalist roader', and began to transform China's peasantbased society into an industrialized nation.

India had to remain cool in its relations with such an unpredictable and volatile neighbour, which could swing from revolutionary belligerence in the early years of the People's Republic to total madness during the Cultural Revolution—and then on to cut-throat capitalism. The 1962 War and its aftermath were only symptoms of China's shifting perception of its role in world politics and, according to Mao himself, had nothing to do with the border dispute.

Meanwhile in Sikkim, the intelligence war between India and China continued unabated. But the days of confrontation, which had prevailed throughout the 1960s, were over. India and China began to negotiate the possibility of cross-border trade and, in June 2006, a historic agreement was signed to allow such trade. On 6 July, after 44 years of closure, border trade at Nathu La was resumed. The agreement allowed residents living in the border areas of the two countries to trade about 28 items mentioned in Sino-Indian border trade agreements of 1991, 1992, and 2003.<sup>64</sup> That list has since been changed several times, though it is still limited to certain items, and trade is not allowed all year round. But it has resulted in an influx of Chinese consumer goods to markets not only in Sikkim but also in West Bengal and northeastern India. Even in Tawang, in Arunachal Pradesh, close to the Chinese border, Chinese items for sale have been imported via Sikkim.

Trade, and not only with China, as well as tourism, cottage industry, and local entrepreneurship coupled with generous grants from the centre in New Delhi, have brought prosperity to Sikkim. It is among the smallest of India's states and union territories, but its per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is the third highest in the country after Goa and Delhi. The literacy rate, which stands at 82.2 per cent, is also one of the highest in the country, well above the national average of 68.9 per cent.<sup>65</sup> It is not uncommon to see cars in Gangtok with the old Sikkimese flag as a sticker in the back window, but there is no secessionist movement in the state. Even Thondup's and Hope's daughter, Hope Leezum, has returned to Sikkim from New York and is married to a Sikkimese man. They live in

Gangtok, where they help operate the Tsuklakhang Trust, which manages the palace and the old royal monastery.