# **Disasters**

### **Jody Glittenberg**

# **IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING DISASTERS**

Disasters, no doubt, have always been part of human history, long before literate societies emerged to record them, yet, in the 21st century they have become increasingly significant in shaping human societies. The everincreasing global population tends to cluster around points of geophysical niches prone to natural disasters such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornados, flooding, and droughts. And, the ever-increasing industrial use of energy, much of it non-renewable, promotes destruction of vital resources leading to potential catastrophes, such as global warming. The vulnerability of marginalized populations, such as refugees and migrants, has increased as many people are separated from long-standing sociocultural support systems. Indeed, massive and rapid global communication and transportation capabilities make us, as a human village, more urgently in need of understanding disasters. Recognizing the importance and urgency of dealing with disasters whereever they occur, the United Nations declared the 1990s as the Decade for Disaster Reduction.

# **HISTORY OF RESEARCH ON DISASTERS**

An early study in 1915 of two munition ships' collision in the harbor of Halifax, Nova Scotia, marks the beginning of disaster research in the United States by Samuel Henry Prince, a sociologist, who studied the process of recovery from the devastation that left 2,000 people dead and another 6,000 injured. When newspapers resumed publication it was used by Prince (1920) as a marker of the process. No attention was given to the pre-existing conditions nor to the cultural patterns surrounding the catastrophic event. In 1932 Carr suggested that a classification system of typing disasters as "localized" or "diffused," and whether they were "instantaneous" or "progressive," would be helpful in the study of the nature and scale of such physical and social disruptions (Carr, 1932). Until after World War II, disaster research remained largely focused on the traumatic event and the geological and atmospheric causes. Most studies investigated ways to forewarn citizens and to control or reduce the damage.

A broader interest in the social aspects of disasters followed the human destruction resulting from the impact of atomic bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. For instance, Anthony Wallace, an anthropologist, focused upon the organization of the community and the formal organization of the rescue and relief organizations. Using a time–space conceptual model, Wallace viewed a destructive tornado in Worcester, Pennsylvania, as a behavioral event in which the dynamics of the cultural system were enacted at both the individual and the community levels. He saw the interactive processes of the relief efforts as promoting conflict and transformation (Wallace, 1954). Fritz and Williams (1957), sociologists, and Wolfenstein (1957), a psychologist, related their studies to the collective behavior of human beings in disasters, and Baker and Chapman (1964), sociologists, pressed forward in viewing the interaction between man and society as it related to disasters. Drabek (1970), a sociologist, began studies of past patterns as important in research disasters, and Turner (1981) viewed collective behaviors and social movements in his disaster studies. Also important were the early and multiple contributions of Quarantelli, a sociologist who researched people and organizations under stress (Quarantelli, 1957, 1978). Medical systems emerged as a 20th century disaster relief force by transporting medical units of rapid, efficient aid to all parts of the world, and set into practice readiness training and triaging principles to reduce loss of life and destruction in times of catastrophe (Glittenberg, 1989). Stress and coping, so much a part of human adaptation to disaster, became important models for treating posttraumatic stress syndromes as sequelae of devastating events (Glittenberg, 1981).

Studies done during the early post-war era were concerned primarily with prediction of disasters, warning systems, the immediate impact and the aftermath of catastrophes with little or no attention given to examining historical precursors or sociocultural patterns. Due in part to anthropologists such as Doughty (1971), Glittenberg (1981), and Oliver-Smith (1986), who each studied earthquake destruction in Central and South America, a new direction in disaster research emerged. Using diachronic and comparative methodologies of anthropology, they and other scientists began to view such catastrophic events within an ecological framework (Hewitt, 1983). Current research addresses human societies and their environments—physical, biological, and sociocultural as inseparable entities in constant flux, and trying to retain equilibrium (Moore, Van Ardsdale, Glittenberg, & Aldrich, 1987). This mutually interactive ecological model is the most promising approach used in today's research of disasters.

# **DEFINITION OF DISASTER**

"What is a disaster?" asked Quarantelli (1998), and 12 scientists responded; their views fall within two categories: (1) a disaster is an objectively identifiable phenomenon; or (2) a subjective, socially constructed process (Oliver-Smith, 1999, p. 22). The subjective definition is more useful to anthropology as it views a disaster as a socially constructed crisis in which the significance to the survival of the society is more important than the physical structures that were destroyed. This definition allows for a wide variety of disrupting events to be considered as disasters, such as a flu epidemic, a major earthquake, or the collapse of a banking system. Within the disruptive process, culturally prescribed ways in which people deal with the system collapse or societal readjustment can be studied and understood.

# **PERSPECTIVES FROM ANTHROPOLOGY**

Anthropology as a holistic discipline includes several important concepts in its perspective on disasters, such as: (1) diachronicity, adaptation, and evolution; (2) the comparative nature of affected units including both micro and macro levels; and (3) the vulnerability and resilience of individuals and groups that are affected. Also, it is important to acknowledge that it is the groups' ethos that shapes the ways in which people respond to crises. When under conditions of stress, it is the culture of a group that overrides individual reactions, as it builds group alliances in order to avert overwhelming stress. Hoffman (1999a) points out that disasters are instigators of essential change. She concludes that through anthropological research it is possible to gain a greater understanding of the basic sociocultural structure of a group in crisis, as deep cultural values and norms are exposed and made explicit.

*Diachronicity, adaptation, and evolution* are concepts that reveal conditions and processes adopted by populations to manipulate and use physical and social surroundings for their benefit. Making shelter, developing subsistence methods, evolving social institutions, and use of power are some processes that develop slowly over time in ways that have an adaptive ecological "fit." However, a rapid shift in conditions, such as in a flood or earthquake, can quickly destroy those adaptive environments, so that immediate change is critical for survival. Long-held mores or beliefs may no longer be adaptive, and resistance to change can prove harmful or fatal. On the other hand, dangerous, shifting conditions may go unheeded by the people as they continue in their longstanding cultural, non-adaptive ways until the processes are so out of balance that dire conditions exist. Global warming is such a process that has been predicted by many scientists to be potentially harmful and perhaps fatal, yet the condition manifests itself so subtly on a daily basis that few seem to feel the need to alter their ways of using the environment.

*Comparative nature of anthropological research* is an important perspective as the nature and scale of physical events and sociocultural disruptions vary at the micro and macro levels of different social groups. Understanding the social forces at these levels can aid in understanding differential responses to catastrophe. The holistic nature of anthropology allows for comparison, analysis, and explanation of variation in response to a similar disastrous event. A good example of such a comparison is the Glittenberg study from 1977 to 1987 of four squatter settlements of about 15,000 inhabitants in each, following the 1976 Guatemala earthquake. Glittenberg (1987) found variation over the 10-year period in the lives of very poor, marginalized people who were all uprooted by the earthquake and needed to start new existences in squatter settlements. One highly energized, chaotic settlement leaped forward, raising their level of living to a new high, while another languished in anomie until outside assistance was

#### **Methodologies used in Anthropological Disaster Research 159**

received. Another settlement suffered further demise as a new river (a result of the shifting land from the earthquake) further destroyed roads and agricultural land. The fourth settlement had mixed starts and stops depending upon the whims of unreliable leadership. Glittenberg concludes in this comparative study that a higher level of living, harmony, and balance were due to social forces including: democratic leadership, access to economic opportunity, and outside aid assistance (Glittenberg, 1989).

*Vulnerability and resilience* are characteristics that are key to understanding the consequences of disasters. These characteristics can be identified at the individual, household, and community levels, and the factors that contribute to these states of being include physical, cultural, political, and economic conditions. As Zaman (1999) points out, the vulnerability of a social system to natural disaster is determined by complex socioeconomic characteristics of a population that are not merely the physical or natural factors alone (p. 208). Glittenberg uses both the concepts of vulnerability and resilience in determining the protective and non-protective sociocultural factors in a small Mexican-American town, a center of drug-trafficking and violence. In exploring these concepts further, she urges sociohistorical forces that shape and create such communities be investigated. As a discipline, anthropology is at the forefront in studying such atrisk populations. For example, Glittenberg found that ethnic minorities, elders, female-headed households, refugees, and new immigrants, were all at-risk households (Glittenberg, 2001). The economic differences between classes are increasing and put the poorest class as the most vulnerable. Recent changes in corporate holdings, take-overs, and neoliberal economic policies have further increased the income gap between the poor and the rich in the United States. Oliver-Smith (1999, p. 91) notes, "It is well-documented that in the U.S. environmental risks and disasters' effects are distributed unequally by class, race, ethnicity, gender, and age."

Glittenberg found interesting patterns among the resilient households in the 1997–2001 National Institute on Drug Abuse funded study, noting that

Such a description fits the definition of a disaster by Bates and Pelanda (1994, p. 149) who state, "Disasters occur when the limits of vulnerability of a system are exceeded." Thus, the perspective of anthropology in viewing the patterns of society that promote vulnerability is important as it permits finding ways to resolve the disaster by countering vulnerability and/or building resilience. It is the sociocultural process/event that when combined with conditions of vulnerability in a social group can result in a disruption that is viewed as a catastrophe or disaster. A society that continues to perpetuate vulnerability is indeed a target for disaster and this persistence may be seen as a condition of a society's total adaptational capability (Oliver-Smith, 1998b).

Aptekar (1994) in his monumental global perspective on disasters raises numerous moral issues related to bringing international relief to the most vulnerable states, the developing countries. As he notes, there are insufficient resources to reduce vulnerability in developing countries, and decisions are based on political factors regarding which disasters will receive relief. Aptekar claims there are 15 deaths related to disasters in developing countries to every one death in a developed country. For instance, a single flood killed almost 4 million people who lived on the Yellow River in China. This dangerous abode, he notes, was not occupied because the people were ignorant of the danger, but because the river was a source of their livelihood (Aptekar, 1994, p. 159).

# **METHODOLOGIES USED IN ANTHROPOLOGICAL DISASTER RESEARCH**

*Archeology, an anthropological method*, provides an in-depth historical account by rebuilding the event through scientific reconstruction of the material culture. Through such material, social structure, political economic vulnerabilities, terrain, habitat, mortuary, and belief systems can be reconstructed through evidence left by the people. Material evidence sheds much light on how the group coped or met their demise. Chronicles and archives also bring to light how segments of the society compromised, coped, and evolved. These documents may reveal in minute detail how societies interpreted the meaning of these disruptive events.

resilient households are not more economically wealthy but rather they have more sociocultural support, as they are not among the migrating, undocumented people who live within the shadows of their uncertain shelters, looking for ways to counter their catastrophic displacement and fears of deportation. These vulnerable people are easy targets for the drug lords who are trafficking their own disasters. (Glittenberg, 2001., p. 2)

*Ethnography* is the major anthropological research method used in disaster studies. Researching a society's pre-disaster conditions as well as its post-disaster ones has been part of ethnographic research, and although most disasters by their very nature are unpredicted, there are examples of data collected prior to a disaster that are used within the ethnography. Some of the known examples of pre-disaster ethnographic data are the Doughtys' long involvement and research in the Andes prior to the 1970 500-year earthquake (Doughty & the Doughty, 1968). And, another is Sheets' (1979) study of the volcanic activity prior to the eruption of Ilopango Volcano in 1987 or his other experiences in Mexico's volcanic regions in 1992 (Sheets, 1987, 1992). Glittenberg's study of fertility in Guatemala became the pre-disaster study upon which the level of living data were used to measure change following the 1976 earthquake in the highlands of Guatemala (Glittenberg, 1976). Ethnography as a research method is diachronic and holistic. The social life of a cultural group is documented by extensive fieldwork gained from living with the people and studying their patterns of coping, and expressions of meaning. Glittenberg documents in her 1994 ethnography some of the myths and legends that appeared following the 1976 earthquake as examples of peoples' interpretations of and meanings given to these events (Glittenberg, 1994).

*Decontextualizing the narratives* gained from ethnographic interviews is another source of data in the study of disasters. Hoffman's vivid picture of her own experience of being a victim of a firestorm that swept the hills where she resided in Oakland, California, on October 20, 1991, is an emic view that adds interpretation to the phases of individual coping and recovery. Her sensitivity to the conflicts and frustrations encountered by victims contributes a unique model for understanding cross-culturally and by gender the phases of coping with a catastrophic event (Hoffman, 1999b).

# **A CASE STUDY: THE 1976 NSF GUATEMALA EARTHQUAKE**

Case studies are often used in anthropology to elucidate theory and illustrate practical applications. There are numerous case studies that could be used in this entry, such as Oliver-Smith's study of Peru's 500-year earthquake, as also written about by Doughty (1999) in his 18-year coverage of that same earthquake. Another important viewpoint is found in Button's study of the media response to oil spills in Great Britain. In respect to the brevity of this entry, it is suggested that the reader accesses a very comprehensive, excellent book edited by Oliver-Smith and Hoffman in which these and other case studies are described. The title is *The Angry Earth* published by Routledge Press in 1999.

The case study that will be described is the 1976 Guatemala earthquake, as I, Glittenberg, was a Co-Principal Investigator along with Frederick L. Bates, a rural sociologist, Principal Investigator, and Timothy Farrell, also an anthropologist and a Co-Principal Investigator. The study was funded for over \$1 million dollars in 1977 and extended through 1982. Following the termination of the NSF study little formal work was done due to the civil war that was growing in intensity, especially in the highland research sites. I returned to selected sites to update my findings on three occasions, 1987, 1992, and 1998. The official title of the NSF Study was *A Longitudinal and Cross-Cultural Study of the Post Impact Phases of a Major National Disaster, 1977–82*. The study was housed at the Instituto Nutricion de Centro America y Panama (INCAP) in Guatemala City, the University of Georgia (Bates), and the University of Colorado (Glittenberg).

### **Synopsis of the Event**

Sleeping Guatemalans were unprepared for the massive natural disaster that struck at 3:04 a.m., February 4, 1976, measuring 7.5 on the Richter scale. In a Republic with 5.2 million people, within 35 seconds nearly 25,000 lost their lives and 75,000 were seriously injured. A million people were left homeless as the deadly earthquake demolished their adobe houses. Throughout the Republic, few families were unaffected. Heaviest damage was in the western highlands and along the Motagua River leading to the Caribbean coast. In Guatemala City, the capital, with a population of almost one million, 200,000 were left homeless, and many other houses were severely damaged. Tents and makeshift shelters of plastic sheeting, tin, and cardboard became home for many, well into the first year after the disaster. As the disaster struck in the middle of winter, cold weather was an ever-present reality, and the monsoons began by mid-May. Mortalities related indirectly to the disaster occurred long into the second year, including drowning of infants in the rushing monsoons when their flimsy shelters left them unprotected,

#### **A Case Study: The 1976 NSF Guatemala Earthquake 161**

and others died as the result of various infections carried through contaminated water systems.

Glittenberg, who had done field work in the western highlands for her doctoral dissertation only months before, returned two days following the earthquake as part of the Salvation Army rescue team. This team was one of over 100 relief agencies that sent people and tons of emergency supplies immediately into Guatemala City. The influx of relief workers was seen by some local people as another "disaster." Many left after delivering their emergency supplies, but others stayed, some as long as five years, to give long-term recovery aid.

Guatemala had been the scene of many natural disasters in the past, and so it had an Emergency Plan in place to deal with such events. This Plan proved to be invaluable, and it could be used as a model for other disaster-prone areas. At the first warning of the earthquake, the Plan went into action, and all electricity in the capital was shut down; this action probably prevented many fires. However, an electrical generator at INCAP, used to ensure that fragile research projects would not be affected by the whims of an unreliable public electricity system, remained running and unfortunately a major fire resulted, destroying valuable research projects as well as the superb research library.

The Emergency Committee (eventually renamed the Committee for Reconstruction) had a far-sighted, long-term plan as to how relief aid could reach the most needy and in an equitable fashion. Each town and village, each departmental center, and sections within the capital were given a sponsorship, drawn by lottery, of a country or relief agency, such as Norwegian Red Cross, or a country, such as Puerto Rico, to assist them in reconstructing their habitats. That country or agency then became the donor and manager of the recovery process of their assigned unit. The Committee for Reconstruction centralized information, and through this process held weekly meetings in the capital to which an elected representative from each unit, such as a town, came. Each unit had its own elected committee of reconstruction and the elected representative for the national Committee. As the plan was carried out, this process led to strengthening civil participation in decision-making and had far-reaching repercussions beyond the disaster event.

### **Structure of the Research Team**

Glittenberg and Farrell met at INCAP during the first week following the earthquake; they had not known each other before, but both were deeply involved in the lives of Guatemalans and saw the disaster as an opportunity to study the process of recovery. Bates, a seasoned disaster researcher, was quickly recruited to be the Principal Investigator and thanks to the enthusiasm of another disaster researcher, George Baker, a Program Manager at NSF, the study was funded. Baker saw great potential in such a study of how aid was sent, received, and the overall benefit to a developing country. A research team of 25 Guatemalans was hired and trained, and all but one (who left to marry in Spain) remained for the full course of the five-year study. These researchers included a field supervisor, household interviewers, mappers, and data entry people. Numerous doctoral students were given field work opportunities. The original data are still held at the University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia.

The research plan was to test the hypothesis presented by Prince in 1920 that a disaster would stimulate change. The major research question was: Is the level of living increased following a disaster? The level of living was defined as a composite score of culturally appropriate material goods/wages or income, found/or not found in the households over a five-year period of time. The amount of damage to the dwelling as well as the amount and type of aid received were also figured within the index of the level of living of each household. Numerous research strategies were used to build a case study of how a nation coped and recovered from a devastating national disaster. The following research strategies were used in the study: a 1,400 random household survey with three waves of interviewing; ethnographies, including community inventories, of each research site; in-depth interviews of relief agency leaders; and collection of life histories and narratives of the earthquake.

A representative sample was purposively set up to match the characteristics of the population of Guatemala. There were 19 research sites (where damage and loss of life were heavy) and seven control sites (where there was no notable damage or loss of life). Inhabitants within Guatemala City, the capital, had no comparative control site, so four squatter settlements, of about 15,000 each, were chosen for comparison, as two were largely Indian and two were Ladino. Other characteristics of the random sample were equal units of Ladino and Indian populations in both highland and lowland areas. Pre-disaster data were available in a few sites from a recent INCAP study and from Glittenberg's dissertation data. Three waves of interviews were done on the 1,400 household random sample in order to study diachronically the process of recovery. The units of population matched from small village, small town, medium to large towns along the parameters of ethnicity, and geographical location.

A short summary of the findings is all that is possible here, but they are significant in understanding the principles of effective disaster relief. The size of the population did affect the changes in level of living, as the smallest units, the villages, and the large towns fared the least well in recovery. It was reasoned that these units simply did not receive an equal amount of outside relief aid, and it was speculated that the remoteness of some villages and the lack of organization in the large towns prevented intimate, face-to-face linkages with relief agencies. Small towns and the capital received the most aid, probably because of access to roads, and to frequent relationships with relief agencies. These factors probably made cooperation and commitment more focused and accountable. Leadership in the sites was a critical factor, and although recovery was continuous, the interruptions due to conflict resolution were often barriers to a smooth process of recovery. Sites where a democratic process was retained were the most progressive, but also where individual liberties were supported. One example was Sanarate, a small Ladino town in the lowlands supported by Jewish Relief Services. This town progressed rapidly as supplies were plentiful and equally distributed, and they had good access to public roads. New roles were found as Sanarate Ladino women became actively involved in rebuilding their homes, as modeled by Israeli women builders.

The question of interfering with the local economy through disaster relief was answered clearly by the study. All supplies were needed; food and shelter, in particular, were in short supply well into the second year. People were hungry and the local food supply, such as beans, was insufficient to feed them. The local bean production was undiminished and profits remained at a pre-disaster level. Strong controls were in place by the government in order to keep the prices of materials and foods from sky-rocketing. The study concluded that the disaster relief food and shelter supplies were needed. The types of housing that proved the best investments over a five-year period were the stronger, earthquake-resistant dwellings that were culturally appropriate. The quickly built wooden shacks and the tent cities were meant only for short-term shelter, and in the long run, the wooden shacks were the least cost-effective.

The way the relief supplies were delivered was found to be more important than the actual supplies. For instance, those relief agencies that gave away supplies were found not to be as effective over the long haul, as they did not build the infrastructure essential for longterm functioning. One of the most effective groups worked carefully with a local planning committee over a six-month period of time before building *one single house*. The infrastructure of the settlement was carefully laid out, and the lotteries drawn openly for the individual lots. Grants permitted the people to buy their own land and dwelling with a 20-year payback system at very low interest rates. The local governing board was headed by women and much of the construction was done by them while their husbands worked a long distance from their homes. In 2001 the settlement, *Carolingia*, was a thriving suburb of the capital with high schools, a technical college, a television station, and two factories. The homes were all occupied and most have been improved upon, showing a sense of pride in ownership. The actual household survey did confirm the hypothesis made by Prince, in 1920, that a disaster does stimulate change, and in this case an increase in the level of living.

Other changes spawned by the disaster clearly are visible as one studies Guatemala in the 21st century. Some writers conclude that the earthquake was a watershed event that increased a disaster of another kind—the 35-year civil war, a scorched land, and a reign of terrorism (Green, 1999). Others have claimed that the earthquake brought new religions into awareness and created a new evangelism. From seeing the vast number of factories and new industries that were spawned and the agribusinesses in the highlands, the earthquake did spawn conflict and transformation (Annis, 1987; Brydon & Grant, 1989; Petersen, 1992; Watanabe, 1992). Other changes include the indigenous rights movement, with the Nobel Peace Prize awarded to Rigoberta Menchu, an indigenous Guatemalan woman, for her role in drawing attention to the abuse of human rights not only in Guatemala but throughout the world (Menchu, 1992). Analysis of all these changes is beyond the scope of this entry, but it can be noted that the disaster brought into play new leaders and new ideas came from outside relief workers.

# **CONCLUSION**

A disaster occurs when the sociocultural structure of a group is vulnerable and an event overwhelms the limits

#### **162 Disasters**

#### **References 163**

of that system. Looking at such an event cross-culturally, holistically, and diachronically through a cultural meaning lens is the approach anthropology takes to investigate disasters of all types. The study of disasters and the processes of recovering is a fertile field for anthropologists who can use such situations to develop theory and practice related to adaptation and survival.

# **REFERENCES**

- Annis, R. (1987). *God and production in a Guatemalan town*. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Aptekar, L. (1994). *Environmental disasters in global perspective*. New York: G. K. Hall/Macmillan.
- Baker, G. W., & Chapman, D. W. (Eds.). (1964). *Man and society in disaster*. New York: Basic Books.
- Bates, F. L., & Pelanda, C. (1994). An ecological approach to disasters. In R. R. Dynes & K. J. Tierney (Eds.), *Disasters, collective behavior, and social organization* (pp. 145–162). Newark: University of Delaware Press.
- Brydon, L., & Grant, S. (1989). *Women in the Third World: Gender issues in rural and urban areas*. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Carr, L. J. (1932). Disaster and the sequence pattern concept of social change. *American Journal of Sociology*, *8*, 207–218.
- Doughty, P. L. (1971). From disaster to development. *Americas, 23*(5), 25–35.
- Doughty, P. L. (1999). Plan and pattern in reaction to earthquake: Peru, 1970–1998. In A. Oliver-Smith & S. Hoffman (Eds.), *The angry earth* (pp. 234–256). New York: Routledge.
- Doughty, P. L., & Doughty, M. (1968). *Huaylas, an Andean district in search of progress*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Drabek, T. E. (1970). Methodology of studying disasters: Past patterns and future possibilities. *American Behavioral Scientists, 13*(3), 331–343.
- Dynes, R. (1974). *Organizational behavior in disaster*. Newark: University of Delaware, Disaster Research Center.
- Fritz, C. E., & Williams, R. B. (1957). The human being in disasters: A research perspective. *Annals of American Academy of Political and Social Science, 309*, 42–51.
- Glittenberg, J. (1976). *A comparative study of fertility in highland Guatemala: An Indian and a Ladino town*. Unpublished dissertation, University of Colorado.
- Glittenberg, J. (1981). Variations in migrant settlements. *Image, 13*, 43–47.
- Glittenberg, J. (1987). The human ecosystem and human adaptation a contemporary view. In L. Moore, P. Van Arsdale, J. Glittenberg, & R. Aldrich (Eds.), *The biocultural basis of health* (pp. 15–53). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Glittenberg, J. (1989, July/September). Socioeconomic and psychological, impact of disaster recovery. *Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, 4*, 21–30.
- Glittenberg, J. (1994). *To the mountain and back*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.

- Glittenberg, J. (2001). *Community as slayer, community as healer: A study of alcohol, drugs, and violence in a Mexican American town* (Final unpublished report). Tucson, University of Arizona, National Institute on Drug Abuse.
- Green, L. (1999). *Fear as a way of life: Mayan widows in rural Guatemala*. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Hewitt, K. (1983). *Interpretations of calamity from the viewpoint of human ecology*. London: Allen & Unwin.
- Hoffman, S. M. (1999a). Anthropology and the angry earth: An overview. In A. Oliver-Smith & S. Hoffman (Eds.), *The angry earth* (pp. 1–16). New York: Routledge.
- Hoffman, S. M. (1999b). The worst of times, the best of times: Toward a model of cultural response to disaster. In A. Oliver-Smith & S. Hoffman (Eds.), *The angry earth* (pp. 132–155). New York: Routledge.
- Menchu, R. (1992). *I, Rigoberta Menchu: An Indian woman in Guatemala* (A. Wright, Trans.). London: Verso.
- Moore, L., Van Arsdale, P., Glittenberg, J., & Aldrich, R. (1987). *The biocultural basis of health*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Oliver-Smith, A. (1986). The Martyred City: death and rebirth in the Andes. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Oliver-Smith, A. (1998a). Global changes and the definition of disaster. In E. L. Quarantelli (Ed.), *What is a disaster?: Perspectives on the question* (pp. 195–198). New York: Routledge.
- Oliver-Smith, A. (1998b). Disasters, social change, and adaptive systems. In E. L. Quarantelli (Ed.), *What is a disaster?: Perspectives on the question* (pp. 231–233.) New York: Routledge.
- Petersen, K. (1992). *The maquiladora revolution in Guatemala* (Orville H. Schell, Jr., Ed.). Occasional Paper Series, 2. Center for International Human Rights, Yale Law School Publications.
- Prince, S. H. (1920). *Catastrophe and social change: Based upon a sociological study of the Halifax disaster*. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Quarantelli, E. L. (1957). The behavior of panic participants. *Sociology and Social Research, 41*, 187–194.
- Quarantelli, E. L. (Ed.). (1978). *Disasters, theory, and research*. London: Sage.
- Quarantelli, E. L. (1998). Introduction: The basic question, its importance, and how it is addressed in this volume. In E. L. Quarantelli (Ed.), *What is a disaster?: Perspectives on the question* (pp. 1–8). New York: Routledge.
- Sheets, P. (1979). Environmental and cultural effects of the Ilopango eruption in Central America. In P. Sheets & D. Grayson (Eds.), *Volcanic activity and human ecology* (pp. 525–564). New York: Academic Press.
- Sheets, P. (1987). Possible repercussions in western Honduras in the third-century eruption of Ilopango volcano. In G. Pahl (Ed)., *The periphery of the southeastern classic Maya realm* (pp. 41–52). Los Angeles: University of California at Los Angeles, Latin American Center.
- Sheets, P. (1992). *The Ceren site: A prehistoric village buried by volcanic ash in Central America*. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.
- Turner, R. H. (1981). Collective behavior and resource mobilization as approaches to social movements: Issues and continuities. *Research in Social Movements, Conflict and Change*, *4*, 1–24.