CHAPTER 15

# **High-Frequency Trading**

If you have a mouse in your hand, you are too late! -Blair Hull, December 2000

We have described the importance of, components of, and challenges<br>to building a high-speed (low-latency) trading infrastructure. These components are used, primarily, for either high-frequency trading (HFT) applications or for implementing automated execution algorithms. In this chapter, we will focus on HFT, seeking to understand the kinds of strategies employed by these traders and how these techniques relate to the infrastructure we have outlined.

There is no widely accepted classification of HFT strategies. However, we can consider them to fall into one of four broad categories: contractual market making, noncontractual market making, arbitrage, and fast alpha. In this chapter, we will describe each of these kinds of strategies, as well as the risk management and portfolio construction considerations that apply to them.

#### CONTRACTUAL MARKET MAKING

A contractual market maker (CMM) is the class of HFT practitioner that has the closest analog to a traditional feature of the markets. First, we should understand the concept of market making.

The odds that two customers simultaneously want to do exactly opposite things (e.g., customer A wants to buy 2,000 shares of XYZ at \$100.00, while customer B wants to sell 2,000 shares of XYZ at  $$100.00$  are fairly small. Of course, it is reasonably likely that there is at least some portion of a customer's desired trade that could be filled by another customer. Taking our

example above, maybe customer A wants to buy 2,000 shares, while customer B wants to sell 5,000 shares. The balance—a desired sale of 3,000 shares—either goes unfilled until a later time (usually at a time adverse to the seller), or it can be filled by an intermediary who is willing to take the risk of buying 3,000 shares for the sole reason that customer B wants to sell them. Market makers are precisely this kind of intermediary: They provide liquidity to those who have a utility for it.

An analogy from daily life is useful here. Manufacturers rarely sell their goods directly to retail customers because, practically speaking, they have operations lifecycles to manage. They cannot afford to change how much and what they are supplying at the whims of retail customers. Thus, distributors buy goods from manufacturers and warehouse those goods until the retail market is ready for them. In the same way, market participants don't necessarily make investment decisions that coincide perfectly, and market makers get paid to warehouse the risk in the interim.

There are two types of market makers. In this section, we will describe CMMs, who are sometimes referred to as *order flow internalizers*. The first key to understanding CMMs is to look at the economic and contractual relationships that CMMs have with the market. The CMM's obligations vary by market, instrument, and geography, but we can examine U.S. equity market making as one example. CMMs engage in legal relationships with various brokerage firms (whose clients wish to make trades), so that the brokerage routes its customers' orders to the market maker to be executed. In exchange for the broker sending its retail order flow to the CMM, the CMM often is required to: (a) pay the broker1 and (b) fill 100 percent of the orders that customers send to it. Generally, this last obligation has two different types of commitments to fill: one in the case of small orders and one in the case of large orders.

CMMs in U.S. equities generally are required to fill 100 percent of "small" orders on an automated basis (this is aptly known as *autofill*). So, for example, a typical investor in U.S. equities has an account with some online broker. This investor decides to buy, say, 200 shares of XYZ as a market order. The CMM has agreed with the broker that it will sell 200 shares of XYZ to this customer at whatever the prevailing market's best offer is. But interestingly, neither the customer's order to buy nor the CMM's taking the other side of that trade ever goes into the exchange's limit order book. The transaction happens away from the exchanges, but it references the activity that is taking place on the exchanges (specifically, the best bid or offer).

The CMM, by virtue of having agreed to this contractual relationship with the broker, gains an advantage that supersedes even the fastest traders. In effect, it doesn't even need to post bids and offers because it passively takes the other side of all customer order flow as it comes in. This happens in the reverse sequence to what happens in a normal market situation: Generally a passive order is resting in the limit order book, and an active order comes into the market later and takes the liquidity offered by the passive order. In this case, the active order to buy comes to the CMM, and the CMM uses the prevailing best offer from the exchanges to fill the active order. While the CMM's orders are not actually in the queue, there is always at least some support behind their positions. After all, the CMM is piggybacking on whatever the prevailing best offer was at the time the CMM elected to fill the customer order. All that said, so far, it is not at all obvious that the customer is any worse off by virtue of his broker having established this contractual relationship. The customer's order is filled at the prevailing best price available and does not need to compete with other active orders.

We contended in Chapter 14 that trading passively is not necessarily a highly profitable activity (especially before the incentives provided by some exchanges for providing liquidity), because of the problem of adverse selection. However, when facing off against retail order flow, a passive participant enjoys the most favorable selection possible. Retail order flow generally consists of a large number of small orders, and the aggregate of these orders on a given name is usually a fairly small net quantity. This means that there is unlikely to be any significant price impact, which is another important determinant of the level of adverse selection.

For larger orders, CMMs generally have the right to act as an agent of the customer, trying to get the order filled at market, without taking the whole order for itself. So, if the customer wants to buy 10,000 shares of XYZ, the market maker acts on behalf of the customer in attempting to get the order filled. However, here, a perverse incentive may exist. At the very least, it is quite an interesting situation. Let's start with an illustrative order book for XYZ, immediately before the customer's 10,000 share buy order comes in, shown in Exhibit 15.1.

If we imagine the 10,000 share buy order comes in at this moment, the CMM can go to market, lift all 2,000 shares offered at \$100.01 (Offer1)

| ID   | Size  | Bid    | Offer  | Size  | ID     |  |
|------|-------|--------|--------|-------|--------|--|
| Bid1 | 1,000 | 100.00 | 100.01 | 2,000 | Offer1 |  |
| Bid2 | 3,100 | 99.99  | 100.02 | 3,000 | Offer2 |  |
| Bid3 | 2,000 | 99.99  | 100.02 | 1,000 | Offer3 |  |
| Bid4 | 5,000 | 99.98  | 100.03 | 4,000 | Offer4 |  |
| Bid5 | 6,000 | 99.97  | 100.04 | 1,000 | Offer5 |  |

Exhibit 15.1 Mockup of an Order Book for a Fictitious Ticker

and all 4,000 shares at \$100.02 (the sum of Offer2 and Offer3). He has now filled 6,000 shares at an average price of \$100.0167. Then he can take, say, 3,500 shares of the 4,000 offered at \$100.03 (Offer4), and fill the last 500 shares himself. Now that the prevailing best offer is \$100.03, he will fill them at \$100.03. The order book immediately after this order is filled looks as shown in Exhibit 15.2.

Those first 9,500 shares offered had no idea that the price was about to move up by 2–3 cents immediately. So in this case, since the CMM knew that this customer's order was about to push the price up, he delayed selling until the buy order was almost exhausted. Those last 500 shares, however, are likely to have been profitable to sell. If there was no other buying pressure behind that 10,000 share buy order, the upward move is likely to be immediately reversed, and the offered side of the book is likely to replenish with offers that are lower priced than \$100.03. This will allow the CMM to exit his position at a profit, and at the expense of those traders whose orders were at lower‐priced offers initially.

I mentioned that this is, at the very least, an interesting dynamic. It may incentivize the CMM to act in a way that is adverse to the customer, however. If the CMM has the ability to act as an agent of the customer *and* to fill the last portion of a trade, the CMM has an incentive to do the worst possible job of filling the bulk of the customer's order, because it pushes the price to a level that almost certainly makes taking the other side of it very attractive. In other words, the CMM could use a horribly ineffective execution strategy for the first 9,500 shares, specifically designed to get the customer the worst possible price (especially on the last few hundred shares), so that the CMM can come in and take those last few hundred shares into his own inventory at an untenably high price.

Exchanges have begun to fight back against internalization of order flow. Interestingly, the near‐destruction of Knight Capital in August 2012

| ID   | Size  | Bid    | Offer  | Size  | ID     |
|------|-------|--------|--------|-------|--------|
| Bid1 | 1,000 | 100.00 | 100.03 | 500   | Offer4 |
| Bid2 | 3,100 | 99.99  | 100.04 | 1,000 | Offer5 |
| Bid3 | 2,000 | 99.99  |        |       |        |
| Bid4 | 5,000 | 99.98  |        |       |        |
| Bid5 | 6,000 | 99.97  |        |       |        |
|      |       |        |        |       |        |

Exhibit 15.2 Mockup of an Order Book for a Fictitious Ticker after a Market Order to Buy 10,000 Shares Is Mostly Filled by a CMM Acting as an Agent of the Customer

was an indirect result of the NYSE's introduction of a new program designed specifically to combat order flow internalization. This program, called the Retail Liquidity Program (RLP), offers retail orders access to better fill prices than they historically could get. To deal with this change in the market structure, Knight made some changes to its own software. And due to a bug in that new release, Knight's brush with bankruptcy unfolded in merely a half hour. It is not a coincidence that the roughly 140 stocks that Knight lost money on were all NYSE tickers. That said, programs such as the RLP are not intended to put CMMs out of business. Indeed, thus far the biggest participants in such programs are the CMMs themselves. The idea is simply to get as much share volume on the lit venues as possible.

As we relate the activities of CMMs to what we showed in Chapter 14 about high-speed trading and the various types of orders, we can see clearly why CMMs need to be fast. While they do not need to compete with other participants for better queue placement in order to get into a position (this comes to them from the brokerage firms directly), they do need to (a) have a precise, timely estimate of the market in order to fill orders at the correct price; and (b) be able to exit positions rapidly. They, after all, are taking on the other side of others' trades. And while retail orders may not be the worst kind to take the other side of, there is still a real risk that retail participants will move heavily in one direction on a given instrument (for example, if a stock has good news, many customers are likely to want to buy it). This can result in the market maker taking on a significant amount of size on the wrong side of the news and short‐term momentum in such an instrument, which highlights the need for speed in placing orders to reduce the inventory acquired. All that said, a CMM's need for speed is categorically not at the same level as it is among the HFTs we will describe in the subsequent sections of this chapter.

# Noncontractual Market Making

Noncontractual market making (NCMM) also involves taking the other side of active orders. NCMMs provide bids and offers that rest in the order books of various exchanges, particularly lit exchanges (as described in "Where to Send an Order"). In many markets, they are incentivized to provide liquidity by virtue of liquidity provision rebates. In other markets, active order flow is sufficiently benign that a fast NCMM can still turn a profit even without any further compensation. In general, an NCMM acquires positions by placing passive orders, waiting for someone to lift his bid or offer. Once acquired, the NCMM may exit passively or actively, depending on liquidity provision rebates and the market's movements.

Given their reliance on passive orders, the biggest risk that any market maker is exposed to is adverse selection. A market maker taking the other side of one order can hope he is able to take the other side of another order immediately, and at a profit that at least equals the bid/offer spread. Or, if the market moves his way, he may be able to exit actively, and make money on the move. This is the embodiment of "buy low, sell high," but modified: "buy low, sell ever‐so‐slightly higher, very soon, and repeatedly." And indeed, in normal times, in the absence of a very short‐term trend, this is at least somewhat achievable.

But first, there is the matter of being fast enough to avoid the adverse selection problems that plague any passive order in the lit markets. As we showed in Chapter 14, this is no small feat in the first place. When we look at the kinds of trades that NCMMs in U.S. equities take the other side of, for example, we find that most of the best order flow is internalized, either by CMMs or by dark pools. This leaves NCMMs to interact primarily with professional investors in the lit exchanges, against whose orders it is dangerous to trade. Thus, while speed matters to any market maker, NCMMs have a particularly acute need to be fast. As an aside, NCMMs do usually have access to dark exchanges as well, and often will route orders through these dark pools first, taking advantage of superior liquidity taking fees, before sending the remainder out to the lit exchanges.

Second, NCMMs must have fast access to information sets that can help them avoid adverse selection problems. We showed in Chapter 14 that the ability to cancel passive orders quickly is critical to a passive trader's likelihood of success. For example, if some stock index's futures contract is rallying sharply, there is a very strong probability that a wide variety of stocks will also rally sharply in the immediate future. A NCMM who cannot access information about the futures market in a timely manner will likely end up failing to cancel his passive offers at the top of the order book, which will cause him to experience adverse selection in the fills he receives on his sell‐trades.

A key challenge for NCMMs is how to manage and dispose of the inventory they acquire by virtue of having other market participants lift their bids and offers. This can be particularly challenging when markets are trending, leaving the NCMM with large positions in the opposite direction of the trend. As mentioned earlier, NCMMs bear such substantial risks when holding positions that they sometimes actively exit their trades, even though this means crossing the bid‐offer spread and possibly also paying a liquidity taking fee. Another approach to dealing with inventory risk is to take opposing positions in instruments that closely correlate with those in inventory. For example, if UVW is an imaginary company that is a peer of XYZ, in the same industry group, with a similar market capitalization (and so on), it is highly likely that any large, directional move in XYZ will be mirrored in UVW. Thus, if the market maker is filled on a passive bid in XYZ (which makes him long XYZ), his algorithms can consider putting passive offers on UVW, or actively selling it, to hedge his risk that XYZ experiences a large move.

# Arbitrage

The word *arbitrage* connotes riskless profit. This has obvious appeal, and it is equally obvious that risk‐free profits are hard to come by. Arbitrage opportunities exist when instruments that are *structurally correlated* behave differently. We define *structural correlation* as a correlation that exists because it must. Instruments that track the S&P 500 index, for example, should all correlate roughly perfectly. If the S&P 500 futures contract (ES) is up 1 percent for today, while the SPY ETF (which tracks the S&P 500 also) is up only 0.6 percent, a riskless profit opportunity exists, to go short the futures and go long the ETF. In this way, the trader has virtually guaranteed himself a 0.4 percent profit. These two instruments are both meant to track the performance of the same 500 stocks, and when one is outperforming the other, it is necessarily because there are temporary imbalances in the trading of one versus the other. For example, if a large order to buy the futures suddenly hits the market, moving the futures contract up suddenly, it might take a small amount of time for the passive orders (both bids and offers) in the ETF to cancel and ratchet upward. During that time, a sufficiently fast arbitrageur can pick off a slow‐to‐cancel passive order and acquire a riskless profit position.

In order to qualify as a true arbitrage, a trade must capture an inefficiency in the marketplace that causes the price of an instrument (or derived version of the instrument) to be different in different locations (e.g., exchanges) or formats (e.g., an ETF versus the stocks that constitute that same ETF) at precisely the same moment. The arbitrageur sells the relatively overpriced one and buys the relatively underpriced one, so that when they converge, he reaps the profit.

The most common form of HFT arbitrage is *index arbitrage*, which is the broader label for our earlier example of S&P futures versus the SPY ETF. This is a strategy that compares the value of an instrument that tracks an index either to another instrument that tracks the same index, or to the value of the constituents of the same index. Take an imaginary futures contract that tracks an index that contains two instruments at a 50/50 weighting. The index can be priced either directly in the futures contract or indirectly by taking the value of each of the constituents and multiplying that value by the weight (50 percent each, in our example). Because the index trades separately from its constituents (often on different exchanges), the prices of the index traded as a whole versus index that can be created synthetically by buying its constituents in the correct weighting can and do diverge by small amounts and for short amounts of time.

Another type of arbitrage is *venue arbitrage*, which exists only in fragmented markets. A venue arbitrage takes advantage of a fragmented market structure (which means that there are multiple exchanges that allow trading on the same instrument), which can sometimes cause a price to be different on one venue from what it is on another. Here, the instrument isn't merely structurally correlated to another instrument; it is actually the *exact same* instrument traded in more than one place. For the same reason that index arbitrage opportunities can come to exist, these venue arbitrage opportunities also can exist. In U.S. equities, Reg NMS was enacted in 2007 in an attempt to deal with this problem. In certain other markets, venue arbitrage remains a possibility.

In a sense, when a CMM receives customer orders that include requests to buy and sell the same instrument at the same time, she has an arbitrage opportunity, because she can sell the instrument to one party and buy it from another at the same time, at different (advantageous) prices. The buy order is filled at the prevailing best offer, and the sell order is filled at the prevailing best bid (which, by definition, is lower than the offer). To address this extremely obvious inequity, some brokers have begun to require CMMs to fill both such customer orders at the best mid‐price when there are matching and opposed orders.

While risk‐free profits are undeniably attractive, the cost of remaining at the highest tier of the technological capabilities required to be fast enough to capture such opportunities is substantial. At first glance, it is evident that speed should matter, for the same reason that \$100 bills don't get left on the street for very long. If you can cross the bid‐offer spread and realize an arbitrage opportunity, then it makes sense to do so. But occasionally, depending on the size of the opportunity, passive orders can be used to improve returns. If the price discrepancy is very large, and if the exchange(s) involved provide liquidity provision rebates, it may be an added benefit to implement an arbitrage trade using limit orders. But in general, these are active trades. It is better to capture some riskless profit with 100 percent certainty than to risk missing the whole opportunity by trying to make it marginally better.

As a practical matter, not all HFT arbitrages are strictly riskless. In more efficient markets (e.g., U.S. equity indices and single stocks), it is often impossible to do both legs of the arbitrage trade. The opportunity is so fleeting that only one leg at a time can be implemented. So, for example, a strategy that compares ETFs to futures might be able to trade the ETFs only, betting on a lead‐lag relationship between the instruments. But the futures might well move again before the trader can lock in a profit. This is still a good trading strategy, but on a given trade, its odds are not substantially better than even. In less efficient markets, there remain opportunities for truly riskless profit.

# Fast Alpha

The fourth type of HFT strategy we will consider is *fast alpha*. Fast alpha strategies are in essence engaged in the same kinds of strategies as discussed in Chapter 3. They mainly use price‐based signals, such as momentum, mean reversion, and technical sentiment. If we consider what we described in Chapter 8, regarding the influence of data types on the kinds of strategies that can be implemented using such data, it makes sense that this should be the case. Fundamental information does not change very often. When it does, it usually takes some time (more than a day in most cases) to be fully priced‐in. Furthermore, most fundamental information is released during after‐hours or pretrading sessions, when liquidity is poor. However, important (i.e., surprising) fundamental data do have an impact on prices on a very short (intraday) timescale. In 24‐hour markets such as currencies, this can be even more true, though there are natural increases in liquidity during certain more conventional market hours. In any case, various growth or value types of strategies can be implemented on an intraday timescale, but this is in the tiny minority of cases. Mostly, fast alpha strategies act on information that changes frequently throughout the trading day: prices, volumes, and limit order book information. Because changes in fundamentals can result in high volumes, HFTs can be quite active when these changes occur, even if they are not explicitly trying to trade based on the fundamental information itself.

Contrasting fast alpha strategies with arbitrage strategies is also useful. Whereas arbitrage strategies are taking advantage of price discrepancies between instruments that are structurally correlated, fast alpha strategies are sometimes looking to profit from price discrepancies on a statistical basis. For example, if XYZ and UVW are two companies in the same industry group that are close peers, with similar market capitalizations and fundamental features, one would expect them to track each other most of the time. If XYZ diverges from UVW, you can reasonably expect that it should converge. But what if the divergence stems from some real information that implies the beginning of a decoupling between XYZ and UVW? Just as we showed in the example of MER and SCHW in Chapter 10, instruments can go through periods of being closely correlated, and periods of being completely different. In other words, there is no structural reason that correlation between the two instruments must remain related. And as a result, we are dealing with a statistical relationship, which by definition implies some risk.

This is also true for directional types of forecasts, which look at historical behavior as a guideline for future behavior. There may, for example, be a good chance that, if some instrument makes consecutive new intraday highs several seconds in a row, it will decline briefly thereafter. But this is still a matter of chance. There is no structural relationship between the past performance of the instrument and the future performance of the instrument that causes this setup to remain a return generating strategy.

Some fast alpha strategies are more passive, for example, intraday versions of statistical arbitrage. They can be considered as close cousins of NCMMs, in the sense that they are passively placing orders that provide liquidity, but perhaps with a certain selectivity that (hopefully) reduces adverse selection issues. For such strategies, everything we discussed in Chapter 14 regarding the need for speed in placing and canceling passive orders applies. Intraday momentum strategies can also be implemented passively, by canceling passive orders that would take the other side of the prevailing trend and working orders that would get the strategy into a position in the direction of the trend. Obviously, these orders are less likely to be executed, because they are attempting to capture small pullbacks in a trend. Furthermore, adverse selection issues apply, particularly when the trend reverses. As such, the need for speed here stems from a desire to get passive orders to the top of the book, and from the need to cancel stale passive orders to avoid adverse selection issues.

More often, intraday trend following is an actively implemented strategy. These strategies have a particularly difficult challenge because market impact and slippage are both working severely against the strategy's objectives. If an instrument is trending down on a very short timescale, a fast trend-following strategy will naturally want to get short that instrument (or instruments that closely correlate to it). However, any delay in processing data or getting orders back to the marketplace can be detrimental, because the market will not wait for a slow trader to figure out what to do. The trend can move the instrument away from the slow trader, resulting in large slippage costs. Furthermore, because the trader is desiring to buy (or sell) an instrument that has already been going up (or down) for some time, market impact costs are also likely to be more severe in this case. For these reasons, intraday trend following is less common than mean reversion oriented trading strategies, and requires low latency capabilities.

# HFT Risk Management and Portfolio Construction

HFT strategies most often have a different approach to risk management from their slower peers, even for strategies (such as those in the fast alpha category) that share similar underlying themes. Accounting for risk factors, transaction cost models, and various other inputs to an optimizer, for example, takes precious computing time. This would slow down the process of implementing the alpha strategy. Furthermore, most of the kinds of risk factors that longer‐term strategies would want to hedge rarely apply to security movements from one moment to the next intraday. For example, some longer‐term traders care about neutralizing their exposure to the *size* factor (market capitalization, essentially). They don't want to have a bias of being long small capitalization companies and short large caps (or vice versa). Intraday, this is a dramatically less useful distinction, because the way that this risk factor expresses itself in the markets simply doesn't take place at an (often very short‐term) intraday timescale. Another way of thinking of this effect is that statistical correlations are much weaker at shorter timescales than at longer ones, while idiosyncratic (primarily liquidity‐driven) considerations are more significant.

There is a further question of applicability of risk models to three of the four types of HFT strategies described above. Arbitrage strategies, for example, clearly require a different type of risk management from what is provided by a risk factor model. By design, long positions and short positions are in essentially identical instruments. This leaves no room for conventional risk factor exposures. The kinds of considerations that apply to arbitrageurs relate to sizing their bets to ensure that the temporary variances in the spread between their longs and shorts do not put them out of business. For CMMs and NCMMs, the goal is to unload inventory as quickly as possible, not to worry about risk factor exposures.

The most common approach to risk management for HFT strategies is to control a very small number of very simple‐to‐calculate risks. For example, limiting the maximum order size on a given ticker, the maximum accumulated position size for a given instrument, the maximum aggregate portfolio size, or the maximum number of open orders on an instrument (or in aggregate) are all very simple risk checks that add virtually no latency. Many will automatically unwind their portfolios and stop trading if they reach a certain predefined loss level. Some HFTs will elect to control their directional exposure as well, limiting their net long or short percentages. Most HFT strategies are concerned with ensuring that hedging trades are put on extremely quickly, and before prices move adversely. For example, if an arbitrage trader sees an opportunity to buy the S&P 500 index and short the underlying stocks, locking in some small profit, it is possible that both legs of this trade will not be implemented at precisely the same moment. After one leg is executed, the trader simply owns a directional bet on the stock market. It is not until the second leg is executed that the trade becomes an arbitrage (and risk free). As such, if the market moves adversely to the first leg of the trade before the second leg can be put on, not only might the opportunity disappear, but money can easily be lost. This is known as *legging risk*, and many HFTs try to manage it.

Portfolio construction, too, looks very different for HFTs from what it is for longer‐term quants. The most obvious example of this is in the case of arbitrage trades. If you have an opportunity to make riskless profits, you should do that trade as large as the market will allow you to do. For both kinds of market makers, they have little control over how many of their passive orders end up being lifted by more active participants. For them, it comes down to simply ensuring that they diversify their risk across names, or to limiting the maximum size of inventory that can be accumulated (since whatever is accumulated must soon thereafter be dispensed). In the case of fast alpha strategies, there is no particularly common theme to how traders size positions. But they tend to use the simpler ideas from among those discussed in Chapter 6. Equal weighting positions, or weighting them based simply on the expected return, are common approaches. But considerations of covariance and volatility rarely factor in, and there is almost no sense in running an optimization or even accounting for risk and transaction cost modeling. All of these things add time to the process of making trades, and so simplifying the calculation of the strategy (as we discussed in Chapter 14) is an important way to reduce latency.

The most surprising thing about HFTs is that, while they trade (hyper) actively, they most often do not account for transaction cost models in their strategies. This seems paradoxical: If transaction cost models are supposed to help you trade in a smarter way, why would the very active traders eschew them? In some sense, the transaction costs that other investors are paying (bid/offer spreads and liquidity taking fees) are often the main sources of alpha for many HFTs. As such, transaction costs as typically defined are very often negative: They are sources of profit. Obviously, it then becomes desirous to trade as often as possible. This is outside of a passive HFT's control, because she cannot cause someone else to trade actively, but it is an objective for a passive HFT nonetheless.

Active HFT strategies, by contrast, must overcome the same transaction costs as apply to other investors, but without the benefit of holding the position for a very long time. As you can imagine, not nearly as many opportunities exist to hold a position for a short amount of time, say a few minutes, and generate a profit net of transaction costs. HFTs, thus, tend to consider commissions, regulatory fees, and taxes, and the economics of providing or taking liquidity more than market impact and slippage.

# Summary

We have now explored the kinds of strategies that HFTs utilize. You may notice that there are some significant differences between HFT strategies and the kinds of alpha strategies that we described in Chapter 3. Indeed, many HFT practitioners, privately, will tell you they don't think about alpha at all. Even for those that do, it is most often at best secondary to technology concerns. A major risk is losing a speed advantage. And, when you look at both the kinds of strategies being employed and the penalties that accrue to being slow (which we described in Chapter 14), it begins to be clear why this is the case.

It does not take someone particularly clever to say that the S&P 500 index should have basically the same value in every instrument that tracks it. This is a tautology, in fact. S&P 500 = S&P 500. But it is something else entirely to be able to profit from the extremely fleeting instances where there is a divergence. It is specifically a technological problem, and many of the strategies that HFTs employ are at least as much driven by technology as by a better way of forecasting the future.

# Note

1. This practice is called *payment for order flow*. It carries quite a bit of controversy, because the beneficiary of the payment for order flow is generally the broker, not the broker's customers. It is, of course, the customers who send orders. As a result of the well‐deserved controversy around this practice, it has become less common as the years have gone by. But it has been a feature of the capital markets for much longer than HFTs have existed.