## **Annexure II**

## **RECENT LANDMARK JUDGEMENTS OF THE SUPREME COURT**

In the discharge of its constitutional responsibility of conducting free, fair and peaceful elections in the country, the hands of the Election Commission have been strengthened by the Supreme Court of India, by its several landmark judgements, pronouncing upon the provisions of the Constitution of India, and the laws relating to the elections. These judgements of the Supreme Court are the guiding stars not only for the Courts, but also for the Election Commission, its electoral machinery, Governments at the Centre and in the states, political parties and the candidates contesting elections.

Together with the Election Commission, the Supreme Court had played a commendable role in making the political arena clean from corrupts and criminals. To begin with, let us have a look at the two important developments that took place in 1996.

The first was the Supreme Court's notices to political parties in January to file returns required by the Income Tax and Wealth Tax Acts by 20 February, in response to a public interest petition filed by a private citizens' group, after the parties did not respond to notices issued by the Income Tax Department. This forced parties, none of which had filed for all the years since 1979 as required, to do so. (However they did this only for 1994–1995).

The second important development was the Supreme Court's order of 4 April, 1996, shortly before the general elections, interpreting Explanation 1 of Section 77(1) of the RPA such that election expenditure by a political party would not be clubbed with that of a candidate for the purposes of the spending ceiling only if the party had submitted audited accounts of its income and expenditures, something that no party had done. This constrained conspicuous party spending on behalf of the candidate during the 1996 campaign.

On 2nd May, 2002, the Supreme Court by upholding a PIL made by Association for Democratic Reforms, held that the right to information – the right to know antecedents, including the criminal past, or assets of candidates – was a fundamental right under Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution and that the information was fundamental for survival of democracy. In its judgement, it directed the Election Commission to call for information on affidavit from each candidate seeking election to Parliament or the State Legislature as a necessary part of the nomination papers on: Whether the candidate has been convicted/ acquitted/discharged of any criminal offence in the past – if any, whether the candidate was accused in any pending case of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or more, and in which charge was framed or cognizance taken by the court of law. If so, requires the details thereof; the assets (immovable, movable, bank balance, etc.) of a candidate and of his/her spouse and that of the dependents; liabilities, if any, particularly of any overdue of any public financial institution or Government dues; educational qualifications of the candidate.

The Election Commission then proposed amendment of statutory rules and the format of nomination papers, to give effect to this judgment of the Supreme Court. But political parties believed that the Election Commission and the judiciary were overstepping their powers. At the all-party meeting, held on 8th July, 2002, representatives of 21 political parties decided that the Election Commission's order should not be allowed to be implemented. The Supreme Court again came out as a guardian of the citizen's right to information. The Apex Court gave its judgment on 13th March, 2003, basically asserting its previous June 2002 decision, which required full disclosure by all candidates. The order made it clear that failing to furnish the relevant affidavit shall be considered as a violation of the Supreme Court's order and as such the nomination papers shall be liable to be rejected by the Returning Officer. Furnishing of wrong or incomplete information shall result in the rejection of nomination papers, apart from inviting penal consequences under the Indian Penal Code. The 2004 General Elections were conducted under these rules.

The above order is an effective step to make democracy healthy and unpolluted. Citizens have every right to know about the persons whom they prefer as their representatives. The EC has directed all Returning Officers to display the copies of nomination papers and affidavits filed by candidates to the general public and representatives of print and electronic media, free of cost.

One has to notice two things here. One is that, this judgement was given way back in 2002, when the country did not have Right to Information Act (which makes Government officials liable for punishment if they fail to respond to people within a stipulated timeframe). The Act was enacted only in 2005. The other is that some of the parties would be able to draw advantage from the Supreme Court order because they already have efficient watchdog systems and batteries of lawyers in place that would permit them to file counter-affidavits and challenge nominations of opposing candidates within hours of their being filed.

With regard to the reformation of Election Commission, there was a longstanding demand to make the EC a multimember body. The Supreme Court in the S.S. Dhanoa v. Union of India case, 1991 had observed: '*When an institution like the Election Commission is entrusted with vital functions and is armed with exclusive and uncontrolled powers to execute them, it is both necessary and desirable that the powers are not exercised by one individual, however wise he may be. It also conforms to the tenets of democratic rule'*. With the 1993 Constitution Amendment Act, the Election Commission was made a multi-member body. The Act provided that the decision of three members 'shall, as far as possible, be unanimous'. But in case of difference of opinion among three members, the matter 'shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority'.

In a landmark judgement that may lead to decriminalisation of politics, the Supreme Court on 10th July, 2013 struck down the provision viz., Section 8(4) of RP Act 1951.

The following are some of the recent landmark judgements delivered by the Supreme Court of India.

**(a) Subramanian Swamy v. Election Commission of India [CA No. 5803 of 2008], Supreme Court:** The Appellant filed the Appeal for striking down paragraph 10A of the Symbols Order as it denies equality before the law that is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.

The appellant alleged that the provisions of Para 10A of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, as amended pre 2001, suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and amounts to an undemocratic act which does not pass the acid test of equality before law under Article 14 of the Constitution – symbol reserved for a party is an intellectual property that could not be taken away by a legislation, and in addition seeking a direction to the Commission to amend the said Para 10A suitably.

The Court held that Symbols Order promulgated by the Election Commission on 31/08/1968 in exercise of powers conferred by Article 324 read with Section 29A of the R.P. Act, 1951 and Rules 5 and 10 of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 to provide for reservation, choice and allotment of symbols at elections in Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies, for recognition of political parties and for matters connected therewith, is perfectly in consonance with the democratic principles.

The concept of recognition of political party is no doubt inextricably connected with the concept of symbol of that party but only a political party having substantial following has a right for a reserved symbol. A party which remains only in the records can never be equated and given the status of a recognised political party in a democratic set up.

With regard to the challenge to the constitutionality of Para 10A of the Symbols Order providing for concession to candidates set up by an unrecognised party, which was earlier recognised as a National or State Party not earlier than six years from the date of notification of the election, for allotment of the symbol reserved earlier for it, it was held that the rationale for providing six years period in para 10A is perfectly reasonable as it gives the party opportunity to prove its continued following in the fresh elections within six years.

The Court did not agree to read down the provisions of clause 10A so as to avoid the mention of six years as that would amount to absurdity vis-a-vis paras 5 and 6 of the Symbol Order. Provisions of Para 10A has to be read and interpreted in terms of other connected provisions in Paras 5, 6, 6A, 6B and 6C and also the objects on the Preamble to the Symbols Order.

It further held that a symbol may be an outcome of intellectual exercise but it does not become an 'intellectual property' of the party for which it is reserved and the Commission has every right to deprive a particular party with a dismal performance of that reserved symbol. Election Symbol is only the insignia which is associated with the particular political party that helps millions of illiterate voters to properly exercise their right to franchise in favour of candidate of their choice belonging to a particular party.

With regard to the prayer of the appellant to freeze the symbol of a recognised political party after the party loses eligibility criteria for such recognition as per Symbols Order, the Apex Court observed that though there is no such provision of freezing of any particular symbol in the said Order the issue can be considered by the Commission in case the issue is raised before it by the appellant party.

**(b) DMDK & Another v. Election Commission of India [WP (C) No. 532 of 2008], Supreme Court 176:** A bunch of writ petitions and SLPs were filed to challenge the constitutional validity of the amendment made by the Commission in para 6 of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, vide Notification dated 1st December, 2000, to prescribe that in order to be recognised as a State Party in the State, a political party would have to secure not less than 6% of the total valid votes polled in the State and should also have returned at least 2 members to the Legislative Assembly of the State.

The petitioner political party 'DesiyaMurpokku-DravidaKazharam', a registered unrecognised political party under Sec.29A of the R.P. Act, 1951, was refused recognition as a 'State Party' by the Election Commission despite having secured 8.33% of the valid votes polled and returning 1 (one) candidate to the Assembly during the general election to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly, 2006, on the ground that it did not qualify the bench mark of returning at least two members to the Legislative Assembly in addition to securing the minimum percentage of votes of 6% prescribed under the amended para 6A of the Symbols Order 1968. It was contended that the classification of parties into recognised and unrecognised parties on the basis of the seats won during an election and the percentage of votes polled, is unreasonable and arbitrary, having no nexus with the purpose sought to be achieved. It causes hardship to political parties as it imposes two conditions clubbed with other conditions that are highly anomalous and therefore liable to be struck down. It further contended that denying a common election symbol to the candidates of unrecognised political parties vis-a-vis recognised political parties' results in hostile discrimination by the Commission.

It was also contended that the symbol in the context of an illiterate electorate is absolutely necessary for a free and fair election and equating established parties with newly-formed parties is a disadvantage to the newly formed parties and thus violative of Article 14 and was, therefore, liable to be struck down.

The Supreme Court (a Three-Judge Bench and the judgment by a majority decision) rejected the challenge to the vires of the Election Symbols Order, 1968, and held that the constitutional validity of the 1968 Order and the power of the Commission under para 15 of that order to settle issues relating to claims of splinter groups of recognised political parties to be the original party has been decided by a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court in Sadiq Ali's case 40 years ago.

It further held that in order to gain recognition as a political party and to become entitled to the allotment of a common symbol, a party has to prove itself to establish its credibility as a serious player in the political arena of the state by achieving the benchmark laid down by the Commission under the Symbols Order, 1968, after taking into account the ground realities of conducting a state-wide poll.

**(c) S. Subramaniam Balaji v. Govt. of Tamil Nadu & Others [CA No. 5130 of 2013], Supreme Court 273:** In the manifestos released by the two recognised State political parties in the State of Tamil Nadu, namely, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) and All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) during the general election to the Legislative Assembly of Tamil Nadu held in the year 2006, promises/offer of several articles to the electorate were made. The Appellant in the above referred cases, S. Subramanian Balaji, filed complaint seeking initiation of action in respect of the said promises on the ground that such promises of 'freebies' amount to bribery within the meaning of section 123 (1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and Section 171-B of the IPC.

He also filed two writ petitions Nos. 9013 of 2006 and 1071 of 2007 before the Madurai Bench of the High Court of Madras challenging the propriety of the expenses incurred by the state government out of the state exchequer for fulfilling the promises of distribution of several household articles, such as, colour television sets, etc. made in their election manifestos to woo the gullible electorate with an eye on their votes. It was alleged that this amounted to corrupt practice and was unauthorised, impermissible and ultra vires the Constitutional mandates. The Madras High Court by its Order dated 25th June, 2007 dismissed both the writ petitions holding that the action of the state government in distributing free colour TVs could not be branded as a waste of public money.

The Appellant preferred an Appeal by way of SLP (C) No.21455 of 2008 before the Supreme Court being aggrieved by the judgment passed by the Madurai Bench of the High Court of Madras in the said two writ petitions filed by the Appellant. During the pendency of the SLP, the schedule of next general election to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly due in the year 2011 was announced.

Both the parties, DMK and AIADMK, again released their election manifestos with a volley of promises of supply of articles like, grinders, mixies, electric fans, laptop computers, 4-gm gold thalis, `50,000 cash for girl's marriage, green houses, 20 kg rice, etc. to the people if they come to power.

The appellant separately filed a complaint dated 22nd March, 2011 before the Election Commission seeking initiation of action in respect of the above freebies as corrupt practices under Section 123 of the RP Act, 1951 and requested to disqualify all such candidates on the ground that such promises amount to bribery within the meaning of Section 123(1) of the 1951 Act and Section 171-B of the IPC.

The Appellant also filed complaint before the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and Accountant General of Tamil Nadu against the transfer of consolidated fund of the state for fulfilling the promises of freebies made in the election manifestos. The Appellant again challenged the promises of freebies by filing another Writ Petition No.17122 of 2011 on 19th July, 2011, before the High Court of Judicature at Madras on the same ground that such promises are unauthorised, impermissible and ultra vires the Constitutional mandates.

The Hon'ble High Court directed the Commission to dispose of the representations made by the Petitioner.

The Commission informed the complainant/appellant on the basis of the existing legal provisions that commission of a corrupt practice by a candidate under Section 123(1) of R.P. Act, 1951 can be raised only before the High Court in an election petition and such candidate can be disqualified only on being found guilty by the High Court and not otherwise. Likewise, any person committing the offence of bribery under Section 171 (B) of IPC can be disqualified only on conviction by the competent court and not otherwise. It was also informed that declaration of public policy or promise of public action, is neither a corrupt practice nor electoral offence under proviso (b) to clause (2) of Section 123 of R.P. Act, 1951 and proviso to Section 171B(1) and Section 171C(2) of IPC. The Commission also conveyed its feeling that the promise of such freebies at government cost could disturb the level playing field and vitiate the electoral process and expressed its willingness to implement any directions or decision of the Court in this regard.

The Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 5th July, 2013 held that promises in the election manifesto do not constitute a corrupt practice under Section123 of the RP Act, 1951. It held that the Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Constitution enjoin upon the State to frame various welfare measures for the citizens and therefore there can be no objection to the promise of such welfare measures in election manifestos. As long as the schemes come within the realm of public purpose and money is withdrawn by passing suitable Appropriation Bill, they are in consonance with Article 14 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court dismissed the petition de hors the jurisdiction issue raised verbally by the respondent State Government of Tamil Nadu at the time of hearing.

The Court, however, observed that even though framing of manifestos is the right of the political parties, it cannot overlook the undesirable impact of some of the promises and offers on the conduct of free and fair elections and maintaining level playing field for all political parties and candidates. It advised the political parties to avoid making those promises which are likely to vitiate the purity of the election process or exert undue influence on the voters in exercising their franchise.

Accordingly, it directed the Election Commission to frame guidelines with regard to the contents of election manifestos in consultation with all the recognised political parties. It also laid down the following guiding principles for framing of such guidelines:

- **(i)** Although the law is obvious that the promises in the election manifesto cannot be construed as 'corrupt practice' under Section 123 of RP Act, the reality cannot be ruled out that distribution of freebies of any kind, undoubtedly, influences all people. It shakes the root of free and fair elections to a large degree.
- **(ii)** The fountainhead of the powers under which the Commission issues these orders is Article 324 of the Constitution which mandates the Commission to hold free and fair elections. The Election Commission, in order to ensure level playing field between the contesting parties and candidates in elections and also in order to see that the purity of the election process does not get vitiated, has in the past been issuing instructions under the Model Code of Conduct.
- **(iii)** The fact that generally political parties release their election manifesto before the announcement of election date, in that scenario, strictly speaking, the Election Commission does not have the authority to regulate any act which is done before the announcement of the date of election. Nevertheless, an exception can be made in this regard as the purpose of election manifesto is directly associated with the election process.

[Note: Pursuant to the Supreme Court's above order, the Election Commission framed guidelines, in consultation with political parties, and inserted them as Part VIII of the Model Code of Conduct by its letter No.437/6/Manifesto/2013 dated 19th February, 2014]

**(d) Lily Thomas v. Union of India & Others [WP (C) No. 490 of 2005], Supreme Court:** These writ petitions were filed as Public Interest Litigations for mainly declaring sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, giving special protection to sitting members of Parliament and State Legislature from immediate disqualification on conviction for offences under sub-sections (1), (2) or (3) of said Section 8 until three months from the date of conviction or, if within that period an appeal or application for revision is brought in respect of the conviction or the sentence, until that appeal or application is disposed off by the Court and ultra vires the Constitution being in contravention of the provisions of Articles 101 and 190 of the Constitution. Petitioners contended that persons to be elected as members of Parliament or a State Legislature stand on the same footing as sitting members of Parliament and State Legislature so far as disqualifications are concerned and sitting members of Parliament and State Legislature cannot enjoy special privilege of continuing as members even after conviction for offences under sub-Sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 8 of the Act. The Parliament lacks legislative powers to enact sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the RP Act, 1951.

It was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the provisions of Article 101(3)(a) and 190(1)(a) of the Constitution expressly prohibit Parliament to defer the date from which the disqualification is attracted in case of a sitting member of Parliament or State Legislature. The Parliament, therefore, exceeded its powers in enacting sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and accordingly declared sub-section (4) of Section-8 of the Act and ultra vires the Constitution. The Court held that

'……We also hold that the provisions of Article 101(3) (a) and 190(3)(a) of the Constitution expressly prohibit Parliament to defer the date from which the disqualification will come into effect in case of a sitting member of Parliament or a State Legislature. Parliament, therefore, has exceeded its powers conferred by the Constitution in enacting sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Act and accordingly subsection (4) of Section 8 of the Act ultra vires the Constitution ……..... (para)

However, if any sitting member of Parliament or a State Legislature is convicted of any of the offences mentioned in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 8 of the Act and by virtue of such conviction and/or sentence suffers the disqualifications mentioned in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 8 of the Act after the pronouncement of this judgment, his membership of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be, will not be saved by sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Act which we have by this judgment declared ultra vires the Constitution notwithstanding that he files the appeal or revision against the conviction and/or sentence'.

**(e) Resurgence India v. Election Commission of India & Another [WP (C) No. 121 of 2008], Supreme**  **Court:** The writ petition was filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India for issuance of appropriate writ/direction including writ of mandamus to effectuate meaningful implementation of the judgments rendered by the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Association for Democratic Reforms and Another (2002) 5 SCC 294 and People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) and Another v. Union of India &Anr. (2003) 4 SCC 399, and for that purpose to direct the respondents to make it compulsory for the Returning Officers to ensure that the affidavits filed by the contestants are complete in all respects and to reject the affidavits having blank particulars.

Pursuant to the Order of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Association for Democratic Reforms and Another (Supra), the Election Commission, vide order dated 28th June, 2002, issued directions to the candidates to furnish a duly sworn affidavit to declare full and complete information relating to his/her criminal antecedents, if any, information regarding assets of the candidate as well as of his/her spouse and that of dependants, liability, if any, and educational qualification of the candidate, to enable electors to know the background of the candidates. It was also directed that non-furnishing of the affidavit by any candidate or furnishing of any wrong or incomplete information or suppression of any material information of substantial character, found by the Returning Officer after summary enquiry at the time of scrutiny of nomination papers, will result in the rejection of the nomination paper, apart from inviting penal consequences under the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

Subsequently, in People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) and Another v. Union of India & Anr. (Supra), while reaffirming the aforementioned decision, the Apex Court, however, held that the direction to the Returning Officer to reject the nomination papers for furnishing wrong information or concealing material information and verification of assets and liabilities by means of a summary inquiry at the time of scrutiny of the nominations by the Returning Officer should not be enforced.

Accordingly, the Election Commission, issued revised order dated 27th March, 2003, inter alia, clarifying that its earlier order with regard to verification of assets and liabilities by means of summary inquiry and rejection of nomination papers on the ground of furnishing wrong information or suppression of material information shall not be enforceable.

Subsequently, the Commission, vide letter dated 02nd June, 2004 directed the Returning Officers that where any complaint regarding furnishing of false information by any candidate is submitted by anyone, supported by some documentary evidence, the concerned Returning Officer should initiate action to prosecute the candidate concerned by filing formal complaint before the appropriate authority. The Supreme Court held that right to know about the candidate is a universally recognised natural right flowing from the concept of democracy and is an integral part of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. To effectuate the fundamental right of the citizens, the candidates are supposed to disclose their antecedents at the time of filing of nomination paper and for that purpose, the Returning Officer can very well compel a candidate to furnish the relevant information.

It accordingly held that in the affidavits filed by candidates along with their nomination paper, the candidates must fill up all columns therein and no column can be left blank. Therefore, at the time of filing of affidavit, RO has to check whether all columns of the affidavit filed with the nomination paper are filled up. If not, the RO shall give a reminder to the candidate to furnish information against blank columns and for that purpose one more column be incorporated in the standard Check List already prescribed by the Commission to ensure filing of all documents required to be filed by a candidate along with the nomination paper. In case no information is to be furnished against any item, appropriate remarks such as 'NIL' or 'Not Applicable' or 'Not Known' as may be applicable shall be indicated in such column by the candidate. No column can be left blank. If a candidate fails to fill the blanks even after reminder, the nomination paper will be liable to be rejected by the Returning Officer at the time of scrutiny of nomination papers.

It further clarified that even though filing of affidavit with blanks will attract the penal provisions of Section 125A(i) of the RP Act, however, as the nomination paper itself is rejected by the Returning Officer, it would not be necessary to prosecute the candidate again for the same act.

**(f) People's Union for Civil Liberties & Another v. Union of India & Another [WP (C) No. 161 of 2004], Supreme Court:** This writ petition was filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India challenging the constitutional validity of Rules 41(2) & (3) and 49-O of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961, to the extent these provisions violate the secrecy of voting required to be maintained as per Section 128 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, and Rules 39 and 49-M of the 1961 Rules in the case of voter who decides not to cast his vote at an election for any of the contesting candidates in fray.

The Apex Court held that casting of vote is a facet of the right of expression of an individual and the said right is provided under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India and any violation of the said right gives the aggrieved person the right to approach the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution. Right to vote as well as right not to vote have been statutorily recognised under Section 79(d) of the RP Act, 1951 and Rules 41 (2) & (3) of the CE Rules, 1961. The fundamental right under Article 19(1)(a) read with statutory electoral right granted under Section 79 (d) of the RP Act, 1951 is violated unreasonably if the right not to vote effectively is denied and secrecy is breached.

It was held that secrecy of ballot is a privilege granted in public interest to an individual. The Apex Court directed the Election Commission to provide '**None of the Above' (NOTA)** option on the EVM and ballot papers so that the electors who do not want to vote for any of the candidates can exercise their option in secrecy. It was also held that the provisions of Rules 41(2) and 49-O under which an elector not wishing to vote for any candidate had to inform the Presiding Officer about his decision, ultra vires Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and Section 128 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

**(g) Subramanian Swamy v. Election Commission of India [CA No. 9093 of 2013], Supreme Court:** The appellant filed writ petition before High Court of Delhi seeking writ of Mandamus directing Election Commission of India to incorporate a system of 'Paper trail/Paper Receipt' in the Electronic Voting Machines (EVM) as a convincing proof that the EVM has rightly registered the vote cast by a voter in favour of a particular candidate. The petition was dismissed by the High Court. Hence, other writ petition under Article 32 also prayed for writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to effect the necessary modifications in the EVMs so as to allow the voters to verify their respective votes and attach printers to EVMs with a facility to print the running record of the votes. The petitioner also prayed for a direction to frame guidelines and to effect necessary amendments in the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961.

The stand of the Election Commission was that the apprehension that EVMs could be tampered with, is baseless as the technology employed is such that it cannot be manipulated in any manner. There has been no instance of tampering with EVMs by anyone since its introduction. However, to make the voting procedure more transparent the Commission has been in the process of exploring the possibility of incorporating a viable Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) system with EVMs. Ultimately, the design of VVPAT system was finalised on 19th January, 2013 and the relevant rules of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 were modified to enable use of VVPAT with EVMs and Notified in the Gazette of India on 14th August, 2013.

The Commission thereafter decided to use the VVPAT system for the first time in the byelection from 51-Noksen (ST) Assembly Constituency in the State of Nagaland. In order to ascertain the efficacy of the newly introduced VVPAT system the Commission decided on its own to manually count paper slips of VVPAT besides electronic count of EVM. No discrepancy was found between both the electronic and paper count. The report was placed before the Court.

The Supreme Court observed that it is necessary to set up EVMs with VVPAT system because vote is nothing but an act of expression which has immense importance in democratic system. It permitted the ECI to introduce the system in gradual stages in the coming general elections and directed the Government of India to provide required financial assistance for procurement of required number of units of VVPAT for conduct of general elections all over India.

The Appeal and the Writ Petition were disposed with the above directions.

**(h) Ashok Shankarrao Chavan v. Dr.Madhavrao Kinhalkar & Others [CA Nos. 5044, 5045 & 5078 of 2014], Supreme Court:** The main issue in the case was whether the Election Commission has been empowered under Section 10A of the R.P. Act, 1951 to hold an enquiry to ascertain the correctness or otherwise of the account of election expenses incurred by a returned candidate as maintained under Sections 77(1) and (2) and lodged with the District Election Officer (DEO) under Section 78 of the 1951 Act for the purposes of deciding the question of disqualification under Section 10A of the 1951 Act, either at the instance of any candidate who also contested in the said election or by any other person or based on any other information received by the Commission through some reliable sources, especially after a decision is rendered by the High Court in the Election Petition preferred by one of the contesting candidates under Section 80 of the 1951 Act.

Ultimately, the Supreme Court dismissed the SLP filed by Ashok Chavan vide its order dated 5th May, 2014 and gave its seal of approval to the decision of the Election Commission as upheld by the High Court to the effect that Section 10A clothes the Election Commission with the requisite power and authority to enquire into the allegations relating to failure to submit the accounts of election expenses in the manner prescribed and as required by or under the Act, is perfectly justified and declined to interfere with the same.

The Apex Court observed that an order of disqualification under Section 10A of the 1951 Act in respect of an elected candidate by the Election Commission does not amount to setting aside the election of the candidate. It emphasised that the scope of an Election Petition to be tried by a High Court and scope of an order of disqualification to be passed under Section 10A are different and one does not conflict with the other. The enquiry to be held under Section 10A is not to examine any allegation of corrupt practice falling under Section 123(6) of the Act. The only area of examination is with regard to correctness of account of election expenses maintained as per the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 77 of the 1951- Act. It did not agree with the contention that once the Election Petition has been rejected for want of particulars, a complaint under Section 10A cannot be pursued.

It was held that the power to hold an enquiry before passing an order of disqualification under Section 10A has been invested with the Election Commission. As per the provisions of sub-rule (5) and (6) of Rule 89 along with Section 10A, the Commission has to necessarily issue a show cause notice, consider whether the account lodged was in the manner as required by or under the Act and only thereafter, pass an order of either disqualification or otherwise.

It was further held that the enquiry under Section 10A would be more or less of a civil nature and, therefore, the principles of preponderance of probabilities alone would apply and that even after the order of disqualification, if any, is passed under Section 10A, after following the requirement of issuance of show cause notice, receipt of reply, etc., there is a further remedy available to the contesting candidate under Section 11 by which the aggrieved candidate can demonstrate before the Election Commission as to how the order of disqualification cannot stand and that it has to be varied. Further, the Constitutional remedy under Articles 32 and 226 is always available to question the correctness of any order that may be passed by the Commission under Sections 10A and 11 of the Act.

The Court held that the maintenance of account of the election expenses is not an empty formality and that the Court cannot turn a blind eye and state that Section 77(1) and (3), as well as 78 of the Act would be relevant only for the purpose of ascertaining the corrupt practices under Section 123(6) of the Act. In fact, it was held that ascertainment of the requirement under Section 77(3) of the Act, viz. the expenses incurred, should not exceed the limit prescribed and that it should be for both the purpose of an enquiry under Section 10A of the Act, as well as in the event where candidates exceed the limit through corrupt practices for the purpose of invalidating the election. Therefore, the requirement under Section 77(3) of the Act has got twin objectives to be fulfilled. Carrying on from this, the Court condemned 'paid news'.

**(i) Kisan Shankar Kathore v. Arun Dattatray Sawant & Others [CA No. 4261 of 2007], Supreme Court:** The Appellant, Kisan Shankar Kathore, was elected from 56-Ambernath Assembly Constitueney, Maharashtra at the general election to the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly held in October, 2004. An election petition under Section 100(1)(d) (i) and (iv) of the RP Act, 1951 was filed before the Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Bombay by Arun Dattatray Sawant, who was a voter of the said assembly constituency, on the ground that in the nomination paper the Appellant had suppressed information about his dues payable to the Government, assets of his spouse and assets of a partnership firm of which he was a partner. It was contended that the appellant's nomination had been improperly accepted by the Returning Officer (RO) and the election was void due to non-compliance of the provisions of the Constitution of India, the Representation of the People Act, 1951 as well as Rules and Orders framed under the Act.

The Hon'ble Bombay High Court allowed the election petition and set aside the election of the appellant by treating non-disclosure of certain information about assets and liabilities in the affidavit, filed with the nomination paper, as material defect that amounted to non-compliance of the order passed by the Election Commission under Article 324 of the Constitution of India, which is founded on the law declared by the Apex Court under Article 141 of the Constitution of India, within the meaning of Section 100(1)(d)(iv) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. The nomination form of the Appellant was thus improperly accepted by the Returning Officer and the election result was also materially affected because of non-disclosure of vital information to the electorate.

Aggrieved by the Order of the High Court, the present appeal was filed before the Supreme Court. The Appellant's contention was that the nature of information given in the nomination form ought to have been treated as substantial compliance.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India agreeing with the aforesaid findings of the Bombay High Court, held that the election of the returned candidate would be void when a Court finds at a later stage during the trial of an election petition, that there was a case of misinformation or suppressing of material information in the affidavit filed with the nomination paper by treating it as a case of improper acceptance of the nomination paper by the RO, holding that when the information is given by a candidate in the affidavit filed along with the nomination paper and objections are raised thereto questioning the correctness of the information or alleging that there is non-disclosure of certain important information, it may not be possible for the returning officer at that time to conduct a detailed examination. Summary enquiry may not suffice. Present case is itself an example which loudly demonstrates this. At the same time, it would not be possible for the Returning Officer to reject the nomination for want of verification about the allegations made by the objector. In such a case, when ultimately it is proved that it was a case of non-disclosure and either the affidavit was false or it did not contain complete information leading to suppression, it can be held at that stage that the nomination was improperly accepted. Learned senior counsel appearing for the Election Commission, rightly argued that such an enquiry can be only at a later stage and the appropriate stage would be in an election petition as in the instant case, when the election is challenged. The grounds stated in Section 36(2) are those which can be examined there and then and on that basis the Returning Officer would be in a position to reject the nomination. Likewise, where the blanks are left in an affidavit, nomination can be rejected there and then. In other cases where detailed enquiry is needed, it would depend upon the outcome thereof, in an election petition, as to whether the nomination was properly accepted or it was a case of improper acceptance. Once it is found that it was a case of improper acceptance, as there was misinformation or suppression of material information, one can state that question of rejection in such a case was only deferred to a later date. When the Court gives such a finding, which would have resulted in rejection, the effect would be same, namely, such a candidate was not entitled to contest and the election is void. Otherwise, it would be an anomalous situation that even when criminal proceedings under Section 125A of the Act can be initiated and the selected candidate is criminally prosecuted and convicted, but the result of his election cannot be questioned. This cannot be countenanced.

The Hon'ble Supreme Court dismissed the appeal being devoid of any merit.

**(j) Election Commission of India v. Bajrang Bahadur Singh & Others [SLP (C) No. 8850 of 2015], Supreme Court:** The Petitioner in the transferred case filed a writ petition before the Allahabad High Court on 13th March, 2015 challenging the legality of the Order passed by the Governor on 29th January, 2015 under Article 192(1) of the Constitution declaring the petitioner disqualified from continuing to be a member of the Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly on the ground that he had entered into a contract with the Government after having been elected as a Member of the Assembly on 6th March, 2012 and executed the contract thereby incurring disqualification contemplated under Article 191 (1) (e) read with Section 9A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

The Secretariat of the Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly issued a notification on 17th February, 2015 declaring the seat held by the Petitioner from the 315-Pharenda assembly constituency as vacant. The Election Commission thereafter announced the schedule for filling up the casual vacancy by issuing a press Note on 10th March, 2015 and issued the notification under Section 150(1) of the 1951 Act to notify the byelection from 315-Pharenda assembly constituency as per schedule announced by it.

The High Court of Allahabad passed an interim order on 20th March, 2015 and stayed the process of the byelection from 315-Pharenda assembly constituency that had already been notified by the Commission.

The Election Commission filed this SLP before the Supreme Court being aggrieved by the impugned interim order issued by the Allahabad High Court to stay the process of byelection in view of the constitutional bar to interference by Courts in electoral matters under Article 329 (b) of the Constitution.

The main contention of the petitioner in the writ petition before the Allahabad High Court was that disqualifications prescribed under Sections 8,9, 10A of the RP Act, 1951 run for a statutorily fixed time frame and for any disqualification under Section 9A of the RP Act, 1951 the period of disqualification is co-terminus with subsistence of the contract. The moment the contract ceases to subsist the disqualification also ceases to exist. The language of Article 191(1) also does not specify whether such disqualification is attracted subsequent to the election.

The Supreme Court held that though the period of disqualification prescribed under Section 9A for subsisting contract with the appropriate government for supply of goods to, or for the execution of any works undertaken by that government and under Section 10 for holding an office under Government Company is co-terminus with the currency of the disqualifying event, in the case of a sitting Member of Parliament or State Legislature the seat held by that Member falls vacant forthwith by operation of law as enunciated under sub-clause (3) of Article 190 of the Constitution. The Court thus rejected the submission of the petitioner and dismissed the transferred writ petition filed before the Allahabad High Court.

The Court further clarified that a person incurring disqualification under Sections 9A and 10 of the 1951 Act is not debarred from contesting any election, including a byelection arising as a direct consequence of his vacating the seat if the event of disqualification ceases to subsist by the relevant date.

On the question of jurisdiction of the High Court to intercept in the election process already set in motion by issuance of notification in view of the prohibition contained in Article 329(b) of the Constitution, the Supreme Court held that the interim order granted by the Allahabad High Court was justified as the primary challenge in the writ petition filed before the High Court was not to challenge the electoral process but the decision of the Governor disqualifying the petitioner that resulted in the vacancy for which a byelection was notified by the Election Commission. The interference in the process of byelection by the High Court under Article 226 arose out of an absolute necessity.

The Supreme Court observed that the extraordinary situation arose apparently due to conflicting constitutional obligations of High Court to adjudicate on any legality of Governor's decision under Article 192 and Election Commission's obligation to conduct bye-election within a period of six months from the date of occurrence of the vacancy under Section 150 of the RP Act, 1951.

By this judgment the Apex Court laid down that the Order of the Governor under Article 192 (though said to be final) can be called in question on limited grounds as explained by the Supreme Court in the cases of Kihoto Hollohan [1992 Supp (2) SCC 651] and Mahachandra Prasad Singh [(2004) 8 SCC 747]. The Supreme Court also prescribed the period of limitation for initiating proceedings before the High Courts against a decision of the Governor under Article 192 on the question of disqualification of a sitting member as eight (8) weeks from the date of the decision of the Governor and final disposal by the High Court within a period of eight weeks from the date of initiation without fail. The Apex Court further directed that such petitions should be heard by a Division Bench of the High Court comprising at least two judges and the Chief Justices of the High Courts have been directed to make appropriate arrangements for compliance within the limitation period.

**(k) Election Commission of India v. Praful & Another [CA No. 178 of 2016], Supreme Court:** The appeal was filed by the Election Commission against impugned final judgment and Order dated 20th December, 2007 passed by the High Court of Bombay at Aurangabad in writ petition No. 6084 of 2007, whereby it struck down one of the clauses [Clause 5(f)] of the public Notice dated 01st October, 2007 issued under Rule 31(1) of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960, by the Electoral Registration Officers of Nagpur, Pune and Aurangabad Division Graduates' constituencies, in the form devised by the Election Commission, inviting applications in prescribed statutory Form 18 appended to the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960, from electors eligible for inclusion of their names in the electoral roll of these Graduates' constituencies with reference to 1st November, 2007 as the qualifying date. In para 5(f) of that notice, it was stated that a mere reference to an entry in the earlier roll relating to the applicant shall not be taken into account for determining the eligibility for enrolment in the electoral rolls and the applicant will have to produce his degree or certificate, in original, for verification by the Designated Officer.

The High Court had struck down the above clause as being without any legal authority or sanction. It held that the relevant Act and Rules do not confer jurisdiction or power on the Election Commission to order for preparation of electoral rolls afresh every time an election is held to Graduates'/Teachers' constituencies. It directed the Commission not to ask for documents from the electors, already enrolled in the electoral rolls of Graduates'/Teachers' constituencies.

The Apex Court considered the question as to whether in matters of revision of the electoral roll for graduates'/teachers' constituencies a fresh roll is to be prepared or the existing roll is to be revised and published after inviting claims and objections. It held that the clear legislative intent of the provisions of Sections 21 and 22 of the Representation of the People Act 1950 and Rule 31 of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960, in the context of revision of electoral roll for graduates' and teachers' constituencies, is that it shall be prepared afresh after every six years as per the procedure embodied in Rule 31 of the 1960 Rules.

It further held that the requirement of an eligible voter to submit fresh application in prescribed Form 18 in case of Graduates' constituency and in Form 19 in case of Teachers' constituencies every six years adequately takes care of the requirement spelt out by Section 22 of the 1950 Act that an eligible voter shall not be deleted from the electoral roll without an opportunity.

The Apex Court thus upheld the validity of Clause 5 (f) of the impugned notice as being in conformity with the requirements of sub-rule (4A) of rule 31 of 1960 Rules. Any contrary view taken would be erroneous.

The Appeal was allowed and the order of the High Court was set aside with the observation that the High Court had fallen into error in taking the contrary view.