2

# AnthropologicAl StudieS of indiAn tribeS

Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant K. Chaudhury

This review of the literature on the studies of Indian tribes (published in the English language) covers the time span from 1988 to 2002. It also reflects upon the discipline of anthropology in India, wherein tribal studies continue to constitute the principal subject matter.

# **Anthropology in India**

Immanuel Kant is credited with coining the word 'anthropology', meaning the 'study of Man', or, in the contemporary gender-sensitive world, the 'study of Humankind'. Although in the literature on the history of anthropology one comes across a tendency on the part of authors to trace its emergence to ancient and medieval thinkers such as Aristotle, Ibn Khaldun, Montesquieu, Rousseau, there is no disagreement on the point that as a professional commitment, and as a subject to be taught and researched in universities, anthropology started in the West in the second half of the nineteenth century. In this development, museums have played an unparalleled role. It was to collect artefacts to be displayed in the ethnology sections of these museums that visits to the territories of 'pre-literate' and 'technologically-simpler' societies were undertaken. It was not enough to collect artefacts for the museum, researchers gave a 'full account of the contexts in which the tools and objects are used' (Srinivas 1989: 71). This was the job of the ethnographer who collected the details about the artefacts and prepared a write-up on each one of them for exhibition. Certain prominent scholars of the formative era in the development of anthropology (such as Edward Tylor, Franz Boas, T.K. Penniman) were closely associated with museums (Eriksen and Nielsen 2001).

The Asiatic Society of Bengal, founded in Calcutta (now Kolkata) in 1784 by William Jones, initiated systematic anthropological (and Indological) studies in India. Some scholars of Indian origin (such as S.C. Roy) were profoundly interested in the study of Indian tribes and castes. They conducted first-hand studies of these communities and published detailed monographs on them, which are still consulted. But anthropology became an independent university discipline when its first department was established in 1921 in the University of Calcutta. Since then a number of anthropology departments (today numbering 35) have been opened in different universities (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 2000).

Although not correct, many think that a familial relationship exists between *sociology* and *anthropology*, with the result that, for instance, for civil and provincial services examinations candidates are not permitted to opt for both these subjects. If there is any kinship, it is between sociology (a 'full' discipline) and social anthropology (a 'part' discipline), and not between sociology and anthropology. In addition to social anthropology, the other branches of anthropology are physical (or biological) anthropology, archeaeological anthropology (or prehistory), and linguistic anthropology, although not all the branches are equally developed (and taught) in a department of anthropology (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1999, 2004). Because of the affinity between sociology and social anthropology, some authors do not make a distinction between the two (Srinivas 2002: 465), whilst others think that notwithstanding the overlapping between them, there are unmistakable differences in their respective practices (Sarana and Srivastava 2005), which would explain why there should be separate departments of anthropology and sociology, wherein the department of anthropology teaches social anthropology along with the other branches which collectively give identity (and separateness) to anthropology (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1999). This does not, however, imply that no mobility is possible from anthropology to sociology. In fact, many sociologists in India (to list the prominent names, G.S. Ghurye, M.N. Srinivas, S.C. Dube, R.D. Sanwal, S.D. Badgaiyan, Andre Béteille, T.N. Madan, B.R. Chauhan, J.P.S. Uberoi, Yogesh Atal) have had their basic training in anthropology. However, mobility from sociology to anthropology is not that common because anthropology departments expect their faculty members to have studied all the branches of anthropology, particularly physical anthropology.

To understand the progress of any subject (or its specialization), one needs to begin with a description of the journals through which its researches and ideas are disseminated to the academic community, and also amongst the wider public.

The last decade of the last millennium witnessed a consolidation of some new anthropology journals and a regular publication of some old journals. A publishing house which has made a major contribution to the publication of anthropology and anthropologically oriented journals in this decade is Old Delhi-based Kamla-Raj Enterprises. It began with the publication of the *Journal of Human Ecology* in 1990. In 1997, it started the *Journal of Social Sciences*. Although both these journals were of interdisciplinary in nature, their managing editors were (and are) anthropologists, which would explain their overall anthropological influence. Kamla-Raj Enterprises also renewed in 1999 the publication of *The Anthropologist*, the third journal (after *Man in India* and *The Eastern Anthropologist*) in the history of anthropology in India, founded in August 1954 by the Department of Anthropology of the University of Delhi. Its publication unfortunately was suspended in the early 1980s. In 2001, Kamla-Raj started the publication of the *International Journal of Human Genetics*, once again managed by an anthropologist, which would explain the overall physical anthropological nature of this journal. In 2002, it founded *Studies of Tribes and Tribals* devoted exclusively to the study of the tribal communities of the world, and in 2007, *Studies in Ethnomedicine*. Except for *The Anthropologist*, the other journals do not carry the word 'anthropology' in their respective titles, but predominantly publish articles by anthropologists and of anthropological interests, as has been noted earlier.

In this decade also began the new series of the *South Asian Anthropologist*, a journal (edited by P. Dash Sharma) which the Sarat Chandra Roy Institute of Anthropological Studies (Ranchi) started in 1979. In 2001, the Oriental Institute of Cultural and Social Research (Allahabad) founded its journal, edited by Vijoy S. Sahay, *The Oriental Anthropologist*. In 2003 began *The Journal of Social Anthropology*, edited by R.M. Sarkar. In addition, there are journals and bulletins that some departments of anthropology (at Dibrugarh, Ranchi, Kolkata) and Tribal Research Institutes (of various states) publish. Presently, to get an idea of the anthropological researches that have been done in India, one may consult, in addition to the journals that the Kamla-Raj Enterprises publishes, the following regularly published journals arranged here in chronological order: *Man in India*, *The Eastern Anthropologist*, *Journal of the Indian Anthropological Society*, *Indian Anthropologist*, *South Asian Anthropologist*, *Man and Life*, *The Anthropologist* (new series), *The Oriental Anthropologist*, and *Journal of Social Anthropology*. It may also be noted that some anthropology journals (such as *Journal of Social Research*, *Spectra of Anthropological Progress*) continued with their regular publication for some years, making worthy contributions, but had to be discontinued for a myriad of reasons. The *Journal of Social Research* (published from Ranchi, Jharkhand), for example, which L.P. Vidyarthi started in 1958, carried several important articles on tribes that are still consulted, especially the impact of industrialization on the tribals. In recent years, attempts have been made to restart this Journal.

Indian anthropologists also publish their articles in other social science journals, such as *Economic and Political Weekly*, *Sociological Bulletin*, *Contributions to Indian Sociology* (new series), and popular periodicals, like *Vanyajati*, *Yojana*, and *Kurukshetra*. In fact, *Vanyajati*, which the Bhartiya Adimjati Sevak Sangh started in 1951, is one of the oldest journals devoted to the issues of tribal societies, publishing popular as well as academic articles, both in Hindi and in English by authors from all walks of life. Incidentally, the term *vanyajati* means the 'forest-dwelling people'. This term is also used in Hindi for tribes, suggesting that Indian tribes are forest-dwellers.

Further, in the last two decades, some publishers have taken the lead in publishing monographs of varying quality on Indian tribes. One which deserves mention is the *Tribal Studies of India Series* launched by Inter-India Publications (Delhi), which has so far published more than one hundred books, principally based on fieldwork. Although some of the monographs that the Indian publishers have brought out lack a high academic standard and sophistication of language, what is important is that they provide empirical data on tribes in India.

In comparison to other social science journals, anthropological and anthropologically oriented journals carry a number of articles on tribal communities. This survey, we did not come across a single issue of an anthropology (or anthropologically oriented) journal, which did not carry an article on tribespersons, whereas other social science journals hardly publish articles on tribes. However, with respect to the issues of biodiversity or eco-conservation, or those of ethnicity or national integration and nation-building, their authors (who generally are not anthropologists) may refer to the studies on tribal societies. Recently, for example, many articles are written in the newspapers (particularly, *The Hindu*) by non-anthropologists on the Scheduled Tribes (Soni 2005; Mudgal 2007). In other words, tribes are not entirely absent in the discourses of other social sciences, but certainly tribal studies are not at the centre. In this context, Béteille writes:

Anthropology has from the beginning had a special interest in the customs, practices, and institutions of simple, primitive, or preliterate societies and cultures…They [the anthropologists] are still the acknowledged authorities, in matters of both theory and policy, on this particular segment of humanity. (1998: 187)

To substantiate this point about anthropology with some quantitative analysis, this chapter begins with an analysis of articles published from 1993 to 2002—a tenyear period—in the oldest journal of India, *Man in India*, which Sarat Chandra Roy1 started in 1921 (Vidyarthi and Rai 1976: 13). Besides book reviews, the contributions to this journal are divided into 'articles' and 'communications', the latter being considerably shorter than the former. Further, like many anthropology journals, international as well as national, *Man in India* publishes articles from all the four branches of anthropology (viz., physical or biological anthropology, social and cultural anthropology, prehistory or archaeological anthropology, and linguistic anthropology). For this analysis, the articles published from 1993 to 2002 have been divided under the heads of the four branches of anthropology. In addition, one more area of interest has also been covered, namely 'general anthropology', which deals with the discipline of anthropology as a whole, and also, with bio-behavioural (i.e., 'bio-social' and 'bio-cultural') aspects. Table 2.1 gives the frequency of articles published during the period under survey covering different branches of anthropology.

The present analysis (presented in Table 2.1) shows that 67.69 per cent of the articles and 68.49 per cent of the communications published in the journal relate to social and cultural anthropology, while 25.00 per cent of the articles and 23.28 per cent of the communications are in physical or biological

| Year                   |     | Total<br>Write-ups |    | Physical<br>Anthro-<br>pology | Social/<br>Cultural<br>Anthro-<br>pology |    | Archaeo-<br>logical<br>Anthro-<br>pology |      | Languages/<br>Linguistic<br>Anthro-<br>pology |      |      | General<br>Anthro-<br>pology |  |
|------------------------|-----|--------------------|----|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------|----|------------------------------------------|------|-----------------------------------------------|------|------|------------------------------|--|
|                        | A   | C                  | A  | C                             | A                                        | C  | A                                        | C    | A                                             | C    | A    | C                            |  |
| 1993                   | 33  | 11                 | 5  | 2                             | 26                                       | 9  | 0                                        |      |                                               |      | 2    |                              |  |
| 1994                   | 34  | 8                  | 10 | 4                             | 24                                       | 3  | 0                                        |      |                                               |      |      | 1                            |  |
| 1995                   | 25  | 11                 | 10 | 5                             | 14                                       | 6  | 1                                        |      |                                               |      |      |                              |  |
| 1996                   | 24  | 4                  | 4  | 1                             | 18                                       | 3  | 2                                        |      |                                               |      |      |                              |  |
| 1997                   | 25  | 9                  | 6  | 1                             | 17                                       | 8  | 2                                        |      |                                               |      |      |                              |  |
| 1998                   | 21  | 5                  | 4  | 1                             | 13                                       | 4  | 3                                        |      | 1                                             |      |      |                              |  |
| 1999                   | 21  | 8                  | 3  | 1                             | 16                                       | 5  | 1                                        |      | 1                                             | 1    |      | 1                            |  |
| 2000                   | 27  | 0                  | 15 | 0                             | 9                                        | 0  | 3                                        |      |                                               |      |      |                              |  |
| 2001                   | 27  | 5                  | 2  | 0                             | 25                                       | 5  | 0                                        |      |                                               |      |      |                              |  |
| 2002                   | 23  | 12                 | 6  | 2                             | 14                                       | 7  | 2                                        | 2    |                                               | 1    | 1    | 1                            |  |
| Total                  | 260 | 73                 | 65 | 17                            | 176                                      | 50 | 14                                       | 2    | 2                                             | 2    | 3    | 3                            |  |
| Total in<br>Percentage |     |                    |    |                               | 25.00 23.28 67.69 68.49 5.38 2.73        |    |                                          | 0.76 | 1.36                                          | 1.15 | 4.10 |                              |  |

**Table 2.1** Survey of Articles and communications published in *Man in India*  from 1993 to 2002

*Notes*: A → Articles; C → Comments

anthropology. Together, 92.69 per cent of the articles and 91.77 per cent of the communications thus represent the two sub-disciplines of social and cultural anthropology and physical or biological anthropology. Only 5.38 per cent of the articles and 2.73 per cent of the communications are in the domain of prehistory. General anthropology is represented in 1.15 per cent of the articles and 4.10 per cent of the communications. The most minuscule representation is of linguistic anthropology: only 0.76 per cent articles and 1.36 per cent communications. This supports the observation that in anthropology departments of Indian universities, and also research organizations (such as the Anthropological Survey of India), the sub-disciplines that have an overwhelming representation are social and cultural anthropology and physical or biological anthropology. One of the oft-stated demands by anthropology departments is that all the branches of anthropology should be equally developed, and special attention should be paid to prehistory and linguistic anthropology (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1999).

The next step in the analysis is to locate the focus of the articles and communications: first, those that deal directly with tribal societies; and second, those that use materials on tribal societies for comparison with non-tribal societies (see Tables 2.2 and 2.3). From 1993 to 2002, *Man in India* carried 20 per cent articles and 41.18 per cent communications which dealt with the biological features of tribespersons. By comparison, 67.11 per cent of the articles and 44 per cent of the communications were on the social and cultural aspects of tribes. In addition, 3.97 per cent of the articles used information on tribal societies for comparison with other societies. The main reason for fewer articles on the biology of tribes is that from the beginning physical anthropology has been concerned with a wide variety of communities—which they call 'Mendelian populations'—tribal as well as nontribal, whereas Indian social and cultural anthropology has paid significantly far more attention to the study of tribes. As a result, it has been able to build up its own tradition of 'tribal studies' (or, what may be called *tribalology*). When speaking of tribal studies, what anthropologists (and other social scientists) have in mind is the 'social anthropology and sociology of tribal communities', although, as said previously, the other branches of anthropology have definitely studied those aspects of tribal life that are of relevance to their respective specializations.

| Year                   | Total<br>Articles |    | Articles Exclusively<br>on Tribes |    |    | Articles Using Tribal Studies<br>for Comparison |  |  |  |  |
|------------------------|-------------------|----|-----------------------------------|----|----|-------------------------------------------------|--|--|--|--|
|                        |                   | PA | SA                                | AA | LA | PA<br>SA<br>AA<br>LA                            |  |  |  |  |
| 1993                   | 33                | 1  | 2                                 |    |    | 2                                               |  |  |  |  |
| 1994                   | 34                | 3  | 7                                 |    |    | 2                                               |  |  |  |  |
| 1995                   | 25                |    | 9                                 |    |    |                                                 |  |  |  |  |
| 1996                   | 24                | 2  | 8                                 |    |    | 1                                               |  |  |  |  |
| 1997                   | 25                |    | 5                                 |    |    | 1                                               |  |  |  |  |
| 1998                   | 21                |    | 5                                 |    |    |                                                 |  |  |  |  |
| 1999                   | 21                |    | 9                                 |    | 1  |                                                 |  |  |  |  |
| 2000                   | 27                | 7  | 1                                 |    |    | 1                                               |  |  |  |  |
| 2001                   | 27                |    | 1                                 |    |    | 1                                               |  |  |  |  |
| 2002                   | 23                |    | 4                                 |    |    |                                                 |  |  |  |  |
| Total                  | 260               | 13 | 51                                |    | 1  | 7<br>1                                          |  |  |  |  |
| Total in<br>percentage |                   | 20 | 67.11                             |    | 50 | 3.97<br>7.14                                    |  |  |  |  |

**Table 2.2** Survey of Articles published in *Man in India* on tribes from 1993 to 2002

| Year                | Total | Communications       |                    |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
|---------------------|-------|----------------------|--------------------|----------------------------|------------------------|--|--|--|--|
|                     |       | Physical<br>Anthrop. | Social<br>Anthrop. | Archaeological<br>Anthrop. | Linguistic<br>Anthrop. |  |  |  |  |
| 1993                | 11    |                      | 3                  |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 1994                | 8     | 3                    | 2                  |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 1995                | 11    | 4                    | 4                  |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 1996                | 4     |                      | 1                  |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 1997                | 9     |                      | 3                  |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 1998                | 5     |                      | 1                  |                            | 1                      |  |  |  |  |
| 1999                | 8     |                      | 4                  |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 2000                |       |                      |                    |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 2001                | 5     |                      | 3                  |                            |                        |  |  |  |  |
| 2002                | 12    |                      | 1                  | 1                          |                        |  |  |  |  |
| Total               | 73    | 7                    | 22                 | 1                          | 1                      |  |  |  |  |
| Total in percentage |       | 41.18                | 44                 | 50                         | 100                    |  |  |  |  |

**Table 2.3** Survey of communications published in *Man in India* on tribes (1993–2002)

Alongside, we have also conducted a quantitative analysis of the contributions from 1988 to 2002 to *The Eastern Anthropologist*, the second anthropology journal that D.N. Majumdar founded in 1947 and one of the three journals (the other two being the *Indian Journal of Physical Anthropology and Human Genetics* and *Manav* [in Hindi]) that the Ethnographic and Folk Culture Society of Lucknow (Uttar Pradesh) publishes (see Table 2.4). During this period, 18.90 per cent of the articles, 33.33 per cent of the shorter notes, and 18.75 per cent of the brief communications published in the journal were on tribes, and they all pertained to social and cultural dimensions since *The Eastern Anthropologist* publishes contributions only from social anthropology and prehistory. One of the reasons for the fewer number of contributions on tribes is that during these fifteen years, five special volumes were brought out and each one was comprised of two numbers. The special volumes either dealt with themes or were commemorative in nature: for example, the *Indus Civilization* (1992: 3–4); *Special Issue edited by Guest Editors* (1996: 3–4); *Golden Jubilee Special Number* (1997: 3–4); *Resettlement*  (2000: 1–2); *Muslims of South Asia* (2000: 3–4); and *Other Backward Classes*  (2002: 3–4). Except for the special volume on Resettlement (which had articles referring to materials from tribal communities), the other volumes did not have contributions on tribes.

| Year &<br>Volume        | Total<br>Articles | Articles<br>on Tribes | Total<br>Short<br>Notes | Short<br>Notes on<br>Tribes | Brief | Brief<br>Comment Comment<br>on Tribes |
|-------------------------|-------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|-------|---------------------------------------|
| 1988:41                 | 19                | 5                     | 8                       | 5                           |       |                                       |
| 1989:42                 | 14                |                       | 7                       | 2                           | 3     |                                       |
| 1990:43                 | 17                | 7                     | 6                       | 1                           | 1     |                                       |
| 1991:44                 | 19                | 3                     | 8                       | 4                           |       |                                       |
| *1992:45                | 9                 | 1                     | 6                       | 1                           |       |                                       |
| 1993:46                 | 14                | 1                     | 7                       | 3                           |       |                                       |
| 1994:47                 | 14                | 1                     | 5                       |                             | 2     |                                       |
| 1995:48                 | 17                | 6                     | 4                       |                             | 1     | 1                                     |
| *1996:49                | 8                 | 1                     | 2                       | 1                           | 1     | 1                                     |
| *1997:50                | 9                 | 3                     | 2                       |                             |       |                                       |
| 1998:51                 | 19                | 5                     | 5                       | 2                           | 1     |                                       |
| 1998:52                 | 17                | 2                     | 6                       | 4                           | 2     |                                       |
| *1999:53                |                   |                       |                         |                             |       |                                       |
| 2000:54                 | 18                | 3                     | 3                       |                             | 2     |                                       |
| *2001:55                | 9                 | 1                     | 3                       | 1                           | 5     | 1                                     |
| Total                   | 203               | 38                    | 72                      | 24                          | 16    | 3                                     |
| Total in percentage 100 |                   | 18.90                 |                         | 33.33                       |       | 18.75                                 |

**Table 2.4** Survey of Write-ups on tribes published in *The Eastern Anthropologist* from 1988 to 2002

*Note*: \*Special numbers

Contributions based on the studies of tribal societies are central to an anthropology journal, but today's anthropology undertakes studies of all types of human societies and institutions, reminding one of what Clyde Kluckhohn (1949) said: that anthropologists study human beings wherever they are found. This also brings to mind Claude Lévi-Strauss' (1985, quoted in Eriksen 1995: 1) famous statement:

Anthropology has humanity as its object of research, but unlike the other human sciences, it tries to grasp its object through its most diverse manifestations.

What is noteworthy in a contemporary anthropology journal is that it has articles on teknonymy, social background of clerks, as well as on milk cooperatives. The June (1989) issue of *Man in India* (64:2), for example, carried four articles, respectively, on (i) residence in ownership flats in Calcutta; (ii) a town of Assam and its impact on the hinterland; (iii) patterns of recreation in an urban setting; and (iv) inter-generational mobility among teachers of higher educational institutions. This issue also reviewed three books, but none of them were on tribes. However, when an analysis of articles published over a period of time is attempted, one finds that notwithstanding the enlargement of the scope of anthropology to include all kinds of societies and the emergence of urban and industrial anthropologies, the study of tribes has not been 'decentred'. Even today, as it was in the past, if there is a discipline holding the charge of tribal studies, it is anthropology, and if there are any scholars to speak authoritatively on the customs and practices of contemporary tribes and those of the past, they are anthropologists. Sociologists who have written articles on tribes happen to be those who have a background in anthropology. Hence, the first place to begin a survey of tribal studies is the set of anthropology (and anthropologically oriented) journals.

This, however, does not imply that other disciplines do not have tribal experts. With the rise of subaltern perspectives in history, many historians have turned their attention to the study of tribal communities (see Ranajit Guha 1998). Anthropologists have maintained that they have always been 'subalternists' because of their unswerving commitment right from their formative periods to the study of the lower and marginalized strata of society which include tribes and rural people. Economists have now started paying respect to the substantive approach for the study of tribal economies that the anthropologists have popularized. Linguists, who are mainly concerned with a scientific study of written languages, have now turned their attention to the unwritten languages of 'primitive' communities. The students of philosophy are also documenting the 'ideologies' and 'thoughts of wisdom' of non-civilized people. The legal scientists have also paid attention to the study of the customary laws of tribes and the conflicts they have with the state laws, and in doing so they often make use of the methodology of fieldwork. In other words, the substantial impact of anthropological perspectives can be felt in other social sciences and humanities. They are all appreciative of anthropology for providing a critique of Euro-centric models and showing that there are diverse and resilient ways of human living.

Anthropology is interesting because it begins with a consideration of the enormous diversity of human society and culture, where each way of living and thinking is to be understood in its context; therefore, the question of placing societies in a hierarchy of 'higher' and 'lower' or 'superior' and 'inferior' does not arise (Leach 1982). In this way, anthropologists have been champions of the idea of essential human equality, notwithstanding the several, and glaring, differences between societies in terms of their respective controls over resources of various kinds.

### **Teaching of Tribal Studies**

The Rajiv Gandhi University (formerly Arunachal University) at Rono Hills, Doimukh (Arunachal Pradesh), has a department of tribal studies which admits students in the M.Phil. and Ph.D. programmes. The centre for distance education of this university is soon launching a correspondence course leading to a graduate degree in tribal studies. Furthermore, under the aegis of this department, anthropology is to be introduced as a separate discipline. It may be kept in mind here that 69.82 per cent of the population of Arunachal Pradesh is tribal (Mandal et al. 2002: 9). Guru Ghasidas University at Bilaspur (Chhattisgarh) has a department of anthropology and tribal development which was founded in 1989. Besides these two departments, some universities (such as Nagaland University and Manipur University) have centres for carrying out research on tribal societies. Himachal Pradesh University has also set up the Institute of Tribal Studies and Research.

All anthropology departments have courses on tribal societies, but whether they constitute a full paper (or a portion of a bigger paper) depends upon the total number of papers that are allotted to the degree programme. For instance, for the Master's programme in anthropology, the University of Rajasthan (Jaipur) has ten papers to be covered in two years. One of the compulsory courses (Paper VIII) for the second year is titled 'Indian Anthropology', almost 70 per cent of which is concerned with the study of tribes. The Central University of Hyderabad has a Core Course (AN-423) titled 'Applied Anthropology and Tribal Welfare' in its second semester of MA in anthropology. Two of the optional courses for this degree are 'Peasant and Tribal Movements in India' (AN-549) and 'Anthropology of Weaker Sections' (AN-552), both dealing in a big way with tribal studies. Similarly, one of the optional papers (IX-B) for M.Sc. (second year) in anthropology (with specialization in social anthropology) at the University of Delhi is titled 'Transformation of Tribal Societies in India'. Besides this, the first year of the Master's programme has a half course (of Paper no. IV) on 'Cultural Diversity in India', one-third of which is on tribal societies while the rest is on caste and village communities. Some departments of anthropology define tribal studies as one of their thrust areas: for instance, for the department of anthropology of Pondicherry University, the thrust area comprises the study of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, and rural societies. One of the thrust areas of the department of Anthropology at Gauhati University (Assam) is tribal ethnography.

It is clear from the above that as the study of tribes constitutes the kernel of anthropology, the anthropology syllabi of various Indian universities will have courses and papers on tribes. But it is important to note that tribal studies are also included in sociology courses as well as in the civil services competitive examinations (national and provincial). For instance, among the four compulsory papers a student has to read for a Master's in sociology at the University of Mumbai is a paper titled 'Theoretical Anthropology' (Paper II), which refers conspicuously to studies of tribal societies. For the second year, where a student opts for four papers, among the list of the optional papers is one on 'Anthropology of Indian Society' (Paper XVIII).

Mumbai's is a special case. The person who shaped sociology there right from 1924 was G.S. Ghurye—a student of the Cambridge anthropologist, W.H.R. Rivers. Nonetheless, all other universities include studies of tribal societies in their sociology courses. This largely because, in India, as noted earlier, the distinction between sociology and social anthropology is not so strictly observed as in other parts of the world. The overlapping of these two subjects owes to the nature of Indian society, where sharp and glaring distinctions between tribal, peasant and urban worlds are grossly non-existent (Atal 2003, 2006; Béteille 2000a, 2002, 2003; Vinay Kumar Srivastava 2005). The continuities between them are so remarkable that, regardless of whether one is a sociologist or a social anthropologist, one cannot claim to be studying just one type of society without taking into cognizance the other. Both tribal and peasant societies in India have been a part—a fragment—of the indigenous civilization. When one speaks of India, it is of a 'literate civilization', which is largely orthogenetic (Nirmal Kumar Bose 1953; Redfield 1956; Surajit Sinha, 1965). Thus, tribal and peasant myths, customs and practices, and patterns of thought have been 'carried forward', 'systematized', and 'reflected upon'; a task which the 'literati' (the intellectual class of the Brahmins, Imams, and other religious specialists) have carried out patiently and diligently, over centuries, thus creating a pan-Indian tradition emerging from below, with which it could claim familial resemblance (Marriott 1955; Singer 1955–56). While studying such a society, it would be foolhardy to keep an impervious distinction between sociology and social anthropology.

Thus, both sociologists and social anthropologists in India study tribes, but the difference is that while tribes are central to social anthropology they are not to sociology. This would explain, for example, why the second paper in anthropology (titled 'Indian Anthropology') for the civil services examination deals overwhelmingly with tribes, while the second paper in sociology (titled 'Study of Indian Society') has only one topic (out of 15) on tribes.

In comparison to the teaching of sociology, irrespective of the faculty (science or arts) under which it is placed, anthropologes expects its Master's students to carry out fieldwork of not less than four to five weeks, and prepare a dissertation from the empirical data thus gathered. For the Bachelor's degree programme, the fieldwork is of shorter duration, generally of two weeks. Although fieldwork may be conducted in any social situation (peasant or even urban), anthropology departments generally prefer to organize such studies in the tribal contexts. As a result, students are trained to undertake tribal studies from the formative days of their career. The courses on tribal societies, like many others, include close reading of monographs. The present authors remember reading Verrier Elwin's *The Muria and their Ghotul* (1947) and S.C. Dube's *The Kamars* (1951) as undergraduate students. The contemporary syllabus of the paper titled 'Transformation of Tribal Societies in India' (in M.Sc. Anthropology, second year, of the University of Delhi) includes case studies of the Naga tribes, the Munda and the Nicobaries; however the names of the monographs to be read are not given. But the monographs that students usually read today were in fact published in the first half of the twentieth century, because, unfortunately, monographs of comparable quality and richness have not been produced in the last 50 years or so. Many writers have also noted a dreadful decline in the standard and length of the fieldwork that Indian anthropologists carry out these days, which has its implication for the quality of monographs (Béteille 1996: 234).

### **Focus in Tribal Studies**

Short profiles of Indian tribes have been provided in Sachchidananda and Prasad's edited *Encyclopaedic Profile of Indian Tribes* (1996) and K.S. Singh's mammoth volume *The Scheduled Tribes* (1997), besides the booklets on tribes of their respective states that the tribal research centres (14 in India) have occasionally published in the vernacular. Moonis Raza and Aijazuddin Ahmad have brought out *An Atlas of Triabl India* (1990), and the Anthropological Survey of India has published a *Map of India's Scheduled Tribes* in 2000, and An *Illustrated Atlas of the Tribal World* (Mandal et al. 2002). Earlier, in 1993, under the auspices of the People of India, National Series (vol. 11), it had published *An Anthropological Atlas* which carries very useful information about Indian tribes, besides, of course, other communities. *The Cambridge Encyclopaedia of Hunters and Gatherers* (1999), edited by Richard B. Lee and Robert Daly, includes substantial accounts of Indian tribes such as the Birhor, the Chenchu of Deccan, the Nayak of Wynaad, the Paliyan, the Hill Pandaram of Kerala, and the Andaman Islanders. P.K. Mohanty (2004) has published two volumes of the *Encyclopaedia of Primitive Tribes in India*, which provide useful information on the primitive tribes, presently 75 in number. Some coffee-table books on tubes, with exquisite photographs are also available, which carry introductions by anthropologists (see, for instance, Arya and Joshi 2004; Baldizzone and Baldizzone 1993; Ceolin and Tirelli 2006; Janah, 1993). A popular textbook, reprinted several times, on the tribes of India is by Nadeem Hasnain (1991).

The present survey of articles, books and reports published from 1988 to 2002 shows that the following aspects of tribes have been largely covered:

 1. There are a number of articles (and books, though few in number) on the biological features of tribal people. Besides being published in *Man in India*, the *South Asian Anthropologist*, the *Oriental Anthropologist*,

#### 62 Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant K. chaudhury

and the *Journal of the Indian Anthropological Society*, they also appear in the *Indian Journal of Physical Anthropology and Human Genetics*. Both environment-affected (like body growth and development) and environment-free (such as sickle cell trait, blood groups, dermatoglyphic patterns) traits have been covered in these studies (Choubisa 1990; B.M. Das 1993; Dash 1996; Naidu et al. 1990; Rao et al. 2000; Roy and Prasad 1993; Sirajjudin 1993). Effects that occur on the anthropometric measurements of people because of migration and environmental change have also been studied (Buzarbarua 1989; Haque 2002). A study has been conducted on the differences in terms of the protein calorie intake, and the growth status between tribal boys in a residential school and those living with their parents (Mohanty et al. 1990). The bio-cultural reasons of population decline in certain tribal groups have also been studied (Myka 1995).

- 2. Tribes have also been studied from historical perspectives (Dasgupta 1994; Ghosal 1994; Padel 1995; Sundar 1998; K.S. Singh 1998b; Kaushik Ghosh 1999). The works of archaeologists are mostly concerned with the role of tribes in the building of civilization (P. Vijaya Prakash 2000; Imam 2002) and the continuities between archaeological findings and the culture of contemporary tribes. These studies have been with the approach generally known as ethno-archaeology (Panda and Reddy 1991). K. Mohan Rao (1998) shows that Santal culture may provide certain clues for decoding the scripts on the scale of the Indus Valley Civilization.
- 3. The study of the indigenous concepts and myths of tribal people has been another area interest (Mittal 1993; Van Exem 1993; Nita Mathur 2001). Some (like Ferreira 1995) have noted the disintegration of the mythological heritage of people as a consequence of acculturation. People approach the world of myths (and the divinities mythically created) to seek solutions to their crises (Rath 1995). Many anthropologists have paid attention to the recording of the indigenous knowledge of tribes (Pradeep Mohanty 1994; Chandrashekara and Sankar 1999; Topal et al. 1998).
- 4. An area which has received a lot of attention relates to the interaction of tribes with their ecological system (Parthasarathy 1988a; Bhasin 1989; Misra 1989; Khera 1990; R.S. Mann 1990; Sudersen and Thamizoli 1995; Mahapatra and Mahapatra 1999; R.M. Sarkar 2002). Land and forest rights of tribes have also been studied (Nongbri 1988, 1997; Chaudhury 1998a; K.K. Misra, 2002a). That tribes take necessary precautions to preserve their ecosystem has been the conclusion of many studies (Suguna Pathy 1995). Demmer (2002: 260) observes that the Jenu Kurumba of the Nilgiri Hills are attributed the lowest position in

the hierarchy because of their closeness to the forest and lack of property. However, this view is not shared by people who think that closeness to the forest means independence and sovereignty rather than inferiority.

- 5. Tribal demography is are area of research which that has engaged both social and physical anthropologists (Harish C. Srivastava 1990; Nautiyal and Srivastava 1993; Sujit Som 1993; Mutum Bokul Singh 1995; Bhattacharya and Bhattacharya 1996; Saha and Saha 1998; Samal et al. 1999; Pandey et al. 2000; Dash and Kanungo 2002). Some anthropologists have worked on the decline of the population in some tribes (Sujit Som, 1995; Misra, 2002b). In their study of the demographic parameters of the Gonds, Banerjee and Bhatia (1988) find that these people show the characteristics of the first stage of demographic transition, i.e. high birth rate with high morality. Deka et al. (2000) have investigated the effects of antigenic incompatibility on the reproductive performance of tribes from Orissa. Pandey and Tiwary (1996) find that the total fertility among the Hill Korwa was about half (2.9 per cent) of what it is among the nonprimitive tribal (5.3 per cent) and rural populations (5.9 per cent).
- 6. Areas which have been extensively covered are the characteristics of tribal social organizations and relations among the people in a given context (Patnaik 1989a; Dasgupta and Sarkar 1990; Kapoor et al. 1990; Prasad and Mahto 1991; W. Nabakumar Singh 1993; S. Maiti 1994; Sengupta 1994; R.S. Mann 1998; Basu 2000). In comparison to other aspects, studies or political institutions are fewer in number. Not many works are available on the traditional institutions of justice and maintenance or order (for some, see N.K. Das 1993; J.M. Sarkar 1996). Vishvajit Pandya's work (1990, 1993, 1999) on the tribal communities of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands is of great empirical and theoretical significance. An interesting work published in this period is on the institution of a youth dormitory found among the Muria of Bastar (Gell 1992). Mohan Rao (1988) describes the nature of ceremonial friendship among tribespersons of Andhra Pradesh. He shows that non-tribal people use this institution to exploit tribespersons, especially their women. It is an important reason for the illegal transfer of land from tribes to non-tribes. Some anthropologists have also studied the condition of the elderly in tribal societies (Toppo 2000).
- 7. Some authors have also worked on tribal personality, using models from psychology and psychological anthropology (Mrinmayi Ray 1988; Banerjee 1991). Vinita Narain and Lakshmi (1994) applied Rastogi's Self-Concept Scale to the Santal women labour force. Alok Rath and D.B. Giri (1998), for instance, in their study of the Juangs, found that the traditional attire of these tribespersons was banned in 1871. As a consequence, they started suffering from 'psychological and spiritual

#### 64 Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant K. chaudhury

shock', which multiplied manifold when certain mishaps occurred in their society, such as tiger attacks, poor harvests, and epidemics.

- 8. Sexual behaviour has also been the focus of some studies, especially against the background of the rise of the cases of HIV/AIDS among tribal communities (Chowdhury 1994). Bhaskar Singh and Abhik Ghosh (1999), in their study of the Bhils of Udaipur, document the abject poverty of these people as the main cause behind prostitution. They do not find any difference in the sexual behaviour of Animistic and Christian Bhils.
- 9. A few studies are also available on tribal kinship, family types, and patterns of marriage (Khan 1990; Bhandari 1992, 1996; Debesh Roy 1995; Nishi Singh 1995; Mutharayappa 1997). R.S. Mann (1990) finds that with respect to polyandry in Ladakh, there is change and readjustment. Babul Roy (2002) observes that the Dimasa Kacharis of Assam exhibit a transitional stage between the matrilineal and patrilineal descent systems. Deb Roy (2002) notes that in spite of adapting to Christianity in the mid-nineteenth century, the Garo have continued to be matrilineal. Some works have also been done on the patterns of socialization, child-rearing and motherhood practices (Barua and Bora 1999; Medhi 2001).
- 10. Tribal economy is represented in a good number of works (S. Bose 1991; Nandita Singh 1997, 1999a; Mukherjee and Khatua 1998; Chandrashekara and Sankar 1999; Pradeep Mohanty 1999). Inequality and stratification among tribes has also been studied (Chakrabarti 1988; Misra 1991). An important observation here is that economists, who are generally thought of as being concerned primarily with economies of complex, market-oriented, and monetized societies, have undertaken some of these studies (S.N. Mishra 1990, 1998). There are also studies of starvation among tribes (Saheb and Begum 1990).
- 11. Some sensitive accounts of forest villages are also available (Jahagirdar 1994). R.R. Prasad and M.P. Jahagirdar (1993) note that there are about 5, 000 forest villages, inhabited by about 2,000 families. These villages, unlike revenue villages, are not meant for extending cultivation. Severe exploitation of forest villagers continues because forest departments and contractors have first claim to their labour on payment at the market rate. The villagers are not expected to seek employment without prior permission from the forest department and they can be summarily evicted for non-compliance.
- 12. An area which has received considerable attention is of land-alienation and bonded labour, although studies pertaining to this are fewer in comparison to studies reported in earlier survey reports, which is an indication of a slight improvement in these problems (A.R.N. Srivastava 1988; Deogaonkar 1990; Bhandari and Bhattacharya 1996).

- 13. Tribal religion (including rites of passage) is another area of interest (Venkatesan 1989; Nita Mathur 1992b, 1996; K.S. Singh 1993c; Padmavathi and Sridhar 1994; Aparajita 1995; Misra 1998; Pradhan 1998; Bhola Nath Ghosh 1999; Sundar 2001a). There are some works on witchcraft in tribal areas (Bhowmick, 1999; Sundar, 2001b). The impact of Christianity on the tribals has also been studied (Buddhadeb Chaudhuri 1992; Chaube 1999; Hardiman 2002). Some researchers have also looked at the impact of Jainism on the tribes (Humphrey 1991; Laidlaw 1995).
- 14. Education in tribal areas has attracted many students of tribes (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1991b; Singh and Mahanti 1997; Jaganath Pathy 1999a, b; Bhowmick and Bhowmick 2000; Xaxa 2001). Insightful works are available on the working of schools in tribal areas (Chakravarthi and Singhrol 1988; Ratha and Behera 1990). Some studies conclude that the health profiles of tubes people can be improved by educating them (Pandey et al., 1999). Rita Sinha (1996) submits that the most important aspect in education is the development of a relevant curriculum which meets the learning needs of specific groups. She calls it a 'localized curriculum' or the 'tribalization of education.'
- 15. A recent area of research in tribal studies, not much represented in earlier surveys, is the study of tribal women, the processes of production and reproduction (Behera and Nanda 1990; Mandal and Sahoo 1992; Mehrotra 1990, 1992; Jena 1994; Sampa Sarkar 1994; Saraswathi 1995; Kamlesh Mann 1996; Rath and Ashraf 1997; Sameera Maiti 1999; Chaudhury 2000; Dipali G. Danda 2000; Pakyntein 2000; Sonowal 2000). In fact, L. P. Vidyarthi (1972: 102) had noted in the first survey report that the only work available on tribal women was that of Leela Dube (2001), and that too was unpublished at that time. Similarly, Sachchidananda (1985: 102), in the second survey, observed that there was just one book on tribal women.
- 16. The health and illness profiles of tribes have been greatly documented, a research commitment that owes its rise to the expansion of medical anthropology in India (P.C. Joshi 1988, 1999, 2000; Vibha Joshi 1989, 1990, 2001; Kurian and Tribhuwan 1990; Imam 1993; Kar 1993; Sharma and Malik 1993; Swarankar 1995; Abhik Ghosh 1996; Rajaratnam et al. 1997; Barua and Phukan 1998; Dutta 1999; Khatua 2001). The nutritional status of women has also been the focus of physical anthropological studies (Karmarkar et al. 1995). Certain pharmacological aspects of tribal herbal medicine have also been studied (see Prabhakar Joshi 1995).
- 17. Some research works have dealt with the material culture of tribes (Mittal 1993; Bharati Devi 2002). Marwah and Srivastava (1992), in

#### 66 Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant K. chaudhury

their work on the gates erected at the entry point of a *khel* (a subdivision of a village) of Angami Nagas, tried to work out the principles of social structure from the motifs and patterns engraved on the gates. The main point in these studies is that, besides being interesting, the study of material culture can illuminate the underlying principles of the structure of a society.

- 18. Forms of art, aesthetics, and entertainment in tribal communities have also been studied (Sudhakar Rao 1997). Some interesting work has been done on the Nags (Ganguli 1993; Amit Ray 2001). Julian Jacobs et al. (1990) document the outcome of the Cambridge Experimental Videodisc Project on the Nagas. Their study also comprises fieldwork material, including photographs taken by the pioneering researcher, Christoph von Fürer-Haimendorf.
- 19. Tribal languages and bilingualism (and multilingualism) have been the focus of works in linguistic anthropology (Trivedi 1991; Manoharan 1989, 1999; Ishtiaq 1999; Senkutthuvan 2000). Krishna Nandan Prasad's (1990) study of the Ho reveals that there is more bilingualism in men (as high as 85.91 per cent) than in women. Young people are more bilingual than the old. Female bilingualism was found to be highest in the below-nineteen age groups. Language and linguistic expressions which outsiders use for tribes have also been analysed (Sreenathan 1998a, b).
- 20. The pattern of crime in tribal areas has been well-researched (Sinha-Kirkhoff 1998). Drug addiction among tribal communities has also been studied (Serto 2000). Some scholars have taken up the study of Ex-Criminal Tribes (or 'Denotified Communities') (Abraham 1999; Bhowmick 1990, 2001; Radhakrishna 2001; Bokil 2002). The conclusion of these studies is that communities were constrained to take up a career in crime when their traditional modes of production were jeopardized. Even after the Acts conferring criminal status on tribes were repealed, the dishonoured label of criminality continues and discrimination against these communities continues. It is this discrimination that needs to be combated socially. Only then will the communities be able to lead a respectful existence.
- 21. The analysis of the impact of industrialization and development on tribes has attracted a large number of students of tribal studies, often from other disciplines (P.R.G. Mathur 1989; Mehta 1992; Aparajita 1994; Behera 1996; Debesh Roy 1996; Nandita Singh 1998, 1999b). The migration of people as a response to industrialization has also been investigated (Bates and Carter 1992; Amar Nath Pal 1995; Venkata Rao 2001; Panda 2002). Issues of displacement of tribal people have also been studied in detail (Sah 1995, 1998; Patnaik 1989b, 1996, 1999, 2000, 2001; Hakim 2000; Saksena 2000). Some studies show the positive impact of

industrialization on tribes. For instance, Amitabh Sarkar (2001) shows that the Dhodia have become economically well off because of industrialization, and have adjusted well to the new behaviour. T.K. Som (1988) has studied the impact of the rubber plantation industry on the Riang economy, and has found that it has changed people's attitude towards income and work. They consider the industry as being benevolent to them, and 'work there with joy and satisfaction'.

- 22. Related to the adverse impact of development programmes on tribes are the studies on the rise of ethnicity among them (Ajit K. Danda 1988a, b, 1991, 1992, 2001; Subba 1992; N.K. Das 1994; Suresh Sharma 1994; Misra 1995; Bailey 1996). How this has contributed to the emergence of ethno-political movements is another area interest where both historical and ethnographic work has been done (Paul 1989, 1991, 1995; Ajit K. Pandey 1994; Tanika Sarkar 1994; Jha 1999). A study of note on tribal insurgency is by S.R. Bhattacharjee (1989).
- 23. An impressive number of studies have been done on the changes occurring in tribal societies. These studies examine the interplay between endogenous and exogenous factors Ajit K. Pandey 1991; Bhattacharya 1996, 1998). An entire volume has been devoted to the changes that have taken place among the Jarawas of Andaman Islands due to contact with non-tribals (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2002). Tribal migrants, to urban settings is another area under investigation (Gregory 2000). The concept of cultural creolization has also been examined (Ghosal 2001). Bikram Naryan Nanda (1994) analysed the gradual transformation of the Bonda highlanders from subsistence economy to agricultural economy. The impact of Panchayati Raj in tribal areas has been the theme of some researches (Jaganath Pathy 1998; Mahi Pal 2000). The emergence of tribal elites has also been studied (Misra 1994), along with the formation of classes among tribes (Pradip Kumar Bose 1999).
- 24. A discussion of tribal policy, tribal sub-plans, and the issues of tribal welfare has also been attempted (Mehta 1988; Channa and Srivastava 1990; Nita Mathur 1992a; Roy Burman 1994b; Bhandari and Channa, 1997; Chaudhury 1997; Amit Prakash 1999; Reddy 2001). Some authors have examined the relationship between tribes and the state (Pfeffer 1998). These works argue that there should be a policy for tribal communities. We should not begin with the preconception that change is anathema to tribes. K.S. Singh (1990) shows that the tribals 'adopt any technology as long as it meets their needs' with no traditional beliefs and rituals obstructing their way. Rajat Kanti Das (1994) shows that the tribes of north-east India are quick to accept modern technological equipment, luxurious items, things of practical value, and recreational objects. In the context of directed and planned changes, the studies submit

#### 68 Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant K. chaudhury

that the dimension of peoples' culture should always be kept in mind. Development and change will be successful when they are compatible with culture.

 25. There are works of theoretical significance dealing with issues like the concept of tribe, its relationship with caste society, the significance of the category of 'indigenous people', etc. (Harsh 1999; Roy Burman 1994c, 1997a; Xaxa 1999a, b). Jawaharlal Nehru's contribution to tribes is also well documented (K.S. Singh, 1988a, 1989; Mann and Mann 1989a; Shashi 1990; Sachchidananda 1999). Christoph von Fürer-Haimendorf's contribution to the development of tribes has been reviewed (Venkata Rao 1996; also see Fürer-Haimendorf and Fürer-Haimendorf 1991), and a biography of varrier Elwin has also been published (Ramachandra Guha 1999). Tanka B. Subba (1994) has compared the views of Elwin, Fürer-Haimendorf, and Rustomji on the development of Arunachal Pradesh. The models generally used in anthropology have been critically examined against data from tribal societies (Channa 1988, 1990; R.S. Mann 1988).

A distinguishing feature of this period is that there is a tremendous increase in the number of tribal scholars and anthropologists carrying out studies on their own respective societies. The tradition of studying one's own society—or, what has come to be termed 'native anthropology', 'auto-ethnography', or 'anthropology at home'—is quite old, but it was largely confined to literate communities whose scholars wrote on their respective peoples. Being preliterate, it was unexpected that the tribespersons would write about their own society and culture; and anthropology was defined as the study of 'other cultures' carried out by 'non-tribal outsiders', mostly 'white men'. At that time, in the formative stages of anthropology, no one imagined that a time would come when 'tribesmen' would not only write about their societies and cultures, but also critically examine studies done by 'outsiders', finding erroneous interpretations and appalling mistakes in their writings, and, at the same time, defending some of their traditional practices (see Ruivah 1993 and its review by Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1995 and 1996; Munda 2000). Some communities, generally not listed as scheduled tribes, have also founded their own 'anthropological societies' to take up their respective cases and provide 'internally generated' information about their own community (see Mate 1997). Some concerned people have started a journal titled *Naga Journal of Indigenous Affairs*, the first issue of which was released in 2002. Another group launched a Hindi periodical, *Dalit Adivasi Samvad*, in 2003. All this has important implications for the 'we' and 'they' distinction in anthropology.

Secondly, the present survey shows that the areas purported to be of applied value have received larger attention than those supposed to be essentially of theoretical importance. Thus studies on kinship and religion are significantly far fewer than studies of issues of demography, health and illness, or environment. Because of the concerted research efforts of different institutions (such as universities, the Anthropological Survey of India, and other research institutions), almost all tribal areas in India have been explored. One of the achievements of 'native anthropology' is that those communities, especially in north-east India (such as Anal Naga, Mate, Maring Naga), that until now had remained unstudied are being researched. Certain tribal areas—especially in Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, and Rajasthan—are going to be the favourite spots for study in the future as fieldwork becomes increasingly difficult in those tribal regions that have come under the grip of the insurgent and Naxalite movements.

# **Concept of Tribe**

While scanning writings on tribes, one will come across authors who are not concerned with 'what one means by tribe'. Here, it is relevant to quote Atal's observation made as far back as 1963:

Despite [social anthropology's] primary concern with tribal societies, it has not been able to develop a universally applicable definition of the term 'tribe'.

An issue emerging clearly in the present survey of writings on tribes (from 1988 to 2002) is the concern of anthropologists with the definition and concept of tribe. Anthropologists make a distinction between the concepts of 'tribe' and 'scheduled tribe'.

While tribe is an anthropological concept referring to a particular type of society, in contrast to societies known as 'caste', 'peasant', and 'urban', scheduled tribe is an administrative and political concept (Verma 1990; Sachchidananda 1992). The concept of scheduled tribe applied is not only to individual communities but also to whole territories (such as Kinnaur, Jaunsar-Bawar, and Pangwal) where all people irrespective of their status have been declared as tribes. A similar situation is found in Ladakh where all the other communities, except one, have the status of scheduled tribe. It is well known that the Constitution of India does not define the term scheduled tribe; Article 366 (25) refers to scheduled tribes as those communities that are scheduled in accordance with Article 342 of the Constitution (K.S. Singh 1985). Many authors have noted the scramble among many nontribes to be included in the list of scheduled tribes (see K.S. Singh 1993a:12). Besides the advantages that come with scheduling, the label 'tribe', by comparison to scheduled caste, does not carry any stigma. Because of such inclusions, the population of scheduled tribes has steadily increased, especially in the decade 1971–81. However, it should be noted that seven tribes (Malaiarayan and Palliyan of Kerala; Bharwad of Gujarat; Naga of Meghalaya; Noatia of Tripura; Onge of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; and Kathodi of Dadar and Nagar Haveli) have shown a continuous decline in their population. This decline has resulted from the operation of a number of factors, such as high mortality, poor health standards, and also the migration of people to other areas where they are not scheduled. The process of exclusion may work theoretically, reducing the number of people in a tribal group, but the cases of inclusion far outnumber those of exclusion.

However, little disagreement exists with respect to the meaning of the term scheduled tribe, which is a constitutional term. There exists an all-India list of these communities who are entitled to a set of privileges under the policy of compensatory discrimination. In its People of India Project, the Anthropological Survey of India prepared an initial list of 6,748 communities in India and investigated and described 4,635 of them. Of these, 461 were tribal having 172 segments (K.S Singh, 1993a:12) and comprising 8.1 per cent of the total population of the country. Many of these segments are 'as good as discrete categories' (K.S. Singh 1997:2). The total number of tribes, their groups and segments including territorial units, that the Peoples of India Project studied was 635 (K.S. Singh 1993b).

But different sources give different numbers of communities classified as scheduled tribe. The revised version of Nirmal Kumar Bose's *Tribal Life in India*, published in 1971, list 300 communities, while the Draft of the National Policy on Tribals, issued in February 2004, records 698 scheduled tribes. The second Draft of The National Tribal Policy, circulated in July 2006, while not committing itself to a particular number, notes that there are 'nearly seven hundred State-specific Scheduled Tribes'. More confusion is created when two different sources give different sets of the number of tribes in a state: one source counts sub-tribes as tribes, whereas the other lists only tribes. For instance, according to the Annual Report (2002–03) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India, Arunachal Pradesh has 16 tribes, whereas the Anthropological Survey of India's *India*: *An Illustrated Atlas of Tribal World* (December 2002) gives a list of 97 tribes in that state.

For those unconcerned with the definition of tribe, debates on the concept of tribe are perennial if not entirely futile. These investigators call the communities they study 'tribes' if they are designated as scheduled tribes in a government notification, or it the scheduled tribes are referred to as 'tribes', whether or not they have the characteristics attributed to a tribe (Mahapatra 2006:1). Thus, a study of the Gujars and Bakarwals (of Jammu and Kashmir) done prior to 1991 was not conceived as a study of tribal communities; later, however there communities were given the status of scheduled tribe, and so the study of the Gujars and Bakarwals has become a tribal study. The problem arises when one studies the Rabari, who are a scheduled tribe in Gujarat and the Other Backward Class (OBC) in Rajasthan (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1991a). Roy Burman (1994c) has given many examples of such communities which are 'tribe' in one state and 'caste' in another. Because of these confusions, many authors begin not with 'tribe' but 'scheduled tribe', and when they use the word 'tribe', they do not imply an anthropological appellation but an administrative designation of a community. Virginius Xaxa (1999b:3589) also notes that Indian academicians and administrators have been more concerned with the 'identification of tribes than with their definition'.

In comparison to those who do not go into the labyrinth of definitions, there are others who define a tribe before they proceed with their specific study. Buddhadeb Chaudhuri (1992: vii), who edited a set of five volumes comprising 143 articles, titled *Tribal Transformation in India*, defined tribe in his introduction in the following words:

Anthropologically, a tribe is a social group, the members of which live in a common territory, have a common dialect, uniform social organization and possess cultural homogeneity having a common ancestor, political organization and religious pattern.

Paul Hockings (1993: 355) has offered the following definition:

…a tribe is a system of social organization which embraces a number of local groups or settlements, which occupies a territory, and normally carries its own distinctive culture, its own name, and its own language.

In another influential publication on ethnicity, J. Milton Yinger (1997: 22) has formulated the following definition of tribe:

…it is small, usually preliterate and preindustrial, relatively isolated, endogamous (with exogamous sub-tribal divisions), united mainly by kinship and culture, but in many places also by territorial boundaries, and strongly ethnocentric ('We are the people').

S.C. Dube (1998: 4–5) has given a set of six characteristics which can serve the useful purpose of developing a concept of tribe:

- 1. The community's habitation of a particular territory dates back to an early period. They may be the original dwellers of a habitat, but in case they are not, they are among the oldest inhabitants of the land.
- 2. Generally they dwell in the isolated hills and forests.
- 3. Their sense of history is shallow. The remembered history gets merged with mythology. Some tribes have their own genealogists who have records of interesting anecdotes and the past.
- 4. The level of techno-economic development among them is low.
- 5. They are distinct from other societies in terms of their cultural ethos, language, institutions, beliefs, world view, and customs.
- 6. They are generally non-hierarchic and undifferentiated, although there may be some exceptions of societies that have landed aristocracies or the class of gentry.

All these authors have placed emphasis on the cultural uniformity of a tribe, which becomes the raison d'etre of its identity and ethno-political movement, if it materializes in future. A tribe is able to maintain its 'homogeneity' not only because of its concerted efforts, in a system of opposition, against the outsiders, but also because of its relative *isolation* from other communities and the wider world. However, these authors (and many others who have tried to define tribe) also think that one will not come across a community labelled as 'tribe' (or 'scheduled tribe') having all the characteristics that are delineated for defining a tribe. Basically, what we wish to highlight is the hiatus between the definition of tribe, given in theoretical terms, and the empirical reality of the communities which are classified as tribes or scheduled tribes. The definition an author proposes may apply to the tribespersons he or she studies, but it may not have a larger coverage. To put it in other way: in most cases, the definition emerges from one's study, against the background of the society one has studied, but its cross-cultural validity may always be doubted.

André Béteille (1992) has made one of the important contributions to the concept of tribe. Earlier, in his articles published in 1960 and 1980, he had argued in favour of a historical approach which would help in understanding the transformation of tribes as a result of which they came to deviate substantially from their 'ideal type' definitions. According to him the concept of tribe will be different where tribes and civilizations coexist. In such situations, when anthropologists speak of tribes, they mean communities of people who have remained outside of the state and civilization, whether out of choice or of necessity. That was the reason, it is supposed, for calling them 'non-civilized', but certainly not 'uncivilized'. In India, 'they all stood more or less outside of Hindu civilization' (Béteille, 1992: 76).

In anthropology, the concept of civilization has been understood in terms of first, the 'practice of reading and writing' (as in the work of Lewis Henry Morgan 1977), and second, the presence of a 'great tradition' (as defined by Robert Redfield 1947). By definition, tribes have their own localized 'conventionalized ways of behaviour', i.e. the 'little tradition', and lack the 'practice of reading and writing'. That is why they have been called 'preliterate'. So, if tribes are defined as 'non-civilized', it is because they are preliterate and have their own localized tradition, which has varying relations and connections with the tradition of the outside world. Béteille (ibid.) suggests the 'permeability of boundary between tribe and non-tribe', the implication of which is that one should 'adopt a flexible rather than a rigid attitude towards the definition of tribe.'

### **Tribes in Transition**

Some authors have examined the communities they have studied from the perspective of the definition of tribe in currency at that time in anthropological literature. For example, after conducting an intensive study of the Toda of the Niligiri Hills for several years, the conclusion that Anthony Walker (1998) arrived at about them is worth considering. He accepts them as a scheduled tribe, since the Government of India has classified them thus for receiving benefits and privileges under the policy of compensatory discrimination. But grave confusions prevails when the Toda are designated as a 'tribe' in the sense in which this term has been used in anthropological and sociological literature. In comparison to 'tribe', Walker (ibid., 150) finds that the term 'caste' has a 'considerable value', for it helps in placing them in the context of the south Indian cultural matrix, to which they actually belong.

In his work on the Badaga of the Nilgiri Hills, Hockings (1993) says that instead of focusing on a unit and labelling it, one must look at the entire system of which the unit is part. It is important to keep this in mind because the Badaga have been called 'tribe', 'caste', and 'Hindu race' in the literature on them starting from 1922. Since 1990 they have been demanding the status of a scheduled tribe, which so far has not been accorded to them (Hockings 1999: 29). Migrating to the Niligiri Hills from the plains to the north, the Badaga are an example of a society which was a caste group before its peregrinations and which then adopted a tribal model and began its regular interaction with the Toda, the Kurumba, and the Kota, the scheduled tribes of the Nilgiri Hills. The interactions between them have often been described in ethnographic literature as being modelled after the caste system. Following this, Hockings (1993: 361) treats the Nilgiri peoples as a 'case of a caste society' comprising 'several distinct indigenous cultures' who have their 'respective origins in pre-caste social formations'. The important point is that individually these 'indigenous cultures' cannot be described as castes, so the toda, Kota, Kurumba, and Badaga interact like castes, but in themselves none of them is a caste. Hockings (ibid.) thinks that the 'difference between the Niligiris and other caste societies lies in the *content* of the culture rather than the *structure* of the society.'

What one learns from Hockings (1989, 1993) is that the question of classifying a society as 'tribe' (or 'non-tribe') distracts one from studying the dynamism of society, where none of the societies in the contemporary world are 'isolated' but are involved in a field of ceaseless interactions and exchanges with other peoples, building up their identity and self-perception. Far from being like 'rocks', communities are ever dynamic. Lying at the interfaces of several cultures, the elements of which they gradually imbibe and make their own by changing their morphology, they may defy a straightjacket classificatory scheme. The concern with taxonomy (whether 'tribe' or 'non-tribe') rather than the processes that connect different communities will lead to the "old, 'butterfly-collecting' tradition", the weaknesses of which Edmund R. Leach (1961) had already exposed.

These ideas reverberate in a study by Subhadra Mitra Channa (1998, 2002a) on the Jad of Harsil (a community included within the generic category of Bhotiya, one of the five scheduled tribes of Uttarakhand). She notes that the term outsiders (including the government officials) use for them is *jan-jātia* (meaning the 'kind of people')—a Hindi term supposed to be the equivalent of 'tribe'—because, for them, they are a 'Bhotiya *jan-jāti*'. However, many Jad, especially the women, are not even aware that this term is used for them in the administrative discourse. They do not subscribe to any clearly bounded social category—for example, Hindu or Buddhist—as will be presumed when one describes a tribe as a 'closed cultural group' (or what has been termed 'cultural isolate'). Rather, the Jad situate themselves betwixt and between the categories of Hindu and Buddhist.

The life of the Jad is centred in pastoral activities. Not only do they have to consider their own adaptation to the environment as human beings but also of their animals. They shift from one location to another as an adaptive strategy to the ecological cycle. The points between which the Jad movement takes place are fixed within the space of which they collectively make all kinds of adjustments. Against this background Channa (ibid. 136) asserts that the Jad is a 'mode of adaptation', a way of life rather than a bounded unit as a tribe is understood. It is imperative then that people are defined, designated, and understood in ways that are different from those that the conventional scholarship has so far adopted.

Against the background of changes that have occurred, these communities, which at one time could be comfortably labelled as 'tribes', may now be called 'tribes in transition', a phrase that Desai (1969) originally coined, which is now accepted in many writings (see Chaudhuri 1992; Dube 1997). Another suggestion is that the label 'tribe' (and also caste) should be avoided as far as possible, since they have been used too loosely in India (for a discussion, see Hockings 1993: 353; Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1990, 1994a). Or, they may simply be called 'communities' (*samudāya*), as proposed to by the director of the People of India Project (1985–93) of the Anthropological Survey of India, with this word suffixed to their name (for instance, 'Santal community', 'Birhor community', 'Seharia community') (Béteille 2000b:169). The word 'community' may also be used for caste people or urban neighbourhoods.

Many anthropologists say that in contemporary times, the term 'tribe' has become as pejorative as were the terms like 'primitive', 'savage', 'rude', 'noncivilized', and several others of the same type, in the mid-twentieth century, which subsequently went out of currency. Today, when these terms are used, it is always within quote marks, for they are value-loaded, indicating the special meaning that was once attributed to them, a meaning for which contemporary scholars hold no sympathy (Jaganath Pathy 1989). However, some anthropologists continue to describe contemporary tribal societies in the same image, as was the practice of classical evolutionists who thought that these communities were the 'social fossils' or 'remnants of the antiquity', a study of which would illuminate the earlier stages of human existence. For an example, one may refer to the following excerpt from an article on the Onge of the Andaman Islands: 'The Onge are paedomorphic not only in physical appearance but also in their behaviour' (Shrivastava 1993: 347).

Therefore, there are debates on whether one should continue to use the word 'tribe' or think in terms of alternatives to this, such as 'community'. Some think that one of the best alternatives is the term 'ethnic group' (see Buddhadab Chaudhuri 1992), which, defined after Fredrik Barth (1969, 1981) means a largely self-perpetuating group in biological terms, sharing the same descent, real or putative, which has a set of similar fundamental values realized in cultural forms. The members of an ethnic group usually have the same field of communication and interaction, speaking the same (or similar) language and understanding its cultural nuances. They also have a discernible sense of identity by which they distinguish themselves from other categories of the same order. Jaganath Pathy (1988, 1989: 356), however, prefers the term 'ethnic minority' because tribes are always subordinated to the majority. They have always sought to restructure the 'relations of domination and discrimination' and bring to an end the system of exploitation. In doing so, tribes have endeavoured to preserve their distinct cultural features and survival resources (Jaganath Pathy 1999a). Moreover, it may also be noted that the term 'ethnic group' has also been used as a generic category for castes as well as 'religious communities' (see Gupta 1997; Varshney 2002).

Other terms suggested for tribes are 'autochthones' and 'indigenes', the discussion of which will be taken up later. However, none of these alternative terms could attain the same level of popularity and acceptance as did the term 'tribe', which, notwithstanding the polemics surrounding it, is still the most widely used social category to describe certain types of societies. Today, when anthropologists use the word 'tribe', they mean (1) the communities included in the list of the scheduled tribes; (2) the communities that were relatively isolated at one time and later had their integration with the outside world, but have continued to call themselves tribe because of their vested interests; and (3) the communities that still dwell in remotely situated forests and hills and are backward in terms of the indices of development, although they may not have yet found a place in the list of the scheduled tribes.

### **Tribe–Caste Distinction and Relationship**

One of the main areas of interest in tribal studies in the past, which was adequately covered in the earlier surveys of research in sociology and social anthropology of the ICSSR, was the relation between tribes and castes. That tribes in many parts of India where they had relations of give-and-take with multi-caste villages were getting transformed into castes was an important finding of the empirical studies. It obviously implied that there were salient differences between the tribe and the caste, which authors in the past had carefully tried to delineate (see, for instance, Atal 1963; Surajit Sinha 1965; Mandelbaum 1970; Soni 1993; Unnithan-Kumar 2001). In these studies, tribe and caste were viewed not only as ideal types but also as polar categories, the two ends of a continuum; the model thus obtained was meant to aid one's understanding of an ethnographic situation, where both these types were unremittingly in a state of interaction and exchange. As a consequence, tribes were gradually, and more frequently, taking up the characteristics of castes because, as the studies showed, of the advantages associated with the superior form of economic production and division of labour that caste system provided (Nirmal Kumar Bose 1953, 1975; Dumont, 1980). However, the opposite movement—from caste to tribe—also took place, but not many examples are available to substantiate this; one oft-cited example is of the Badaga of the Niligiri Hills.

The problem with respect to the tribe-caste distinction at the empirical level surfaces because there is no indigenous term for tribe. The social and cultural continuities between tribes and castes are so great that it becomes virtually impossible to distinguish one from the other. The situation in India is different from what one finds in the USA, New Zealand, and Australia, where marked differences exist between the White colonizers and the 'indigenous tribal populations'. In this context, S.C. Dube (1998: 4–5) notes: 'Their [Tribals'] position, however, cannot be compared to that of Australian aborigines, American Indians or native Africans.'

Denis Vidal (1997:113) writes: 'In Sirohi [Rajasthan]…the same generic term (*jati*) was often used to refer indiscriminately [to] the castes or tribes.' The Hindi and Sanskrit terms (such as *jana*, *adimjati*, *adivasi*, *vanvasi*, *vanyajati*, *janajati*) or Persian terms (such as *qabila*, *qabilewale*) in vogue for tribes have been used for them by outsiders; none of them are indigenous (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1994b). David Hardiman (1987, 1998) notes that in Gujarat, terms like *jangli*-*jati* (the 'kind of forest dwellers') and *kaliparaj* (the 'black people') were used for tribes. Since the tribes found these terms 'hardly flattering', the Gandhian social workers coined equivalent terms like *raniparaj*, *vanyajati*, and *girijan*, all implying tribes as the 'noble denizens of the forest' (p. 14). Contrary to the terms that the outsiders have improvised for them, tribes refer to themselves by their respective names (like Baiga, Seharia, Gaddi), or by the generic term *jati*, or the hybrid term 'Adivasi *jati*' (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1994a). The word *jati* should be defined as meaning 'kind or type' rather than 'caste', because it is used in a variety of other contexts such as humankind (*manushya jati*), gods and demons (*devta jati*, *danav jati*), gender (the 'caste of women', *stri jati*), the 'category' of animals or plants (*pashu jati*, *vanaspati jati*), and also for foreigners (like the 'caste of English people', *Angrez jati*). In some cases, the names by which the tribes in an area are known to the outside world are in fact not the indigenous names by which they know themselves and by which they would like to be known. M. Sreenathan (1996) has substantiated this with the tribes of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

For this reason some authors think that the term 'tribe' is a *colonial construct*, in the sense that the British administrators improvised and used it for distinguishing between the different populations in India. K.S. Singh (1998a: 8) writes:

The tribe is a colonial concept, an Anglo-Saxon word, defined for the first time in the Census of 1901, in contradistinction to caste. The notion of tribe has evolved over the censuses, from a hill and forest tribe, to a primitive tribe, to a backward tribe, and finally, to the scheduled tribe.

Susana B.C. Devalle (1992) made an important work in this context. Focusing on Jharkhand, the author concluded that 'tribe is essentially a construct', and is a 'colonial category'. There were no tribes in Jharkhand until the European understanding of the Indian reality *constructed* them, and the categories thus devised later received administrative sanction. The characteristics attributed to tribes (such as 'egalitarianism', 'subsistence economy', 'little or no external control', 'autonomy and isolation of such a unit'), Devalle argued, are not found among Jharkhand's people, known as *adivasi*, nor were they found in the past.

According to Devalle, the 'myth of the tribe' was a colonial invention with the explicit aim to serve certain specific imperial interests. The category of tribe (in opposition to caste) operated as a device to catalogue the conquered population, thus sowing the seeds of divisiveness and fissiparity. The tribes were also perceived as an undifferentiated mass from which labour and revenue could be extracted. Moreover, the identification of tribes would lead to the colonial efforts of 'civilizing them', since many of their cultural traits, the administrators felt, needed to be eradicated once and forever, like shifting cultivation (because it destroyed forests), marriage by capture (because it amounted to abduction), drinking (because it vegetated peoples' existence), etc. In a nutshell, the concept of tribe does not have a reality of its own; it attained its reality because of the force of the colonial legitimizing ideology.

The view that the concept of tribe is colonial has come under critical scrutiny in several writings. One of the major submissions is that when the colonial administrators used the term 'tribe' they did not give it the same meaning as do many anthropologists now. Also, the colonial state did not have a fixed meaning for tribe. That there were economic and political motivations behind creating the concept of tribe may not be a tenable argument (B.B. Chaudhuri 1997). It is against the background of the contemporary understanding of the colonial state that we think it is. It may not have been what the colonial powers had in mind when they catalogued Indian society into castes and tribes. To put it differently, the current 'orientalist discourse' has considerably influenced the idea of the 'myth of the tribe'.

An important publication on the issue of tribe and caste, an outcome of a seminar, was *From Tribe to Caste* (1997), edited by Dev Nathan. Many authors in Nathan's edited volume submit that although a specific term for tribe—an ironclad, clear term, one that anthropologists would ideally like to look for—may not be found, but definitely there are ideas about tribes in earlier Indological writings. There are definite accounts of people who were not part of the caste system, and they looked quizzically at Hindu pilgrims on their way to shrines located in far-off places as they travelled through their territories (Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1990). About the Jad, Subhadra Mitra Channa (2002b: 67) writes:

[They] were a mountain people who had only marginal contact with the mainstream populations of the plains of India. 'Sitting on the roadside to watch the pilgrims go by' is a graphic description of the nature of interaction at that time with the Hindu majority. The Jads, however, derived a large part of their income from the pilgrims by providing them with transport by way of the animals they raised and also, by acting as guides and porters.

These people, 'outside the caste system', were treated with both reverence as well as contempt. In many situations they were employed to guard the troves of princes and emperors (as was the case with the Mina of Rajasthan) because they were regarded as incredibly honest, strong, loyal, and committed (Mann and Mann 1989b; Smith 1991; Vinay Kumar Srivastava 1994c). They were (and are) considered as the storehouses of knowledge pertaining to the supernatural and herbal healing, and they also supplied forest products, honey, shellac and wood, even elephants, to multi-caste villages.

Studies document that the habits of tribespersons, their non-observance of the mores of purity and impurity, laxity in sexual behaviour, and their rituals involving sacrifices and liquor-oblations, have often raised the eyebrows of Hindu communities as an outcome of which they were assigned a low status. Many tribal communities adopted a way of life akin to that of the high castes, because they were 'claiming equality of status with high caste Hindus' (Hardiman 1994:214).

Several movements came up in tribal areas, some of which were initiated by Hindu leaders, which strictly emphasized adherence to the values of purity. For instance, a Gandhian, a person of the Oswal Vaisya caste, named Motilal Tejawat of Udaipur, started a movement among the Bhil to adopt violent means to fight for their agrarian demands, at the same time exhorting to them to lead a pious life. When visiting Tejawat, the tribal people made him offerings of coconuts and rupees, quite like the venerative behaviour of people in temples or in the courts of local princes and chiefs (C.S.K. Singh 1995). Another example is of a Rajput called Anup Das, who founded an association called the Anup Mandal with the intention of fighting the exploiters of lower castes and tribes—the Vaishya (Baniya). He also began to dress as a religious renouncer. His most vocal and ardent supporters hailed from artisan communities (notably *Suthar*, the carpenters), who often cultivated small plots of land besides carrying on their trade; but many tribesmen from the community of Girasia also joined him (Laidlaw 1995; Hardiman, 1996). These examples show the enduring relations between tribes and castes, even when each continued to maintain its respective identity and boundaries.

An important approach to tribe-caste relations may be located in Vidal's work (1997). He writes that the examples of societies from western India and the Himalayas, with which he is familiar, suggest that tribes cannot be understood as separated *from* caste, but should be analysed in terms of how they have been able to maintain their autonomy *within* the wider society that includes castes as well. Tribesmen controlled the borders between kingdoms and also the areas that could be termed as 'no-man's-land'. They played a key role in the dynamics of political authority, and each contending party (the nobles and rulers) tried to mobilize support. This would explain the support the leaders of the two movements from Rajasthan, Tejawat and Anup Das, enjoyed from the tribal people.

In contemporary India the process of transforming tribes into castes has almost stopped, although tribal communities living in close contact with caste villages may be consciously or unconsciously adopting some Hindu customs, ideas of cosmology, practices, and lifestyles (Buddhadeb Chaudhuri 1992: vol. 5), but this in no way changes their perception and expression of tribal identity. In other words, adopting (and adapting to) another religion does not conflict with their tribal individuality (Chakravarty 1996). Tribes which had adopted a caste identity in the past are concertedly giving it up, steely reinforcing their own 'tribal image and distinctiveness' (Xaxa 1999a). This explains the decline in the studies of the tribe-caste continuum and the increase in the studies of tribal ethnicity in the last 15 years (see Bhadra and Mondal 1991; Sharma 1996).

In addition, some other researchers have also studied the tribe-caste interaction. In their survey of 22 major temples spread over 11 districts of Karnataka, B.B. Goswami and S.G. Morab (1988) found that their functionaries hailed from both tribal and caste communities: for example, the men of Koraga tribe are temple-musicians. Relations similar to *jajmani* (patron-client), which have been described as an important trait of multi-caste villages, have been found to exist in tribal areas as well: for example, D.B. Negi (1990) describes this system, locally known as *binanang*, in Kinnaur where the tribal communities are broadly divided into two categories. The 'upper castes', called Khosia, consist of Rajputs (or Kanets) and Jads, while the 'lower' known as Beru, meaning 'outsider', comprising the Domang, Ores and Chamang are generally regarded as the 'Harijans of the area'. It is between these communities that the *binanang* ties obtain. As Brahmin priests never settled here, the Buddhist priests (called *lama*) perform religious functions for them.

There have been many examples of tribal deities accepted in Hindu villages. Chitrasen Pasayat (1995) describes the case of one such deity called Bhim, whose worship has been admitted into the local Hindu village of Gainpura (Sambalpur, Orissa), without bringing about any significant change in either the tribal or the caste Hindu society. Other studies have also arrived at a similar conclusion (K.S. Singh 1988b). For example, Hardiman (1995) shows that even when the 'egalitarian society' of Bhils was interacting with the 'hierarchical society of the Jain merchants' (*shahukars*), the internal organization of neither underwent a fundamental change.

In Gainpura, the important fact is that the tribal deity was initially accepted without any drastic changes in its core elements (Pasayat 1995). Later, the caste folk gave a Hindu status to the deity, changing its ceremonial process according to Sanskritic Hinduism and creating a myth for its position in the existing society. Pasayat considers this a process of the *Tribalization* (of the Hindu village) followed by *Sanskritization* (of the deity). This case can also be treated as an example of what Marriott (1955) has called, in the context of his study of Kishangarhi village of Uttar Pradesh, the process of *Universalization*.

Changes in tribes resulting from their long-term interaction with peasants (who in many cases are caste Hindus) have been the theme of many studies, which are also concerned with the processes of *de-tribalization* (see S.N. Mishra 1998). These works lend support to the point that tribal economy and culture are becoming integrated with the non-tribal population. This process has been taking place from time immemorial, although its speed has increased since the latter half of the twentieth century. Roy Burman's view (1994a) is that tribes in India were never isolated from the outside world, as was generally imagined. They have always been in contact with the outside world, including the communities described in anthropological literature as typical examples of isolated tribal existence: For instance, the Jarawa's use of iron in the last century shows their enduring relations with other people (Ujjwal Mishra 2002:19). On the contrary, B.K. Roy Burman (1994c) says that their isolation increased because of the oppressive British Empire and its diabolical policy to colonize their territories and bring their traditional resources and life-support systems under their control. Tribespersons fled to un-surveyed territories to escape the tyrannous rule. It was perhaps because of the process of integrating tribes with non-tribes (who were predominantly Hindu), and of tribes taking on the characteristics of caste, that Ghurye— whom Elwin called an 'anthropological quisling'—described tribes as 'backward Hindus' (K.S. Singh, quoted in Momin 1994: 298; K.S. Singh 1996).

### **Tribes as Indigenous People**

An extremely important aspect of tribal studies conducted in the last 15 years has been the debate around the concept of 'indigenous people'. It was thought that the use of this term rather than tribe would certainly be better, but it created more confusion, with some arguing in favour of Indian tribes as indigenous people, while others opposed it (see Xaxa 1999b for a review of both the points). A notion similar to 'indigenous people' has always been present in India, conveyed by the respectable concept of *adivasi* ('pristine' or 'original' settlers). However, it was never a moot issue and perhaps anthropologists never thought of ascertaining the claim of tribes as 'autochthones' of the country. Generally it was in the context of B.S. Guha's classification of Indian races that one encountered the idea of Negrito as the autochthonous people of India (Bhattacharya and Sarkar 1996).

That India was not an ethnic vacuum was an oft-repeated statement, but who the original settlers were was a vexatious question on which there was no easy consensus. Ethnologists, principally from the background of physical anthropology, did concern themselves with the issues of autochthones in India (see Kalla 1994), but for social anthropologists, almost overtaken by the tide of structural-functionalism in the latter half of the twentieth century dealing with societies 'here-and-now' rather than with what they were in the past, the questions of origin, though important, could not be answered since suitable evidence did not exist. The paradox was that though social anthropologists were conducting synchronic studies of tribal societies, they did not object to their being called *adivasi* in governmental, anthropological, and popular literature.

The term 'indigenous population' came about in 1957 when the ILO (International Labour Organisation) adopted the Indigenous and Tribal Populations Conventions (no.107) (Roy Burman 1994a, 1995a, 1997b, 2003). The convention first spoke of tribal and semi-tribal populations, and then of 'indigenous population' as a 'population of special category analogous to the tribal and semi-tribal populations'. The aim of the original convention was to protect and integrate indigenous and other tribal and semi-tribal populations in independent countries. However, notwithstanding the many positive stipulations, the ILO convention of 1957 was criticized for its 'ethnocentric bias and patronizing attitude' (Roy Burman 1995a: 7). Accordingly, the ILO adopted a revised Convention 169, where the concept of indigenous has been overtly de-linked from the concept of tribe, though by implication they have been treated as analogous (Roy Burman 1997a). Tribes were defined in this convention as those people whose 'social, cultural and economic conditions distinguish them from other sections of the national community' and who regulate them 'wholly or partially by their own customs or traditions or by special laws and regulations' (Roy Burman 1995b: 7). The 'indigenous people' are described as those who have descended from the populations that inhabited the country (or the geographical area to which the country belongs) at the time of conquest, or colonization, or the establishment of the present political boundaries. In addition, they live according to their own social, economic, and political institutions.

In other words, tribes and semi-tribes (those who are fast-changing, almost on the verge of losing their identity) are analogous to indigenous people, although different from them because they constitute a distinct international category (Xaxa 1999b: 3590). Indigenous people are the descendants of those who lived in the country to which they now belong before colonization or conquest by people outside the country or the geographical region. Once under colonial rule, these people were marginalized, exploited, oppressed, and in some cases deliberately exterminated or used for experimental purposes. In spite of their interaction with the colonizers, or those who enjoyed their patronage, the indigenous people have been able to retain their culture and its institutions, and it is according to them that they principally live.

Although taken up at the level of the international institutions, the discourse on indigenous people was almost non-existent in the Indian academic as well as political world before 1993 when the United Nations declared that year as the 'International Year of the Indigenous People'. Once this issue was 'internationalized', the category of 'indigenous' came to be critically examined. Arguments for considering tribes in India as indigenous people have come up with the same degree of intensity as did the arguments against it. Many of those who defended the term 'indigenous' for tribes happened to be activists. The slogan—'The *adivasi* of the world unite'—acquired popularity as it was printed on the cover of the booklets that the Indian Conference of Indigenous and Tribal Peoples brought out in 1993 on the occasion of the UN Year of the Indigenous Peoples of the World (see Bose Mullick et al. 1993; Fernandes 1993b). Another important publication on this issue which the International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs, Copenhagen jointly published with Zed Books Limited was *The Indigenous Voice*, *Visions and Realities* (Moody 1988).

The argument in favour of indigenous was not so much in terms of tribes being the original settlers, since the protagonists of this view knew full well that the facts of original settlement could not be easily established since historical (and archaeological) evidence was scarce. Their defence was more on the grounds of tribes as being the worst victims of conquest and colonization. Because of acculturation, which is always asymmetrical, they suffered the loss of control over resources, leading to a penurious existence and becoming serfs in their own lands. They became powerless; their institutions were undermined; their customs and practices were ridiculed; and the outcome of all these deprivations and humiliations was that they lost the desire to live.

In their ethnographic works, anthropologists have shown that the tribe people claim association with their habitats which stretches back into antiquity. They have no legal documents, no decrees of purchase, or registered birth certificates to prove their aboriginal status. What they have instead is a body of sacred truths, which they have inherited from their ancestors. What the outsider regards as 'myths', they see as 'history'—a string of true happenings. If they claim, as they generally do, that their ancestors were the first human couple to be created by the gods to walk on the earth, then this is what they believe *actually* happened. They nurture no scepticism about their origin; what their ancestors proudly narrated is held in reverence. The evidence for such truths is all around—preserved in stones, animals, and the floral world. There is no reason to doubt the omnipotence of their gods and spirits; nor do they show any shame in the belief that an incestuous union gave birth to their people.

The point is that the tribal world should be understood in the context of its cosmology and the thoughts of the people, rather than historical and archaeological facts which are not only limited but also shattered and partial. André Béteille's observation (2000b:184) deserves to be remembered at this juncture:

Where historical records are scarce and historical memory is short, the idea of 'indigenous people' provides abundant scope for the proliferation of myths relating to blood and soil.

Many anthropologists have recorded the fact that although the tribes may think that they were the first ones to be created after a deluge or catastrophe, they also talk of their collective movements from one physical space to the other, in search of fertile pastures and secure habitats. On the basis of the findings of the People of India Project, K.S. Singh (1997: 7) writes:

Four hundred and nine tribes (64.3 per cent) claim to be migrants to their present habitat. In fact all our tribal people have been migrants. Their migration is recorded in oral tradition and historical accounts. About eight per cent of the tribes record their migration in recent years.

S.C. Dube (1998: 5) notes:

The Kol and Kirda of India have had long association with later immigrants. Mythology and history bear testimony to their [tribals'] encounters and intermingling.

In other words, the claims of autochthonous (or 'native') status are political devices which in the end create divisiveness in society. Far more important are the historical facts pertaining to the impact of colonialism on tribes. Although colonial rule has been liquidated, the exploitation of tribes continues unabated. This was noted in studies conducted on tribes immediately after the India's independence and later (see Fürer-Haimendorf 1967). The exploitation can be checked; tribespersons would be able to live with dignity if their interests were taken care of and they got their rightful share. To make this happen, there is no need to begin with the polemical idea of Indian tribes as the indigenous people.

### **Economic Problems of Tribes**

One of the points that contemporary studies of tribes unexceptionally share is that the condition of tribal societies needs to be examined in the context of national and international social and economic systems (Miri 1993; Roy Burman 1995b). Whenever a poor and debt ridden country is in the grip of a severe economic crisis, it tries to overcome its problems by selling its precious natural resources of which an important one is its forest wealth. Tribal communities, dwelling for millennia in and eking out their subsistence from forests, have been the worst sufferers in this context (see the *Report of the Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 1987–89*; Fernandes 1993a; *Seminar* issue of August 2005). These are the people thronging the streets of Ranchi as rickshaw-pullers, begging for tobacco in middle and south Andaman, working in middle and upper class households in Delhi as servants and maids, and serving with contractors as labour for paltry sums. Studies on migration point out that both landless as well as landed people from poverty-stricken areas migrate to towns as well as cities, but their implications are different. The landless move from 'severe to moderate poverty', whereas the landed, move from a 'moderate to non-poor' status (Sah 2002).

The incidence of poverty among tribes was 44 per cent in 1999–2000, while among the non-tribals it was 16 per cent. Many reasons have been given for why an overwhelming percentage of the population of Indian villages, mostly belonging to the lower castes and tribal groups, reels under the miserable state of poverty and deprivation. An important reason for the vast disparity in the levels of income and wealth is the age-old practice of bonded labour, which though legally abolished continues to survive in some parts of the country. A close relationship exists between land-alienation, indebtedness, and bonded labour. The equivalent of slavery in the contemporary world is the institution of debt-bondage. At one time it was thought that bonded labourers were confined to villages, but time and again various surveys have shown the existence of this institution in towns and cities as well (A.R.N. Srivastava 1988).

Known by different terms in different parts of the country, the institution of debt-bondage has certain typical characteristics, on the basis of which its model can be constructed:

- 1. A poor person (landless labourer, peasant, artisan, craftsperson) takes a loan (of a few hundred or thousand rupees) from whosoever is in a capacity to advance loans (may be a rich farmer, moneylender, or liquor vendor).
- 2. The loan is generally taken to meet a contingent expenditure, unanticipated and sometimes uncalled for (such as to organize a death feast, or replace a bull during the peak agricultural season, or pay a fine as levied by the caste council), or to perform certain expensive rituals (the marriage of a daughter), or for bare minimal survival (such as buying food).
- 3. The loan is advanced at an exorbitant rate of interest, certainly not less than 2 per cent per month (i.e. 24 per cent per annum). In some cases it is frighteningly high 5 per cent per month. Often, in addition, property or jewellery, or whatever assets the person has, is mortgaged.
- 4. The economy of the debtor is non-surplus-producing. It even falls considerably short of fulfilling the basic survival needs of the debtor and his family. In other words, the debtor will never have surplus money to settle his debt, or even pay off the full interest.
- 5. Such a terrible state of the debtor produces optimum conditions for bondage. The person and his family members work for their 'master', the one who has advanced them the loans. Their wages are supposed to be adjusted against the loans, but does not this happen. In always fact, in most cases, the wages are not adjusted and the person continues to suffer under bondage for his entire life.

- 6. But the wages are so ridiculously low that even of they are paid, the debtor could never succeed in paying off the interest, leave alone the capital. The loans then multiply exponentially, making it impossible for the debtor to ever settle them. As a consequence, he and his family remain indebted forever, and bonded forever.
- 7. The debts are not tied to the individual; rather, they are tied to the family. After the demise of the debtor, his son or grandson inherits the debts. For a loan of a measly sum, the family remains in the vicious circle of debtbondage forever.
- 8. The loans would never be repaid unless some external, powerful agency, such as the government, intervenes dissolving the loans and freeing the debtors from the cage of bonded labour.

Many studies have pointed out that in contemporary India, a majority of tribal respondents know what debt-bondage is (Buddhadeb Chaudhuri 1992). They may not know how it actually results, but they know full well that it is 'eternal', inherited in the same manner as other biological and cultural characteristics are acquired. The most vulnerable to bonded labour are those working in brick-kilns, followed by those who are agricultural workers. After them are domestic servants in the houses of the landlords (*zamindar*). There are fewer chances of factory workers becoming bonded labourers because factories are not feudal enterprises. The chances of one entering the system of debt-bondage are greater in feudalism than in other system of production. Incidentally, the caste system, which is the system of stratification prevailing in Indian villages, has the characteristics of a feudal system of production. One of the most significant characteristics of feudalism is the quality of relations between the employer and the employee. These relations are described as paternalistic, in which the employer looks after his employees by advancing them loans to meet contingent situations and also provides them with other benefits.

Ethnographers have pointed out that tribes and lower castes are so dependent on the *zamindar*s for their basic survival that it is unthinkable that they would ever annoy their patrons by providing details about a system against which legal prohibition exist, that is, if they even know the details. The result is that cases of bonded labour can rarely be identified details about bonded labourers and their patrons given. When people are tight-lipped about a practice, that is its indirect confirmation.

Many suggestions have been given for combating the system of debt-bondage. However, two significant aspects emerge. First, though people may know this, it still needs to be explained to them clearly and with emphasis that one of the most important reasons for their bondage is the customary practice of giving feasts on ritual occasions. If the community collectively resolves to discontinue or drastically reduce these feasts the people will be less constrained to take loans beyond their ability to repay. Second, people know how oppressive and exploitative the system of debt-bondage is and they certainly want to emerge out of it, yet they cannot do so because the system at least ensures their survival. There does not exist an alternative economic arrangement for them, they are hesitant to leave it. Hence, it is extremely important that all agencies—governmental and nongovernmental—think seriously in terms of the economic alternatives wherein the 'liberated bonded labourers' could be honourably rehabilitated (Bhandari and Bhattacharya 1996). In fact, B.D. Sharma, in his letter to the prime minister on 31 March 1990, had stated that land alienation was one of the most important issues to be taken up. *The Report of the Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (1987–89)* made it clear that the 'tribal people are being denied due protection of constitutional safeguards on a vital issue which concerns their very survival as a community'.

### **Impact of Development Programmes**

A number of works deal with the poverty that the development programmes cause (Chaudhury 1992, 1998b). Why the scheduled tribes lag behind the scheduled castes has also been explored (Xaxa 2001). From the success stories of some individuals of a few tribal communities (such as the Mina of Rajasthan, Christian tribespersons from central and north-east India, the families of tribal leaders who have acquired power in the democratic system) one should not infer that the policy of compensatory discrimination and rapid development has elevated the economic status of a majority of them. On the contrary, a perpetual conflict exists between the national programmes of development on the one hand, and the interests of tribes on the other, with the result that many tribal communities have become the 'victims of development', pushed to the brink of a dehumanized existence, while many non-tribal societies, located in towns and cities, have become affluent (Sachchidananda 1997).

The national development programmes have included the setting up of largescale industries, construction of dams for irrigation, systematic and intensive extraction of forest and mineral resources, and power projects for generating electricity, acquiring land on the outskirts of towns (generally inhabited by tribal people) for private housing projects, and also reserving forests for regeneration (K.S. Singh 1993a; Patnaik 1996; Saksena et al. 1998; Rath and Rath 2002). These development projects are undertaken in tribal-inhabited regions because they are rich in minerals and forest resources.

At one time it was thought that the programmes of development would facilitate the integration of tribal communities with what has come to be known as the 'mainstream of Indian society'. The basic difference between the tribal situation in India and in many other parts of the world has been in terms of the 'mainstream'; the Indian tribes are presumed to have one, whilst tribes in other parts of the world do not. So the question of integrating tribes with the 'mainstream' has been of pivotal concern in India, and in this context, national development has been viewed as a cardinal step in bringing tribes into the national polity.

But what has resulted is quite the opposite of what the national planners had thought, i.e. the impoverishment and pauperization of the tribes, the consequences of which for the psyche and self-esteem of the tribal people have been disastrous (Vidyut Joshi 1998b; Saksena and Sen 1999). Vidyut Joshi (1998a: 14) writes:

Our tribal development policies and programmes assumed that all the tribes will develop and will 'integrate' themselves with the so-called 'mainstream'. This has happened only in a symbolic way. Most of our researchers agree on this point that as a result of the planned tribal development, stratification on secular lines has taken place among tribals and only a small section has been able to take advantages of our tribal development programmes.

The impact of the policy of national development has been catastrophic for the basic resources of tribal societies—viz. water, land, and forest—on which the people have had usufructuary rights from time immemorial, bestowed on them by their traditions, their myths of origin, for which they did not need bureaucratic sanction. The relationship of tribespersons with their ecological system was one of 'profound respectful dependence'. They used only as much of the resources and only the quantity they needed for their bare survival. The notion of what is now called 'sustainable development' was in fact indigenously woven into the matrix of tribal culture. They did not need to be reminded of posterity, the fact that they should cultivate an ideology of conservation—the conserver ethic—towards their ecosystem, so that their future generations could live well with dignity. For them, the forest was not a commercial proposition, an 'uneven mishmash of trees that could be sold to the greedy world for revenue'; rather it was their 'way of life', an 'abode of their deities and ancestors', and the meaning of life for them was to live in 'harmony with nature' and 'venerate her for blessing people with all that they need for their existence' (Fernandes 1993a).

Development has led to a breakdown of this 'respectful' relationship between tribes and nature. All over the world, tribe persons have witnessed the transformation of their nature from a 'way of life' to a 'commercial proposition'. Their ecosystems were overexploited, which they could neither stop from being destroyed nor register strong protests. And when they raised their voice against the pillaging of their resources, their life-support system, the exploiters silenced it. Against this background, many tribal communities had no option but to flee to those areas where they could have a minimal level of freedom to live the way they would like. In fact, as submitted earlier, the isolation of tribes, which is usually regarded in anthropological literature as an important defining trait of tribes, resulted as a consequence of the experiences of exploitation and oppression that they underwent (Roy Burman 1994c).

The entry of 'outsiders'—government officials, surveyors, landlords, moneylenders, liquor vendors, etc.—to tribal territories began a long time back, with the advent of the British rule (Fürer-Haimendorf 1967). British policy in India was not one of non-interference with tribal existence, as was the case with the pre-British rulers. The British were keen to survey the tribal area and learn about its material wealth, which could eventually be siphoned off to build industries back home. They were also interested in studying tribal peoples and their institutions, not only to make academic contributions to the understanding of the 'other', but also for administering these societies better to ensure peace among them and keep them subservient to colonial rule. The role of anthropology in tribal administration is well known. The colonial interests were couched in the idiom of 'civilizing people'. Tribe persons were described as being in a state of barbarism and wildness and should be phenomenally changed (and 'domesticated') so that they could become like the rest in the 'mainstream', which actually meant the 'mass of British subjects'. Tribes started losing their customary rights over land, forests, and water rule, their resources being alienated to non-tribes, the exploiters who had thronged tribal territories in search of newer mines of wealth. The process that the colonial rule started of 'civilizing' people by forcing them—or 'forcibly persuading' them—to accept the packages the state offered them has continued uninterrupted with the development programmes of Independent India (see Miri 1993).

The number of people displaced (or uprooted) from their traditional habitats (or 'ancestral homes') because of development programmes is estimated to be over 16 million, of which about 40 per cent belong to tribal societies (Fernandes 1993a). The area under forest cover has also declined abysmally; from 40 per cent of the country's territory in 1854 to just 10 per cent in the 1980s. As a large number of tribal people are forest-dwellers, they have suffered the most. With the British forest policy came state control over forest resources and the rights and privileges of tribes over forests were curtailed. Although the forest policy of Independent India has enlarged the rights and privileges the forest-based tribal communities enjoy, and the local communities in many parts of India are actively involved in the programmes of Joint Forest Management (Roy Burman 1995b), there is no doubt that as a number of tribal studies and articles point out, the condition of the people in 'forest villages' has not shown any qualitative improvement (Prasad and Jahagirdar 1993; Jahagirdar 1994). On the contrary, it has worsened and the exploitation of people, particularly women, by forest officials has increased considerably.

Development programmes have not only displaced people from their traditional habitats, but also, brought a large number of 'outsiders', of different social strata, from moneylenders to government officials, into tribal territories (Chaudhury 1991, 1992). Because of their links and networks among themselves and with the bureaucracy, which they use to their advantage, they have been able to control trade and commerce, siphoning off the local resources in the same way as the British did before India's independence. As many observers have reported time and again, the outsiders have also ridicule tribal practices and customs, thereby making the people suspicious of their own institutions, with which they have lived from time immemorial (Alam 1993; Sarkar and Chakravorty 2003). Tribal culture, in some cases, has become a liability and embarrassment to its bearers because of the sort of treatment it has received from outsiders.

In the wake of industrialization came urban influences. Tribal areas, rich in mineral and forest resources, as was noted earlier, were chosen for setting up industries, and around them emerged towns. Contrary to what was thought at one time about the positive and integrative effects of industrialization and urbanization, these processes have added to the woes of tribes. Besides the despoliation of their habitats, the gains of development have not been dispersed to them. They do not have access to either the schools or the hospitals; and a large number of their villages are yet to receive the benefits of electrification or irrigation. Development has been lopsided for tribal communities, and the rich 'outsiders' have monopolized the gains, which in fact should have reached tribal areas. Development has created a class of what sociologists call 'surplus labour' (or 'underclass') from among the tribal people, who are largely unskilled and have no option but to migrate to towns and cities in search of jobs for basic survival, although such jobs are not easily available. This has often resulted in these 'underclass' tribes persons taking up crime as a way of life, thus being stigmatized forever (Bhowmick 2001; Radhakrishna 2001; Bokil 2002). Against this background, some anthropologists think that tribal communities constitute the 'fourth world', the most undeveloped of the undeveloped and underdeveloped world (Xaxa 2003). And such a state of affairs culminates in the rise of ethnicity, which in the apt words of S.C. Dube (quoted in Sachchidananda 1997: 234) is 'part sentiment, part ideology and part agenda'.

The condition of tribes differs widely from one geographical region to the other, and also, there are differences between the same geographical regions as well. This abundantly supports the idea, which anthropologists have often submitted: the 'context-specific' and 'ethno-local' model of development. People's viewpoint can be understood and fully appreciated when they are involved in every development and welfare project right from its inception. In this regard, Pingle and von Fürer-Haimendorf (1998: 163–64) write:

After fifty years of Independence and many government failures, the realization that the only way left for government to succeed in its efforts to reduce poverty in rural areas is to include the wide participation of the bottom third of the poor in their own development

People will be empowered when they not only determine the course of development but also develop their own measures and technology to evaluate its respective impacts on different components of their society, i.e. people of different gender, age, and strata, and also if the impact of development programmes is studied objectively using anthropological methods (Chaudhury 1992: 151–52). Then these two evaluations are compared to determine whether the people subjectively feel that their lifestyles have really improved as a result of development programmes. In addition, the state should guarantee the rights of tribal people over their land and resources and ensure their share in the power structure so that they exercise control over their land and resources for their own benefits. Perhaps this idea can be best expressed in the following maxim: 'The state should help people to help themselves.'

### **Tribal Policy**

An important statement issued in February 2004 was the Draft of the National Policy on Tribals. It was the first time in the history of tribal India that the government formulated a National Policy on Scheduled Tribes, for none had existed in colonial times. What did exist at that time were the 'approaches' that aimed to provide a solution to the 'tribal problem'. These 'approaches' were generally grouped into three categories: isolation, assimilation, and integration. In July 2006, a much-improved version of the Draft of the National Tribal Policy was circulated.

A 'national policy' on tribes is definitely a further reinforcement of the idea that notwithstanding a myriad of measures which the government has taken after independence, the quality of life of many tribes, especially the primitive tribes, has not shown any improvement. On the contrary, as stated earlier, the development programmes, which were undertaken to facilitate the process of the integration tribes with the mainstream of Indian society, have destroyed the life-support systems of many of these communities, weakened their social and cultural fabric, and forced the people to seek 'refuge' in their own land. Fernandes (1993a: 20) has called these people 'internal refugees'. The entry of non-tribal outsiders into tribal areas has continued unabated, bringing in its wake a grave exploitation of tribespersons, their illegal and forceful ousting from their own land, and their existence in a state of perpetual penury, fear, misery, and destitution. Against this background, it is imperative that a National Policy on Tribals comes into existence even though the scheduled tribes are well covered under the Constitution of India. Such a policy will guide all the thoughts and actions (of the governments and the NGOs as well as of independent social activists and advocates) that are held and carried out in collaboration with the people for the amelioration of their condition.

The aim of the policy is defined at the outset: 'to bring [the] Scheduled Tribes into the mainstream of society through a multi-pronged approach for their allround development without disturbing their distinct culture.' By this, one instantly understands that the approach the policy puts forth is to 'integrate' tribes with rest of the society. Here, it is extremely important that the policy discusses in clear and comprehensive terms what it means by the concept of 'mainstream', for it is well known that what north Indians understand by 'mainstream' is different from the meaning that south Indians attribute to it. Similarly, the 'mainstream' for the Nagas is different from that of the Assamese plains-dwellers.

Like many other concepts in social anthropology and sociology, 'mainstream' is also a plural-concept, in the sense that it has many meanings. The meaning of the concepts of 'mainstream' and 'integration' the policy intends to put forward must be clarified, because, for reasons not given, its Draft of February 2004 ended with the subtitle of 'Assimilation', which, in the context of tribal studies, as is well known, refers to the approach of social workers according to which the problems of tribal societies were the result of their continued isolation, and it was believed that the more they came in contact with the outside world, the better it would be for their upliftment. The solution to tribal problems, according to the 'assimilationists', lies in 'assimilating' tribes with the outsiders, largely Hindu, and imposing upon them the values they deemed proper (such as prohibition of liquor, dressing like caste Hindus) (see Hardiman 1987, 1998). As critics have said, assimilation is utopian, undemocratic, unethical, and unjust. Moreover, it is ethnocentric, an imposition, for, as J.D. Mehra (1987: 40) writes, tribes 'may or may not agree to what appears to those encouraging …assimilation as a logical and more effective way of doing things, and they may prefer their own old ways.' Assimilation is a contrapuntal ideal type of integration. If assimilation symbolizes the 'melting' of tribal cultures into the culture of outsiders, integration stands for the 'respect' that tribes and their cultures receive from outsiders. If assimilation favours homogenization of cultures, integration subscribes to the Chinese maxim: 'Let the hundred flowers blossom, let the hundred schools of thought flourish'. Integration is a celebration of the principle of diversity and a denunciation of any variety of cultural imperialism.

In the last 50 years, anthropologists have started studying societies, both urban and industrial, using their traditional field methods which generally they did not do earlier, although they have always defined their subject as a study of the entire human society in time and space. Theoretically too, anthropology has critically examined the perspectives and methodologies that had their origins in other disciplines (such as philosophy, sociology) or in the writings of some later twentieth-century thinkers (such as Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida), against the background of their empirical studies in a variety of contexts. Anthropology, therefore, has neither remained conservative nor lagged behind.

But in spite of moving into newer territories with time-tested methods, anthropology has never given up the study of tribal communities. On the contrary, more and more anthropologists insist that even when they study other social formations, their first and foremost commitment is to the study of tribes. The argument that the destiny of anthropology is incumbent upon the presence of 'pre-literate tribes' in the world, or that it is tagged to structural-functionalism, is, to say the least, 'substance-less'.

#### 92 Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant K. chaudhury

It is now well known that when anthropologists put forth the idea of providing certain tribes, precariously placed in economic and social terms, with their 'reserves' or 'national parks', as Elwin (1939) suggested for the Baiga, it certainly was not because their subject was endangered and could have only survived with a 'museumification' (or 'zoofication') of tribal communities (see Bhasin and Srivastava 1990, and comments on this article, 1991). Rather, it was to save the tribes—simple, credulous, gullible, powerless, and the most vulnerable to exploitation—from the nefarious designs and stratagems of outsiders (merchants, moneylenders, liquor vendors, colonizers of land, etc.), whose interests lay in seizing control of natural resources, seeking cheap and free labour, ousting the tribals from their original habitats, and also sexually exploit tribal women. Anthropologists exposed these motives of the outsiders, trying to place before the world the 'tribal viewpoint'. Thus the anthropologists have emerged as the 'spokespersons' of tribal communities, and because of this, there is a strong likelihood of their taking up the tasks of advocacy and activism. In fact, Elwin's letter to *Vanyajati* (1952: 2 [2], cited in *The Eastern Anthropologist*, 1953–4 [7: 3 & 4]: 128–9) puts this idea across clearly:

I have frequently made it clear that my views on the tribal problem are entirely different now to what they were during the days of the British Raj. The coming of *our* own government has completely altered the position, and it is as I venture to think, a little unfair to use statements which applied to a different situation to discredit me today. I am … vehemently in favour of opening communications in the tribal areas. But I think that such a road should be made in the interests of the tribals and not for the benefit of those who would exploit them from the plains.

### **Emerging Concerns**

Our survey shows that we have been able to collect basic information on almost all the tribes of India. Material on north-east India is now substantial (see Bhupinder Singh 1998; Bhadra and Mondal 1991; Samanta 1994; Das and Barua 1996) as it is for other zones of the country. In this regard, the Anthropological Survey of India has carried out exemplary work under the People of India Project. The reports of this project have also been published. In the last 15 years, ethnographic accounts of certain tribal societies have been published (see, for instance, Bhanu 1989; Suseela Devi 1990; Maitra 2002; Nayak 1989; Parkin 1992; Parthasarathy 1988b; R. K. Sinha 1995; Sudhakar Rao 2002).

But it will not be wrong to say that we still lack good ethnographies, comparable to those published in the first half of twentieth century, and which are still consulted for their details, if not always for their theoretical perspectives. One of the reasons for this state of affairs is an abysmal decline, especially among the students of Indian origin, in the tradition of long, intensive fieldwork of not less than one year. With the rise of 'auto-anthropology', many investigators return to their homelands, sometimes to their own villages, neighbourhoods, and families, for fieldwork. This practice is the opposite of what anthropologists in the past had adopted, when they set out to study a culture different from their own, as a consequence of which anthropology came to be conceptualized as the study of 'other cultures'. Today, the study of one's own society has become a legitimate practice, but the danger is that one may begin with the assumption that by virtue of being a native, one knows one's customs and practices well, for one has inherited them, therefore, one need not make enquiries. An assumption of this sort signals the end of the ethnographic tradition. Whether one studies one's own or a different society, one is advised to begin with a *tabula rasa* mind, that is, one should not have any preconceptions about one's study; one should not be a victim of one's stereotypes, prejudices, or biases. In other words, one should begin with an open mind. In the study of one's own people, one should de-familiarize oneself with the customs and practices one has inherited, treating them as strange as are those of other cultures. It requires considerable effort, constantly reminding oneself to make an objective investigation of all types of facts, notwithstanding one's level of familiarity with them.

On many primitive tribes (for example, Parangiperja of Orissa, Kolgha of Gujarat, Koraga of Karnataka and Kerala, Maria Gond of Maharashtra, Buxas of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, and others), apart from short notes and brief scattered communications, there are no full-length accounts. Such communities need to be studied with a sense of priority, before their lifestyles change (Ajit K. Danda 1996: 34). Anthropologists do intend to study these communities before they change because they wish to keep detailed records of different types of living patterns and adaptive strategies. Similarly, there are 'de-populating' communities, those declining in number, which both physical and social anthropologists and medical practitioners need to study so that culturally relevant and medically suitable programmes of development can be chalked out for them. Further, those tribal communities on which extensive studies have not been conducted in the last 50 years should also be studied.

At this juncture, an important question is of how to motivate research scholars to choose communities which deserve to be studied. Perhaps grant-giving agencies (such as the ICSSR, ICMR, Anthropological Survey of India, UGC, etc.) could announce fellowships for the study of these hitherto unstudied and less studied communities. To identify these communities a committee should be set up which also prioritizes the areas of study.

Several studies have pointed out the migration of tribal people to urban and industrial areas. Many of these migrants are permanent for they have no stake in their native places; their land has been usurped, bought, or acquired in the national interest, and the meagre compensation they received was spent heedlessly or, as in most cases, taken away by moneylenders towards the settlement of accounts. The net result was that the tribespersons were left to fend for themselves. Not many studies have been done on these migrants—what happens to them, whether they are absorbed in the tertiary sectors of economy, or whether they remain without gainful employment or are intermittently employed or become beggars, lumpenproletariats, and criminals. In this case, the study of tribal women and children should have priority over all other studies.

It was noted earlier in the chapter that anthropologists (and historians) have carried out studies of tribal movements; but these are not enough. There is an urgent need to give an impetus to the studies of tribal assertions and protests. Detailed studies of the rise of insurgency and the steps that the state and Central governments have taken to combat it are also required. For instance, priority must be given to the study of Naxalism in central India, and the political response of the local populace in the form of Salwa Judum. Given the grotesquely inflammable situation in the area, it may not be possible for anthropologists to conduct a long term, first-hand empirical study using the standard technique of participant observation. However, a beginning can be made with an analysis of whatever material is available in the form of reports. In this regard, recently (2006–07), S. Narayan and his team carried out a study of violence in Bastar, interviewing almost one hundred respondents, both Naxalite leaders and their sympathizers, and the supporters of Salwa Judum, and circulated a report for further deliberation.

 Even when holistic studies were carried out, certain areas of tribal living did not receive the attention they deserved; for example, material culture, music, dance, folklore, and other aspects of expressive institutions. This was noted in the early surveys also (Sachchidananda 1985: 103; Ajit K. Danda 1996: 33). These neglected areas require immediate study. Some of them, for instance, music, may need the expertise of specialists such as musicians or folklorists for proper documentation, and hence, these projects have to be multidisciplinary in nature. In addition, the changing tribal worldview requires documentation.

Further, not many anthropologists, save a few (such as Roy Burman 1997b), have commented on the constitutional provisions for tribes, and their impact on society. It appears that these areas of legal anthropology have been glossed over. Against the background of the importance of judiciary in contemporary India, it is imperative that anthropologists undertake detailed studies of the constitutional safeguards and their impact, along with the study of the cases pertaining to tribal societies that have been decided by the honourable courts.

 Separate studies should be carried out on the analysis of auto-ethnographic writings and their comparison with the writings of outsiders on the same communities. Other areas that deserve immediate attention are the history of tribal areas and their colonial administration; the ethno-medical and ethno-pharmacological knowledge of tribes and its interaction with the established systems of medicine; tribal leaders and spokespersons; the emerging patterns of social stratification among tribal societies; the differential effects of the policy of compensatory discrimination on tribes; the destruction of tribal ecological systems as a consequence of the commercial and economic motives of the outsiders and the state; and the assessment of poverty in tribal communities.

The present survey shows that a variety of approaches have been used for the study of tribes in comparison to what was done earlier. For instance, Vidyarthi (1972: 101) wrote in the first survey that the tribal studies were functional or empirical in orientation. Of all the approaches that have found place in tribal studies the most popular is the interpretive approach. Some sociologists have also used the Marxian approach, especially in the context of the tribal mode of production. Against this backdrop, we need researches comparing the outcome of different approaches to the study of tribal societies.

With reference to publications, in the first survey report Vidyarthi (ibid., 104) had observed that an 'adequate machinery should be created for the publication of doctoral and master's degree theses.' We have gone through a number of good dissertations, with valuable data, submitted for the award of research (M.Phil. and Ph.D.) and Master's degrees, which have not been published. The fact is that if the awardees of these degrees get into non-teaching and independent research jobs, including working for a project, the benefits of which are enjoyed by its director, they generally do not undertake the onerous task of converting their theses into books (or research papers). After the passage of some years, the researchers lose interest in their work, with the result that good manuscripts gather dust on closed library shelves and are unavailable to the academic community at large. It is imperative, therefore, that research-funding organizations devise methods to ensure these works are published.

Some organizations have taken on the task of publishing reports on the traditions of knowledge of various communities. One such example is of the 'Intangible Cultural Heritage Series' that the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya (Museum of Mankind), Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh), has started, in which it has so far published two monographs on the indigenous knowledge of the tribes of Orissa (by Biyotkesh Tripathy 2005) and Konda Reddi (by Kamal K. Misra 2005), and three are in print. Some more ethnographic accounts are likely to be published soon in this series. In addition, the museum has also published a number of books on areas such as rock art, family systems, tribal identity, etc. The Museum of Mankind also needs to be complimented for its collection of exhibits from different tribal areas and the short write-ups on them. Other museums of anthropology need to emulate this example.

In his survey report, Vidyarthi (1972: 104) was concerned about the duplication of researches in the sense that different scholars from different organizations in the region tend to study the same communities while a number of other communities remain unstudied and unreported. Sachchidananda (1985: 102) also noted that 'There have been a number of replicative studies. These do not promise any innovative thinking.' It has been noticed that those states that which do not have anthropology departments lag behind in tribal studies, whereas those that do tend to study the same communities again and again. There is no harm in focussing