# 14

# Ombudsman in India

### Rajni Ranjan Jha

he institution of Ombudsman has become a standard part of the democratic system in many developed countries of the world. It is a mechanism of grievance redressal available to the people against the functioning/ actions of those in the government service. Geofrey Sawer has tried to trace the origin of this institution to the offices of Censor and Tribune of the ancient Roman Republic, but for all practical purposes the roots of Ombudsman office in modern times may be traced to the 1809 constitution of Sweden. Etymologically, the Swedish word 'Ombud' refers to a person who acts as a spokesman or representative of another person. In Swedish public law, however, Ombudsman means an appointee of the Parliament of Sweden for the supervision of the administration.<sup>1</sup> After the idea became popular in Sweden and other Scandinavian countries, any complaint handling mechanism in some countries began to be given the name of Ombudsman.<sup>2</sup> As a result, the committee of the International Bar Association formulated a standard definition of the term Ombudsman in 1974 which says:

'An office provided for by the constitution or by action of the legislature or parliament and headed by an independent, high level public official who is responsible to the legislature or parliament, who receives, complaints from aggrieved persons against government agencies, officials, and employees or who acts on his own motion, and who has the power to investigate, recommend corrective actions, and issue reports.'<sup>3</sup>

# ☐ MECHANISMS OF GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL

Ombudsman is viewed as an improvement upon the existing system of grievance-redressal. Traditionally, the grievance-redressal is available to an individual in various forms, such as: departmental self-control, administrative tribunals, legislative remedy provided through the members of the House by asking questions on the floor of the House, for example the adjournment

motion, the system of ministerial accountability, etc. For one reason or the other, these methods proved inadequate to meet the requirements of individual complainants. Though the traditional function of legislature since long has been the redressal of grievances, as a body, it is not suitable for paying due attention to innumerable number of small grievances of people.<sup>4</sup>

The Ombudsman is also preferred to the judicial remedy, because court procedure is usually taxing, time-consuming, expensive, tension-creating, protracted and slow-moving. One of the important features of the judicial procedure is that the initiative must come from one of the concerned. The court until PIL, since the early-1980s, had no *suo motu* jurisdiction to initiate investigation into any matter on its own. For a vast majority of people, especially in a third world country, like India, seeking remedy through courts is a choice of despair.

Further, the judicial methods have not been modelled in such a manner that these can effectively tackle the grievances of the people arising as a result of day-to-day contact with government machinery. Besides, in some cases, people have a grievance which cannot be redressed through the proper application of law only. The complainant may be actually interested only in the proper accommodation of his interest and not in getting a remedy in strictly legal terms. In fact, he seeks a mediator who can negotiate and settle a satisfactory remedy for him.'

Owing to the above deficiencies of the traditional system of grievanceredressal, the Ombudsman has emerged as an alternative institution. It answers the main problem before the modern administrative system, that is, how to provide the citizens with an alternative institution within the democratic framework which enjoys their confidence and to which he can have easy access for the redressal of his grievances. It is also equally important to ensure that the review of administrative action by the said institution is cheap, quick, thorough, and impartial.<sup>5</sup>

#### **Salient Features of Ombudsman**

Ever since its emergence in Sweden, the office of the Ombudsman has been so closely associated with the parliament that it has been regarded as an extended "arm of legislature, though an appointee of parliament, the Ombudsman enjoys independence from the legislature itself."<sup>6</sup> In some countries, like Britain and some provinces of Canada, there are designated committees of the House to coordinate and assist in the functioning of the Ombudsman. The Ombudsman is not only independent of the legislature, but of the executive wing of the government as well. Independence and autonomy in functioning is the most striking element of the system. The apt remark of Bernard Frank that the Ombudsman must be free from any control by any officer and, if he is subject to supervision, then whatever he may be, he is not an Ombudsman very well assesses the significance of independence guaranteed to this institution.<sup>7</sup>

#### **Objectivity**

Apart from independence, objectivity is another hallmark of the Ombudsman system. The institution is primarily based on the principle of impartial investigation by an authority entirely independent of the administration. To be successful, therefore, an Ombudsman must continue to operate independently and with objectivity, competence, efficiency, and fairness.

The Ombudsman has the authority to criticize and expose all agencies, officials, and public employees. Normally, he is not empowered to criticize courts and their personnel, legislative bodies and their personnel and the chief executive and his personal staff.<sup>8</sup>At the same time, he has the freedom of investigating complaints relating to governmental action or inaction.

#### *Suo motu* **Power**

A very important and unique element of the Ombudsman system is the *suo motu* power enjoyed by most Ombudsmen in various countries of the world. Under this, the Ombudsman has the authority to act on his own initiative, reopen and undecided case and pursue it to the end. He may start investigation on the basis of reports gathered through various communication agencies, like newspapers, radio, television, etc. For initiating investigation the Ombudsman does not need to be approached by the concerned parties. However, this important power is not available to the Ombudsman in Britain and France.

#### **Informal Procedure**

The procedure of investigation conducted by an Ombudsman is quite informal in nature. It is expeditious and inexpensive as well. Generally, he is empowered to call for information from any quarters and has the authority to inspect almost all government documents and files.<sup>9</sup> Thus, Ombudsman ensures that all the necessary facts have been placed before it in connection with a case under investigation.

#### **Ombudsman and Courts**

The difference between the Ombudsman, on the one hand, and the courts and administrative tribunals, on the other, needs to be understood and highlighted. Apart from *suo motu* power of the Ombudsman, no counsels for presenting the point of view of a complainant are required in the Ombudsman institution. Nothing of the sort of court-like trial takes place in the office of Ombudsman. Many matters of maladministration, such as receiving no reply to an application, leisureliness in replying to mail, tardiness or bias in making a decision, not giving sufficient information on a decision, etc., are such matters that are generally not subject to review by courts or are not serious enough to warrant the high cost of the court review are usually dealt with by the Ombudsman.<sup>10</sup>

#### **Poor Man's Tribune**

The investigation by Ombudsman is not only informal, but also inexpensive. The procedure of complaints, at least in a majority of places where the office functions, involves no cost to the complainant.<sup>11</sup>The complaints of the aggrieved persons is accepted through a letter or a toll-free telephone call in some countries.<sup>12</sup> Once a complaint is filed, the Ombudsman's machinery starts functioning in a free and quick manner. Another quality of the institution is that the Ombudsman is easily accessible. Under the Ombudsman system, justice is provided to the ordinary people virtually at no or relatively low cost. Thus, even those people who cannot afford to approach a court of law because of lack of means can think of getting their grievances redressed through the office of the Ombudsman. No wonder that the Ombudsman has sometimes been hailed as a "poor man's tribune." Justice through Ombudsman is, thus, cheap, quick, and virtually free of botheration and risk.

#### **Power to Recommend**

Except for Sweden and Finland, the Ombudsman in most of the other countries has only power to recommend, report, and suggest.<sup>13</sup> He has no power to enforce his decisions. His function is essentially to persuade and not to command. He tries to seek solution of a problem through a process of investigation and conciliation. His authority and influence come from the fact that he is appointed by, and has the authority to report to one of the main organs of the state, usually the Parliament or to the President.<sup>14</sup> After making the report to the concerned authority, he makes his report public.<sup>15</sup> Someone has rightly pointed out that persuasion and publicity are the chief weapons through which the Ombudsman works. Commenting upon the question of providing enforcement power to the Ombudsman, Guy Powles, the former Chief Ombudsman of New Zealand, once remarked, "To give him such (enforcement power) would be to depart from the peculiar and valuable characteristics of the institution."<sup>16</sup>

#### **Confidentiality**

Maintaining confidentiality is one of the most important aspects in the entire functioning of the Ombudsman. The name of neither the complainant nor the official complained against is disclosed either during or after investigation. It creates confidence among both the parties concerned and helps, in many cases, in arriving at a negotiated settlement. Confidentiality also rules out the possibility of repraisal, which, in very many cases, prevents people from approaching such institutions for grievance-redressal.

In any discussion on Ombudsman, a fact worth taking note of is that he deals with only minor administrative matters and not with questions concerning policy decisions which fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the legislature and executive in state.<sup>17</sup> The Ombudsman not only functions as a watch-dog of the people's interest and well-being, but his very presence goes to augment the official functioning; it injects a double dose of care and vigilance into the public dealing of administration. It, thus, has "tonic effect" on the administration.

The Ombudsman has been created to observe, to investigate, to criticize the functioning of the government and, if need be, to negotiate a solution for the aggrieved complainant. It has been observed that his attitude is sympathetic towards persons perplexed by life and victimized by officialdom. Walter Gellhorn rightly maintains that the "Ombudsman is, as it were, lithe Auditor-General of human relations accounts."<sup>18</sup>He is citizen's defender. Others regard his role as that of an "administrative doctor,"<sup>19</sup> who treats complaints arising from the omissions and commissions of the excessive bureaucracy in the public sector.

#### **Ombudsman in India**

The idea of Ombudsman attracted the attention of political leaders, administrators, social scientists, journalists, and jurists in India in a serious manner in the early-sixties of this century, more precisely, after the publication on the report of "justice," the British section of the International Commission of Jurists in England. This report was known as Wyatt report. The institution of Ombudsman in India recommended, in 1962, by the Committee on Ombudsman of the third All India Law Conference, New Delhi, was discussed at the third All India Law Ministers' Conference, and, also at Madras Bar Association, Madras, in October 1963. Making a convocation address at the Indian Institute of Public Administration, in New Delhi, on 15th July, 1963, the then Chief Justice of India, Justice P.B. Gajendragadkar, lent his powerful support to the cause of an Ombudsman for India on the ground that the confidence of the public is the main asset to a public administration and that the establishment of such an institution would create a sense of confidence in the people that their grievances would be looked into.<sup>20</sup>

The question of having an Ombudsman for India was for the first time raised in the parliament on 3rd April 1963 by L.M. Singhvi, and an eminent jurist and later India's High Commissioner in the U.K.*,* while participating in a debate in the Lok Sabha on the demands for the grants of the Ministry of Law. In the meantime, the Government of Rajasthan appointed an eight-member committee under the chairmanship of H.C. Mathur to suggest administrative reforms. In its reports submitted to the government, sometime in September 1963, the Committee recommended the appointment of an Ombudsman, or a Commissioner to enquire into complaints against high officials, including Ministers of State.<sup>21</sup> Sometime later, while addressing the All India Congress Committee at Jaipur on 3rd November 1963, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru stated that he was seized seriously of the problem of combating corruption in administration. Further, he said that "the office fascinated him since the office had the overall authority to deal with charges even against the Prime Minister and commanded everybody's respect and confidence. Nevertheless, he felt that in a big country, like India, the system might not provide the right solution."<sup>22</sup>

Meanwhile, a parliamentary committee on the Prevention of Corruption headed by K. Santhanam was constituted in 1962 "to review the problem of corruption and make suggestions." On the recommendation of this committee, the Government of India established the office of the vigilance commissioner at the Central level to deal expeditiously with cases of corruption in the Central and All India Services. But the Vigilance Commission was deficient on two counts. First, the cases of corruption concerning public men but debarred from its jurisdiction. Secondly, it was constituted to look into alleged cases of corruption only. Thus, the matter concerning public grievances and that of corruption at the political level could not be looked into by it.

It was in 1966, that the Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) of the Government of India in its interim report under the chairmanship of Morarji Desai favoured the idea of setting up the Ombudsman to deal with grievances as well as corruption.<sup>23</sup> It needs specific mention here as to why in India the Ombudsman was assigned the twin functions of dealing with the grievances of the people arising out of maladministration and fighting corruption at administrative and political levels. And here also, more emphasis was laid on the corruption-fighting role of the Ombudsman. It was, in a few words, the result of the existing social and political conditions in which serious concern was being shown from various quarters regarding the growing evil of corruption and need to check it.<sup>24</sup> This feeling has been found to be well-reflected during the debates of Lok Sabha in India, wherein member after member laid primary emphasis on the corruption-fighting role of the Ombudsman in India and the grievance-redressal aspect was, thus, given a secondary emphasis. Thus, not only that a peculiar feature of fighting corruption was added to the Ombudsman system in India, it also made the institution strikingly different from its European counterparts.

#### **Lokpal Legislations**

The ARC also submitted a draft bill, the Lokpal Bill 1966, for the consideration of the Government of India. It was on 9 May 1968, the Government of India introduced the Lokpal and Lokayukta Bill in the Lok Sabha. Though modelled on the Lokpal Bill 1966, the 1968 Bill made a major departure in the sense that whereas the 1966 Bill talked of one comprehensive scheme covering both the central and the state administration, the 1968 Bill confined itself to Central administration along with the Union Territories and left the states completely out of its purview. Perhaps this change was made due to changed political environment in the country after the fourth general election in 1967 in which Congress had lost power in many states. The Bill, after being referred to the Joint Select Committee (JSC) of both the Houses, was passed by the Lok Sabha in August 1969. While awaiting its consideration by the Rajya Sabha, the Bill evidently became one of the legislative casualties of the Congress split in 1969. Later on, it lapsed due to the subsequent dissolution of the Lok Sabha in December 1970.

Meanwhile, the ARC in its final report on the problem, in 1970, again emphasized the importance and the need for setting up the offices of the Lokpal and the Lokayukta. Containing certain modifications, a Bill with identical title was again introduced in August 1971, but this also lapsed with the dissolution of the fifth Lok Sabha on 18th January 1977.<sup>25</sup> A Lokpal Bill was again introduced by the first non-Congress (Janata government at the federal level in July, 1977). A typical product of the aftermath of the Emergency, this Bill was instituted to combat the problem posed by corruption at higher political levels. It proposed to alter the scheme of the Lokpal from the 1971 Bill. The fate of the Lokpal Bill 1977 was no better than the earlier Bills. Before it could be passed by the Lok Sabha, the House was dissolved on 22nd August 1979, and the Bill lapsed as a result of it. During the 1980- 84 there was virtually no talk of establishing the office of the Lokpal at the federal level. As a result of renewed interest in the Ombudsman institution during the Prime Ministership of Rajiv Gandhi, the Lokpal Bill 1985 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 26th August 1985. Once again, the Bill was referred to the JSC. After 40 months of consideration and constitution, the government withdrew the Bill in the first week of September 1988, ostensibly due to lack of consensus on some important provisions of the Bill. Other reasons for not proceeding with the Bill were, first, the passing of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; and second, the setting up of a Directorate of Public Grievances in April, 1988, headed by an official of the level of Secretary.<sup>26</sup> In view of the above, the government felt "the need to re-examine the entire issue relating to the establishment of Lokpal, his powers, and jurisdiction." In 1989, the National Front government, headed by V.P. Singh, introduced the Lokpal Bill which also lapsed due to the defeat of the government on the floor of the Lok Sabha. During the term of P.V. Narasimha Rao, despite several pressures from the opposition, no Lokpal Bill was introduced. Only at the far end of the five-year term the Prime Minister gave assurance in the Rajya Sabha to introduce a bill to this effect, but nothing concrete came out of it.<sup>27</sup>

#### **Recent Interest**

In recent years, a lot of interest has been generated in the institution of Lokpal, primarily because the Ombudsman institution is viewed as a strong institutional bulwark against the hydra-headed monster of corruption in the country. With more and more disclosures in recent months of *hawala,* scams, scandals, and other corrupt practices adopted by the politicians and bureaucrats the case of a federal Ombudsman is steadily getting strengthened. The proof of this lies in the fact that almost all national political parties in their election manifestoes for 1996 parliamentary election promised to set up the institutions of Ombudsman at federal level. Both the short-lived Atal Bihari Vajpayee government and the minority coalition government of the United Front headed by H.D. Deve Gowda pledged to institute the office of the Lokpal. Thus, having a Lokpal at the federal level is no longer a debatable point. What, however, is debatable is how genuine and sincere politicians are about implementing the idea.

#### **Lokpal: Features**

An overview of the various Lokpal legislations brings out the salient features of the Ombudsman institution in India and spells out its main provisions. The main features of the institution may be summarized as follows:

- 1. The status of Lokpal should be compared with the highest judicial functionary in the country.
- 2. He should be impartial, independent, non-controversial, and nonpolitical so as to gain the confidence of all concerned.
- 3. He should be empowered to investigate into matters of alleged injustice, corruption, and favouritism indulged in by high functionaries.
- 4. He has the power to call for government documents providing information required in a case in hand from all concerned.
- 5. He cannot be easily removed by the government.
- 6. He has to maintain confidentiality in functioning and secrecy of information.
- 7. He has the powers of a court in a limited sense.
- 8. He should be approached directly by the people.
- 9. He has to annually present to parliament consolidated report about his functioning.
- 10. The institution is recommendatory in character.<sup>28</sup>

Having discussed the main features of the proposed federal Ombudsman in India, an attempt has been made to critically examine the main provision of the various Lokpal legislations in brief.

#### **Appointment and Tenure**

The Lokpal is to be appointed by the President of India in consultation with other important functionaries, like the Chief Justice of India. Consultation with the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha was provided for in 1968 and 1971 Bills, but was later on dropped in subsequent Bills of 1977, 1985, and 1989 to be substituted by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and Chairman of Rajya Sabha. The earlier Bills did not prescribe any qualification for the Lokpal. That only a judge of the Supreme Court could be appointed to this position was prescribed in the 1985 and 1989 Bills. That the Lokpal is to hold office for a term of five years has been provided in all the Bills. The Bill of 1989 provided for a three-member Lokpal, one of them being designated as the chairman.

In order to discharge his responsibilities without fear or favour, the Lokpal has been debarred from becoming the Members of Parliament or Legislative Assembly; hold any office of trust or profit or carryon any business; could not be connected with any political party. He was ineligible for reappointment. He could be removed from the office by the President only on the grounds of misbehaviour or incapacity. The procedure for removal was the same as the one provided for the judges of the Supreme Court or a High Court.

#### **Jurisdiction**

The jurisdiction of the Lokpal has been perhaps the most controversial aspect in the whole debate on the Ombudsman system at federal level in India. As stated earlier, the ARC had suggested one comprehensive scheme covering both the Central and state administration. But, the Lokpal Bills introduced in the parliament from time to time related to Central administration only. The 1968 and 1971 Bills authorized the Lokpal to investigate any action taken by or with the approval of a minister (other than the Prime Minister) or a Secretary or any other public servant belonging to that class into alleged complaints of grievance or an allegation.

A grievance was claim by a person that he sustained injustice or undue hardship in consequence of "maladministration". Maladministration was defined as action taken in exercise of administrative function in any case.

- 1. Where such action or administrative procedure or practice governing such action was unreasonable, unjust, oppressive or improperly discriminatory; or
- 2. Where there had been negligence or undue delay in taking such action or the administrative procedure or practice governing such action involved undue delay.

An 'allegation' in relation to a public servant meant any affirmation that such public servant:

- 1. had abused his position as such to obtain any gain or favour to himself or to any other person or to cause undue harm or hardship to any other person;
- 2. was actuated in the discharge of his functions as such public servant by personal interest or improper corrupt motive;
- 3. was guilty of corruption or lack of integrity in his capacity as such public servant.

It may be understood that the term allegation was a euphemism for corruption which included political corruption as well. In 'allegation' an element of guilt is involved, whereas in 'maladministration' an element of administrative negligence is implied.

The Lokpal Bill, 1977, restricted the jurisdiction of the Lokpal to enquire into complaints of misconduct, again a euphemism for corruption, by union ministers (the Prime Minister not excluded), Members of Parliament and Chief Ministers, etc. The Bill excluded the civil servants from its purview, but included Members of Parliament.

The Lokpal Bill of 1985 excluded the Prime Minister and the Members of Parliament from its jurisdiction. It was applicable only to a small group of public functionaries which covered ministers, Ministers of State, Deputy Ministers, and parliamentary secretaries of the union. Similar to the Bill of 1985, the Bill of 1989 also covered only public functionaries. Grievances were excluded in both the Bills. The Bill of 1989, however, included the Prime Minister. Unlike the earlier Bill, the Lokpal Bills of 1985 and 1989 did not make any provision for *suo moto* investigations by the Lokpal.

#### **Exemptions**

There were certain matters which, however, were not subject to investigation by the Lokpal. They were, action taken in a matter affecting the relations or dealings between the Government of India and a foreign government or any international organization of governments; action taken under the Extradition Act, 1962, or the Foreigners Act, 1946; action taken for the purpose of investigating a crime or protection of the security of the state; action taken in the exercise of a court of law; action taken in matters arising out of a commercial contract with some exceptions; action relating to service matters; grant of honours and awards; exercise of discretion being absent to such an extent that no discretion was exercised at all; the entire judicial establishment was also outside the scope of enquiry by the Lokpal. The 1985 and 1989 Bills excluded any matter if the same had already been referred under Commissions of Enquiry Act, 1952, and if the Lokpal had any bias or the case was referred to him after expiry of five years from the date on which the offence was alleged to have been committed.

#### **Provisions Regarding Complaints**

In case of grievances only the person aggrieved had the right to move to the Lokpal, whereas in the case of allegations, any person, other than a public servant, could seek the help of the Lokpal. Thus, public servants were expressly prohibited from seeking redressal from the Lokpal organization. The complaints had to be lodged on a prescribed form and to be accompanied by such affidavits and fees as may be prescribed by rules under the different Bills. The Bills of 1977, 1985, and 1989 provided for `1,000 as a fee for registering complaints. This was done, perhaps, to discourage frivolous, false, and vexatious complaints.

#### **Maintaining Confidentiality**

The procedure for conducting an investigation by the Lokpal or the Lokayukta was to be such as was unexceptionable as well as appropriate. The identity of the complainant and the identity of the public servant affected by the investigation was not to be disclosed to the press or the public before, during, or after the investigation.

#### **Powers**

As per the provisions of the Bills, the Lokpal could require any public servant or any person who, in their opinion, was able to furnish information or produce documents relevant to the investigation to furnish any such information or produce any such document. Any proceeding before the Lokpal was deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of Section 193 of the Indian Penal Code. The Lokpal was given powers to punish for contempt for showing willful disrespect to him. The Lokpal was required to submit a consolidated annual report which was required to be laid before the Parliament along with an explanatory memorandum. In the 1985 and 1989 Bills, the time limit of 'not later than 90 days' was stipulated for laying of the reports before each House of Parliament. Again, in the 1985 and 1989 Bills, the Lokpal was empowered to award punishment up to 3 years or fine up to `50,000 to anyone for making false complaints or giving false information before the Lokpal.

The Bills provided that if after the investigation, the Lokpal was satisfied that the action complained against resulted in injustice to the complainant or the allegations were substantiated as the case may be, he, by a report in writing, could recommend to the competent authority concerned the suitable course of action to be taken in such manner and within such time as may be specified in the report. Lokpal also had the power to issue special report if he was not satisfied with the action taken by the competent authority. But this provision was dropped in the 1989 Bill.

The various Lokpal Bills also provided for provisions relating to the conferment of additional functions to the Lokpal, his powers to delegate functions, etc.

#### **Basic Issues**

An analysis of the five abortive Lokpal Bills brings into sharper focus some of the basic issues which deserve serious consideration. These are, whether the Prime Minister should be included within the jurisdiction of the Lokpal? What should be the area of enquiry of the Lokpal? Should it include either the cases of grievances and allegations, or only either of the two?

Should we have a single or a multimember Lokpal? Should the Lokpal have the power of *suo motu* investigation of a case? Should there be a Parliamentary Select Committee to supervise and coordinate the activities of the Lokpal? In our view, the Prime Minister's office should be included within the purview of the Lokpal, especially in view of the charges of corruption levelled in recent years against some of the Prime Ministers. That both grievances and corruption cases should come under his jurisdiction. Looking into the size of the country and by putting both grievance and allegation cases under his charge our preference would be for a multi-member body of the Lokpal consisting of three persons. One of them being designated the Chief Lokpal to coordinate the activities in order to ensure uniformity in decision. All important cases, particularly those of allegations should be decided by the body as a whole.

#### **Other Ombudsmen**

The establishment of the federal Ombudsman still remains only a theoretical proposition. In the meanwhile, the first press Ombudsman in the person of former Chief Justice of India, Justice P.N. Bhagwati, was appointed as the Ombudsman of *The Times of India* on 7th January 1989, to create a forum for speedy solutions to readers' complaints and to ensure objectivity, accuracy, balance, and fairness in reporting and comments. As Justice Bhagwati himself has remarked, "it will not cover comment and editorializing unless it was unfair."<sup>29</sup> Any matter related to the financial transaction, such as claims arising out of financial damages has been kept outside the purview of the press Ombudsman.<sup>30</sup>

Some of the nationalized banks have also appointed their Ombudsmen. In addition, there is a growing demand 'to appoint Ombudsmen for public utility services and public sector undertakings to make them accountable to the people.'

#### **Lokayukta in States**

The Ombudsman functioning at the state level is known as Lokayukta.<sup>31</sup> While the federal-level Lokpal proposals were lapsing due to one reason or the other, many states, in the meanwhile, influenced by these proposals and the draft bill of the ARC, went ahead with their plans to enact legislations for establishing the office of the Lokayukta and Up-Lokayukta. The office of the Lokayukta now exists in Maharashtra (1971), Bihar (1973), Rajasthan (1973), Uttar Pradesh (1975),<sup>32</sup> Madhya Pradesh (1981), Andhra Pradesh (1983), Himachal Pradesh (1983), Karnataka (1985), Assam (1986), Gujarat (1986), and Punjab (1995). The Delhi government has passed Delhi Lokayukta and Up-Lokayukta Bill (1995) which is pending before the Central government for approval. The Kerala legislation, in our view, stands on a different footing. It can't be equated with Lokayukta legislation. The state of Orissa was the first to enact legislation in 1970, and also the first state to abolish the institution in 1993.

A study of the Lokayukta legislations brings out some very interesting facts and figures. It reflects that there is no uniformity in Lokayukta legislations. It also makes it clear that there are wide variations in respect of the qualifications, jurisdiction, and powers of the different Lokayukta and Up-Lokayuktas. As far as the qualifications of the Lokayukta is concerned, states, like Maharashtra, Bihar, and Rajasthan have not prescribed any specific qualification for the Lokayukta. On the other hand, states, like Anhdra Pradesh (AP), Madhya Pradesh (MP), Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, and Uttar Pradesh specifically prescribe judicial background for Lokayukta. Similarly, the term of the Lokayukta varies from 3-6 years, but most of the state legislations stick to a 5 year term. States, like AP, Gujarat, MP and UP provide for security-money ranging from `1000-2500 as a necessary precondition for investigation by Lokayukta into cases of allegations/corruption. All states, however, do insist on filing of affidavits by the complainants.

Section 3(1) of the Lokayukta Acts in the states of Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Bihar, UP, HP and Assam provide for similar method of appointment, whereby the Lokayukta is to be appointed by the Governor of the state in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Leader of the Opposition in the Assembly of the concerned state. In Karnataka, in addition to the above functionaries, the Presiding Officers and Leaders of Opposition in Karnataka legislatures are also to be consulted by the Governor. In AP, there is no provision of consultation with the Leader of the Opposition in the Assembly.

In some states, controversies regarding the appointment of the Lokayukta have also taken place, thereby underlying the need to protect the office from political controversies. The states are, Bihar, in 1973, during the appointment of the first Lokayukta of the state, S.V. Sohoni; AP in 1988, during the abortive attempt to appoint Justice R.N. Aggarwal as the second Lokayukta of the state; both the first and second Lokpal (as the institution was legally known) of Orissa, in 1983 and 1989, and that of Justice P.D. Kudal in Rajasthan in 1990.

There is a complete lack of uniformity on the question of covering authorities within the jurisdiction of the Lokayukta and Up-Lokayukta. The Chief Minister of the state has been covered under the Lokayukta legislation in the states of MP, HP, Karnataka, and Gujarat only. Similarly, legislators have been covered under HP, UP, AP, Assam, and Gujarat legislations. Ministers and high-ranking civil servants have been covered under all Acts. Most of the Acts include the authorities of local bodies, corporations established and owned or controlled by states, government companies, and societies, etc.

With an exception to the Lokayukta of Assam, HP and UP, all the other Lokayuktas have been given with *suo motu* power to initiate any investigation.

The Lokayukta in Maharashtra, Bihar, UP, Karnataka, and Assam have the powers to look into cases of both grievances and allegations concerning the actions of different functionaries placed under their jurisdiction. However, the Lokayukta in UP, MP, HP and Rajasthan can look into only against complaints concerning allegations. Like provisions in the Lokpal Bills, the Lokayukta legislations have also placed certain matters outside the jurisdiction of the Lokayukta.

#### **Working Experience**

The experience gained out of the functioning of the Lokayukta institution shows that a large number of complaints had to be rejected by the Lokayukta for want of jurisdiction, and also, because many of them were anonymous, pseudonymous, or trivial in nature. However, the number of such rejected cases has been going down in every year.

It has been observed that those departments that are intimately associated with public dealings, *e.g.,* public works, health, irrigation, civil supplies, municipalities, cooperative societies, etc., attracted large number of complaints in the office of the Lokayukta.

In some states, like Bihar, Orissa, and Maharashtra when the Lokayukta tried to investigate into the allegation cases against ministers and highranking civil servants, his experiences were far from happy, and, at times, frustrating also.

The working experience shows that delay, and at times inordinate delay in sending requisitioned papers by the government departments constituted the single and most irritating factor in conducting investigation by Lokayukta. The average delay ranged from 2-6 years. The situation became worse if it concerned a minister.

The cooperation from the complainants had also often been found to be very inadequate, except in the case of AP. Even when repeatedly asked to do so by the Lokayukta office, in a substantial number of cases, the complainants preferred not to comply and maintained silence.

The working also shows that the Lokayukta organization took up numerous and varied type of cases in different states, in which relief could be granted to the complainants. One such important area belonged to cases relating to non-payment of pension and other retirement benefits to government employees. The intervention of Lokayukta brought relief to very humble and low-paid public servants, like village school teachers, constables, peons, clerks, and various categories of retired non-gazetted public servants who had failed to get their claims settled even after running from pillar to post.

The functioning of the Lokayukta in checking corruption has not been very effective. But for that, the Lokayukta organization alone cannot be held solely responsible. Apart from structural and other deficiencies, a fact which needs to be stressed repeatedly while assessing the functioning of the Lokayukta is the socio-cultural milieu in which the Lokayukta organization has to function.

# ❑❑ **Conclusion**

The Ombudsman idea has continued to attract the attention in India for the past several decades. From time to time, it has occupied the centre stage of the national political agenda, but due to a number of factors and forces operating at the national level an Ombudsman at the federal level remained a dream until 2014. With more and more disclosures of political corruption in recent years and months, once again, the establishment of the Lokpal went on the top of the agenda of all the political parties.

The experience of the Lokayukta organization functioning at the level of states has not been similar in all the states. Nor are the Lokayukta legislations alike. The success of the Lokayukta has been at the lower levels of the administration and in remedying the grievances of the people and petty government servants. The organization has not been very effective in curbing corruption at higher levels of administration. Walter Gellhorn rightly remarks that the Ombudsman should not be seen as a "knight in shining armour" and a "possessor of a cure all." Lokayukta should not be painted as a "super-Chief Minister". He should be viewed with both his strength and weaknesses. For the Ombudsman institution to function successfully and effectively, the internal grievance-redressal and investigative mechanism of the government needs to be adequately streamlined and put under the unified command of the Ombudsman.

#### **Notes and References**

- 1. See Geoffrey Sawer, *Ombudsman,* Carlton, Melbourne University Press, 1968 (Second Edition), p. 6.
- 2. R.L. Narsimhan, "The Ombudsman Proposal: A Critique" in L.M. Singhvi (ed), *Law and Commonwealth,* Delhi, National, 1971, p. 24.
- 3. Bernard Frank, *Ombudsman Survey,* Pennsylvania, International Bar Association Ombudsman Committee, July 1975-June 30, 1975, p. 2.
- 4. See Niell Mac Dermot. "The Ombudsman Institution" in *The Review,* No. 21, International Commission of Jurists, Geneva, December 1978, p. 38.
- 5. V. Jagannadham and H.R Makhija, Citizen *Administration and Lokpal,* New Delhi, S. Chand & Co., 1969, p. 52.
- 6. Frank, n. 3, p. 133.
- 7. *Ibid.*
- 8. In Sweden and Finland, the Ombudsman enjoys the unparalleled power of criticizing the working of the courts and its personnel which includes not only procedural matters but also the decisions of the courts. See Frank Stacey, *Ombudsmen Compared,*  Oxford, Clarendon, 1978, p. 5.
- 9. Even in the case of documents relating to national security the British Ombudsman has been entitled to all information relevant to his enquiry, but the minister-in-charge may impose a restriction that he shall not disclose in his report any matters whose disclosure would, in the opinion of the minister, "be prejudicial to the safety of the state or Contrary to the public interest." See Mac Dermot, n. 4, p. 41.
- 10. G.B. Sharma, "The Office of the Ombudsman in Nova Scotia Province: A Conceptual Empirical Analysis" in *Indian Journal of Public Administration,* Vol. XXIV, No. 4. (Oct-Dec. 1978), p. 1108.
- 11. In New Zealand, initially, some fee was charged from the complainants, but it has now been abolished. In India, in the state of A.P., *U.P.,* M.P., and Gujarat some amount of security-money is required.
- 12. Like the Ombudsman in some Canadian provinces.
- 13. Mac Dermot, n. 4, p. 34.
- 14. *Ibid.,* p. 38.