# **Constituent Assembly and** Its Vision of the Future

# S.K. Chaube

he purpose of this chapter is to examine the basic concepts of the Indian constitution in their historical perspective. No other method has been found as suitable for the purpose as the study of the Indian Constituent Assembly, the mother of the Indian constitution.

The task is admittedly difficult. It involves a study of the constitutional progress as well as the political struggle of India leading to the establishment of the Constituent Assembly and also its problems. The mind and working of the Assembly will be better understood in this setting than through any mechanical analysis. The developments in the Indian politics, even during the prolonged working of the Constituent Assembly, form a part of this setting no less vital than the collective political and socio-economic background of the members of the Constituent Assembly. It is also to be remembered that the collection of a vast store of data from the constitutions of other countries formed the comparative background of the Indian constitution.

Until the beginning of the Second World War, British schemes for constitutional reform in India were confined to the grant of responsible government within the British Empire and under British supervision. And the major obstacle to the grant of responsible government was considered to be the so-called 'Indian problem', by which the British constitutionalists referred to the organic heterogeneity of the Indian community and the reluctance of the princes to sacrifice their rights and status. The core of the Indian problem was, however, unmistakably considered to be the Hindu-Muslim communal rivalry reflected in the Congress-League differences on the political future of India. As Reginald Coupland wrote, "of cardinal importance" was not the division between British and Indian India, but the conflict between the Congress and the Muslim League, "more strictly, the Hindu-Muslim schism which that conflict reflects."<sup>1</sup>

In his "restatement" on India, Coupland, however, admitted<sup>2</sup> that the British "had deliberately widened" the Hindu-Muslim schism. Positive encouragement to separation in the constitutional set-up indeed started with the Morley-Minto Reforms (1909) which granted separate electorates to the Indian people with the first installment of responsible government. The Montagu-Chelmsford Report considered the system as repugnant to democracy but, in view of "the promises given and renewed by secretaries of state and viceroys"<sup>3</sup> recommended its retention and even extension. The Government of India Act, 1919, gave separate electorates to Muslims, Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo-Indians, and Europeans. Among the Hindus, the non-Brahmins of Madras and Marhattas in Bombay had reservation of seats in their respective provincial legislatures. A provision was made for nomination of depressed-class Hindus to ensure them adequate representation.

The Simon Commission (1928) recommended the continuation of separate electorates for Muslims, Sikhs, Anglo-Indians, and Europeans. Reservation of seats was recommended for the depressed classes and Indian Christians (the latter had so long enjoyed separate electorate). So was recommended the abolition of the reservation for the non-Brahmins of Madras though reservation for Marhattas was allowed to stay. The Commission commented that the separate representation of the communities and special interests was "the most noticeable feature of the Indian electoral system."<sup>4</sup> The Government of India Act, 1935, extended the franchise to cover about 15 per cent of the population, but retained and further extended the system of separate electorates to a total of 18 categories.

## **The Cabinet Mission Plan**

The Coupland Plan which came after the failure of Cripps Mission directly influenced the Cabinet Mission, which came to India in March 1946 and took no time to realize that the whole constitutional problem of India boiled down to the communal question. The Cabinet Mission held a conference at Simla to bring about an understanding between the Congress and the Muslim League. Since the effort failed, the Cabinet Mission "decided that immediate arrangements should be made whereby Indians may decide the future constitution of India."<sup>5</sup>

The Cabinet Mission proposed a representation of 292 from British India exclusive of the three chief commissioners' provinces and British Baluchistan (whose total representation would be four). It rejected the expedient of universal adult suffrage as it would lead to a "wholly unacceptable delay in the formation of the new constitution" and had the constituent assembly elected by the provincial legislative assemblies which themselves had been elected under the Government of Indian Act 1935, according to which not more than 15 per cent of Indians had the right to vote.

So far as the electoral provisions were concerned the constituent assembly was, therefore, made of men who represented the relatively propertied section of Indians. The political developments in India, however, had led to an overwhelming victory of the Congress in most of the provincial legislatures in elections that took place in early 1946 and its consequent prodominance in the constituent assembly.

Following was the relative position of parties among the British Indian representatives to the Constituent Assembly, when it first met.<sup>6</sup>

Out of 296 members from British India 75 were Leaguers (all Muslim), there being five non-League Muslims. In section A, Rafi Ahmed Kidwai won a Muslim seat from UP with a Congress ticket. The other Congress Muslim (in a general seat) in section A was Asaf Ali, the member from Delhi. In section B, out of 23 Muslims three were non-Leaguers, two with Congress tickets (from NWFP—Abul Kalam Azad and Abdul Ghaffar Khan) and one Unionist (from Punjab). In section C, 35 Muslim members were Leaguers, one from Krishak Proja Party (A.K*.* Fazlul Huq, whose difference with the League was difficult to trace). Fifteen members were women, of whom three were Muslim, all Leaguers. The age of the members ranged between 25-75.

The Congress position was sound in section A with 164 seats out of a total of 190 while Muslim League had 19 seats. In section B, the League captured 19 seats, whereas 10 seats went to Congress, three each to Panthik Akali and the Unionist Party (Punjab). In section C, the League and Krishak Proja Party own 36 seats, though Assam returned a Congress majority (7:3). The Independents ranked seventh in section A and first in section B. In section C, one seat went to the Communist Party and one to the Scheduled Castes Federation.

The most significant point about the status of the constituent assembly is that it was convened not by any national provisional government, but by the British government who regarded it merely as a conference of the delegates of the major political parties in this country. This was exactly what Reginald Coupland had suggested a few years earlier, though recommending a smaller size. The restrictions were imposed on the constitution-making body obviously on the assumption that, unless guided by the British, the Indian communities would fail to arrive at any agreed formula regarding the constitution. The limitations on the powers of the constituent assembly to change the composition and procedure of work and even given its own interpretation to the clauses of the Cabinet Mission's statement could be disregarded only when complete communal harmony was reached. Until then any attempt of the parties to modify any of the provisions of the Cabinet Mission Plan was destined to be unsuccessful as the British parliament still retained the right to veto over the transfer of power. The procedure of constitution-making in India was, thus, intended to be similar to that in Canada and Australia, where notwithstanding the people's approval of the constitutions, their legal authority was sanctioned by the British parliament. The transfer of power was conditional upon the acceptability of the constitution to the League as well as the British government.

## **Scope of the Interim Government**

"While the constitution-making proceeds", declared the Cabinet Mission, "the administration of India has to be carried on. We attach the greatest importance, therefore, to the setting up at once of an interim government having the support of the major political parties."<sup>7</sup>

The scope of the interim government was only fit to carry on the administration of British India until such time as a new constitution can be brought into being.8 At the Simla conference between Cabinet Mission and the Indian leaders (5-12 May 1946), negotiations for replacing the Viceroy's Executive Council by an Interim ministry of fourteen members (six Congress nominees including a scheduled caste Hindu member, five League nominees, and three representative members of other communities to be nominated by the Viceroy) were held. The talks failed. The Congress insisted on its right to nominate two nationalist Muslims from its own quota which Jinnah rejected.

The viceroy renewed his efforts to form an interim government on 22nd July 1946, granting the Congress freedom to nominate six members (including a scheduled caste Hindu). The Muslim League would nominate its five members. Three other members (a Parsi, a Sikh, and an Anglo-Indian) would be nominated by the Viceroy. Distribution of portfolios would be decided after the parties agree to join. The viceroy was sure that such a government would enjoy the status of a dominion government with least interference by the British government.

Jinnah rejected even this offer as it was not based on Congress-League parity and as he apprehended that the Congress would not follow the "convention" of respecting minority interests in a cabinet under its dominance. On 8-10 August 1946, the Congress Working Committee accepted the offer of the interim government and evasively repeated their acceptance of the Cabinet Mission plan "in its entirety."<sup>9</sup> The Viceroy immediately requested the Congress President Jawaharlal Nehru to form the interim government. Nehru sought the cooperation of Jinnah who objected to the status of the interim government.

Amidst this situation, the personnel of the interim government were announced on 24th August. Most of the members were Congressites, three members belonged to the Sikh, the Indian Christian, and the Parsi communities. Of the Congress members, one was a scheduled caste Hindu, three were Nationalist Muslims. Two seats remained vacant. A communique said that the Viceroy's Executive Council had resigned. It also stated that five seats would be allotted to the Muslim League whenever it agreed to join the government.<sup>10</sup>

On the same day, Viceroy Wavell, in a radio broadcast, desired that the work of the constituent assembly should begin as early as possible. On 20th November, a government press note said that it had been finally decided that the preliminary meeting of the constituent assembly would be held at New Delhi on 9th December. On the same day, invitation was sent to all members of the constituent assembly to attend its session. Jinnah declined the invitation.

## **The Constituent Assembly Meets**

On 9th December 1946, the Constituent Assembly met in the constitution Hall, New Delhi, at 11 o'clock in the morning. According to the program set by the Congress Experts Committee, J.B. Kripalani, Congress President, proposed the name of Sachchidananda Sinha, the senior-most member of the Constituent Assembly, for the temporary chairmanship of the Assembly. The chairman took his seat with perfect dignity and immediately started the business. He read three congratulatory messages from aborad, gave his ruling on an election dispute concerning the member from Baluchistan and nominated Frank Anthony as his deputy. B.N. Rau read out Sinha's address. A total of 207 members presented their credentials on the same day.

On the next day, a resolution was moved by Jawaharlal Nehru, and seconded by Govind Ballabh Pant, proposing the provisional adoption of Central Legislative 'Assembly rules and standing orders' until permanent rules were framed. It was passed after some discussion. So was passed another resolution confirming the existing organization of the Constituent Assembly office pending final decision of the Assembly.

The Constituent Assembly declared its firm and solemn resolve to proclaim India as an independent sovereign republic and draw up for her future governance a constitution for a union of the territories of British India, the Indian states, and such other parts of India as were outside British India and the states as well as such other territories as were willing to be constituted into the independent sovereign India. Therein the said territories, whether with their existing boundaries or with such others as might be determined by the Constituent Assembly and, thereafter, according to the law of the constitution, would possess and retain the status of autonomous units together with residuary powers.

The sovereignty of the constitution would be derived from the people who secure justice, equality, and freedom. "Adequate safeguards shall be provided for minorities, backward and tribal areas, and depressed and other backward classes." The constitution would maintain the integrity of the territory of the republic and its sovereign rights or land, sea and air according to justice and the law of civilized nations.<sup>11</sup>

The next meeting of the Constituent Assembly was scheduled on 20th January, 1947.

When the second session of the Assembly started, the debate on the Objectives Resolution continued. Jayakar said that as the Muslim League had not so far shown any intention of joining the Constituent Assembly, it was of no use further holding up the Objectives Resolution. Nehru wound up the debate on 22nd January. He regretted the delay, but considered it justified, "because we have always balanced two factors. One, is the urgent necessity of reaching our goal, and the other, that we should reach it in proper time and with as great unanimity as possible." However, "there has been waiting enough". The Objectives Resolution was carried unanimously.<sup>12</sup>

The second session also disposed of some routine work, like setting up of the Steering Committee, Advisory Committee on Minorities, Tribal Areas and Fundamental Rights, Business Committee, and Union Powers Committee, electing Harendra Kumar Mukherjee as the Vice-President and passing the budget of the Assembly.

# **Partition**

The final refusal of the League to join the Constituent Assembly created a critical situation. On 20th February, Prime Minister Attlee, made a vital statement in the Parliament. He regretted that there were still differences among the Indian parties which were preventing the Constituent Assembly from functioning as a fully representative body, though the British government desired to hand over their responsibility to authorities established by a constitution approved by all parties in India in accordance with the Cabinet Mission's plan. "The present state of uncertainty is fraught with danger and cannot be indefinitely prolonged. His Majesty's government wish to make it clear that it is their definite intention to take the necessary steps to effect the transference of power to responsible Indian hands by a date not later than June 1948." But, if it should appear that such a constitution would not have been worked out by a fully representative assembly before that time, the British government would have to consider, "to whom the power of the Central government in British India should be handed over, on the due date, whether as a whole to some form of Central government for British India", or in such other way as may seem most reasonable and in the best interests of the Indian people13.

Although the final transfer of authority might not take place until June 1948, preparatory measures must be taken in hand in advance. As the first of such measures, Attlee announced the termination of the war-time appointment of Wavell and the appointment of Mountbatten who will be entrusted with the task of transferring to Indian hands responsibility for the Government of India.

Mountbatten was only too eager to arrive at a prompt solution of the "Indian problem", "within six weeks of his arrival and after constant and ceaseless effort, Lord Mountbatten had produced a plan which marked the first stage towards the transfer of power."<sup>14</sup>

After detailed and complete consultation with the Indian political leaders, on 3rd June 1947,<sup>15</sup>Mountbatten declared that British government was formulating the new plan, though it had no intention of attempting to frame any ultimate constitution for India which was "a matter for the Indians themselves". The plan did not preclude "negotiations between communities for a United India". Yet, "any constitution made by this (Constituent) Assembly cannot apply to those parts of the country which are unwilling to accept it." Partition was, therefore, inevitable by implication, though negotiations for a united India was not ruled out.

In order to ascertain the wishes of the people of Bengal and the Punjab, the plan provided that the representatives of the Muslim-majority districts and the representatives of the other districts to the provincial legislative assemblies would sit separately to decide whether the provinces would be partitioned. If even one part of a particular provincial legislature decided in favour of partition, the province would be partitioned. If both parts agreed to remain united, they would decide to which constituent assembly they would belong. The legislative assemblies of Sindh and British Baluchistan would also, at special meetings, decide which constituent assembly they would join. The British government considered the position of NWFP as "exceptional". "Two of the three representatives of this province are already participating in the existing Constituent Assembly. But, it is clear, in view of its geographical situation and other considerations that if the whole or any part of the Punjab decides not to join the existing Constituent Assembly, it will be necessary to give the North-West Frontier Province an opportunity to reconsider its position." So, there would be a referendum in that province.

In the predominantly non-Muslim province of Assam, the Sylhet district had a majority of Muslims. In case of a decision for partition of Bengal, Sylhet would get a referendum to choose whether it would or would not join the Muslim part of Bengal. If Sylhet, along with the contiguous Muslim majority areas of adjoining districts were to join "Eastern Bengal", the rest of Assam would continue in the Constituent Assembly.

| Province        | General | Muslim | Sikh | Total |
|-----------------|---------|--------|------|-------|
| Sylhet district | 1       | 2      | a    | 3     |
| West Bengal     | 15      | 4      | a    | 19    |
| East Bengal     | 12      | 29     | a    | 41    |
| West Punjab     | 3       | 12     | 2    | 17    |
| East Punjab     | 6       | 4      | 2    | 12    |

Consequent upon the possible partition, the number of representatives to which each area would be entitled was as follows:

Following the mandates given to them, the representatives of the various areas would either join the existing Constituent Assembly or form a new constituent assembly. British policy in respect of the Indian states remained as under the Cabinet Mission's plan. It was proposed to introduce legislation shortly to implement the transfer of power on the basis of dominion status, the dominion(s) having the right to opt out of the Commonwealth.

The most important change introduced on the 3rd June plan in the working of the Constituent Assembly was the abolition of the communal veto. So far as the communal question was concerned, the Constituent Assembly of India could work independently. The Constituent Assembly was, thus, promoted to the status of a really free body, though its authority would still apply to the states only to the extent of their negotiated acceptance of it. Transfer of power remained subject to an agreement between the British government and the successor authority or authorities on matters arising out of the transfer of power.

Acceptance of the 3rd June declaration involved the partition of the country, consequent upon the splitting up of the Constituent Assembly into two parts. Sindh, Baluchistan, and after referendum on 20th July 1947 which was boycotted by the Khudai Khidmatgar Party, the North-West Frontier Province went wholly to Pakistan. The Punjab, Bengal, and Assam (after a referendum in Sylhet on 14th July 1947) were divided. This brought down (East) Punjab's representation to the Indian Constituent Assembly to 6 general, 4 Muslim, and 2 Sikh and (West) Bengal's representation to 15 general and 4 Muslim. On 22nd July 1947, by a government press note, the Governor General fixed the representation of Assam minus Sylhet (a part of which remained with Assam) at 6 general and 2 Muslim.

New elections took place in West Bengal, East Punjab and Assam. All general seats in West Bengal and Assam went to the Congress and some sitting members were dropped. The only communist member, Somnath Lahiri, lost his seat. B.R. Ambedkar returned from Bombay, with a Congress ticket in the vacancy caused by the resignation of Jayakar. All Muslim seats of Bengal went to the League. In East Punjab, all general seats and one Sikh seat went to the Congress. The other Sikh seat went to the Akali Party. The four Muslim seats went to the League. In the new house, the total strength of British Indian representatives came down to 229.

# **Transfer of Power**

The Indian Independence Bill was introduced in the British Parliament on 4th July 1947 in order to create two "independent dominions", making a technical departure from the Statute of Westminster, which had merely provision for dominions. The Act defined the Indian Constituent Assembly as the Constituent Assembly, "the first sitting whereof was held on 9th December 1946", modified by the exclusion of the members representing the territories due to be included in Pakistan.

Section 6, sub-section 1 of the Act provided that, "The legislature of each of the new dominions shall have full power to make laws for that dominion, including laws having extra territorial operation." This would necessarily imply that no law and no provision of any law made by the legislature of either of the new dominions would be void or inoperative on the ground of its repugnance to the law of England, or to the provisions of any Act of the British Parliament, including the Indian Independence Act itself, or to any order, rule or regulation made under any such act. The powers of the dominion legislatures would include the "power to repeal or amend any such act, order, rule or regulation insofar as it is part of the law of the dominion" (Section 6, Sub-section 2).

Sub-section 3 of Section 6 gave unlimited power of assent to the Governor-General "in His Majesty's name to any law of the legislature of that dominion." Disallowance by His Majesty or reservation for His Majesty's signification of a law would no longer apply in case of the two dominions. It was in this respect that the Indian Independence Act was a definite improvement on the Statute of Westminster. No law of the British Parliament and no order-in-council passed after 15th August 1947 would be automatically operative in the dominions (Sub-sections 4 and 5).

This unlimited legislative competence of the Assembly would cover constitutional legislations for the dominions (Section 8, Sub-section 1). Subsection 2 of Section 8 provided that "except insofar as other provision was made by or in accordance with a constituent law", enacted by the Constituent Assembly of the dominion, each of the new dominions and all provinces and other parts thereof shall be governed as nearly as may be in accordance with the Government of India Act, 1935. The provisions of the 1935 Act, and the orders-in-Council, rules and other instruments made thereunder would, so far as applicable, and subject to any express provisions of the Indian Independence Act and with such omissions, additions, adaptations, and modifications as might be specified in orders of the Governor-General, have effect accordingly. This meant that, so long as Constituent Assembly did not interfere, the Governor-General-in-Council was competent to make alterations, adaptations, modifications, etc., of the Government of India Act, 1935, in order to run the administration.

According to provision (1) of the Section, these powers of the Governor-General would in no way imply the control of Parliament over the dominion legislatures. Provision (2) removed the power of Governor-General and governors to act in individual discretion. Also, provision (3) laid down that "the powers of the federal legislature or Indian legislature under that Act (i.e., Government of India Act, 1935), as in force in relation to each dominion, shall in the first instance be exercisable by the Constituent Assembly of the dominion in addition to the powers exercisable by that Assembly under Sub-section 1 of this section." The ordinary legislative authority of the dominion was, thus, also vested in the Constituent Assembly. On the whole, the total legislative functions and authorities of the successor government were vested in the Constituent Assembly.

In order to make the transfer of power "smooth" and utilize Mountbatten's services in the transition period, the Congress leadership proposed that Mountbatten would continue as the Governor-General of India for some time. They authorized the President to chalk out the programme for the Independence Day celebration. On 14th August, at 11 pm the Constituent Assembly met and decided upon the formalities of the transfer of power. As the clock struck twelve, the President and members stood up and took the pledge of service to India and its people. Then the President proposed "that it should be intimated to the Viceroy that:

- 1. The Constituent Assembly has assumed power for the governance of India, and
- 2. The Constituent Assembly of India has endorsed the recommendation that Lord Mountbatten be the Governor-General of India from 15th August 1947, and that this message be conveyed to Lord Mountbatten by the President and Pandit Nehru.<sup>16</sup>

On 15th August 1947, Mountbatten addressed the Constituent Assembly, after reading out a historic royal message of greetings to the Constituent Assembly of India.

On 20th August 1947, the President appointed a committee to consider the Indian Independence Act, the adaptations of the Government of India Act, 1935, the rules and standing orders of the Legislative Assembly, the rules and standing orders in force in the Constituent Assembly, etc., and report on the procedural matters."<sup>17</sup>

In view of the report, the House passed a resolution moved by K.M. Munshi to the effect that the Assembly's functions would be:

- 1. To continue and complete the work of constitution-making which commenced from 9th December 1946, and
- 2. To function as the dominion legislature until a legislature under the new constitution came into existence.

These changes were brought into effect by the Governor-General through the India Provisional constitution (Second Amendment) Order, passed on 6th October 1947.

# **Foundations of the Constitution**

The last and the most important act of the drama was played on 26th January 1950, when the Governor-General gave the following proclamation in the Durbal Hall of the Government House at 10.30 am.

"Whereas the people of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a sovereign democratic republic, adopted, enacted and gave to themselves on the twenty-sixth day of November 1949, in their Constituent Assembly, the constitution of India;

"And whereas it has been declared by the said constitution that India, that is Bharat, shall be a union of states comprising within the union the territories which were hitherto the governors' provinces, the Indian states and the chief commissioners' provinces;

"And whereas the, twenty-sixth day of January 1950 has been fixed for the commencement of the said constitution;

"Now, therefore it is hereby proclaimed that on and from this, the twenty-sixth day of January 1950, India, that is Bharat shall be a sovereign democratic republic, and the union and its component units, the states, shall exercise all powers and functions of government and administration in accordance with the provisions of the said constitution."<sup>18</sup>

The Constituent Assembly was partly elected by the popularly-elected provincial legislatures and partly filled by representatives of the states, about one-half of whom were the rulers' nominees and the rest elected through a greatly restricted franchise. Everywhere popular franchise was limited by property qualifications.

In India, a strong political factor had emerged by the time the Constituent Assembly was convened. That was the party system. It is in, and through the political parties that the socio-economic forces in India had crystallized. A proper characterisation of the Indian Constituent Assembly, therefore, can be made not by any mechanical inquiry of the individual property background of the members, but by an objective study the concerted growth of social, economic, and political forces in this country.

The most fundamental of them were: (1) a parliamentary government, (2) a politically centralized but culturally diversified federal state, and (3) a dynamic social order, whose connotation varied from man to man.

The most outstanding influence that is perceptible is that of the Government of India Act, 1935, with its 321 articles and 10 schedules.

Yet, at least in some respects, the new Indian constitution was going to be different from the Act of 1935. For instance, the Act of 1935 did not contain any bill of rights, whereas the Cabinet Mission scheme itself provided for one. The protection of minority and tribal interests, a cornerstone of the Cabinet Mission scheme, had been left, by the 1935 Act, under the special responsibilities of the Governor-General and the governors. India having decided to adopt a republican government, there was need to make new arrangements for such thing as well as to redefine the position of the chief executives at the Centre and the units along with their discretionary powers. There was also the Congress commitment to linguistic reorganization of provinces.

A major issue before the fathers of the Indian constitution was the establishment of social justice between the various religious and social groups to which the Indian leaders had already been committed. The most complicated situation existed within the Hindu religious institutions, the solution of which had long been overdue. Social problems within the Muslim community were also grave, but due to several political reasons the fathers of the Indian constitution could not attack them with the vigour with which they did the Hindu social problems. In fact, the issue of minority rights, quite paradoxically, stood between the government and social reforms of the minority communities.

But the greatest problem before the Constituent Assembly in the postpartition era was economic in nature. An industrial revolution had already set in, producing a consequential class contradiction. Largely fed by the financial assistance of the propertied classes, the Congress had to meet the demands of private property, paying at the same time equal attention to the amelioration of the condition of the poor workers and peasants, which in this underdeveloped economy had already become unbearable.

Now, let us examine the political thinking in India around 1947 that witnessed the making of the Indian constitution.

At the end of the Second World War, Indian industry was far more organized than at any time before. Consequently, tremendous pressure was being exerted by it, on the government, for moulding the national economic policy in its interests. The biggest and most controversial issues, on which private Indian business felt it necessary to speak out and assert the right to property, were economic control and nationalization. The attitudes of Indian businessmen to these questions, however, were sometimes contradictory.

Indian businessmen, for instance, were well-aware that the system of controls that had been introduced during the war could not be done away with; on the other hand, it could be utilized to serve the purpose of a newly-emerging economic order that was state-capitalism.

On the assumption, therefore, that the future economy of our country would be largely state-directed it endorsed *"*progressive strengthening of the present system of controls, in scope and character, so that not only may it strengthen the smooth transition to peace economy, but may also become the instrument of long-term economic planning in our country."<sup>19</sup>

But the real controversy on Indian planning had started with the publication of what is commonly known as the Bombay Plan, a product of the deliberations of a group of big industrialists led by G.D. Birla, which rejected the "Soviet-type socialism". The Bombay Plan was in essence a capitalist plan with the state control unavoidable in the middle of the 20th century.

The Economic Programme Committee of the National Planning Committee struck a compromise between state socialism and private enterprise. It promised equal opportunities to all classes of people and special opportunities for the backward. Private enterprise was not to be abolished, but at the same time basic industries were to be expanded under public sector. While land would be exploited on the basis of cooperative farming, *zamindari*  was to be abolished. Small-scale industries would be promoted through cooperatives, especially in the rural areas. It was on the basis of these recommendations that the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1948 was drafted.

#### **Integration of Indian States**

Participation of a handful of princely states in the proceedings of the Constituent Assembly, however, did not imply their merger with the Indian union or their obligation to accept the Indian constitution. On the basis of the Cabinet Mission's plan a state department was set up with V.P. Menon as its secretary on 5th July 1947. Patel, the presiding minister of the department, assured the princes in his inaugural speech, that "we are no enemies of the princely order."<sup>20</sup>On 25th July, Mountbatten, in an address to the Chamber of Princes, endorsed Patel's appeal for accession.

Long and arduous negotiations between the state department and the states followed. These negotiations certainly involved a tremendous pressure tactics in order to counteract the fissiparous tendencies of several princely states. Two major points that emerged out of such negotiations were the signature of three categories of instruments of accession (covering defence, external affairs, and communication) and a Standstill Agreement with each state (which would make possible the continuation of all treaties and obligations between the crown and the states).

The transfer of power on 15th August 1947 made the princes realize their position, 547 states had joined the Indian union, though a number of them were yet unrepresented in the Assembly. Hyderabad, Junagarh, and Kashmir were still outside the orbit.

After 15th August, a new process of integration was initiated by the state ministry with the object of democratizing the governments of the states and linking them up with the Indian administration either by merger with neighboring provinces or by "unionisation" in groups. A few states were brought under the administration of chief commissioners. Most of the princes, on pain of popular revolts and even, in some cases, of "communist menace," readily handed over power.

The fascinating story of the integration of the Indian states is beyond the scope of this work. It would be sufficient to state here that this integration was almost wholly attained outside the Assembly through negotiations with the rulers of the states and their official representatives. The Constituent Assembly indeed provided a forum for such negotiations; technically, however, all agreements were based on the consent of the Government of India on the one hand and the rulers on the other.

On 26th November 1949, Patel announced in the Constituent Assembly that all the states and unions of states had accepted that constitution of India. The President of the Assembly, on the same day, duly took note of the fact that "the constitution as it stands practically makes no difference so far as the administration and distribution of powers among the various organs of the state are concerned between what were the provinces and what the Indian states were before. They are now more or less on the same footing and as time passes whatever little distinction still exists is bound to disappear."<sup>21</sup>

# **Fundamental Rights**

Religious rights became a central point of minority rights. On 26th March 1947, the sub-committee on fundamental rights adopted a modified version of Munshi's draft article on the freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess and practise religion. Such rights would not include economic, financial, and political activities associated with the religious activities. The sub-committee adopted Ayyar's clause about communities being free to set up their religious institutions. The two women members, Amrit Kaur and Hansa Mehta were, however, opposed to this form of religious right which would block the long-needed reforms of the practices, like *devdasi* and child-marriage. The objections led to the removal of the right to "practise" religion.<sup>22</sup>

The house readily accepted Munshi's amendment that notwithstanding the religious freedom, the state would be able to legislate for the purpose of "throwing open Hindu religious institutions of a public character to any class or section of Hindus", as well as for social welfare or reforms.

The question of religious instructions in educational institutions underwent several drafting operations. Adopting B.N. Rau's draft the Advisory Committee recommended that religious instruction would not be compulsory in "any school maintained or receiving aid out of public funds" (Clause 16).

The recommendation was broken into three parts in the Draft constitution: (1) No religious instruction would be given by the state in the educational institutions "wholly maintained out of state funds", (2) religious instructions was made optional in an institution receiving aid from or recognized by the state, and (3) a community or denomination could yet give such instruction "outside the working hours".

The Fundamental Rights Sub-committee also accepted the proposal of Rau to incorporate the right of religious denominations to manage their affairs, and to own, acquire, and dispose of property, in the teeth of opposition of Masani and Shah.<sup>23</sup>Munshi's proposal for freedom from taxation for religious purpose was also accepted. On 7th December 1948, however, the rights of denominations were subjected to "public order, morality or health."<sup>24</sup>

In line with Ambedkar's suggestion, the Fundamental Rights Sub-committee on 26th March 1947 proposed that the state would not recognize any religion as state religion.

The problem of minorities had several and confusing dimensions. Because of the long Gandhian commitment of the Congress members, there was a general eagerness for constitutionalizing prohibition.

The framing of a set of fundamental rights was implied in the Objectives Resolution that had been adopted by the Assembly as well as the Cabinet Mission's scheme. Moreover, most of the members were determined to have "uniform fundamental rights" providing at the same time safeguards for minorities and backward classes and areas.

Clause 2 of the sub-committee's report said that the existing laws and ordinances inconsistent with the given fundamental rights would be abrogated to the extent of such inconsistency. The state would also not pass in future any law prejudicial to the fundamental rights. Clause 22 elaborated the constitutional remedies to be secured from the courts. The Supreme Court was given the power to enforce such rights. Such power included the power to issue directions in the nature of the writs of *habeas corpus, mandamus*, prohibition, *quo warranto*, and *certiorari tiorari.* The right to secure remedies would not be suspended unless "when, in the case of rebellion or invasion or other grave emergency, the public safety may require it". The union legislature by law could restrict these rights in the case of the armed personnel. Broadly, the committee classified the justifiable right under seven heads: (1) citizenship, (2) equality (including abolition of untouchability), (3) freedom (including the right to life), (4) religion, (5) culture and education, (6) miscellaneous (including the right to property), and (7) constitutional remedies.

Every person born in the union or naturalized according to its laws would be a citizen of India. Irrespective of race, religion, caste or sex, citizens would have equality vis-a-vis the state and access to places of public importance, though separate provision might be made for women and children. There would be equality of opportunity in public services. Untouchability was to be abolished and heritable titles would not be conferred by the state. Subject to public order and morality, or in case of grave emergency, the restrictions imposed in the interest of the security of the country, freedom of speech and expression, peaceful assembly, associations or unions, movements and residence was to be granted. No person was to be deprived of his life or liberty without due process of law, in the eye of which all citizens were equal. Subject to regulation by the law of the union, trade, commerce, and inter-dependence among the citizens or units would be free, though units could impose reasonable restrictions in public interest. Trafficking of human beings, forced labour, and employment of children below the age of 14 in factories, mines, and other hazardous works were to stop. Full religious freedom as well as the rights to maintain their own religious institutions was granted to all communities, subject to public order, morality or health, and other constitutional restrictions, *e.g.*, against conversion through coercion or undue influence. Cultural and educational rights of all communities were duly granted. Among miscellaneous rights, right to property was not to be taken away except by law, for public purposes and against payment of compensation.

In the Fundamental Rights Sub-committee in spite of Rajagopalachari's contention that the provision of universal adult franchise in the fundamental rights part would amount to an encroachment on the constitutional structure of the country, which was being thrashed out by other committees, the principle was "unanimously" accepted. Elections were to be universal, free, and controlled by an independent commission. The Minority Rights Sub-committee in April 1947 endorsed them.

The Advisory Committee recommended to the Assembly the grant of voting right to all citizens at the age of 21, the conduct of voting by secret ballot and the superintendence and control of elections to be left under an election commission.

On 16th June 1949, the Constituent Assembly adopted the principle of universal adult franchise in the form of an amendment (Article 289B). By an earlier amendment (Article 289A) voting right was granted irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them.<sup>25</sup>

The machinery of elections was evolved in an interesting way. It was the Minority Rights Sub-committee which had insisted upon a neutral and autonomous election commission to conduct free elections. The Advisory Committee endorsed the formula and the Draft constitution of February 1948 provided, in Article 289, for a union election commission, whose personnel would be appointed by the President, and an election commission, for each state, whose personnel would be appointed by the governor, to superintend, control, and direct the elections. But on 15th June 1949, Ambedkar moved an amendment in the Assembly envisaging "a radical change in the proposed system". The new plan was to have an integrated election commission, with members appointed by the President and wanted, in the language of Ambedkar, *"*centralize the election machinery in the hands of single commission to be assisted by regional commissioners, not working under the provincial government", but under the central government. The change was found necessary "because today we find that in some of the provinces of India, the population is a mixture".

# **Directive Principles**

After the Fundamental Rights Sub-committee completed its discussions and formulations, Rau drafted its report to the Advisory Committee. At the very beginning of the meeting of the Advisory Committee an interesting confrontation took place between Munshi and Rau. By a stroke of drafting ingenuity, Rau had provided in the introductory clause in the chapter on the rights, that any existing or future law inconsistent with the rights guaranteed "in this constitution" would be invalid. Munshi pointed out the difference between the rights in "this part" as originally decided by the Fundamental Rights Sub-committee and rights in "this constitution" as drafted by Rau. Obviously, Rau's draft was an attempt to provide judicial guarantee to the rights guaranteed in the other parts as well. The Advisory Committee made no mistake about it and changed Rau's version.<sup>26</sup>

The effect of the amendment proposal was that no law made by the state in discharge of its duty under the principles of social policy would be invalid on ground of its inconsistency with the justifiable rights. This proposal also was not accepted by the Drafting Committee.

The most important point about the directive principles of social policy is that, they had never been discussed in the Constituent Assembly before the Draft constitution was presented. If their origins are to be found in the rather academic benevolence of B.N. Rau, their adoption "may be considered as a golden compromise between the desire of Congress to achieve a social revolution" and the pressure of the vested interests.

## **Assessment**

Granville Austin finds in the fundamental rights and directive principles "the core of the commitment to social revolution" of the India.<sup>27</sup> It is difficult to accept the view without reservations.

The concepts of equality and freedom are indeed revolutionary and have great social content. But, it is doubtful whether the fundamental rights in the Indian constitution proceeded much further than that. Secularism has long been accepted to be a condition of political stability, and India certainly can claim a great credit on account of this achievement. So is property, a symbol of a stable polity. But these are concepts which Europe achieved by 1848, one hundred years earlier than the making of the Indian constitution. The social revolution in 1948 should evidently have a different content from the social revolution in 1848.

The abolition of untouchability was common in the Munshi and Ambedkar drafts. Presumably, on Ambedkar's insistence, restriction of caste, etc., on the use of wells and places of public use was removed. But, when Munshi moved that "No impediments to marriages between citizens shall be based merely upon differences of religion", the resolution was defeated 5-4. Ambedkar's resolution to remove difference between "legitimate" and "illegitimate" children was defeated 6-3.

Munshi's "rights of workers" was shifted into social policy. K.T. Shah wanted the right to employment. It was not granted.

The main outlook of the constitution, therefore, is political in spite of the directive principles. Two other major features of the fundamental rights under the constitution are:

1. At least some of the basic rights of the constitution are closely linked with the state and government structures of the country. Citizenship is indeed closely linked with the state and government of a country. But the fact that the right to franchise found no place in part III of the constitution, freedom of trade, practically became a constitutional instrument of integrating the Indian polity and the right to property had to be safeguarded by the requirement of the President's approval to every state legislation encroaching upon property, which are distinct pointers to the trend of a modern state towards centralism. The incorporation of a uniform set of fundamental rights into the Indian constitution itself is a part of this process.

The deliberate rejection of "due process of law" in favour of "the procedure established by law" speaks eloquently about the constituent assembly's intention not to make the judiciary a super-legislature. Yet in India, as in the USA, the judiciary has not only assumed the power of judicial review, but also challenged Parliaments' power to amend the fundamental rights. The power was asserted first in the case of *Golaknath vs. the State of Punjab*, and was taken a step further in the case of *Keshavananda Bharati vs. the State of Kerala.* 

2. If the fundamental rights in the Indian constitution contributed to the development of a massive political superstructure in India, its place in determining the intra-governmental power-relation is no less significant. The most elaborately written constitution as it is, the Indian constitution allots rather than limits space for the functioning of the judiciary as guardian of the constitution. Parliament ultimately is the master of the rights, which was never intended to be unalterable.

## **Structure of Federal and State Government**

The compulsion of what had always been regarded as the core of the Indian problem being absent, a trend towards centralization became irresistible. Yet the new Indian situation did not at all rule out the necessity of a federation. The composite character of the Indian social organization was too real to be ignored. Besides, the provincial aspirations aroused by the previous reforms were heading towards their logical culmination. A federal structure of state with considerable autonomy for the provinces and regions was, therefore, a historical imperative though the union was certainly going to be much stronger than what had been anticipated by the Cabinet Mission.

The two most important committees responsible for the formulation of the state structure of India were the Union Constitution Committee and the Union Powers Committee. Both were chained by Nehru and overlappingly manned by most of the stalwarts. Three days after Mountbatten's declaration on 6th June 1947, the Union Constitution Committee decided that: (1) the constitution would be federal with a strong centre, (2) there would be three exhaustive lists of powers, the residuary powers lying with the Union in the pattern of the 1935 Act, (3) the states would be on par with the provinces in respect of the federal legislative list, subject to the consideration of any special matter which might be raised when the lists would be fully prepared, and (4) the executive authority of the federation would be coextensive with the legislative authority.<sup>28</sup>

According to the Union Constitution Committee, the federal government was to consist of (1) a President elected by the members of both the houses of the federal legislature through proportional representation by means of single transferable vote, (2) the two houses of parliament, and (iii) a federal judicature. There would be a vice-President to act for President in contingencies. There would be a council of ministers appointed by the President, who would follow the cabinet principles. There was no mention of ministerial responsibility to the legislature. The tenure of the office of the president was six years. The upper house of the Central Legislature was based on federal principles, mainly, though not more than ten of its members would be nominated by the president in consultation with the universities and scientific bodies. Other members would be elected by legislatures of units. Out of the total strength of this house (Council of States) one-third would retire every two years, making it a permanent body. Its total strength would not be more than half of the strength of the lower house (House of the People) elected through universal adult franchise.

Direct election of the president, it was thought, "would not be desirable, first because we want to emphasize the ministerial character of the government, that power really resided in the ministry and in the legislature and not in the president as such. At the same time we did not want to make the president just a mere figurehead, like the pre-Fifth Republican French president. We did not give him any real power, but we have made his position one of great authority and dignity."29 Second, election of the President by the whole people would mean a big waste. So the committee suggested the indirect election of the President. The President, however, would be elected not only by the members of the union legislature, but also by the members of the provincial legislative assemblies. This system was not evolved solely out of any regard for the federal principle, but also because the President's election by only the central legislature was considered to be on a too narrow basis.

The Draft constitution published in February 1948 provided, in the centre, for a council of ministers to aid and advise the President, though the conformity of the President with their advice remained outside the jurisdiction of a court's enquiry. Ministers were to hold office during the pleasure of the President (Article 62/2) and were to be entirely responsible to the House of the People (Article 62/3). There was no reference to any discretion of the President.

The Drafting Committee in October 1948 decided that as it was wellestablished convention in a parliamentary government that the ministers would be in office so long as they had the support of the legislature, the above proposal was unnecessary.

Presenting the Draft constitution in the Assembly, Ambedkar clearly said that, What the Draft constitution proposes is a parliamentary system.

In this constitution, there is placed at the head of the Indian union a functionary who is called the President of the union. The title of the functionary reminds one of the President of the United States. But beyond identity of names there is nothing in common between the form of government prevalent in America and the form of government proposed under the Draft constitution.<sup>30</sup>

"Under the parliamentary system of government, there are only two prerogatives which the king or the head of the state may exercise. One is the appointment of the Prime Minister and the other is dissolution of parliament. With regard to the Prime Minister, it is not possible to avoid vesting the discretion in the President. The only other way by which we could provide for the appointment of the Prime Minister without vesting the authority of discretion in the President is to require that it is the house which shall in the first instance choose its leader, and then, on the choice being made by a motion or a resolution, the President should proceed to appoint the Prime Minister. "If the president made a wrong choice, the legislature could express no confidence." With regard to the dissolution of the houses, Ambedkar said, "there again there is no definite opinion so far as the British constitutional lawyers are concerned."

Ambedkar concluded, "I think these are purely prerogatives and they do not come within the administration of the country."<sup>31</sup>

The Union Constitution Committee in early July 1947, at first, decided to have 25 members of the Council of States from functional constituencies, or panels and other members elected by lower chambers of provincial legislatures on the basis of the strength of population of provinces (one representative for one million, up to five millions, above which one representative for every two millions, subject to a maximum of 25 representatives).

The final shape of the Council of States emerged out of an amendment moved by Ambedkar, on 3rd January 1949, in the Assembly. The wide range of nomination constituencies was reduced to men of "letters, arts, science, and social service," the number of nominated members being reduced from 15 to 12.<sup>32</sup>

Only one of the replies from the Provincial Constitution Committee members (Katju) had required a second chamber for a unit legislature. Rau's draft of the provincial constitution left the scope for bicameral legislatures in some provinces, if the members of the Constituent Assembly from the province so chose. When the Provincial Constitution Committee met, some provinces were found to be demanding two chambers. The committee finally decided to have, normally, one chamber, and two chambers in exceptional cases. The question of the need for a second chamber was referred to a subcommittee (Kher, Sitaramayya, Subbarayon and Katju) which recommended that the strength of the second chamber should not exceed 25 per cent of the strength of the first chamber. Representation to the provincial second chamber was to be, on the Irish model, functional, up to a half, the other half being filled up by election from the lower chamber of the provincial legislature and nomination by governors.<sup>33</sup>

The Draft constitution provided for election of one-half of the total strength of the upper house of a state from five panels of candidates from universities, literature, arts, science, various professions, and social service. A special representation of trade, commerce, industry, women, and labour was abolished from both the union and state second chambers.

The whole episode gives an estimate of the indecisiveness which the Constituent Assembly suffered from over the question of the second chambers. India inherited the second chamber from the British days. With the introduction of the federal idea into Indian politics, a second chamber had been taken for granted at the central level. Yet, explaining the purpose of the second chambers in the union legislature, N.C. Ayyangar could only say that, "The most that we expect the second chamber to do is perhaps to hold dignified debates on important issues and to delay legislation which might be the outcome of passions of the inoment."<sup>34</sup> But never was the justification of a second chamber in a unit sufficiently established. Ultimately, the decision was left to the provincial representatives of the assembly to be taken separately.

The joint meeting of the union and provincial constitution committees recommended on 10th June 1947 that high court judges should be appointed by the President of the union in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the provincial governors and the provincial chief justices. To appoint the chief justice of a province, the President was to consult the chief justice of India, the provincial governor, and other judges of the Supreme Court and the high courts as he deemed necessary. The Provincial constitution Committee accepted the suggestion.

The Ad-hoc Committee on the Supreme Court, appointed by this committee, whose report was appended to the report of the latter, recommended that, "A Supreme Court with jurisdiction to decide the constitutional validity of acts and laws was a necessary implication of any federal scheme. This jurisdiction might not, however, belong exclusively to the Supreme Court". Other courts might enquire into the validity of acts and laws as well.<sup>35</sup>

The Union Constitution Committee accepted the recommendations of the Ad-hoc Committee on Supreme Court that the Supreme Court would have: (1) exclusive jurisdiction over centre-unit and inter-unit disputes, (2) ultimate jurisdiction on matters arising out of the union government's treaties with foreign states, (3) concurrent jurisdiction with high courts on disputes relating to fundamental rights, (4) appellate jurisdiction similar to that of the Privy Council, and (5) advisory jurisdiction. However, the Adhoc Committee's recommedation about a panel of advisers for recommending the appointment of the Supreme Court judges was turned down. The president was given the full authority to appoint the judges in consultation with the chief justice and other judges, as necessary. The joint meeting of the union and provincial constitution committees on 10th June 1947 decided that the judges of high courts would be appointed by the president in consultation with the Supreme Court judges. The fourth session of the Assembly passed the reports. But, on Ayyar's resolution, the high courts were given the powers to issue writs on cases involving fundamental rights and of superintendence and control of the lower courts.<sup>36</sup>The controversy over the writ-issuing powers was, thus, finally solved. With a view to adding to the dignity of the highest courts, another amendment of Ayyar made the Supreme Court judges liable to removal on the address to the President of India by the two houses of the parliament.<sup>37</sup>

The Draft constitution of February 1948, for the first time, upheld that the central judiciary would not be separate from the state judiciaries. In the list of union powers it put the "Supreme Court of India" instead of the "federal judiciary."<sup>38</sup> Following the Ad-hoc Committee's recommendations the Supreme Court was given original, appellate, and advisory jurisdictions.

Considering the intensity of the "Indian problem" which was very close to explosiveness one is bound to appreciate the strong and centralized statestructure that the Constituent Assembly of India evolved into. In several ways the governmental machinery itself helped this centralization. So did some of the special features of the Indian government.

A significant special feature is the "discretion" of the governor. The concept of discretionary power of the governor underwent several changes. In B.B. Rau's model Provincial constitution the governor was expected to be working, generally, following the adive of the ministers, except on a few occasions, *e.g.* the choice of the ministers, protection of minorities and maintenance of law and order. If in any case, the ministerial advice was disregarded by the governor, the ministers might resign, and the governor was advised even to dissolve the legislature and call for another election. The "discretionary" power would "in such cases have at least the effect of bringing the issue before the electorate."<sup>39</sup>

According to clause 9 of the Provincial constitution Committee's report, the governor would act in his discretion in the following matters:

- 1. The prevention of any grave menace to the peace and integrity of the province or any part thereof,
- 2. The summoning and dissolving of the provincial legislature,
- 3. The superintendence, direction, and control of elections,
- 4. The appointment of the chairman and the members of the Provincial Public Service Commission and of the Provincial Auditor General.

The Special Committee, with Jawaharlal Nehru as the chairman, which recommended the appointment of a governor<sup>40</sup> rather than election on 11th April 1948, opined that "all references to the exercise of functions by the governor in his discretion should be omitted from the Draft constitution."

While the Drafting Committee dropped the "discretion" of the governor in the appointment of minister, the governor's "pleasure" to determine their tenure was retained. The Drafting Committee held that such "pleasure" was limited in scope by the confidence of the legislature. The other fields of the governor's discretion were retained.<sup>41</sup>

The house discussed President's power of suspension of the constitutional remedies for the violation of rights (part III) on 4th August 1949. Kamath and Kunzru moved for restriction of the scope of this suspension to a few articles relating to freedom. On Ambedkar's request, the article was held over<sup>42</sup> and placed on the day on which an amendment to Article 277 (requiring the president to lay before parliament every proclamation of emergency as soon as possible) was passed. The modified draft article restricted the scope of suspension to only those rights which might be mentioned in the proclamation (an amendment very close to Kamath's) and required the suspension order to be placed in parliament as soon as possible. The suspension might also be operative "in the whole of the territory or a part of it."<sup>43</sup>

The last stroke of emergency on the states' autonomy came in the revised and renumbered Draft constitution that was placed in the House in November 1949. A new Article (No. 365) declared that non-compliance of a state government with the directions of the centre would be considered a "failure" of the state, following which by implication, president would have the power to declare "constitutional breakdown".

# **Conclusion**

In India, the Cabinet Mission plan, first, set up the Constituent Assembly; the 3rd June 1947 statement of Mountbatten then split it and the Indian Independence Act finally gave it not only the status of a sovereign constituent assembly, but also the power to control a provisional government. The Constituent Assembly, in its final form was, therefore, very much different from the constituent assembly that had been anticipated by the Cabinet Mission.

Born with a peculiar stigma, it was confronted not only with the task of drafting a constitution for India, but also with the odd job of making the most important political decision for the country, namely, the state's structure. No other constituent body in the world has had to make such an important decision in as much as each of them merely recorded the achievements of the revolution through which the major political decisions has already been reached.

Partition of the country gave the Assembly a sense of direction which its earlier sessions lacked. If the partition was the result of circumstances that developed outside the Constituent Assembly of India, the other major decisions were also taken according to the several political notions that had taken shape in the course of the national movement, particularly, on the platform of the Indian National Congress which commanded an overwhelming majority in the Constituent Assembly. Those notions, in 1947-49, crystallized in a strong federation and a parliamentary government. It was left to the changing political situation in the country to determine how "strong" the centre of this federation would be. The rather long duration of the Constituent Assembly was contributory to the emergence of this strongly unified political organism. Beginning with the hazy idea of a loosely federated India, the members of the Constituent Assembly moved a long way to reach a tangible unity effectively mitigating all local aspirations.

It was imperative of the social forces of the time that India would emerge into a strong and organized political entity. Ambedkar effectively stressed this social imperative when, during the presentation of the Draft to the Constituent Assembly, he severely criticised the orthodox demand for a village-centric policy, "I am glad that the Draft constitution has discarded the village and adopted the individual as its unit."<sup>44</sup>

That the application of the principle of parliamentary government was somewhat crippled at the unit level, was due to the "strong centre" growing stronger. But, when it was a question of the nature of the union government, the decision of the leadership was firmly for a parliamentary type. The statelevel governmental set-up was the result of a compromise between centralism and parliamentary government. On the details, however, the leadership had no clear picture, except the somewhat bitter memory of the provincial administrations in the short period before the Second World War. The formulation of the details was initially left to one of the ablest Indian bureaucrats, B.N. Rau, whose acquaintance with the Indian constitutional developments was more through the Reforms Office than through the judiciary.

The original drafts of the union and provincial constitutions formulated by Rau were almost wholly based on the models of the Government of India Act, 1935, and the dominion constitutions. Some of their basic assumptions, therefore, inevitably clashed with the republican and anti-executive notions of the Congress leaders. The result was the intervention of the lawyers, like Ayyar and Ayyangar in the question of the union constitution and a somewhat unsatisfactory compromise on the question of the provincial constitution. On the question of minority representation to the legislature and the executive the Swiss constitutional precedent was, for a while considered. But, as the minority problem took a new turn, the scheme was dropped.

Besides the minority question, the states formed almost the only element of the "Indian problem." Here, the Constituent Assembly had a very little part to play. It only registered whatever the states/ministry worked out in its "negotiation" with the rulers.

The "limited" and "political" achievement of the Constituent Assembly in India consisted installing the disintegrationist forces of India which flowed during the latter part of British rule and encouraged by the fact of partition. It consolidated the unity of India including the native states. It put an end to the cancerous problem of minorities. In short, it cut the Gordian knot of the classical "Indian problem", though the merit of the surgery appears to be dubious. In any case, the present political map of India was drawn in the Constituent Assembly and a parliamentary-federal democracy was set up to preside over it.

This was bound to be so. Right from the beginning the makers of the constitution had no illusion about their aim. On several occasions they made it clear in the Assembly that the constitution was going to be nothing more than a political document.

Truly, the work of the Constituent Assembly was the reflection of the political developments that took place on the national political arena. Yet, the national revolution of India was not complete in the period of work of the Assembly. As a result, the Constituent Assembly was found to be doing a balancing act between the claims of stability and adaptability. Placed between its own commitment to widespread socio-economic reforms, repeatedly though rather vaguely promised, and the pressure of the propertied class, it upheld the claims of property and at the same time confirmed its promises for socio-economic reforms through the directive principles and left the door open for land reforms in certain states where the programme had already been initiated.

A number of important developments took place during the rather prolonged functioning of the Constituent Assembly and were reflected in the constitution.

A very important feature of the constitution was the transitional character of several provisions, among which those relating to the units of the federation are most remarkable. The parliament got absolute power to change the territorial boundaries of states. The integration of princely states was not obviously complete. The problem of linguistic reorganization of states was unsolved.

The social forces of the time permitted exactly this much and no more. The stable and independent political order that was most urgently needed for the full flowering of Indian economic prosperity was ensured by the two epoch-making incidents of transfer of power and framing of the constitution. Right to property was ensured to the extent that a welfare state could afford to ensure.

If the constitution has great omissions, the mistakes of the commission are not quite insignificant. Complaints of complicating details in the constitution have been raised very often and by many, including Jennings. In the constitutional document several provisions are overlapping; some may even be considered superfluous.<sup>45</sup>Understandably, the radicals of the country, specially the socialists, demanded the constitution to be amendable by an ordinary legislative procedure.

The claim is valid as far as it goes. For, every Constituent Assembly has a mind which can be understood in the light of the concrete political and socio-economic forces of the time and place. The limitations of these forces, therefore, are bound to be attached to the constitution it produces, and to be exposed gradually with the passage of time.

# **Notes and References**

- 1. R. Coupland, *The constitutional Problem in India*, Part III, London, OUP, p. 16.
- 2. R. Coupland, *India-A Restatement*, London, OUP, 1945, p. 69.
- 3. *Report on Indian constitutional Reforms*, p. 150.
- 4. *Report of the Indian Statutory Commission*, Vol. I, Government of Great Britain, 1923, p. 200.
- 5. *Cabinet Mission's Statement*, 16 May 1946, para 3.
- 6. Figures based on *IAR*, 1946, Vol. II, and the *Hindusthan Yearbook*, Calcutta, 1947.
- 7. *Cabinet Mission's Statement, op. cit.*, para 23.
- 8. *Ibid.*, para 3.
- 9. *AIR*, 1946, Vol. II, p. 105.
- 10. *The Statesman*, 25th August 1946.
- 11. *CAD*, 10th December 1946, Vol. I, p. 57. Undoubtedly, the Objectives Resolution was a confederal document of the democratic aspirations of a newly-freed people and the departing British imperial rules. Yet it was basically a political document and had no economic outlook.
  - 12. *CAD*, Vol. II, p. 305.
  - 13. *AIR*, 1947, Vol. I, pp. 142–143.
  - 14. V.P. Menon, *The Transfer of Power*, Calcutta, Orient Longman, 1957, pp. 353–357.
  - 15*. AIR*, 1947, Vol. I, pp. 143–146.