## **Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803)**

Herder was born in 1744 in a remote part of East Prussia where his father was a village schoolmaster. His ambition was to be a Lutheran pastor. Herder went to the University of Königsberg, where he had the good fortune to be taught by Immanuel Kant, who introduced him to a wide range of European thought. After several years as a pastor and schoolmaster, Herder travelled extensively in France, Holland and Germany. In Strasbourg in 1773 he met the young Goethe, with whom he collaborated on a book about German character and art. Their friendship subsequently led to Herder's appointment as Court preacher at Weimar, where he remained until his death in 1803.

Herder was one of the seminal minds of his age, contributing to a range of subjects, including philosophy, history, theology and linguistics. His early inspiration was the Enlightenment, but, while he retained some of its ideas throughout his life, he was arguably the most significant single figure in the development of the Romantic 'counter-Enlightenment' that revolutionised European thought.

Herder's most important works include Johann Gottfried Herder *Treatise on the Origin of Language* (1772) and the monumental Johann Gottfried Herder *Ideas for the Philosophy of the History of Mankind* (1784-91). Despite a voluminous output upon a great range of subjects, Herder did not write a major work on political theory, but his ideas are diffused among other works. Furthermore, the nature of German public life and his own position at Court made it difficult to be politically candid, so that some of Herder's more radical views are only fully expressed in his letters. Nevertheless, his political ideas were important and influential. They need to be understood against the background of his general philosophy.

As a philosopher Herder challenged Enlightenment epistemology, especially in respect of human understanding. He rejected the concentration on causal laws, universal timeless truth and universal standards in behaviour and the arts. He insisted that human affairs could not be understood by the same methods as natural sciences, but only through understanding the point of view of those participating, and in terms of the traditional practices and purposes of forms of behaviour of which their actions form a part. In other words, understanding from the 'inside' and not from the external application of causal relationships. Understanding human thought and action involved the study not of science, but of history, literature, the arts and especially language; that is, the whole historical and cultural context. All this meant understanding historical events, individuals, communities and cultures as being particular and unique.

Language was central to this understanding. A language embodies the uniqueness of a culture, expressing a whole way of life, the collective experience of a nation. Language and literature forms nations and individuals. Herder has a very modern sense of thought *consisting* of language rather than merely being expressed through language. All human actions are an expression of the self but also of the particular culture as an evolving totality that embodies a total vision of life.

Herder's political thought revolves around the assertion that the cultural nation is the true basis of the political community and of political identity. This contrasts with the Enlightenment view of the political community as a construct made up of all those who are subject to a sovereign power arising from a social contract. The state was central in Enlightenment thought and remained so in the French development of nationalist ideas after the Revolution. This was not, however, Herder's conception. He loathed the centralised state, which he saw as imposing uniformity and destroying local difference. He anticipated twentieth-century concerns about the dangers of bureaucracy and of people becoming mere cogs in the vast state machine.

He thought his conception of the cultural nation would replace Enlightenment notions of contract and sovereignty. The state was an artificial construct, whereas the nation was a product of natural growth. This was a vision of society as an organic unity. But Herder was aware that the organic metaphor was indeed a metaphor and did not in any sense infer the subordination of the part to the whole or the individual as inferior to the community.

Herder's vision of an ideal society was one without central government. He believed it possible for a political community to function effectively in a non-hierarchical, non-coercive situation where social power was diffused through different but mutually interdependent communities and sectional interests within the wider nation. This could be established after a period of transition in which the people would be educated to cope with the system. Herder was a strong advocate of freedom of expression, and thought it essential to this educative process. He believed in a more egalitarian society but not in absolute equality for all. He considered hereditary monarchy and aristocratic social leadership to be thoroughly irrational. Everyone could and should participate in the affairs of the nation. In this pluralist-anarchist society violence and coercion would no longer have a place and government would be by a form of continuously negotiated consensus.

While Herder put considerable emphasis on the centrality of tradition, he did not see a contradiction between tradition and progress, as traditionalists usually do. He thought Enlightenment ideas of progress were shallow and simplistic, but not the concept of progress as such. Human society evolved and developed as traditional practices and ways of life pursued their own internal purposes and individuals creatively applied the principles and methods they inherited. There is no overall, uniform, universal plan for humanity as a whole beyond the perpetual unfolding of human potential in a multitude of ways. This involves a new way of looking at history that is evolutionary, like the growth of an organism, where there is no question of recreating a past state of affairs. Both within national cultures and between national cultures such unfolding proceeds at different speeds and in different directions. There is no natural harmony of purposes or values. Within each national community an endless accommodation and adjustment is necessary to ensure an organic unity is maintained, and can be negotiated or imposed.

The basic units of history and the basic divisions of humanity Herder saw as national cultures, every one of which had the right to develop in its own way. He was deeply hostile to any form of imperialism or racism and was thus as much opposed to European domination of non-white races as he was to the multinational empires of Central and Eastern Europe. God favoured no race and no nation.

Herder was the most important intellectual founder of nationalism in general, but his nationalism is very different from that of revolutionary France or that which subsequently developed in Germany. In French revolutionary nationalism what constitutes the nation was rather taken for granted. All the theoretical emphasis was upon the state, as an expression of the single will of a united sovereign people. The tradition of German nationalism as it developed after Herder combined his cultural nationalism with a glorification of the state

amounting in some cases to state worship; this could hardly be further from Herder's intention.

Hegel, whom Herder influenced enormously, certainly glorified the state as morally superior to the individual and saw the Prussian state of his day as the final pinnacle of the state's development. German nationalists of the late nineteenth century took xenophobic German nationalism to extremes, insisting upon the superiority of German culture. They would gladly sacrifice the individual for the state, as well as being highly chauvinist and racist. However, Herder's most direct influence was upon a group of thinkers known as the German Romantics. The German Romantics, such as Friedrich Schlegel, Novalis and Adam Müller (with whom Herder is often linked), followed Herder's emphasis on culture and history, and the political necessity of forming a unique harmony of disparate elements. However, in sharp contrast to Herder, theirs was a backward-looking vision that idealised medieval feudalism and looked for social leadership to a traditional aristocracy, albeit one advised by scholars like themselves.

As a political thinker Herder does have limitations. He can be vague and inconclusive and his anarchist pluralism is not very convincing (although no less so than other versions of anarchism). Nevertheless, he was one of the most creative and influential minds of the age. He changed the way we understand our history and ourselves, profoundly influencing major intellectual movements, such as Romanticism, German idealism and nationalism, that have shaped the modern consciousness. His central idea of cultural nationalism, when combined with French nationalist ideas of the sovereignty of the people expressed through the national state, created the form of nationalism that has shaped much of world politics over the last two centuries.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Johann Gottfried Herder *Reflections on the Philosophy of the History of Mankind* (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1968).
- Johann Gottfried Herder *Herder on Social and Political Culture*, ed. F. M. Barnard (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969).

## *Secondary sources*

- Barnard, F. M. : *Herder's Social and Political Thought: From Enlightenment to Nationalism* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1965).
- Berlin, I. : *Vico and Herder* (London: Hogarth Press, 1976).
- Norton, R. E. : *Herder's Aesthetics and the European Enlightenment* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991).