# **David Hume (1711-76)**

David Hume was born near Berwick into the minor landed gentry of Scotland. He was educated at the University of Edinburgh, where he read law, though his interest presently turned towards literature and philosophy. In early manhood he abandoned the Presbyterian beliefs of his family, and opposition from the Scottish religious establishment prevented him from securing the Chairs of Philosophy at Edinburgh in 1745 and Glasgow in 1752. His first and most important philosophical work, *A Treatise of Human Nature*, was written in France and published in 1739-40. To his great disappointment, the *Treatise* was not a success. He published a revised and more accessible version of its main doctrines in two works: David Hume *An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding* (1748) and David Hume *An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals* (1751). He was an elegant and versatile essayist, producing *Essays Moral and Political* in 1742 and *Political Discourses* in 1752. His *History of England* was published in eight volumes between 1754 and 1761, while he held the post of Keeper of the Advocates' Library at Edinburgh. He was an easy and cheerful man, who made friends easily and enjoyed their affection, though Rousseau treated him with characteristic ingratitude when they met. His *Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion* were published posthumously, in 1779.

The starting-point of Hume's political and moral thought is his conviction that human beings are primarily creatures not of reason, but of passion or feeling. Reason, he tells us in a muchquoted aphorism, *is, and ought only to be, the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them.*

## *(Treatise of Human Nature 2:3:3)*

This is an odd way of putting it (if reason *is* the slave of the passions, there seems no point in adding that it *ought* to be so), but what Hume intends to do is challenge the supposition that our moral beliefs are grounded in, and demonstrable by, reason. This supposition appeals to those who, like Locke, wish to repudiate the idea that political authority must be accepted as a given and not subjected to the scrutiny of reason or required to conform to rational standards. But, Hume maintains, it rests on a misunderstanding of the causal relation between reason and feeling. Moral belief, he thinks, is a species of feeling. But we do not have the feelings that we do because we have reasoned in a certain way. On the contrary, we reason as we do because we have the particular kind of feelings that we have. Some people might prefer the destruction of the whole world to some trifling inconvenience to themselves; someone else might choose total ruin to spare another a trifling inconvenience. We might think such preferences odd, but they are not *irrational*: that is to say, no logical contradiction is involved in holding them. Moral convictions are positions chosen because one feels as one does, not logical conclusions that one has thought one's way to. In so far as government institutionalises moral beliefs, it is a creation not of reason directly, but of reason in so far as reason is the 'slave' of a certain kind of feeling.

What this implies for politics is that government and political obligation are to be understood as originating not in some such abstraction as a social contract or law of nature, but in the practical responses of human beings to felt needs and desires. Men are, Hume thinks, naturally sociable. They are drawn to live with others of their own kind. But their goodwill towards others - their 'benevolence' - is limited. It is limited in the sense that they think first of themselves and their own families and only then of other people. Given that this is so, and given also that the material resources of the world are scarce, it is inevitable that disputes will occur wherever human beings come together. It is in order to keep such disputes to a minimum that men have over the years generated what Hume calls 'rules of justice': rules intended to maintain the security of possessions and the honouring of contracts. We cannot point to a legislator who formulated these rules first, nor is there any need to try to do so. They have arisen more or less spontaneously in the course of human transactions. They are not 'natural laws' discovered by abstract reason; they are merely conventional, and have no intrinsic merit. They are the productions of practical reason responding to the sentiments to which the possibility of conflict gives rise. Because human beings are all more or less the same in how they feel and think, the rules of justice by which men live show a high degree of uniformity. They are logically prior to government. Government comes about because, human nature being what it is, we cannot live by the 'rules of justice' unless we have over us some agency with coercive power. The rules of justice need to be enforced because we are short sighted; we value short-term goals at the expense of our long-term interests. In our calmer moments, we realise that it is in our true interest to support an authority that can enforce the rules of justice effectively. It is this collective realisation on the part of passionate, short-sighted but ultimately rational human beings that accounts for the existence and authority of government.

When and in what precise circumstances did government originate? Hume does not understand why political authors have attached so much importance to this question. We cannot, he thinks, possibly know the answer to it, and no good purpose can be served by speculation. It is probably best to regard government as having evolved over time and become established by the authority of custom, but it is enough for us to know that we have it and that it answers successfully to its purpose. Like Burke, Hume recommends a policy of leaving well enough alone. If the existing regime does what we want of it, it is as well not to tamper with it. He believes that government conducted according to uniform and general laws will be the most satisfactory, because it is the form of government most likely to please everyone under it. Hume's own preference is for a form of mixed monarchical and republican government of (what he takes to be) the British variety, where the two kinds of power check and limit one another. But the form of government does not much matter, as long as it works and the people consider that their purposes are served by supporting it.

I look upon all kinds of subdivision of power, from the monarchy of France to the freest democracy of the Swiss cantons, to be equally legal if established by custom and authority.

### (*New Letters*, p.81)

Hume is impatient of social-contract arguments. He offers a pertinent critique of them in his essay called 'Of the Original Contract' - an essay that every admirer of Locke ought to read. If all our obligations are held to rest on an original contract, what does the obligation to keep the original contract rest on? Since no one can identify the occasion when an original contract was actually concluded, why does it make more sense to appeal to consent than to tradition or custom as the source of obligation? Locke had appealed to 'tacit' consent. The mere fact that individuals do not leave the community in which they live is, he had argued, evidence that they are consenting to the arrangements by which it is governed. But this, says Hume, will not do. He invites us to consider the press-ganged seaman who wakes up and finds himself on a ship in the middle of the ocean. According to the social contractarians, all authority is constituted by, and only by, the individual's consent to it; but that consent, says Locke, does not have to be explicit. What, then, is the individual taken to sea against his will to do? He can either throw himself over the side, which is obviously not an eligible possibility, or he

can remain where he is; in which case, according to the tacit consent argument, he is *ipso facto* accepting the captain's authority. This, says Hume, is exactly the predicament of the 'poor peasant or artisan' who hates the government under which he finds himself, but has no means of removing himself from its jurisdiction. Tacit consent is an argument that takes no account of the fact that there may be people living under a government whose only reason for doing so is that they cannot leave; this is hardly a sensible version of consent.

Hume also has a telling argument against the type of natural law doctrine that deduces its prescriptions from what purport to be facts about human nature or the nature of the world in general. This kind of derivation, Hume suggests, involves a straightforward fallacy.

In every system of morality which I have hitherto met with, I have always remarked that the author proceeds for some time in the ordinary way of reasoning, and establishes the being of a God, or makes observations concerning human affairs; when of a sudden I am surprised to find that instead of the usual copulations of propositions 'is' and 'is not', I meet with no proposition that is not connected with an 'ought' or 'ought not'. This change is imperceptible; but is, however, of the last consequence. For as this 'ought' or 'ought not' expresses some new relation or affirmation, 'tis necessary that it should be observed and explained, and at the same time that a reason should be given, for what seems altogether inconceivable: how this new relation can be a deduction from others, which are entirely different from it.

### (*Treatise of Human Nature* 3:1:1)

Hume's point in this passage is that the sort of moral reasoning he is describing involves what we should now call a category-mistake. In this respect he is, of course, correct. From the fact that (say) all men naturally starve without food, it clearly does not *follow* that anyone has a 'natural right' to food. The consequences of Hume being correct are not, however, as radical as is sometimes supposed. The fallacy of deriving 'ought' from 'is', as it tends to be described nowadays, is a fallacy if and only if the derivation is a formal deduction. We can perfectly well formulate a list of 'natural rights' *in the light of* what we know about natural needs, but without purporting to make a deduction; there is nothing whatsoever fallacious about this. It is, indeed, difficult to see how we might formulate such a list other than in the light of what people actually need. To this extent, Hume's point is not as damaging to natural-law type arguments as has sometimes been thought; although it has, it must be admitted, prompted moral philosophers to think about exactly what kind of claim is being made when they talk about natural or human rights.

Hume may fairly be described as a proto-utilitarian. Jeremy Bentham was impressed by the *Treatise* and clearly influenced by Hume's ideas about what motivates us to act as we do, although it is unlikely that Hume would have approved of Bentham's narrow hedonism. Hume believes that we are to account for government, and evaluate it, not by trying to measure its conformity to some such abstract idea as consent, contract or natural law, but in terms of its historical, organic development, and by reference to the consequences that make it worth our while to accept and support it. Also, although he deliberately kept himself aloof from political parties - the common assertion that he was a Tory is erroneous - he is temperamentally a conservative in much the same mould as Burke, upon whom it is hard to believe that he did not have an influence.

### *Further reading*

#### *Primary sources*

- David Hume *New Letters of David Hume*, ed. R. Kilbansky and E. C. Mossner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954).
- David Hume *Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals*, ed. E. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975).
- David Hume *A Treatise of Human Nature*, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978).
- David Hume *The History of England from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution of 1688*, ed. W. B. Todd (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Classics, 1983-5).
- David Hume *Essays Moral, Political and Literary*, ed. E. Miller (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Classics, 1985).

### *Secondary sources*

- Forbes, D. : *Hume's Philosophical Politics* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975).
- Mackie, J. L. : *Hume's Moral Theory* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980).
- Miller, D. : *Philosophy and Ideology in Hume's Political Thought* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981).
- Whelan, F. G. : *Order and Artifice in Hume's Political Philosophy* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985).