## **Sir Thomas More (1478-1535)**

Thomas More was born in London in 1478, the son of a successful lawyer. He spent part of his upbringing in the household of John Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellor. More also seems to have spent some years living among Carthusian monks and the religious life always held strong attractions for him. He was widely educated and trained as a lawyer. As well as practising law, he became a Member of Parliament in 1504, and attracted the attention of the king. He became an official and diplomat in the court of Henry VIII, and after a number of royal appointments became Lord Chancellor of England, the head of the legal system, in 1529 (he was the first layman to hold the post). In addition to his public life, More was a considerable classical scholar, a leading figure in the Northern Renaissance and a close friend of Erasmus.

More was a man of considerable charm and wit, and this is reflected in his most famous work, *Utopia*, written in Latin and published in 1516. However, More was also a deeply religious man and the advent of the Reformation in the years immediately following this publication brought out another side of his personality: he persecuted heretics with the greatest vigour. His *Utopia* was later repudiated and he refused to have it translated into English (apart from anything else, the society it portrays is a model of religious toleration). More's religious convictions eventually brought him into conflict with the king, with him refusing to accept the king's position as supreme head of the Church. He did not seek martyrdom and defended himself by every legal means. In the end, however, he would not submit and was beheaded for treason in 1535. The Roman Catholic Church beatified him in 1886, canonised him in 1935 and subsequently declared him the patron saint of politicians.

More's contribution to political theory lies entirely with his short book, *Concerning the Best State of a Commonwealth and the New Island of Utopia*, better known simply as *Utopia*. Despite its brevity, it is a very complex and enigmatic work, reflecting the personality of its author. What precisely his intentions were is still the subject of considerable scholarly debate. The ambiguities of *Utopia* begin with the title. It is a play on two Greek words *u-topia*, meaning 'no place', and *eu-topia*, meaning 'happy place'. The ambivalence continues in the name of the central character, Raphael Hythloday, with Raphael meaning 'messenger of God' and Hythloday meaning 'talker of nonsense'. Yet the two characters to whom he tells his story are More himself and a friend who did exist, and on an occasion (a diplomatic mission to the Low Countries) that really happened. These and many other puzzles, jokes and ironies make the book ambiguous as to how seriously it should all be taken and just what the author is trying to do.

After the main characters have been introduced, there is a discussion of the pros and cons of entering public life, and of some of the social problems officials of Henry VIII might face, especially poverty, vagrancy and crime. The account of Utopia that follows could be viewed as an answer to these ills, but this is far from clear.

The central character of the book is a returning traveller who tells of his visit to a wondrous land - a perfectly plausible story in that age of discovery. He tells of an island-society called Utopia, founded around the middle of the third century bce by King Utopus. It is not a state, but rather a federation of fifty-four largely independent, though remarkably uniform, citystates. Representatives meet once a year to discuss common problems, but there is no islandwide executive. In each city the people, or at least households, choose officials who organise work and form an assembly of around 200, which in turn selects higher officials to form a

senate of around twenty. A prince is elected for life (dependent on good behaviour), having been chosen by the whole body of officials from popular nominations.

Utopia is a prosperous island, although no one has any personal wealth. Precious metals and stones are treated with ostentatious contempt, yet everyone is provided for: food, shelter and other needs are fully met from communal sources, there is communal eating and all must work. There are no hereditary social classes in Utopia, which is a highly egalitarian and meritocratic society. But there is a class of scholars from which all officials and priests are chosen. Children of scholarly promise are picked out at an early age, although many of the population cultivate scholarly pursuits in their spare time. The scholars are exempt from manual work, but everyone else must work for up to six hours per day, alternating between agriculture and some town-based craft.

At the same time, Utopia is a highly authoritarian society and there is tight social discipline. The permission of elders or officials is necessary for practically everything out of the normal routine. Law is strict, although executions are rare. More serious crimes result in slavery, and slaves supplement the work of the rest.

The Utopians are remarkably tolerant when it comes to moral and religious beliefs, there being a variety of forms of worship. Yet there is a broad consensus about the existence of an all-creating deity, and a list of moral principles to which virtually all subscribe. The Utopians seem to readily take to Christianity because it is close to their own moral ideas. The implication here, deriving from Aquinas, is that religion and morality are essentially rational, needing revelation to reach completion. The Utopians, being a highly rational people, have worked these things out for themselves, as had the Ancient Greeks.

With their rational and sensible approach to every question, the Utopians have created a world of perfect harmony and happiness. But yet it cannot be More's personal vision of a perfect society, if only because it is not a Christian society. This returns us to the question of why it is written.

*Utopia* is very much a work of Renaissance Humanism. It manifests a higher opinion of what human beings can achieve by their reason than prevailed in most of the Middle Ages. Utopians are remarkably like the Ancient Greeks as Humanists saw them. The work expresses More's deep admiration for Greek thought and literature, especially Plato's *Republic*, which was a major inspiration. The community of goods and the communal life relate directly to Plato's Guardians, only here they are extended to everyone. And instead of the rather bleak intellectualism of the Platonic Guardians, we have a thirst for, and veneration of, scholarship. Utopia is a Renaissance Humanist's paradise.

In terms of religion and ideas the book is as tolerant and eclectic as was the Renaissance. It is very much a Renaissance Humanist exercise in moral philosophy, discussing issues in a light and literary yet serious way. How far it relates, or was meant to relate, to the actual conduct of affairs is difficult to gauge. It is a commentary on the ills of contemporary society, which are discussed with considerable passion. Yet the book is also partly a satire. It is clearly not More's ideal society, though it is certainly ideal in some respects, reflecting what might be possible if only humans were rational. As such it is a vehicle for More's views on a great range of topics, from church music to the conduct of war.

There are many elements mixed together. But whatever More's aims may have been, utopian literature has since been used for all these purposes and more. While More's *Utopia* is not the first picture of an ideal society (examples can be found particularly in the literature of the classical world) he did coin the word 'utopia' and began a self-conscious tradition of utopian writing that continues to this day. In keeping with More's own character, it is a complicated and ambiguous tradition. The nature and purpose of utopian literature is an open and contested question that continues to be debated by scholars.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary source*

Sir Thomas More *Utopia* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).

## *Secondary sources*

- Cousins, A. D. and Grace, D. (eds) : *More's Utopia and the Utopian Inheritance* (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1995).
- Hexter, J. H. : *More's Utopia: The Biography of an Idea* (Harper, 1965).
- Kenny, A. J. P. : *Thomas More* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983).
- Logan, G. M. : *The Meaning of More's Utopia* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1983).
- Olin, J. C. (ed.) : *Interpreting Thomas More's Utopia* (New York: Fordham University Press, 1989).
- Surtz, E. : *The Praise of Wisdom* (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 1957).