# **Nicolò Machiavelli (1469-1527)**

Nicolò Machiavelli was born in Florence, Italy, into an ancient but impoverished family. He entered the service of the republic of Florence in 1494 and was employed on diplomatic missions to France, the Holy See and Germany. When the republic fell in 1512, he was briefly imprisoned and tortured. He retired into private life and devoted himself to political analysis, military theory and the study of history, producing *The Prince* in about 1513, *The Discourses* in about 1516 and *The Art of War* in about 1520. Part of his purpose in writing *The Prince* was to ingratiate himself with Lorenzo de' Medici, to whom it is dedicated; but it was not until 1525 that he was recalled to government service. With the overthrow of the Medici in 1527, Machiavelli was again excluded from office. In the last years of his life he completed a *History of Florence*, a commentary on the historical records of Florence, offering a remarkably sophisticated account of causal relationships rather than mere chronology.

Machiavelli is not interested in the religious and ecclesiastical issues so characteristic of medieval political thought. He is on the whole hostile to Christianity, believing that a people genuinely committed to the Christian virtues of meekness and submission would not thrive in the cut-throat world of politics. He is a republican and a patriot interested in the establishment and maintenance of a strong state in the face of foreign aggression and domestic upheaval. This interest expresses itself in two main ways. In *The Prince*, Machiavelli's concern is with how one man can maintain his sway over subjects; in *The Discourses*, he addresses the question of how a republic can be made to endure and prosper by channelling the fundamentally selfish vigour of its citizens in publicly beneficial ways. Machiavelli's method is historical and comparative, relying especially upon illustrations furnished by classical antiquity. His purpose is to show how events are conditioned by the circumstances in which they occurred, to identify their causes, and to lay bare the general principles underlying human relationships and behaviour. His underlying hope seems to be that a strong prince will one day unify Italy and that a republican form of government will thereafter emerge.

Throughout his writings, Machiavelli subscribes to a consistent theory of human nature. An important aspect of this theory is the assumption that human nature is changeless. It is this that enables us to make generalisations about politics. Although their behaviour is always in some respects modified by their conditions of life, human beings exhibit the same essential characteristics, and these characteristics are not of the kind traditionally admired. Machiavelli says in *The Prince*, *One can make this generalisation about men: that they are ungrateful, fickle, liars and deceivers; they shun danger and are greedy for profit; while you treat them well they are yours . . . but when you are in danger they turn against you.*

## *(The Prince ch.17)*

In *The Discourses* (3:4) he remarks that *all men are bad, and ready to display their vicious nature whenever they find occasion for it. If their evil disposition remains concealed for a time, this must be attributed to some unknown reason, and we must assume that it has lacked occasion to show itself; but time, which has been said to be the father of all truth, does not fail to bring it to light.*

The root of man's 'evil disposition', Machiavelli believes, is inveterate selfishness. This selfishness manifests itself primarily in the desire for self-preservation and security; then, when security has been achieved, it becomes a single-minded devotion to personal power and the glory inseparable from it. Also, power means freedom: this is one of the main reasons why people value it. Even those who do not wish to rule others at least wish to have enough power to prevent themselves from falling too completely under the control of others. The world is divided into those who dominate and those who strive not to be dominated.

It is because this desire for power plays so prominent a part in human behaviour, Machiavelli believes, that political life has always been characterised by strife. Politics is not, and cannot be, about the kind of co-operation and organic interdependence that Plato and Aristotle assumed to be possible. People are able to co-operate, but they do so only in so far and for as long as co-operation serves their turn. The traditional suggestion that the point of politics is to achieve a harmonious common good is humbug. Politics necessarily involves struggle. In a monarchy, Machiavelli suggests, the struggle is that of one man to dominate all others. It is true that the prince's private gratification can also be a public good. The decisive qualities of the ruthless Italian prince Cesare Borgia are just what is needed to unite Italy. But the prince's primary purpose is his own secure tenure and free enjoyment of power. The struggle can be seen most clearly in the case of the prince who has just seized power, and whose position is therefore not buttressed by custom, apathy or the people's veneration for his family. The 'new' prince has to maintain and consolidate his position by his own adroitness alone. Ostensibly, *The Prince* is a treatise on how he may do so.

Machiavelli suggests that the prince must rely chiefly on the judicious use of force and deceit. Because we must assume that man is the slave of his own selfish passions, it is pointless and unsafe to suppose that subjects may be ruled by obtaining their rational consent or setting them a good moral example. Wherever there is a choice, men will respond to the dictates of passion rather than to the requirements of moral reason. It is therefore by manipulating the passions of others that they can be made to do what one wants them to do. There is, in politics, no such thing as an effective appeal to reason. Machiavelli suggests that there are four passions that govern human behaviour: love, hatred, fear and contempt. Love and hatred are mutually exclusive: clearly it is not possible simultaneously to love and hate someone. By the same token, it is not possible to both fear and despise someone: fear and contempt are also incompatibles. However, love and fear are compatible; so are hatred and contempt, hatred and fear, and love and contempt. The passions that the prince will most obviously seek to inspire are the compatibles of love and fear. If people hate and despise their ruler, they cannot be controlled and they will, indeed, be anxious to act against him. Love and fear are therefore to be induced, and contempt and hatred avoided. The worst thing that can happen to a ruler in seeking to maintain his power, Machiavelli suggests, is that he be despised. Thus, though love and fear are best, hatred and fear are to be preferred to love and contempt. Any combination with fear will be good because it will mean that subjects can be controlled through their fear. Any combination with contempt, however, even if that combination is love, is to be avoided because it will rob the ruler of his power to coerce: fear and contempt are incompatibles. It is not essential to be loved, but it is essential to be feared - and it is even more essential not to be despised.

What this means, in plain terms, is that the foundation of the prince's power is force and his willingness to use it ruthlessly. This accounts for Machiavelli's assertion that the only arts that the prince need acquire are the military arts. Many of Machiavelli's Renaissance contemporaries, and many of his forebears in the history of political thought, had taken it as a truism that the prince should be a cultivated and humane man: a patron of the arts, godly, wise, learned and so forth. To Machiavelli, though, the proper study of the prince is the art of war. This is because, for Machiavelli, politics itself is only a kind of muted or ritualised

warfare. His takes it for granted that, in quality if not in scale, the relations between a ruler and his subjects are the same as those between sovereign states. It is as if subjects are perpetually at war with their ruler, just as states are always potentially or actually at war with one another. The prince's correct general policy, therefore, is to ensure that there is no one who has sufficient power to challenge him, because, if such persons exist, he must assume that lust for power will induce them to challenge him indeed. Moreover, war between states, Machiavelli thinks, can never be avoided, only postponed; the prince who does not realise this is heading for disaster. If there are neighbouring powers capable of challenging the power of the prince, war is inevitable, because neither side can rest secure until the threat from the other is removed. So it is always best to attack if one has the advantage or to destroy the other's advantage by diplomacy if not. War should never be postponed to one's own detriment. Above all, if the prince is forced to injure others, he should do it in such a way as to deprive them of power permanently or destroy them altogether. If he does not do this, desire for revenge will augment their natural ambition and they will leave no stone unturned in their efforts to undermine him.

Machiavelli's view of morality and politics is, then, very different from the traditional insistence that the good ruler is necessarily also a good man: that he will exhibit moral virtue in his own life and conduct; that he will set a good example to his subjects; that he will seek to secure the common good rather than his own good merely; that he will submit to the guidance of the Church. To the Machiavelli of *The Prince*, politics is simply about getting and keeping power. He attaches to the word 'virtue' a quasi-technical meaning. Virtue, to Machiavelli - it is the custom in discussing his view to retain the Italian spelling, *virtù* - is not moral virtue; rather, it is a particular kind of skill or aptitude, combined, of course, with the will to use it.

We can amplify this idea by examining the relationship, which Machiavelli sketches in *The Prince*, between *virtù* and *fortuna*. There is, he remarks, a considerable extent to which we are all in the hands of the fickle goddess Fortuna, and experience teaches us that there is no necessary connection between the traditional moral virtues and the incidence of good and ill fortune. An honest and skilful merchant may have all his ships sunk in a storm, and his honesty will not help him. A diligent and godfearing farmer may still have all his crops destroyed in a storm. Life does not run in comfortable grooves; unpredictable and unexpected things happen; we inhabit a morally incoherent world in which there is no necessary relation between what one deserves and what one gets. And nowhere is this unpredictability and moral incoherence more evident than in the political forum. Those who occupy the shifting and unstable world of politics are pre-eminently in the hands of fortune. For them, there is certainly no connection between desert and reward. They do not know from one day to the next what will happen, how loyalties will change, how the balance of force will alter, and so on.

In contrast to the unstable and contingent world of practical affairs, however, stands the fact that, on the whole, human beings have rigid and inflexible temperaments. A man's character and disposition, Machiavelli observes, and therefore his mode of procedure, are normally fairly fixed and constant. Indeed, what might be termed a traditional moral education calls upon one to cultivate such a fixed and constant disposition (one is not brought up, after all, to be virtuous only sometimes or when it serves one's purposes). But what is the good of having an inflexible mode of procedure in a world where the necessities under which fortune places one are subject to such variation? Always to act in the same way regardless of the circumstances in which you find yourself is, Machiavelli insists, a recipe for disaster. This is

particularly true, of course, if you are a prince - especially a new prince - trying to survive in the volatile and merciless world of politics.

In a nutshell, then, we can say that, for Machiavelli, *virtù* is that quality or prowess which enables an individual to encounter the blows of fortune and overcome them by whatever means are necessary. Fortune, he tells us, uttering in the process a celebrated piece of political incorrectness, is like a wilful and headstrong woman. A man should cope with her, just as he would with any wilful and headstrong woman, by beating her into submission. In his encounters with fortune, it will not do for the prince to be bound by a rigid moral temperament. He must be adaptable. He must be ready and able to use both the lion and the fox in him: he must be able to be both man and beast. When mercy is appropriate, let him be merciful; but when it is appropriate for him to be merciless, savage and terrifying, let him be these things too. Let him be honest and truthful where necessary; but let him lie and break faith if he must. The prince must do whatever circumstances require, and if those circumstances require him to disregard traditional moral values and Christian ways of behaving, then so be it. It is self-defeating to behave in ways that will increase one's chances of losing power or to omit to behave in ways that will increase one's chances of keeping it.

Many of Machiavelli's contemporaries held, and many of his subsequent critics have held, that he is a teacher of evil. By the early seventeenth century, Machiavelli's name had become a synonym for tyranny and perfidy. But it is easy enough to see that Machiavelli does not counsel wickedness and that his prince is not a wicked man. Machiavelli is quite ready to concede that, from the point of view of ordinary morality, necessity requires political actors to do deplorable things. This may be regrettable, but the fact remains that the prince who cannot alter his mode of procedure to suit changing circumstances will not be a prince for long. This is a fact of life and there is no point, Machiavelli thinks, in wringing one's hands about it. Most people cannot deviate from what their character or education predispose them to; or perhaps, having prospered by walking in one path, they cannot persuade themselves to adopt another. If one could change one's mode of procedure and character to suit the varying conditions of one's life, one's fortune would never change. The successful prince, Machiavelli thinks, is a man who can do precisely this. The ability by which he counteracts the effects of fortune is the ability to be infinitely flexible, to bend with the breeze. Everything he does is done because circumstances require it; he does nothing merely because his character or moral principle dictate it. We might, therefore, most easily describe the prince as amoral. He is neither good nor bad, neither wicked nor the reverse. He has *no* moral character in the traditional sense of the term. He does not have a fixed disposition or habit of mind to act in a certain way. Unlike most men, who do have such fixed dispositions, he is able to be either completely virtuous or utterly vicious, and he knows how to be both. The traditional moral virtues are simply no part of his character. They are not absolutes to which he adheres through thick and thin. They are simply modes of action, which he can pick up and discard at will.

Machiavelli's assumptions about human nature and behaviour lead him to conclude that, though power is most easily studied in the case of the new prince, a republic is a healthier and more successful form of government than a monarchy. This is the theme of *The Discourses*: a quite different work from *The Prince*, but resting on the same presuppositions. In a monarchy, one man has supreme power. One man is in a position to stifle - and, if he is to survive, must stifle - the manly impulses of all those subject to him. In a republic, every individual is a prince: every individual is able to develop and deploy his own *virtù* in defence of his security, freedom and property, thereby producing a kind of collective or public *virtù*

that conduces to the welfare and safety of all. In a monarchy, Machiavelli says, only one man is free; in a republic, all are free. This collective *virtù* does not arise out of friendship or altruism. Men co-operate because they know that collective wisdom and effort is, on the whole, better than that of any individual. Each man co-operates with others so far as is necessary to secure his own good, while at the same time competing with others for the things that men value - glory, honour, riches. A republic furnishes everyone with both the benefits of co-operation and the opportunity to develop *virtù* by striving with others to assert himself in an open forum. Republics will be more stable than monarchies, more able to defend themselves and more successful at extending their territories by war, not because they somehow submerge or counteract human self-assertiveness, but because they give it freer range and so produce sturdy, indomitable, self-reliant individuals.

Human nature being what it is, the problem confronting a republic is that of ensuring that it does not become a tyranny; or, at any rate, of delaying the process of deterioration for as long as possible. Republics can only be stable if they enable men to compete with one another creatively without allowing anyone to acquire so much power that he can simply dominate everyone else. There is bound to be conflict between the aristocracy or commercial elites and the mass of the people. The former will wish to dominate the latter; the latter will wish to remain free. Such conflict is inevitable and energising. The struggle between the plebeians and the Senate in the Roman republic is the example to which Machiavelli looks. Opposing interests produce the force by which good laws are generated, provided such conflict is kept in bounds by properly designed political institutions. Machiavelli realises that actual governmental forms will vary according to the circumstances of the people in question, but the best form of state, he thinks, will be a republic with a mixed constitution rather like that favoured by Aristotle. Where the people have a meaningful share in government, all are able to feel secure in their honour, property and person. The laws must be clear and made known: the citizens must know with a high degree of certainty what they can and cannot do with impunity. General economic prosperity should be encouraged, but excessive individual wealth and luxury prevented by the laws. Due recognition must be given to the merits of citizens, and advancement in the service of the state should be open to those who seek honour and glory. There should be a state religion for the inculcation and maintenance of civic virtue. This religion should not, however, be Christianity, which encourages weakness and submission. There should be a citizen army, both to defend the republic and to extend its possessions by wars of aggression. The army should serve an educational as well as a military purpose: it should instil in citizens a respect for authority, patriotism and martial virtues. It will also provide a means for individual ambition to find its natural and healthy expression. Life in a republic should not be too comfortable. Social cohesion and vigour are most readily secured in conditions of hardship and crisis. Such conditions bring out the best in a people and encourage them to work together. Ease and security are inconsistent with public *virtù* not because they make people selfish, but because they turn their natural selfishness inwards and make it destructive.

In short, Machiavelli regards political activity as being the activity of individuals with power of various kinds and degrees who are trying to keep what they have and acquire more. *The Prince* and *The Discourses* are not radically different; nor are they contradictory. Both share a view of human nature as individualistic, competitive and, where necessary, ruthless and unscrupulous. *The Prince* is an essay on how the prince is to control the forces of human nature to his own advantage; *The Discourses* is a treatise on how these forces can be harnessed in such a way as to secure unity and public safety. But the forces involved in each case are the same. It is often said that Machiavelli is the first political theorist to give serious

attention to the idea of *raison d'état*. This may be so, but it is not the whole story. Machiavelli admires the combination of practical qualities that he calls *virtù*, even where no particular *raison d'état* is at stake. He does so because, at heart, he is fascinated not so much by outcomes as by the phenomenon of power itself. One cannot help forming the impression that, for Machiavelli, the ends to which power is applied are of secondary importance. He admires Cesare Borgia - an individual who, by all ordinary standards, is a cruel and vicious tyrant - for his effectiveness, not his moral character. Unlike the great majority of his forebears and contemporaries, Machiavelli really does believe that politics is a morally neutral art. The fact that he, more than anyone, established this as a respectable view of how political events and relationships are to be analysed is what gives his career its significance in the history of political thought.

### *Further reading*

#### *Primary sources*

- Nicolò Machiavelli *The Discourses*, ed. L. J. Walker and B. Crick (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970).
- Nicolò Machiavelli *The Prince*, ed. Q. Skinner and R. Price (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).

### *Secondary sources*

- Pocock, J. G. A. : *The Machiavellian Moment* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1975).
- Skinner, Q. R. D. : *The Foundations of Modern Political Thought*, vol. 1: *The Renaissance* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
- Skinner, Q. R. D. : *Machiavelli* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).
- Viroli, M. : *Machiavelli* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998).