## **Montesquieu (1689-1755)**

Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de la Brède et de Montesquieu, was born at La Brède, France. He was educated at the Oratorian collège de Juilly from 1700 to 1705 and thereafter at the University of Bordeaux, where he read law. In 1716 he inherited from his uncle the barony of Montesquieu and the office of Président à Mortier of the Parlement de Guyenne at Bordeaux. His literary reputation was established in 1721 with the publication of his *Lettres persanes* (*Persian Letters*), a satire on French life, customs and political institutions in the form of letters supposedly written by two bemused Persian travellers. In 1728 he was elected, though by no means unanimously, to the Académie française. He spent the years between 1728 and 1731 travelling in Europe. He lived for a short time in England, and his experience of English life and politics left a deep impression on his mind. In 1734 he published his *Considérations sur les causes de la grandeur et de la décadence des romains* (*The Causes of the Greatness and Decline of the Romans*). Part of the purpose of this work is to emphasise the extent to which Roman history was the product of the external circumstances that shaped the Romans' lives and actions. This emphasis on external circumstances foreshadows one of the important themes of the work for which Montesquieu is best remembered, *De l'esprit des lois* (The Spirit of the Laws, 1748).

Reading *De l'esprit des lois* is an arduous task. It is very long, and it exhibits a notorious lack of form and coherence. Its literary peculiarities are to some extent, though only to some extent, deliberate. Montesquieu wrote obscurely partly to shield the susceptibilities of plain folk from the possibly unsettling effects of his doctrines, partly to set his readers the challenge of unravelling his meanings for themselves, and partly to evade censorship (of which he seems to have been inordinately fearful: all three of his major works were at first published abroad and anonymously). Thanks to these peculiarities, *De l'esprit des lois* is not an easy work to summarise without distortion. This should be borne in mind throughout the following account.

The universe, Montesquieu observes, exhibits as part of its nature the kind of regularities that we call laws. Laws in this sense are 'necessary relationships deriving from the very nature of things'. Even God is bound by the 'laws' - the necessary conditions - that make creative activity possible. Those parts of the law of the universe that pertain to human behaviour are, predictably enough, called 'natural laws'. Natural laws relate to the achievement of such basic imperatives of human existence as protection and reproduction, but they are not mere instincts. They prescribe what we should do, and what they prescribe is discoverable by human reason. By nature, however, men are solitary and fearful, and their reason is developed only to a very rudimentary degree. It requires pressure or stimulus to activate and refine reason. Sociability develops as they begin to discover the pleasures and advantages of life with others of their own kind; but the development of sociability is immediately productive of strife, as men begin to exhibit their natural tendency to exploit one another. For Montesquieu, as for Hobbes, the primitive or ungoverned condition of mankind - the 'State of Nature' - would be a state of misery and terror. It is under the impulse of such terror that man's hitherto torpid reason teaches him that it is necessary to devise and enforce positive laws that will enable him to achieve peace and security. This, at the most basic level of explanation, is how government emerges. Montesquieu's argument is, it will be noticed, something of a blend of Rousseau and Hobbes, and his account of law owes something to St Thomas Aquinas.

Government as a general phenomenon, then, is created by common humanity and its needs, but the particular ways in which government manifests itself are diverse. This diversity arises from the fact that human needs, though universal, will be expressed and met in different ways by different peoples, according to their different circumstances. The form taken by government and law will depend on the 'general spirit of each nation', and this spirit will itself be determined by a number of variables: climate, soil, occupation, history, geographical location, religion and so forth. It is commonly said that Montesquieu's emphasis on the physical, environmental and cultural factors that give a society its character is the earliest attempt to write a sociology of politics. It may fairly be pointed out, however, that, in emphasising how different circumstances favour and produce different constitutional forms, Montesquieu is really only pursuing the kind of analysis pioneered by Aristotle. Montesquieu identifies three main types of government, although these types will be modified by environmental influences: despotisms, republics and monarchies. Each kind of government has what he calls a 'nature' and a 'principle'. Its 'nature' is defined by where sovereign power is located in it; its 'principle', in the absence of which it will not work successfully, is a suitable disposition or condition of mind - a 'modification of soul' - on the part of those subject to it. Despotism, again predictably enough, is in its 'nature' arbitrary and capricious government by one person. It is an unnatural form of government from which law is absent. It tends to be characteristic of large empires and hot climates. Its 'principle' is the fear or servility of those under it. Republican government is a blend of aristocracy and democracy, requiring of its citizens a strong sense of civic virtue or public spirit, which will motivate them to subordinate private interests to public or patriotic ones. Montesquieu admires republics, but he considers that the standards of selflessness and public service that they demand are often achieved at the cost of institutionalising a rigid morality that stultifies the individualism of their citizens. Life in a virtuous republic is, he says, rather like life in a monastery. Monarchy is government by one man tempered by the countervailing influence of 'intermediate powers' such as the parlements, chartered towns, nobility and clergy. It will depend, Montesquieu thinks, on a sense of honour, by which he seems chiefly to mean a strong sense of rank and distinction, and, in particular, a taste for military accomplishment. Again, the dependence of Montesquieu on Aristotle's description of constitutional forms and their variations is clear enough. Although he believes himself to be engaging in a value-free analysis of political forms, he cannot in practice separate his analyses from his own convictions about the contemporary political evils of France. A monarchy is what Montesquieu thinks France should be; a despotic regime is what he thinks it has become under the centralising tendencies of Richelieu and Louis XIV.

What form of constitution, then, is most compatible with liberty: that is, what constitutional arrangements will best enable individuals to live their lives without interference and enjoy their property in peace? The answer, Montesquieu thinks, is monarchy, and, in particular, monarchy of the kind observable in England. His famous discussion of the English constitution comes in Book XI of *De l'esprit des lois*. Old-fashioned feudal monarchies derived their stability from the uneasily balanced distribution of power between king, nobles and clergy. In contemporary England, this equipoise has come to express itself in a formal 'separation of powers'. Legislative, judicial and executive functions are in different hands, and the various mechanisms through which these functions are expressed operate as 'checks and balances' upon one another. Power cannot therefore achieve unwholesome concentrations, despotism cannot arise, and the liberty of all is guaranteed. Montesquieu also thinks that the English dedication to commerce is a civilising influence. Quite apart from the material benefits of prosperity, commerce broadens outlooks; it tends to overcome destructive religious and national differences; the desire to engage in peaceful trade cures human beings

of their addiction to military exploits; it inculcates the virtues of thrift, diligence, moderation, prudence and order. Montesquieu believes that the political ills of France, where the executive, legislative and judicial powers are concentrated in the king's hands, are in principle capable of being cured by the importation of the main features of English government; though he understands, of course, that any imitation by one nation of the customs and practices of another would have to take full account of differences of history and culture.

It is not easy to give a brief evaluation of Montesquieu. *De l'esprit des lois* tends to be regarded as the classic work of French Enlightenment political thought, but there is nothing truly original in it; nor is his analysis of the English constitution a very accurate account of what the English constitution was like in the middle of the eighteenth century. He claims to have studied it first-hand, but most of what he says seems to depend on Locke, Harrington and Bolingbroke. Even the famous 'separation of powers' doctrine is really no more than a version of the 'mixed' constitution discussed by Plato, Aristotle and Polybius. Montesquieu's erudition is wide but not deep, his analyses are often prejudiced and subjective, and the writing and organisation of *De l'esprit des lois* is incoherent in ways that often suggest a failure of literary skill rather than intentional policy. Despite all negative comments, however, it is impossible not to admire the size and ambition of his undertakings. He was the first modern thinker to attempt an investigation of the effects of geography, environment and other externalities upon political institutions. His reputation also owes much to the esteem in which he was held by the draftsmen of the Constitution of the United States. His influence has been immense, and on the strength of it he holds a place of great importance in the history of political thought.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Montesquieu *The Political Theory of Montesquieu*, ed. M. Richter (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977).
- Montesquieu *The Spirit of the Laws*, ed. A. M. Cohler , B. C. Miller and H. S. Stone (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).

## *Secondary sources*

- Durkheim, E. : *Montesquieu and Rousseau: Forerunners of Sociology*, ed. R. Mannheim (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1960).
- Pangle, T. L. : *Montesquieu's Philosophy of Liberalism* (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1973).
- Shackleton, R. : *Montesquieu: A Critical Biography* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961).