## **Prince Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921) and Anarchism**

Prince Peter Kropotkin was born into a Russian noble family in Moscow in 1842. He was educated at the elite military academy in St Petersburg, and had the honour of becoming *page de chambre* to the Tsar. After graduating as top student, Kropotkin unexpectedly chose to join an unfashionable regiment in Siberia. There he was able to become involved in local reform and lead scientifically important explorations of eastern Russia and parts of China. His work on the structure of the mountains of northern Asia gained him an international reputation as a physical geographer. He also read widely in history and politics. After five years he resigned his commission and returned to St Petersburg to continue his education and his scientific work.

Already strongly influenced by anarchist ideas, in 1872 Kropotkin visited Switzerland and the French region of the Jura, then a hotbed of anarchist sympathy and activity. There he completed his conversion to anarchism. On his return he became involved in the revolutionary politics of the Populist movement, which believed in the transformation of Russia into a socialist society based on the traditional Russian peasant commune rather than on the Western model of industrialisation and a revolutionary proletariat. Kropotkin was imprisoned for his revolutionary activities, but after a spectacular escape in 1876 spent the next forty years in exile in Western Europe.

Initially Kropotkin continued his career as a political activist and writer in Switzerland and the Jura. But after expulsion by the Swiss and imprisonment by the French (1883-6) he settled in London to become the anarchist movement's leading theorist and publicist. Only at the end of his life, in 1917, did he return to Russia, but he was soon disillusioned with the new regime. His funeral in 1921 was attended by 20,000 anarchists, the last public demonstration of anarchist sympathies in the Soviet Union.

Kropotkin's anarchism grew out of two sources. The first was his Russian experience, particularly in Siberia among ordinary Russians capable of organising themselves far from the remote centres of power. The second was his reading of the major social anarchists, Proudhon and Bakunin.

The anarchist tradition in Western political thought is only as old as the French Revolution. The first anarchist thinker was William Godwin, who thought of society in terms of a collection of individuals in need of complete freedom to allow their natural rationality to flourish. The first exponent of a more social version of anarchism was the Frenchman Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-65). His vision, despite his famous declaration that property was theft, was of a pre-industrial world of independent farmers and craftsmen, owning their own businesses and associating in local communities, which then federate together for mutual benefit, without the need for any higher political authority. A more integrated and thoroughgoing conception of communist anarchism was developed by Michael Bakunin (1814-76), who was primarily a full-time revolutionary. As a theorist he was rather spasmodic and inconsistent, and never developed a firm foundation for his thought. His vision of what an anarcho-communist society would be like is rather sketchy. All private property would be abolished and social life would be in communes that could associate together. He insisted that everyone must be educated and must work, implying a rather authoritarian element in a society supposedly devoted to absolute freedom.

Kropotkin was influenced by both of these thinkers and sought to build on their achievement. In particular he attempted to give a more systematic account of anarchist society than his predecessors and to place anarchism on more secure rational foundations. Kropotkin was a prolific writer, producing a multitude of books, articles and other materials on anarchist ideas. The fullest account of his vision of an anarchist society is to be found in Prince Peter Kropotkin *The Conquest of Bread* (1892), supplemented by Prince Peter Kropotkin *Fields, Factories and Workshops* (1899). His attempt to place anarchism on solid scientific foundations is to be found in his most famous book: Prince Peter Kropotkin *Mutual Aid* (1902).

Although he personally abhorred violence, Kropotkin thought that a violent revolution was necessary to usher in an anarchist world. Only a general uprising of the people could create the situation where the state could be abolished immediately and federations of selfgoverning communes take its place. Anarchists would lead and persuade but not take power. Like Proudhon and Bakunin, Kropotkin would have no truck with elite parties in possession of the truth.

The communities and productive associations that Kropotkin believed would spontaneously arise when people's natural sociability was released from the constraints imposed by the state would be completely voluntary and self-governing, and entirely without means of coercion. People would opt, he thought, to dispense with private property and to work without incentives, such as differential rewards: a system of 'free communism' he sometimes called it. The economy would be neither free-market nor planned. Kropotkin envisaged a decentralised and largely self-sufficient regional and local economy.

All would be equal, would work when they wished and take whatever they needed from the common store. There would be little or no crime because, with no more private property or exploitation, its causes would have been eliminated. But if there were those who committed criminal acts then they should be counselled rather than punished. For those who were lazy and would not work, Kropotkin admitted that a degree of social pressure through public opinion would be acceptable, but not coercion. He thought that most would in fact want to work and contribute to the well-being of themselves and others. This may sound naïve, but, Kropotkin argued, we would be foolish to simply assume that people would behave the same way as they did under capitalism.

If properly shared, work would only take up four or five hours per day. The rest of the time people would be free to develop themselves, for which purpose a multitude of associations would spring up, devoted to science or literature or any number of things people are interested in. People would thus have full scope to develop their individuality.

Much of Kropotkin's theoretical energy was devoted to giving anarchism a secure rational foundation, and as a scientist of some distinction his intention was to ground anarchist ideas in scientific observation and theory. The scientific theory here is Darwinian evolution. As with Herbert Spencer and other social Darwinists, Kropotkin sought to derive from biological science a sociology that would indicate a form of society that corresponded to basic human nature. In Prince Peter Kropotkin *Mutual Aid* (1902), he claimed to refute the contention that since competition was the 'way of nature', as evolutionary theory seemed to suggest, a competitive free-market society was in some sense 'natural' and desirable. Instead he sought to demonstrate, with a wide range of examples, that co-operation and social solidarity were more important than competition in the evolution of both animals and humans. Future

evolution and therefore progress would be the result of greater co-operation, facilitated by the removal of the huge obstacles of capitalism and the state, thereby releasing humanity's natural sociability.

How far Kropotkin was successful in putting anarchism on a scientific footing is open to some doubt. Certainly he assembles empirical evidence that small traditional communities can flourish without central control, but he has little evidence for anything larger. As to founding a sociology on evolution, he cannot prove that co-operation must prevail over competition, or that one is more 'natural' than the other. Even if he could, he cannot say that co-operation is morally superior to competition. His last work, *Ethics*, which was unfinished at his death, was a systematic attempt to derive an ethics from biology. But the attempt involves the well-known fallacy that from fact alone we can deduce what is the morally right thing to do, and is a failure. In the end, belief that a society based on mutual aid is the optimum society in which human beings can flourish is not something that can be proven.

Kropotkin was the major theoretical figure in anarchism's heyday in the late nineteenth century and his anarchist vision became the predominant one, only rivalled by the later development of anarchosyndicalism based on trade unionism (see Georges Sorel). Anarchism, in these two forms, was a serious rival to socialism for the allegiance of the European working class up to World War I. Thereafter it went into serious decline as a mass movement, although there have always been anarchist groups, normally taking their vision of an anarchist future from Kropotkin. There was something of a revival of anarchist ideas in the New Left movement of the 1960s. Today, anarchism is particularly associated with the green movement and as part of the general anti-globalisation movement. Some see it as peculiarly fitted to a postmodern age, but anarchism remains very much a minority view, and a peripheral but useful challenge to prevailing ideas.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Prince Peter Kropotkin *Mutual Aid* (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1939).
- Prince Peter Kropotkin *The Conquest of Bread and Other Writings*, ed. Marshall Shatz (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).

## *Secondary sources*

- Avrich, P. : *The Russian Anarchists* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1967).
- Cahm, C. : *Kropotkin and the Rise of Revolutionary Anarchism 1872-1886* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
- Marshall, P. : *Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism* (London: Fontana Press, 1993).
- Miller, D. : *Anarchism* (London: Dent, 1984).
- Miller, M. A. : *Kropotkin* (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 1976).