## **Herbert Marcuse (1898-1979) and the Frankfurt School**

Herbert Marcuse was born into a prosperous Jewish family in Berlin in 1898. After service in World War I, his early involvement with revolutionary politics ended with the failure of the Communist Revolution in Germany in 1919. Marcuse then studied for a doctorate in literature and spent a number of years in publishing, before turning to the study of philosophy under Husserl and Heidegger. He then joined the Frankfurt Institute of Social Research in 1933. With the rise of the Nazis in the same year, he left Germany and followed the Institute to America. During the war, Marcuse worked for American Intelligence and for a while for the State Department (later a cause of embarrassment among his student followers). He resumed his academic career in America in the early 1950s and his subsequent writings helped to inspire the New Left and radical student movements there, for which he became something of an international figurehead. Their failure was a great disappointment and led to a progressive decline in Marcuse's standing as a thinker.

For most of his career Marcuse was associated with the Frankfurt School, which was founded as the Institute of Social Research by a group of young middle-class intellectuals in 1923. Although officially part of Frankfurt University, the Institute was funded by the wealthy family of one of its founders, which gave it a good deal of independence. The Institute was devoted to interdisciplinary social research from a broadly Marxist point of view (see Karl Marx), seeking to integrate empirical and theoretical work. However, it was only after Max Horkheimer became Director in 1930 that it began to develop the distinctive voice of the Frankfurt School. After leaving Germany in 1933, the Institute was refounded at Columbia University in New York, where it remained until its return to Germany around 1950, along with such leading figures as Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno. Marcuse remained in America.

The distinctive outlook of the Frankfurt School grew out of disillusionment with the official 'orthodox' Marxism of social democratic parties such as the German SPD and the Marxism-Leninism of the Soviets. Both were considered too rigidly mechanical and scientistic, and too prone to reduce everything to economic determinism (Marcuse later attacked Marxism-Leninism, in his book *Soviet Marxism: A Critical Analysis*, 1958, for generating a monstrous totalitarianism). What was thought to be missing was an understanding of individuals and their experience of domination. Various attempts were made, using non-Marxist ideas, to solve the problem. Before joining the School, Marcuse had attempted to fuse Marxism and existentialism. However, the solution turned out to be provided by Marx himself. In 1932 Marx's recently discovered *Paris Manuscripts* were published for the first time. This document revealed a more humanistic Marx, concerned with alienation and domination, and the possibilities of liberation. The Frankfurt School argued that it represented a truer Marx, before positivism and economic determinism began to distort his work. Marcuse wrote the first major review of the *Paris Manuscripts* and his first book, Reason and Revolution (1941), stressed the Hegelian and non-positivist roots of Marxism.

This new Marxism became the basis of the Frankfurt School's outlook and programme, which they termed 'critical theory'; it was formulated by Horkheimer in a series of articles in 1937. He rejected any claim that theory could be objective and value-free, and such theories as purported to be so merely supported the *status quo*. All theory had to be from a certain point of view and critical theory's stance was from the point of view of humanity in need of liberation, which in practice meant using dialectical reasoning to analyse the forms of human domination with a view to revealing the possibilities of liberation. It also involved seeing

virtually all other forms of theory or knowledge as favouring the existing system of domination. The School was committed to a revolutionary transformation of society by means of changing consciousness, rather than awaiting capitalism's collapse through the working out of its own contradictions.

Positivism was the particular bugbear of the Frankfurt School. Positivist philosophy claimed for science a monopoly of knowledge, thereby marginalising any reasoning to do with values and moral purposes. The School insisted that the essence of science was not the pursuit of knowledge but the domination of nature. Science and positivist philosophy tended to reduce everything in nature, including human beings, to objects governed by mathematical relationships. This tendency was reinforced by capitalism, which tended to reduce everything, including human attributes, to commodities with the common measure of value in money terms. Ultimately this would lead to the destruction of individuality and civilisation, and to the triumph of totalitarianism. Furthermore, since scientific reasoning was only concerned with observed regularities, all science served to reinforce the *status quo* and close off any discussion of how the world could be better.

Positivism was also held responsible for the permeation of society by the kind of instrumental reasoning that technology represented, as strictly concerned with the most efficient means of control and manipulation. Their fears were strongly influenced by those of Max Weber, who saw the rationalisation and bureaucratisation of society as dominating social and economic life to such an extent as to threaten to crush all freedom and individuality, a process he referred to as the 'iron cage of modernity'. Unlike Weber, however, the Frankfurt School saw capitalism as at the root of the process, forever extending its control of society.

This analysis of science and positivism culminated in Herbert Marcuse *Dialectic of Enlightenment* (1947), by Horkheimer and Adorno, in which they argued that the eighteenthcentury Enlightenment's aspiration to create a world of universal freedom and happiness through reason had in fact resulted in its opposite: a world dominated by totalitarian oppression. Inevitably, the rise of the Nazis was a major subject for the Frankfurt School, with several accounts of the 'authoritarian personality' and related themes; the School initially saw it as a necessary consequence of the development of capitalism. Humanity was there to be dominated and manipulated, which taken to its logical conclusion led to fascism.

However, even if the overt oppression of fascism had been defeated, the prosperous West nevertheless kept the working class in comfortable slavery, deprived of the will to change the world. So complete did this seem to be becoming in the post-war world, that Horkheimer and Adorno despaired of any possibility of revolution. Of the leading Frankfurt School figures, only Marcuse was able to find renewed revolutionary hope in new theoretical developments and fresh sources of activism.

Marcuse turned first to psychoanalysis. In Eros and Civilization (1955), he attempted to fuse Marxism with Freudian ideas - indeed, Freud rather eclipses Marx in the book. Using Freud was not new to the Frankfurt School (Eric Fromm and others had used Freudian ideas, especially in trying to demonstrate the social psychology of fascism), but nothing as thoroughgoing as Marcuse's attempted absorption had been attempted. What Marcuse sought to do was to rewrite Freud's theory of the relationship between civilisation and sexual repression. Freud had argued, in *Civilization and its Discontents* and elsewhere, that the powerful instinctual drives that human beings possess, especially the sexual, have to be repressed in order that civilisation - institutions, businesses, states and empires, high art - can be created. Sexual energy has to be rechannelled to make it available for other purposes. The greater the level of civilisation, the greater the level of repression there must be. Thus, civilisation comes at a heavy price in terms of widespread individual unhappiness and a high incidence of mental illness. Freud's bleak conclusion was that there was no answer to this relationship between civilisation and unhappiness. Repression was an inescapable accompaniment of any kind of advanced human society. Marcuse, however, disagreed.

Marcuse argued that the need to redirect sexual energy to build civilisation was only true of times of scarcity, including most of human history, but that in a time of abundance, like the present in the West, the repression was no longer necessary. It becomes 'surplus repression' (echoing Marx's 'surplus value'), which is used to maintain the existing socio-economic system rather than creating more civilisation. Because this repression was inessential, it was a form of repression that could be exposed, resisted and overthrown.

Marcuse was a strong advocate of violent revolution to create an ideal society, which he characterised in terms of an 'eroticised' society. This did not mean, as was frequently claimed, a utopia of endless sexual gratification. Marcuse associated the erotic with all that was free, joyful and life-enhancing, including play, the arts and philosophy, as well as sexual freedom. Such a world Marcuse regarded as genuinely fulfilling the Enlightenment ideal of a rational world in which all are free and happy. Whatever society fell short of this ideal and whatever was an obstacle to it, Marcuse regarded as correspondingly irrational.

In his most famous and influential work, One Dimensional Man (1964), Marcuse attacked both advanced capitalist and advanced communist societies. In particular, he analysed the way the individual under post-war capitalism was subject to more subtle forms of oppression: a new totalitarianism, based upon technology and mass culture, that distracted the workers with consumer goods and cheap mass entertainment, removing any impulse to revolution and even the desire to reflect upon experience in any critical way. The result is the shallow 'onedimensional' person typical of modern society.

*One Dimensional Man* is a pessimistic book, although Marcuse does not despair in the manner of Horkheimer and Adorno. The working class is thus removed as a revolutionary subject, but there are other possibilities. Marcuse puts his hope in those who have yet to be processed and brainwashed by the system (students in particular) and in those excluded or marginalised by the system (women, blacks, gays and the poor). These would be the source of new revolutionary thought and action. *One Dimensional Man* made Marcuse an international figure, putting him in the thick of the New Left movement, advising radical groups all over the world and turning out a stream of books and articles attacking all aspects of modern society and encouraging radical movements.

However, much to Marcuse's disappointment, the revolutionary fervour of the 1960s rather fizzled out in the 1970s; Marcuse devoted his last works to aesthetics and his view that art expresses human striving for freedom and happiness. Being such a high-profile revolutionary thinker and activist, Marcuse was subject to much criticism from all directions. Much of it applies to the Frankfurt School as a whole. More orthodox Marxists complained of their abandonment of central doctrines, the substitution of psychology and cultural criticism for political economy, their despair of the revolutionary potential of the working class, the importation of alien theories, and so on. Marxists and non-Marxists alike objected to the use of Freud, especially by Marcuse, as arbitrary and unconvincing.

Marcuse and the rest of his Frankfurt School colleagues are criticised on all sides for their treatment of science. To suggest, as Marcuse does, that all science, not merely its technological application, together with formal logic, are fundamentally repressive and supportive of the *status quo* hardly bears examination. For logic, science and technology, he offers alternatives that do not stand up. Marcuse never tells us what his alternative science and technology might look like, while the reliance upon dialectic as a superior sort of logic is arbitrary and self-serving. Similarly, Marcuse demands a wholesale destruction of contemporary society with no very clear idea of what to put in its place.

Marcuse and the Frankfurt School were important in the revival of Marxism and the radical tradition in general, expanding its horizons to include changes in modern capitalist society and provide fresh focus on culture. Since his death in 1979 Marcuse has become a somewhat neglected figure. However, there remains a considerable body of unpublished work, which may be the basis of revived interest in due course. In the meanwhile, the Frankfurt School continued with a new generation of thinkers, the most notable of whom has been Jürgen Habermas.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Herbert Marcuse *Reason and Revolution* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1941).
- Herbert Marcuse *Eros and Civilization* (Boston, MA: The Beacon Press, 1955).
- Herbert Marcuse *One Dimensional Man: The Ideology of Industrial Society* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964).
- Herbert Marcuse *Soviet Marxism: A Critical Analysis* (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1971).

## *Secondary sources*

- Geoghegan, V. : *Reason and Eros: The Social Theory of Herbert Marcuse* (London: Pluto Press, 1981).
- Held, D. : *Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas* (London: Hutchinson, 1980).
- Kellner, D. : *Herbert Marcuse and the Crisis of Marxism* (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1984).
- Reitz, C. : *Art, Alienation and the Humanities: A Critical Engagement with Herbert Marcuse* (New York: New York University Press, 2000).