# **Michel Foucault (1926-84)**

Paul-Michel Foucault was born in Poitiers in 1926, the son of a wealthy surgeon. He had a somewhat troubled youth and attempted suicide several times, but went on to study philosophy, psychology and psychopathology. After working for a period with the mentally ill, he taught at a number of universities in France and abroad, culminating in his appointment to the illustrious Collège de France in 1970, choosing the title of Professor of the History of Systems of Thought.

Like most post-war French intellectuals, Foucault began as a Marxist (see Karl Marx), being briefly a member of the Communist Party. Disillusioned, he was strongly influenced in the 1950s by the philosophy of Nietzsche and by French structuralism. Structuralism was an intellectual movement that developed within linguistics and then spread to anthropology, literary studies and a variety of other disciplines. It saw human activity, social organisation and, above all, language as governed by deep internal structures, complex sets of rules, which unconsciously work to severely constrain what human beings can think and do. On this view, our natural assumptions about our freedom to think and act and confer meaning are illusory. This anti-humanist stance was retained when structuralism evolved into the more fluid and ambiguous post-structuralism. Anti-humanism was endorsed by Foucault throughout his work and only modified a little towards the end of his life.

Foucault's first major publications - Michel Foucault *Madness and Civilization* (1961), Michel Foucault *The Birth of the Clinic* (1963), Michel Foucault *The Order of Things: The Archeology of the Human Sciences* (1966) and The Archeology of Knowledge (1969) - could be said to be broadly structuralist (although he rejected the structuralist label, as he did all labels). Subsequently, his themes and approach became more Nietzschean, stressing the role of power in society and in knowledge, as in works such as Michel Foucault *Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison* (1975) and his massive Michel Foucault *History of Sexuality* (three volumes of which were published, beginning in 1976, out of a projected six). In the 1970s Foucault became a major inspiration for radicals, campaigning on behalf of oppressed individuals and groups of various kinds. He was especially interested in sexual identity. In later years he spent much time in America, exploring the experimental gay scene in California. He died of AIDS-related illness in 1984.

In his early writings, Foucault seeks to explain the origins of our modern conceptions of madness, of clinical medicine and of the modern conception of 'man' generated by the new social sciences. He develops the concept of 'discursive formation', by which he means the complex of concepts and arguments and techniques and technologies relating to a particular practice, and how these in fact create not only the knowledge of a subject but the object of study itself. Thus, the modern conception of madness was created along with the creation of psychiatry in the early nineteenth century. This was not, as is generally assumed, the result of improved science and greater humanity, but of the wider needs of society for increased discipline.

The new conceptualisations, including that of 'man', are therefore arbitrary and could be otherwise. Just as psychiatry defines and therefore creates the madness it studies and treats, the human and social sciences create and help to control 'man', in the sense of establishing what is 'normal', what are the rules and norms of normal human functioning and how we understand ourselves. This is the point of Foucault's notorious remark towards the end of *The Order of Things*: *As the archeology of our thought easily shows, man is an invention of recent*  *date. And one perhaps nearing its end.*

## *(p.387)*

What he means by this is that the way we presently tend to understand ourselves can change and perhaps soon will. He may also have in mind the triumph of structuralism, which would fatally undermine current notions of what is human - a view he held at the time, but subsequently abandoned.

These studies of modern forms of thinking are set against a background of a series of 'epistemes', which are broad frameworks that have changed over time from the Renaissance to the Classical period (*c*. 1750-1800) to the modern. These frameworks provide basic assumptions that underpin particular disciplines and practices at a given period. Foucault's epistemes and discursive formations bear a close resemblance to the 'paradigms' described in Thomas Kuhn's Michel Foucault *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* (1962), which are similar structures of theory and practice that define 'normal science' for long periods. Like these scientific paradigms, epistemes and discursive formations are arbitrary and do not follow each other in a rational and progressive way that scientists, and the rest of us, generally assume. Foucault's use of the term 'archeology' rather than 'history' is meant to emphasise the disjunction and discontinuities of historical change in the way we understand the various aspects of reality, especially ourselves. Foucault wanted to emphasise that these pictures are not necessary but contingent and therefore changeable.

After 1970 Foucault abandoned the somewhat rigid and deterministic framework of epistemes and made discursive formations more flexible and, at the same time, more arbitrary by concentrating upon the concept of power and how power and knowledge are deeply interwoven. It is a move signalled by his use (following Nietzsche) of the term 'genealogy' rather than 'archeology' to describe his method. Genealogy studies the way in which what we count as knowledge and the content of discourse is the outcome of power struggles between groups whose views then count as universally valid truth and knowledge. Power is an integral part of the production of truth and there is a 'politics of truth' in any society whose outcome determines what is deemed true and by what procedures it is legitimately arrived at.

This is expressed above all in what many regarded as Foucault's most important work, Michel Foucault *Discipline and Punish* (1973), in which he analyses the origin of the modern prison in the early nineteenth century. The reason for this development, he insists, was nothing to do with greater rationality or humanity, but with the need of an industrialising society for more efficient techniques of social control, with schedules of activity and systems of surveillance, culminating in Jeremy Bentham's all-seeing 'Panopticon' prison design, with its central tower from which all prisoners can be observed, where those subject to it internalise the system and become docile bodies. The prison, Foucault believes, became the model for all kinds of disciplinary systems in schools, factories, asylums and so on. 'Panopticism' characterises modern society, where all are scrutinised and made to conform to standards of 'normality'.

Through the social sciences the modern individual, or 'subject', is created in the sense of defined and given a sense of what is normal. In creating disciplined citizens the social sciences determine the nature of the modern state, which uses its knowledge of these sciences, rather than force or custom, to control society.

Disciplinary power thus pervades the whole modern society. However, Foucault's analysis of power is a subtle one. Power in society can be creative as well as oppressive, disciplines can enable as well as oppress. In modern societies, particularly in democracies, nobody 'owns' power: it moves and flows among different groups and institutions. It inheres in the system rather than in individuals. Society cannot function without it. Nevertheless, individuals are shaped, manipulated, restricted and oppressed by webs of power relations of which they understand little.

Foucault's history of sexuality also gives a picture of the individual hopelessly entangled in a web of power relations, although in this work there is another major theme (especially in volumes two and three, published in the year of Foucault's death): namely, the creation of the subject and how the subject can resist. If there is always power, there is always the possibility of resistance.

The modern subject is created by the human sciences and the systems of disciplines associated with them, and thus the systems of socialisation and social expectation that shape us. But the picture they create of what it is to be human and behave in appropriate ways can be challenged. We can intervene in the process and shape ourselves, although not in the sense of discovering our 'true humanity'. There is no such true humanity to discover; we would only be conforming to some constructed image generated by the system and thereby submitting to the system's disciplinary power. Instead, we must understand the processes involved and be creative in the construction and reconstruction of our individual selves. Therein lies the possibility of freedom.

Foucault has been the subject of criticism from many quarters. Some have criticised his historical methods, arguing that his interpretations are based on sweeping generalisations that rely on selective use and over-interpretation of evidence. Others have pointed to ambiguities in Foucault regarding the truth of theories that claim that truth is relative or that posit thought as socially determined without being determined themselves.

Criticisms have also come from the left. Although an inspiration for radicals in the 1970s, Foucault ultimately disappointed. He gives no indication of what a better world might be like, and so no reason for changing the present one on any more than a local level. Furthermore, given the oppressiveness of modern society as he portrayed it, Foucault's account of the possibilities of resistance seems very feeble. Limited local action and shaping one's life as a work of art hardly answer to the case. Habermas has been among those who have criticised Foucault's ideas as ultimately conservative, since they suggest that radical change is impossible.

But despite undoubted weaknesses, Foucault's ideas have been highly influential across the social sciences, especially his concepts of discourse, the operations of power, the relationships between power and knowledge, and - perhaps above all - his perception that what we consider fixed in our concepts and practices (especially reliance on social sciences) could always be different. Through genealogical research we understand the historicity and contingency of our understanding of ourselves and the possibility of freedom.

### *Further reading*

#### *Primary sources*

- Michel Foucault *The Archeology of Knowledge* (London: Tavistock Publications, 1969).
- Michel Foucault *Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison* (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977).
- Michel Foucault *Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other Writings 1977- 84*, ed. L. D. Kritzman (London: Routledge, 1988).

#### *Secondary sources*

- Gutting, G. (ed.) : *The Cambridge Companion to Foucault* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).
- O'Farrel, C. : *Foucault: Historian or Philosopher?* (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1990).
- Poster, M. : *Foucault, Marxism and History* (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1984).
- Simons, J. : *Foucault and the Political* (London: Routledge, 1995).