## **William Godwin (1756-1836)**

William Godwin was born at Wisbech in Cambridgeshire, England. The son of a Presbyterian minister, he was himself educated for the ministry at Hoxton Presbyterian College and spent some five years as a minister in Beaconsfield, where he met the radical clergymen Richard Price and Joseph Priestley. Between 1778 and 1783 he suffered not so much a crisis as an evaporation of faith. At the same time, his early Tory sentiments gave place to increasingly radical ones. After gravitating to London, he scraped a living with various kinds of literary work before persuading a publisher to finance him while he produced a summary of recent political philosophy. The result was the work that made his reputation: *An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice*, which came out in 1792. It was published in revised editions in 1795 and 1797. In 1794 Godwin published his most successful novel, *Caleb Williams*. In 1797 he married Mary Wollstonecraft, who died shortly after the birth of their daughter, also called Mary (Mary Godwin would later marry the poet Shelley and write the novel *Frankenstein*). His wife's death was a loss from which he never recovered. In a more censorious age, the fact that Mary Godwin was born only five months after her parents' marriage, coupled with the candid nature of the *Memoirs of the Author of a Vindication of the Rights of Woman* (which Godwin published in 1798), did Godwin's public standing much harm. Also, as the kind of radical writing characteristic of the 1790s fell out of fashion, so his literary reputation went into decline. Despite a large, though now mostly forgotten, output, the last thirty years of his life were marked by debt and obscurity.

In common with other radicals of his day - such as Mary Wollstonecraft and Tom Paine - Godwin is an incurable optimist. This is the founding principle of his political thought. He adopts without cavil the Enlightenment view of human nature as rational and perfectible through reason. Individuals are, he thinks, made what they are by environment and upbringing. The human condition is capable of being improved by the application of reason. There is no unalterable human nature that fixes our station and destiny. Godwin is, at least in most respects, a utilitarian. He believes that the only rational and proper courses of action are those that bring about the greatest happiness of the greatest number. He is convinced also that truly rational human beings will know this, and will behave accordingly. Human beings are naturally benevolent towards their fellows, and become more so as their level of rational development increases. With the spread of science and philosophy and the advance of education, therefore, there is every reason to suppose that the condition of humanity will improve and that man will become ever more capable of self-government. The need for state government will disappear; so, too, war, poverty, crime and violence will vanish under the civilising influence of reason. Godwin's belief in progress knows no bounds. In the final book of *An Enquiry*, called 'On Property', he foretells a time when human beings will achieve control even over the physical processes of ageing and fatigue: a time, in short, when human beings will achieve literal immortality.

The chief obstacle standing in the way of these things, however, is the state. The common belief - fostered, of course, by governments - is that government is necessary to successful human association; but this belief is false. Governments maintain themselves by fraud and violence, and by keeping their subjects in ignorance. There are in truth no natural distinctions between one human being and another. The processes of government, and the doctrines and dogmas by which systems of government are sustained, are what create artificial distinctions of rank. Again, government both institutionalises and induces competition, greed and conflict, which are the chief sources of the ills from which mankind suffers. It is only when the dominion of one man over another has ceased that people will be able to live a fully

rational life. The abolition of all political institutions will put an end to distinctions of rank and to national feeling, and will rid humanity of the destructive passions of envy and aggression that go with these things. It will restore to men their natural equality and enable them to rebuild social life on the basis of free and equal association, governed by their reason alone.

Godwin was a radical rather than a revolutionary. Revolutions (and, for that matter, ordinary party politics), he thinks, polarise society and arouse passions that result in the eclipse of reason. Social progress is entirely dependent upon intellectual progress, which in turn comes from reflection and discussion. Government will not need to be overthrown by violent or revolutionary means. As the scope of human reason broadens and grows, the structures of subordination and superior rank upon which we now rely will simply cease to be necessary. This can come to pass only when the entire population has been brought to the level of understanding at present confined to the few. It will be a lengthy process, but Godwin never doubts the inevitability of its completion. He believes that some kind of representative assembly will be necessary as a transitional measure. Finally, however, men and women will live together in a natural society governed only by natural benevolence informed by developed human reason. Matters of public interest will be decided by public debate and discussion. Like later anarchists, Godwin believes in small face-to-face communities that will federate together on a voluntary basis for larger economic and social purposes. He believes that reason will lead people to opt for a system of voluntary communism in which all will work. Such communities will, he thinks, eventually embrace the whole world.

Many early socialists and other radicals were influenced by Godwin's writings. He also enjoyed the unusual distinction of having his ideas turned into verse by a major poet. With poems such as *Queen Mab* and *Prometheus Bound*, his son-in-law Shelley inspired generations of later radicals. Although the term itself was coined later, Godwin may fairly be described as the first modern anarchist. In this respect, he is the founder of a tradition of political thinking that has continued to the present day.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- William Godwin *An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice*, ed. I. Kramnick (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1976).
- William Godwin *Caleb Williams*, ed. D. McCracken (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977).

## *Secondary sources*

- Clark, J. P. : *The Philosophical Anarchism of William Godwin* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977).
- Marshall, P. : *William Godwin* (New Haven, CT, and London: Yale University Press, 1984).
- Philp, M. : *Godwin's Political Justice* (London: Duckworth, 1986).