# **Aristotle (384-322 bce)**

Aristotle was born at Stagira, a Greek colony of Thrace. He became a member of Plato's Academy in 367 bce. It is said that he expected to be made head of the Academy when Plato died. Disappointed in this expectation, he left Athens. After three rather mysterious but decisively formative years spent in the court of Hermias at Assos, in 343 bce he accepted a post at the court of Philip of Macedon, as tutor to the future Alexander the Great. He returned to Athens in 335 bce and opened his own school, the Lyceum. His connection with Alexander made him unpopular with Athenian patriots after Alexander's death in 323 bce, and he again left the city. He died at Chalcis in Euboea. Of his numerous philosophical, logical and scientific works, the ones directly of interest to us are the *Nicomachean Ethics* and *Politics*. Like nearly all his extant works, these were posthumously assembled from literary remains by his family and students (the Nicomachus of the *Nicomachean Ethics* was Aristotle's son). This fact has given rise to serious textual complications.

The naturalness, and therefore the rightness, of political life is a constant theme of Aristotle's political and ethical writing. 'Man is *by nature* a political animal. Whoever is outside the state is either greater than human or less than human' (Politics 1:2). The state - the *polis* - is, he thinks, the only setting within which human beings can live the sort of lives appropriate to their kind. Aristotle's *Politics* is devoted to a technical analysis of the ways in which states can be organised. The ethical presuppositions that inform this analysis are mostly found in the *Nicomachean Ethics*.

Aristotle's general view of the world is of the kind known as *teleological*. Everything in the universe has a *telos* - an 'end' or 'purpose' - peculiar to itself. By this, Aristotle does not mean that everything has a 'purpose' in the way that it is the purpose of a knife to cut or a pen to write. Things which are not artefacts, which have not been made to do something, have *teloi* in the sense of having a state of full or final development towards which it is their nature to unfold. The *telos* of an acorn is to become an oak tree. The process whereby it does so is its *ergon*, its work or task. The natural capacity it has for engaging in and completing this process is its *dynamis*. Finally, what we mean when we call a thing 'good' is that it has achieved its *telos* successfully. A good pen is a pen that writes well, a good oak tree is a fully grown specimen, and so on.

What is the *telos*, and hence the good, of man? It is, Aristotle says, the achievement of a state of *eudaimonia*. The customary translation of *eudaimonia* is 'happiness', but 'happiness' means less than Aristotle does by *eudaimonia*. For Aristotle, the word denotes a lifelong state of active ethical well-being considered as the goal of human activity. How do we know that 'happiness' is man's 'end' in this sense? We know it because we know both that we desire happiness and that we do not desire it for the sake of anything else. If someone asks why we want money or power, we might say that we want them because they will make us happy. But if anyone asks why we want to be happy, we do not reply in terms of some objective lying beyond happiness. Happiness is the 'end' in the uncomplicated sense of there being no further desideratum to which it is a means. Moreover, happiness is only properly such when it is continued or continuous throughout life. Happiness cannot be something evanescent or trivial. We cannot really say that a man's life has been 'happy' until it is over, since only then can it be reviewed in its entirety.

By what means, then, are we to accomplish this end, and hence this good? It is, Aristotle thinks, only by identifying some mode of activity in which no other creature is equipped to engage that we can identify a *telos* peculiar to human beings. We need, therefore, to find a capacity, a *dynamis*, that we and only we have. This *dynamis* cannot consist merely in the processes of living, for plants are alive; nor can it consist in being alive and sentient, for then we should have no *telos* separate from that of the beasts. It must, Aristotle concludes, have to do with *reason*, the capacity, which no other creature has, to engage in connected and purposive thought. And it must lie in the use rather than the possession of reason: musicians are not musicians because they own, but because they play, their instruments. Again, it cannot lie in the *mere* use of reason: someone is a good harpist not because they play the harp, but because they play it well. We shall not, therefore, call someone a good man unless he uses his reason well: unless he uses it 'according to virtue'. The 'point' of human life is to achieve 'happiness' through rational activity according to virtue. This is the 'end' prescribed for us by our nature.

Aristotle uses the word 'virtue' to mean two different but related things. He speaks of moral virtues, which are virtues in the usual sense, and *dianoetic* or intellectual virtues, of which two are of interest to us: *sophia* and *phronesis*. Difficulties inherent in the texts as they have been transmitted to us sometimes make Aristotle's meaning less than obvious, but he seems to think that happiness is associated in different ways, or at different levels, with the deployment of both types of virtue. On the one hand, happiness in the fullest sense lies in the contemplation of abstract ideas and their logical relations. Such activity requires the deployment of the intellectual virtue called *sophia*: 'theoretical' or 'demonstrative' wisdom. Demonstrative reasoning has no practical outcome. It is the activity of philosophical thought pure and simple, divested of any connection with the material world. To practise such reasoning is to enjoy happiness of the most sublime kind, removed from all change and uncertainty. The philosopher, in so far as he is a philosopher, is without want and without pain, rapt as the gods are in the calm and desireless contemplation of the eternal and changeless. 'The human activity that most resembles the activity of the gods will most of all have the character of happiness' (Nicomachean Ethics 10:8). On the other hand, the happiness of philosophical contemplation, precisely because it is so sublime, cannot be the normal condition of anyone's life. No one can live permanently in a state of abstraction to the exclusion of everyday activity. Are we, then, to say that so exclusive a form of happiness is the only sort of happiness? Clearly not, since we want to discover a happiness capable of being achieved by mankind in general and throughout life as a whole. We need to look for a kind of happiness that is, so to speak, more mundane or everyday.

It is here that the moral virtues come in. Happiness for most of us, most of the time, is to be found not in abstract reasoning, but in the practice of good or honourable behaviour in everyday life. This statement is not inconsistent with the view that the philosophical life is the most sublime of all.

But in a secondary degree, life according to the other kind of virtue [moral virtue] is happy; for activity according to this is suitable to our human condition.

#### (*Nicomachean Ethics* 10:8)

'Secondary' or everyday happiness, then, consists in the practice of the moral virtues, the moral virtues being such things as courage, temperance, generosity and justice. But in what specific kinds of action does the practice of these virtues consist? It is in this connection that Aristotle proposes his doctrine of the mean. Morally virtuous activity, he says, is *a habit of choice lying in a mean, relative to ourselves, determined according to a rational principle in*  *the way that a man of practical wisdom would determine it . . . between two vices, the one of excess and the other of defect.*

### *(Nicomachean Ethics 2:6)*

The principle is clear enough. Courageous behaviour lies somewhere between the foolish courting of danger and the timorous shirking of it. The man of temperance neither suppresses his natural appetites altogether, nor does he wallow in them swinishly: he enjoys what is enjoyable in the right measure and at the right time. An important part of the definition is the phrase 'relative to ourselves': that is, 'relative to the kind of person we are and the position in which we find ourselves'. The practice of moral virtue is a matter of doing what is suitable to person, time and place while avoiding extremes. One cannot prescribe hard and fast rules in advance. The specific and appropriate manifestations of courage, temperance and so on will be different at different times and in different circumstances, and will be subject to the judgement of the agent. Sometimes, indeed, it will be appropriate to be intensely pleased or intensely angry. What the doctrine of the mean prescribes is not the avoidance of intense feeling or strenuous action, but the avoidance of responses that are excessive in the sense of unsuitable to the occasion.

The practice of moral virtue brings into play an intellectual virtue different from the *sophia* that we deploy when philosophising. In order to find the mean, one needs to be 'a man of practical wisdom', a *phronimos. Phronesis*, 'practical reasoning' or 'prudence', is the type of thinking that we engage in when we debate with ourselves what to do in any given situation. The aim of *phronesis* as distinct from *sophia* is not abstract and universal knowledge, but action of a practically or morally beneficial kind. *Phronesis* does not identify moral goals as such. These are given by our disposition to seek the mean, and this disposition is formed not by reason or deliberation, but by habit. But *phronesis* specifies for us what our conduct should be in given circumstances if we are to achieve our moral goals. 'Virtue makes us aim at the right mark, and practical wisdom makes us take the right means' (Nicomachean Ethics 6:13).

Our 'end', then, is *eudaimonia*, 'happiness'. We accomplish it by living well throughout life as a whole, and living well is a matter of rational activity well performed. Supreme happiness is found in abstract contemplation by means of the intellectual virtue of *sophia*, undistracted by mundane concerns; but this is hardly an attainable goal for life considered at large. For ordinary purposes, happiness lies in the consistent practice of moral virtue, calling upon the intellectual virtue of *phronesis* to guide us in our specific acts. This teleological analysis is, we recall, an analysis in terms of nature. The end that man has is the end appropriate to his nature. We recall also that 'man is by nature a political animal'. What, then, is the connection between our natural end as moral creatures and our natural existence as political ones? Just as Plato does in his discussion of the beginnings of political association, Aristotle makes the point that, as a preliminary to any kind of moral activity at all, we need material conditions of life that depend upon a division of labour. It is a fact of nature that no individual can supply himself with all the necessaries of life. Thus all forms of human association are natural in so far as they meet a particular level of material need: the household is natural; so is the village; so is the *polis*. But it is the *polis* that is the most completely sufficient, and therefore the most completely natural, community. Unlike less developed forms of association, the *polis* enables all our needs to be met in their entirety. Aristotle has in mind here not only economic needs, but also the full range of moral needs that we have as rational creatures. 'The state comes into

existence so that men may live; it remains in being so that they may live well' (Politics 1:2). The following points will amplify this maxim.

First: the *polis* provides the economic prerequisites of morality. Economic and moral needs are intertwined. Neither the supremely happy life of contemplation nor the balanced, rational and moral life of the kind that Aristotle identifies with 'ordinary' happiness can be lived in conditions of want. Too plentiful a supply of external goods is bad for us: it encourages laziness and arrogance. We should engage in economic activity only to the extent necessary to meet our needs. Economic activity for profit alone is unnatural; as is usury, the use of money to create merely paper values. But a sufficient level of material prosperity is necessary if we are to live well. We cannot engage in pursuits suitable to rational creatures if we are distracted by care or if we lack health and leisure. We cannot be generous unless we have the means with which to be generous, or just unless we have the means to pay our debts. The processes of production and distribution that the *polis* makes possible therefore have moral as well as economic dimensions.

Second: the *polis* provides the educational conditions upon which the cultivation and realisation of moral virtue depend. For Aristotle, education in moral as distinct from intellectual virtue is a matter of acquiring habituated modes of behaviour through training and repetition. It is by *doing* virtuous acts that we learn to be virtuous, just as it is by practising music that we become accomplished musicians. It is therefore an important function of legislation to make men good by requiring or encouraging them to form good habits. Aristotle believes that law can in this way make men good, as distinct from merely inducing conformity. This, at least partly, is why he says that 'Man, when perfected, is the best of all creatures, but when isolated from law and justice he is the worst of all' (Politics 1:2). Also, it is by associating with others like ourselves and participating in a common life that we develop *phronesis*, that we become accomplished in the practice of deliberating and acting correctly. The life of the *polis* - life as part of a social community governed by law - provides the conditions of our moral education and practice.

Third: the *polis* provides the social preconditions of our ethical good. This is because it is not in our nature to be solitary, nor is it in our nature to find satisfaction or happiness solely in ourselves and our own interests. We take pleasure in and achieve fulfilment through interaction with other human beings. In its everyday, attainable sense, happiness will be incomplete unless it is involved to some extent with the happiness of others. Aristotle does not mean that human beings are natural altruists who put the good of others before their own; nor does he think that our interest in the welfare of others can or should be limitless. What he means is that the good of others can make an important contribution to our own good. We derive pleasure and satisfaction from the concern that we feel for our friends and from the shared activities that friendship makes possible. Friendship takes a number of different forms, not all of them disinterested, but the love of friends for their own sake is one of the highest pleasures that life affords. On the other hand, if we take no interest in the welfare and happiness of others, we cut ourselves off from relationships of shared concern and trust that are necessary to the fulfilment of our natural capacities as social beings. Also, since the moral virtues are pre-eminently social virtues, it is clear that moral virtue cannot be practised alone: one cannot be generous or just without other people to be generous or just to.

The *polis* as Aristotle depicts it, therefore, is a natural community in that it meets all the needs, both moral and material, attaching to the natures of those who occupy it. Severed from the *polis*, human beings lose their identity, just as a hand does if severed from the body. We

are defined by the organic relations existing between us and the whole of which we are parts. By the same token, because the *polis* is an all-sufficient community in this sense, it must be true that the study of politics is the master science by which all other studies bearing on human happiness are defined. Political science is the study of the common good: 'its end must be the good for man' (Nicomachean Ethics 1:2).

This idea of politics as a systematic and practical investigation accounts for Aristotle's interest in the comparison and classification of constitutions. Aristotle defines a constitution as 'the organisation of a *polis* with respect to its offices generally, but especially with respect to that office which is sovereign over all matters' (Politics 3:6). He does not wish to argue, as Plato does, for one ideal constitution from which every other is necessarily a decline. He knows that, in practice, states have devised many ways of organising themselves and that we have to deal with what exists rather than with what ought to exist. He knows that even the worst arrangements can be improved, and that what is best for one *polis* may not suit another. All these conclusions are largely the result of a determinedly comparative approach. Aristotle is said to have written (or supervised the writing of) treatises on 158 Greek city-states, although only one of them, on *The Constitution of Athens*, is extant.

The most general conclusion to which his comparisons lead him is that constitutional types are classifiable into three broad categories: rule by one, by few and by many. Aristotle deals in detail with these three types and their possible permutations. He is largely concerned with technical questions of stability and change. With considerable impartiality, he recommends ways in which even bad or dysfunctional constitutions can be made more stable. The stability of a constitution is, he thinks, secured by balancing elements of 'fewness' and 'manyness' in such a way as to ensure that as few people as possible are excluded or alienated. In general, the more moderate and broadly based a constitution is, the more stable it will be. By the same token, 'pure' forms of constitution have instability built into them because they will always contain disaffected groups. Oligarchies will antagonise the poor, who are numerous; democracies will antagonise the rich, who are few but influential. Thus, oligarchies can protect themselves by admitting as many people as possible to some share of political power; democracies can make themselves more stable by pursuing moderation with regard to the redistribution of wealth and by placating the wealthy with dignified and expensive offices. The most stable constitution will be one in which political power rests with a large middle class: that is, one that is a government of neither the wealthy few nor the propertyless many, but somewhere between the two. The members of the middle class are not wealthy enough to be resented, but they are sufficiently well off not to want to dispossess the rich. This is the political expression of Aristotle's doctrine of the mean.

But, as we might expect, given the close connection that he draws between politics and ethics, Aristotle's interest in constitutions is not purely analytic and taxonomic. He is concerned with constitutions not simply as organisational, but as moral phenomena. To that extent, the designation 'political scientist', with its implication of value-freedom, does not belong to him. The *moral quality* of a constitution, considered as something apart from stability and longevity, is, he thinks, not a matter of structure but of what one might call intentionality. It is a matter of the *good* at which the ruler or ruling group aims. Aristocracy and monarchy are good constitutions, oligarchy and tyranny are bad or degenerate ones; yet aristocracy and oligarchy both involve rule by the few. Outwardly, in terms of the visible distribution of power, they look the same. But aristocracy is rule by the best men for the good of all, whereas oligarchy is rule by the wealthy for their own good. Similarly, monarchy and tyranny are both rule by one, but a monarch rules for the good of all and a tyrant for his own

good. What Aristotle calls 'polity' is rule by the many for the common good; its bad counterpart, democracy, is, in effect, mob rule: rule by the many for the good of the many. Good constitutions answer to the true nature of a constitution by securing the good of all their members; bad or degenerate constitutions fail to do so because they secure the good of a part or group only.

Notwithstanding Aristotle's 'scientific' interest in political forms and dynamics, then, he thinks that politics is ultimately worthwhile as a mode of human experience only in so far as political arrangements secure not a narrow or sectional good, but the interests of those whose arrangements they are. Genuine monarchies and aristocracies are rare. It may happen that individuals appear on the scene who are so superior by nature that it is obviously right to hand over responsibility for government to them, but such individuals are, in the nature of the case, seldom found. Thus, although he is prepared to regard any constitutional form as good if it aims at the good of all the citizens, Aristotle considers that, on the whole, the best achieveable kinds of political association will be those that involve as many people - or, at any rate, as many free, non-foreign males - as possible in the processes of government. Similarly, the best kind of *polis* will be large enough to be self-sufficient, but small enough for everyone to be able to participate in its life. Where the citizens are united under a good constitution, governed by just and impartial laws, and all play a part in bringing about the good of the whole community, the virtue of the good man and the virtue of the good citizen will be the same. The moral purpose of the commonwealth will be realised most fully.

Between them, Plato and Aristotle furnish what subsequent political philosophy was to regard as 'the' classical doctrine of the state. Virtually all subsequent Western political theory has owed something, acknowledged or unacknowledged, to their efforts. Their broad conclusion, that the state exists by nature to enhance the lives of its members, was, if not the sole, at least the dominant, theory of political association down to the establishment, in the fifth century, of a new and Christianised version of politics. This in itself is a measure of their achievement.

## *Further reading*

### *Primary sources*

- Aristotle *Nicomachean Ethics*, ed. W. D. Ross (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980).
- Aristotle *Politics*, ed. C. Lord (Chicago, IL, and London: University of Chicago Press, 1984).

### *Secondary sources*

- Coleman, J. : *A History of Political Thought*, vol. 1 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000).
- Davis, M. : *The Politics of Philosophy* (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1996).
- Hardie, W. F. R. : *Aristotle's Ethical Theory* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1968).
- Kraut, R. : *Aristotle* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
- Mulgan, R. G. : *Aristotle's Political Theory* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977).