## **Max Weber (1864-1920)**

Max Weber was born in Erfurt in 1864, the son of a prominent lawyer and National Liberal deputy in the German parliament. He was a brilliant student across a range of subjects and later successively held professorships in economics, law and political science, although he gave up the teaching side of his academic duties after a mental breakdown in 1897. He produced major studies in a number of areas, particularly the relations between them: between law and economics in one society, religion and economics in another, and so on. Exploring these relationships led Weber towards the development of an overview of human history, particularly in respect of modernity. They also led to major developments in methodology and theory. All this established Weber's reputation as among the greatest of sociologists, although one subject label hardly does justice to his intellectual range and achievement. Weber died in 1920.

While Weber contributed much to political sociology, he wrote no explicit work of normative political theory. Nevertheless, a normative theory can be gleaned from his various writings, and his general account of the modern world has influenced many other political thinkers. He also wrote directly on the politics of contemporary Germany (and later in life stood as a parliamentary candidate) from which his more general outlook can be inferred, but he always sought to keep his prescriptions and prognostications rigorously separate from his 'scientific' conclusions.

Weber has been described as 'the bourgeois Marx' and while in fact he admired and was influenced by Marx, many of his conclusions profoundly challenged basic Marxist doctrines, including the nature of social and historical explanation, the role of ideas in history, and the nature of modernity.

There are key differences in basic methodology. Where Marxist social and historical explanations are in terms of the interplay of social and economic forces, Weber insists that adequate explanations must also involve the understanding of the participants. Their actions have to have meaning in themselves and often this is bound up with their general understanding of reality as a whole, their world-view. Weber goes to some lengths to analyse different kinds of thinking and forms of rationality, the kinds of reasons we have for action, the reasons that give actions meaning. Actions may be undertaken for emotional reasons or to conform to traditional patterns of behaviour, but these are less rational than actions directed to the fulfilment of some purpose (means/ends reasoning) or for the sake of some value (value reasoning). Weber was well aware that we usually do things for a mixture of such reasons, but the distinctions are clear enough and usually one predominates.

Social action must consist of meaningful behaviour within a meaningful universe, and this suggests that social and historical change will involve ideas and the ways people think. Weber sought above all to analyse the nature and development of modernity and why it occurred in the West rather than elsewhere. He believed that the analysis of religions within different civilisations was central to this task, since in all pre-modern societies, both East and West, it was largely religion that provided world-views and the general intellectual background. He investigated world religions and their relation to various aspects of society, such as economy and law, to see if there was something about Western Christianity that was peculiarly conducive to the rise of the modern world.

In probably his most famous work, Max Weber *The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism* (1905), Weber argues that capitalism could not have come about through economic factors alone. Certain ideas of early Protestantism not found in other religions (the notion of a secular vocation and especially the Calvinist notion of worldly success being a mark of election) inadvertently set in train the process of capital accumulation that in due course became self-generating, but which would not have occurred without the initial noneconomic impulse.

However, for Weber the rise of capitalism is not the central fact of modernity, which more or less explains everything else (as it is for Marxists), but is only one aspect of a wider trend that constitutes the true essence of modernity. This wider trend he calls 'rationalisation' and embraces not only economic activity but government and social organisation in general, as well as intellectual life. Again religion has an influence, Weber argues, in that Western Christianity's tendency to approve being active in the world as 'God's instrument' rather than totally withdrawing was more conducive to the development of means/ends rationality than Eastern mystical contemplation and disdain for this-worldly concerns.

What rationalisation amounts to is the rise and triumph of instrumental means/ends reasoning, where the most rational is that which is most efficient at achieving ends. That is, reasoning to fulfil purposes, rather than to pursue values. Capitalism is in this sense the most rational form of economic organisation, being free of previous religious and ethical considerations, such as the 'just price' and the immorality of usury, and able to calculate everything in money terms through market mechanisms.

The rise of means/ends rationality is by no means confined to the sphere of the economic. More importantly, Weber charts the development of rational organisation generally. That is, the development of bureaucracy, with its hierarchy of salaried officers bringing ever more aspects of society under rational control. Bureaucracy, as the most efficient form of human organisation, is central to government but has come to pervade most aspects of social life, including capitalist organisations. Unfortunately, the more impersonal and therefore 'dehumanising' rational organisation is, the more effective and efficient it is. It produces a fragmentation of the individual: what Weber called a 'parcelling out of the soul'. Through capitalism and bureaucracy, the ever growing rationalisation of social life progressively reduces the individual to a mere cog in the great Kafkaesque socio-economic machine: hence Weber's reference to the 'iron cage of modernity' (The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, p.181). Although in capitalism there was some room for individuality and creativity, particularly for the entrepreneur, in Marxian socialism Weber saw a necessary merging of the governmental and economic bureaucracies into one mighty organisation that would crush all individuality completely, hence his strong opposition.

Rationalisation has a further dimension in the intellectual sphere. The impulse we possess to make sense of the world has led us through science and technology to a convincing picture of reality. And here again Weber stresses the role of religion. He argues that Western Christianity had absorbed the intellectual inheritance of the Greeks in philosophy and science, which provided an environment, given suitable stimulus, conducive to the generation and growth of modern science, an environment that other major religions could not have provided.

The role of religion here is particularly ironic, for our vastly extended knowledge and control of reality, and the wealth and organisation that has flowed from this, has come at a cost. It has undermined religion and all metaphysical foundations of value and ethics, and reduced them, together with the alternative form of rational action that is value-oriented, to the sphere of the irrational. Weber himself thought that religious belief was no longer rationally tenable. As a consequence, the world had become 'disenchanted'. Our impulse to understand the world as rationally meaningful has only resulted in a conception of reality that is ultimately meaningless, in the sense of being devoid of moral value.

This has serious consequences for human life, since we cannot live without values. Value reasoning has been increasingly reduced to the private sphere, regarded as a matter of personal faith that is subjective and conflicting, and thereby marginalised. On an individual level, this forces us, Weber believes, to choose our values in order to try to live a meaningful life in a meaningless universe. One possibility (important for him personally) was committing oneself to a vocation. His own vocation was science and not politics, although he attached great importance to politics as a vocation - both could give meaning to life.

What, then, of the ethical possibilities of politics? In his essay 'The Profession and Vocation of Politics' (Political Writings, p.309), Weber argued that, in the first place, one could satisfy one's ethical needs by identifying oneself with a cause or ideology. He believed that the actions of those who merely 'lived off' politics, who made their living from manipulating power without any fixed principles, led only into 'emptiness and absurdity'. On the other hand, one may devote oneself to a cause to such an extent that its demands are absolute, make no compromises with reality and blame the disastrous effects of policies on others. But this absolute ethics or 'ethics of conviction' was irresponsible and also potentially disastrous. The genuine vocation of politics involved dedication to a cause, but one modified by an 'ethic of responsibility', and making the pragmatic recognition that evil must sometimes be used to produce good. The acceptance of this 'ethical irrationality of the world' is what the pure ideologue cannot accept.

Weber had a somewhat bleak view of the nature of politics, which he thought was necessarily bound up with violence and never-ending struggle. Struggle between nations and within nations was inevitable and would not end in some future utopia of peace and brotherhood - it was permanent. Weber famously defined the state as an institution that has a monopoly of legitimate violence within a given territory, and in fact he believed that the politician's capacity to get things done ultimately rested upon the threat of physical violence. Politics frequently had to use morally questionable means to achieve good ends. This gave politics a morally compromised and even tragic dimension.

However, politics involved not only power but also authority, and Weber's analysis of different forms of political authority is a central feature of both his political sociology and his own normative political beliefs. He thought that there were three basic types of authority or legitimate domination: traditional, legal-rational and charismatic. The first two are by far the more common and fit in with his overall account of the rise of modernity and its central characteristic of rationalisation. Traditional authority is based on the idea of the sanctity of tradition and prevailed in pre-modern societies. Legal-rational authority is based on the authority of law and the notion that through law, society is rationally organised. This is closely related to bureaucracy and corresponds to the general rise of rationality that is central to modernity. Charismatic authority, based on devotion to a charismatic leader, is more rare, but can appear at any time and cuts across the other two. In the name of new values, the charismatic leader can institute change that overthrows tradition, but can also set aside the imperatives of legal-rational organisation.

This was Weber's 'scientific' picture of the social world and its historical development. It forms a background to his own passionately held ethical and political commitments, which as matters of personal choice - he sought to keep rigorously separate from his scientific life.

His vocation as a scientist, committed to value-free social science, was deeply important to him on a personal level. At the same time, he was strongly committed to the cause of German nationalism, although he was not any kind of extreme nationalist. He subscribed to no belief in the necessity of all Germans belonging to the same state, nor in the intrinsic superiority of Germans or their culture; he merely believed that the culture was irreplaceable, just as other cultures were, and the state had a central duty to preserve it. He also believed that Germany, because of geography and history, was fated to play a major role in international affairs. Nationalism was a possible substitute for religion because it can give death meaning in a disenchanted universe, in the sense of offering a cause worth dying for.

More importantly, Weber was a liberal, although of an unusual kind, deeply influenced by the scepticism and pessimism of Nietzsche. We have already seen that Weber believed there was no rational basis for any system of values or ethics, but he was also deeply sceptical about what had been (and for many still remains) a central article of liberal faith: the ideal of progress towards a fully rational world. Indeed, Weber was more inclined to see Western civilisation as being in decline.

The ideal of an ever more rational world had been a central liberal ideal ever since the Enlightenment, yet Weber saw the progress of rationalisation as little more than a curse upon humanity. Ever more detailed social and economic organisation turned people into cogs in a vast socio-economic machine that limited their freedom and crushed their individuality. Weber expresses this in dark phrases like the 'iron cage' and (in relation to the development of a welfare state) 'the new serfdom'.

For Weber, freedom and individuality were absolute values. Following Kant, Weber believed that human dignity and worth were bound up with the human capacity to choose moral values and live by them. As a normative political thinker, Weber was therefore preoccupied with the question of how human freedom and individuality can be preserved in a hostile world. It was not through capitalism, for that (at least for the vast majority) was part of the problem.

Despite his Nietzschean pessimism, Weber did explore some hopeful possibilities, especially in relation to German politics. In so far as he had an answer, it lay in his support for parliamentary democracy, though not for the usual liberal reasons. It was not in terms of the people ruling themselves, for that was a fiction in the sense that ultimately it is always elites that rule. The attraction of parliamentary democracy lay precisely in the struggle between elites, which tended to generate two desirable outcomes: a political class and charismatic leaders.

Weber believed that Bismarck's rule had left Germany without a viable political class. Political power lay in the hands of the Emperor and the bureaucracy, neither of which was fit to rule. Bad decision-making was the result, and a consequent failure to maintain Germany's proper place in world affairs. By contrast, Britain had a democratic or semidemocratic system, which Weber greatly admired. Not only did it sustain a competent and confident ruling class, it also threw up charismatic leaders such as Gladstone and Lloyd George. Parliamentary democracy could be the means of both unifying the nation and providing an acceptable combination of rational-legal government and charismatic political leadership,

which could be an antidote to the deadening conformity of modern rationalised society. Thereby a degree of personal liberty and creativity might just possibly be preserved.

Weber saw bureaucracy and charismatic leadership as polar opposites. Perhaps a fusion of the two might hold back the organisational juggernaut a little longer before it crushes everybody. However, Weber's solution seems less than convincing. Charismatic leadership is in its nature an ephemeral phenomenon, which no system can guarantee it will generate. More significantly, it seems more important to Weber that there be charismatic leadership than where that leadership might be leading. It is beyond question that Weber would have hated the Nazis and all they stood for (apart from anything else he was a fierce opponent of anti-Semitism), yet a more perfect example of charismatic leadership in modern times than Adolf Hitler is difficult to imagine.

But perhaps the initial problem that Weber poses is too stark and unrealistic. We do not live in a society where everything is organised to the last detail, but one where individuality flourishes: a post-industrialist 'disorganised capitalism' that Weber could hardly have foreseen. The dangers lie more in our consumerist over-fondness for creature comforts and mass entertainment, and the cultural conformity these tend to impose.

Whatever the weaknesses of Weber's prognostications and prescriptions might be, his analysis of the modern world has been immensely influential. Fear of bureaucracy has haunted much political theory, and indeed practice, in the twentieth century, from conservatives such as Oakeshott to New Right liberals such as Hayek, as well as revolutionary Marxists such as Marcuse and the Frankfurt School.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Max Weber *The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism*, ed. T. Parsons (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1968).
- Max Weber *Political Writings*, ed. P. Lassman and R. Spiers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).

## *Secondary sources*

- Beetham, D. : *Max Weber and the Theory of Modern Politics* (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1974).
- Giddens, A. : *Politics and Sociology in the Thought of Max Weber* (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1972).
- Sayer, D. : *Capitalism and Modernity: An Excursus on Marx and Weber* (London: Routledge, 1991).
- Turner, S. : *The Cambridge Companion to Weber* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).