## **Immanuel Kant (1724-1804)**

Kant had a famously uneventful life, entirely confined to the provincial town of Königsberg in the remotest province of the Kingdom of Prussia (now Kaliningrad in Russia), where he was born in 1724 and died in 1804. Although of humble origins Kant obtained a place at the town's university, where he went on to be a lecturer and its most distinguished professor. He never married and was well known in the town for the regularity of his daily routine. Despite his isolation, Kant kept abreast of developments across Europe. He has come to be recognised as one of the greatest philosophers of modern times.

In his Immanuel Kant *Critique of Pure Reason* (1781), Immanuel Kant *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals* (1785), Immanuel Kant *Critique of Practical Reason* (1788), Immanuel Kant *Critique of Judgement* (1790) and other major works, Kant made the great contributions to metaphysics, epistemology and ethics for which he is best known. He also made important contributions to other areas, including politics, but he wrote no major political treatise. His political ideas are found in various works and in various essays on related topics. Essentially they develop the social implications of his ethics and metaphysics.

As a young lecturer Kant was a great admirer of Newtonian science, and was greatly shocked at reading the sceptical philosophy of David Hume, which seemed to undermine the very foundations of science and question its claim to certainty. Hume argued that, strictly speaking, the process of cause and effect cannot be observed and that in consequence all the causal laws of science have no solid empirical foundation. In order to defend the scientific view of the world, Kant developed a revolutionary account of reality, which argued that the world is the way it is because our minds shape it that way. The world we experience is characterised by cause and effect, time and space, and so forth, because these are built into our minds to generate a view of the world that we can comprehend. What the world is really like, independent of human experience of it - what he calls 'the thing in itself' - we cannot possibly know. Kant does, however, identify this unknowable world with the world of 'noumena', which is the world of spirituality and freedom beyond the senses.

The everyday world of the senses, the world of 'phenomena', is entirely governed by causal laws and this includes the behaviour of animals and human beings. When we pursue our selfinterest, Kant thinks, the relationships between our desires and what we do to satisfy them are causal ones. The fact that we use reason in this process does not crucially distinguish us from other animals. It just gives us an extra instrument that animals lack. However, human beings *are* different and special in so far as they alone can step outside of the phenomenal world of cause and effect in which they are normally bound.

Human beings can escape the world of phenomena, and partake of the world of noumena, by acting morally. That is, by acting according to one's moral duty *against* one's self-interest. It is in this way that the human being can be fully free and fully human. This is a variation on Rousseau's view, which greatly influenced Kant, that what makes human beings distinctively human is their capacity for moral choice. Again like Rousseau, Kant took this capacity for moral choice as a justification for political freedom, although his conception of such freedom was very different and politically much more conventional than Rousseau's.

However, when it comes to the question of what moral choices individuals should make, Kant is firmly individualist. In his *Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals* he argues that it is up to each individual to decide his or her own moral rules by means of what he calls the

'categorical imperative'. This is an abstract principle, which requires that we act in ways that we would want others to act in the same circumstances. The moral imperative to do what is right is, for Kant, categorical or absolute, whatever the circumstances. How we ought to act to achieve some end, however desirable, is only a 'hypothetical imperative', which for Kant is not moral at all. In practice the categorical imperative means that we should treat people as we would have them treat us. Kant believes that it means the same as always treating people as ends and never as means. He also believes that because human beings are capable of giving themselves their own moral rules, then every human being is of infinite moral worth, and as such every human being has a right to freedom and autonomy.

The political question is: what kind of government is appropriate to a society of such human beings? Kant's answer is that it must be a 'republican' government (first outlined briefly in Critique of Pure Reason, p.312, and developed in other essays). By 'republican' Kant means, first of all, a constitutional government, but one based upon the principle that all are entitled to maximum freedom that is compatible with the freedom of others. Kant thought such a government was necessary for all rational beings and that we have a moral duty to strive for a government of this kind.

Kant's notion of good government is in line with moderate liberal thinking in his day (although, as he was living in an authoritarian, absolutist state, his ideas are highly radical in relation to his situation). This included a range of civil liberties, a constitutional monarchy and a legislative assembly elected on a wide but not universal franchise (exclusions include women, tradesmen and servants, since they were dependent upon others for their livelihood and could not be expected to vote independently). Kant has a remarkable faith in the efficacy of this kind of government. He believes it will drastically reduce wars, crime and other horrors of the human condition. This is because he believes that unless people are free they cannot achieve their full moral stature: even the most benign paternalism stops people from morally growing up and this explains much of the evil in the world. Whenever republican government is introduced, people must become ever more mature, responsible and rational.

Kant believed that the spread of republican government would eliminate war, which he considered to be the enemy of all things good. He did not, however, believe that a republican world government was feasible. What would eventually ensure perpetual peace was a league of republican governments, by means of which all international disputes could be settled. This Kant took to be the highest political goal. It would take time, but he was in no doubt that this was humanity's ultimate destiny.

Kant's confidence that humanity was moving towards an ideal future was based on more than a general Enlightenment belief in the gradual spread of rationality and education. He also believed that human progress was guaranteed by nature. In his Immanuel Kant *Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose* (1784), Kant wrote that there was a 'hidden plan' of nature to lead man towards the perfect constitution both within states and between them, so that all the natural capacities of humanity can be developed completely. The 'plan' will be fulfilled because nature has implanted within humanity what Kant calls its 'unsocial sociability'. Human beings are naturally social beings, while at the same time their behaviour displays a strong bias towards the antisocial: they are ambitious, egocentric and aggressive. But while these lead to conflict, crime, tyranny and war, they also ultimately lead to their opposites, since the horrors of crime and civil strife force people to create orderly societies with laws and institutions, and eventually to recognise the need to live within a rational legal

order based on the principles of freedom. In time, Kant believed, the horrors of war would teach humanity the same lesson, and permanent peace would be the eventual outcome.

Kant's political writings are redolent with Enlightenment optimism, yet there is a certain ambiguity in his work concerning the extent to which progress will eliminate the human capacity for evil. Perhaps today we find the pessimistic view the more convincing. More basic are questions surrounding the Kantian approach to moral philosophy, which has been greatly admired and followed down to the present day. Its critics question whether the different versions of the categorical imperative amount to the same thing, as Kant suggests. It is also highly questionable whether, if everyone were fully rational, they would all come to the same moral conclusions, as Kant seems to think. However, the most telling criticism is, as Hegel emphasised, that all Kant gives us is a formula with no content. Some argue that it is a formula that, with sufficient ingenuity, can be made to justify almost anything. Despite these criticisms, Kant's political ideas remain one of the most intellectually powerful, compelling and influential defences of liberal values.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Immanuel Kant *Critique of Pure Reason*, ed. N. Kemp Smith (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1933).
- Immanuel Kant *Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals and What is Enlightenment?*, ed. L. W. Beck (Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs Merrill, 1959).
- Immanuel Kant *Kant's Political Writings*, ed. H. Reiss (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971).

## *Secondary sources*

- Caygill, H. : *A Kant Dictionary* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995).
- Gayer, P. : *The Cambridge Companion to Kant* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
- Saner, H. : *Kant's Political Thought* (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 1973).
- Williams, H. : *Kant's Political Philosophy* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1983).