## **Jürgen Habermas (1929-)**

Jürgen Habermas was born in Düsseldorf in 1929 and has spent his career in German universities. Between 1956 and 1959 he was research assistant to Theodor Adorno, one of the major figures of the Frankfurt School (see Herbert Marcuse and the Frankfurt School). He subsequently taught philosophy at Heidelberg and in 1964 became Professor of Philosophy and Sociology at the University of Frankfurt. After a period at the Max Planck Institute at Starnberg, Habermas returned to his Frankfurt chair in 1982, where he remained until his retirement in 1994.

Habermas's first major work was Jürgen Habermas *The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere* (1962), but it was the publication of Jürgen Habermas *Knowledge and Human Interests* in 1968 that established him as the leading figure of a new generation of Frankfurt School theorists; his reputation was reinforced by his Jürgen Habermas *Legitimation Crisis* of 1973. However, in the 1970s his thought started to move in a new direction, which culminated in his most important work: Jürgen Habermas *The Theory of Communicative Action* (1981). This and later works took him progressively further from the Frankfurt School and its Marxist inspiration.

Habermas has been an enormously prolific and highly eclectic theorist. Unfortunately his writings are obscure, extremely abstract and difficult. He is nevertheless a thinker of considerable range and originality. Furthermore, despite a number of changes of tack, there is an underlying theme and direction to his work. The leading Frankfurt School theorists, especially Horkheimer, Adorno and Marcuse, had all concluded that the aspiration of the Enlightenment to the creation of a society of freedom and happiness through reason had gone seriously wrong and that 'reason' as embodied in science and rational organisation had turned into monsters that had come to enslave humanity in what Max Weber had called the 'iron cage' of modernity. With the resurgence of capitalism following World War II, Horkheimer and Adorno, and eventually Marcuse, came to despair of the possibility of breaking the grip of modern capitalism and bureaucracy. But at no stage was the Enlightenment aspiration questioned as the ideal that should be striven for, if at all possible. For all his changes of doctrine, Habermas has consistently sought to refashion the Frankfurt School's account of reason to show that a free and rational society is indeed a possibility.

In his earlier writings, Habermas attempts to rework the approach of the Frankfurt School theorists, coming to rather different conclusions. He shares much of their suspicion of the dominance of scientific rationality, but thinks their rejection of science goes too far and cuts them off too much from Marx's legacy. Habermas attacks Marcuse's belief that science and technology are inherently ideological. Science and technology are legitimate human projects; it is the illegitimate extension of scientific/technological rationality into other spheres that has to be resisted. Furthermore, Habermas maintains that Marx was right in insisting on the necessity of understanding the workings of society the better to uncover the nature of domination and the possibilities of advance. Habermas believes that social science, even positivist social science, can be productive of social knowledge, provided its conclusions are properly understood within a wider context of critical theory. He has in fact been voraciously eclectic, taking ideas from Weber, symbolic interactionism, developmental psychology, linguistic philosophy, hermeneutics, psychoanalysis, ethnomethodology, even structural functionalism - and much else besides.

One of Habermas's themes is the rise and decline of the public sphere, which he sees as developing in France, Britain and America in the eighteenth century, when, through newspapers and pamphlets, an educated public discussed the great political issues of the day and created a genuine public opinion. But this was when the middle class was in its progressive phase, challenging traditional authority and traditional beliefs in the name of reason. With the subsequent triumph of the middle class, and their capitalist system, newspapers became commercialised and interested in other things, the state proceeded to underpin and ultimately manage the economy, political parties became merely rival teams of administrators of the same system, and public opinion was replaced by public opinion polls with their simplified and undiscussed expressions of preference. Thus the public sphere has been diminished with ever more technocratic management and people making ever fewer decisions on matters affecting their lives. This technocratic management, based on supposedly value-free social science, is a new form of ideological legitimation of the state. Merely maintaining the system becomes the central value in itself, the ultimate logic of which, Habermas thinks, is society run by computers.

Modern government, he argues, has sought to treat problems of a political and moral nature as technical ones that require the application of technique to solve them. This has the effect of diminishing the public sphere, the sphere of public debate over values, and thereby allows governments to dodge issues that would call their own powers into question. But this only makes them vulnerable to crises of legitimacy when they cannot solve the problems they have labelled as merely technical, and when the necessity of supporting the economy is revealed as manifestly supporting the interests of one class as against another, thereby falsifying the claim of government to be based on freedom, equality and justice.

Establishing the proper role of knowledge in human affairs is the function of Habermas's theory of 'cognitive interests' or 'knowledge constitutive interests' set out in *Knowledge and Human Interests*. All knowledge is the outcome of the process of people creating and recreating themselves through labour - that is, humanity pursuing its basic human interests and there is a necessary relationship between the form of knowledge and the uses to which it can be put. There are three basic interests that must be pursued: first, making things; second, communicating; and, third, self-knowledge and self-determination. These are the basic activities human beings must engage in to survive and develop and create their world. Each type of activity is pursued via a characteristic type of thinking, which in turn creates the possibility of three bodies of systematic knowledge: empirical-analytic, historicalhermeneutic, and critical. Human advance is bound up with the refinement and extension of these basic forms of thinking, each with its own inner logic of development in disciplines and in institutions and practices.

However, the unequal distribution of power in society causes distortion and misdirection. This is particularly so in modern capitalist society, where everything is treated as a commodity, people are objects of technical manipulation and our understanding is corrupted by ideology. The answer is some kind of socialist transformation, although there is no indication as to how this might come about.

In the 1970s Habermas moved towards developing a more complex epistemology, and towards ethics. Marx is somewhat obscure about the source of ethical values and the Frankfurt School were sceptical of finding any rational basis, but Habermas became quite sure that he had found a clear source of value strong enough to provide a solid moral foundation for critical theory. This source, he believes, lies in the very nature of language. The argument is roughly this. Whenever we speak, communicate or argue - and especially when we debate some important matter - certain assumptions are, in the nature of things, being made. We trust each other to be telling the truth and to be basing assertions on what can be verified; we assume that, through discussion, the best argument will prevail; and so on. The aim of all discussion is to arrive at a consensus where it is accepted that the true facts, the correct moral evaluation or the best course of action has been established on the basis of good reasoning. This does not always happen and yet, without assumptions such as these, meaningful communication would not be possible. Habermas wishes to argue that such effective communication is systematically distorted by the prevailing power relations in society. As a consequence, ideology pervades our thinking and our language in such a way as to prevent us understanding our true position. Language is also a medium for domination and social power, serving to legitimate relations of organised force, and as such it is ideological. This is similar to the feminist argument that women's oppression is reflected in and reinforced by our ordinary forms of speech.

We thus have an ideal of communication at its best: involving mutual trust and consensus, based on the best arguments, and undistorted by oppression, domination or constraint. It follows that the ideal conditions for communication necessarily involve the moral ideals of freedom, justice and respect for truth, and ultimately a society in which the ideal conditions of communication are the norm. Such a society would have to be without domination and inequality: that is, a socialist society.

Habermas, therefore, believes that the nature of language provides the basis for a true universal ethics and the good society for humanity as such. This theory owes nothing to Marx, or the Frankfurt School, but perhaps something to Karl Popper. It is in many ways similar to Popper's view that the ideal conditions for science, such as free criticism, are the basis of an 'open society', which is the good society; while a 'closed' society, where criticism is artificially limited, is necessarily a bad society.

There is an implication that the ideal conditions for communication, and the society that goes with them, are in some sense 'natural' and the *telos*, or ultimate destination, of human development. This is reinforced by Habermas's use of developmental psychology as an alternative to what he sees as Marx's discredited historical materialism. He has used Piaget's stages of the cognitive development and Kohlberg's stages of the moral development of the child as models for human evolution. Thus, humanity grows in both scientific and technical knowledge, and also in social and moral understanding, and in consequence grows in the capacity for self-understanding, autonomy and freedom. Just as the child develops to maturity, so does humanity; but just as the child's growth can be stunted, so also can humanity's - as it has in modernity, with its managed capitalism and technocratic consciousness. The task of critical theory is to demonstrate this and to reveal whatever potentiality there may be for overcoming it.

These ideas are further developed in Habermas's *Theory of Communicative Action*. This is an even more ambitious attempt to analyse the nature of rationality and of rationalisation (the embodiment of reason in institutions and practices) and their role in modern life. However, the main dichotomy, between technical rationality and communicative rationality, remains. Only now Habermas offers a more refined account of different kinds of rationalisation developing in different ways in different areas. It is an analysis that he believes provides a proper foundation for a critical sociology: one that reveals the conflicts and dangers, and also the potentialities, of modern social development.

This new critical sociology attempts to synthesise sociological theories (such as structural functionalism) that explain social life in terms of interacting structures with 'action' or 'lifeworld' theories that explain society in terms of the actions of free, autonomous individuals, 'negotiating' social existence and creating it as they go along (such as symbolic interactionism). Each of the two traditional sociological positions represents a necessary feature of society, and they correspond to the two basic kinds of rationality. Structural or 'systemic' thinking is technical-rational reason, while life-world thinking is communicative reason. Both may be necessary, but a good society depends on the right balance. What is wrong with the modern world is that systemic thinking has developed, and continues to develop, at the expense of communicative, life-world thinking; in Habermas's phrase, systemic rationalisation is engaged in a 'colonisation of the life-world'. Thus, the Weberian 'iron cage' still threatens (see Max Weber). Its advance is bound up with the development of late capitalism. Systemic rationalisation means ever greater rational organisation of everything, ever more bureaucracy and ever greater classification of social problems as technical problems, all of which masks a sophisticated system of social control, domination and repression.

However, Habermas does not despair, as his Frankfurt School predecessors were prone to do. He believes that at all levels, even our mundane daily activities, we can encourage the extension of communicative action and help to embody it in institutions and practices, thereby fighting a rearguard action against the advance of systemic rationalisation. Furthermore, Habermas is heartened by the development of social movements - such as the greens, the women's movement, the gay movement, anti-nuclear protests and so on - as representing communicative action fighting back against the tide of technical rationalisation. Even the New Right, which Habermas takes to be a mistaken and dangerous doctrine, nevertheless stands for a communicative reaction against the ever spreading system.

Since the 1980s Habermas has mellowed further, seemingly dropping his opposition to capitalism as such and concentrating on elaborating his communicative ethics and the conditions for effective democracy: that is, improving the quality of deliberation to create a form of 'discursive' democracy that provides a better balance than at present between the rights of the individual and those of the community. It could be argued that, in Jürgen Habermas *Between Facts and Norms* (1992), he implies that capitalism in some form is a necessary foundation of a modern democracy. This suggests a final social democratic position that seeks to fulfil liberal ideals of individualism and democracy that can only be fully realised when a fuller citizenship, based on greater equality, dominates a genuine public sphere.

Habermas's firm commitment to the creation of a fully rational society has put him in conflict with one of the most influential intellectual movements of recent decades: namely, postmodernism. Postmodernists (such as Jean-François Lyotard) have interpreted 'modernity' as the outcome of the 'Enlightenment Project' but, unlike the early Frankfurt School thinkers who thought it had all gone wrong, they deem the Enlightenment Project to have been misconceived in the first place and to have now totally failed; consequently, we are now living in 'postmodernity'. Habermas, who has spent most of his career trying to refound on a more satisfactory philosophical footing the promise of a free society based upon reason, regards modernity as an 'unfinished project'. It is thus not surprising that he is hostile to postmodern reasoning and has been one of its most consistent critics.

Habermas has had many critics of his own. The vagueness and obscurity of much of his vast output offends many. More seriously, it is questioned whether it is indeed possible to conjure a universal ethics out of the conditions of language. Nevertheless, despite changes of mind on many issues, Habermas has been one of the most productive and influential political thinkers of the late twentieth century.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Jürgen Habermas *Knowledge and Human Interests* (London: Heinemann, 1972).
- Jürgen Habermas *The Theory of Communicative Action*, vol 1: *Reason and the Rationalisation of Society* (London: Heinemann, 1984).
- Jürgen Habermas *The Theory of Communicative Action*, vol 2: *Lifeworld and System* (London: Heinemann, 1987).
- Jürgen Habermas *Between Facts and Norms* (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1996).

## *Secondary sources*

- Colhoun, C. (ed.) : *Habermas and the Public Sphere* (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992).
- Outhwaite, W. : *Habermas: A Critical Introduction* (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1994).
- Ramussen, D. M. : *Reading Habermas* (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1991).
- White, S. K. : *The Recent Work of Jürgen Habermas: Reason, Justice and Modernity* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
- White, S. K. (ed.) : *The Cambridge Companion to Habermas* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).