## **Sir Karl Popper (1902-94)**

Karl Raimund Popper was born into a Jewish family in Vienna. His father had a successful legal practice, but the family's comfortable life was disrupted by World War I and its aftermath. Popper left school at the age of sixteen and earned a living as a manual worker; he also spent some time as an apprentice cabinet-maker. A youthful flirtation with communism came to an end when he witnessed and repudiated the violence of contemporary communist agitators. He became a student at the University of Vienna and took his Ph.D. in 1928. He married in 1930 and became a schoolteacher. Alarmed by increasing violence and anti-Semitism, Popper and his wife left Vienna in 1937, just before the *Anschluss*. From 1937 to 1945 Popper taught philosophy at Canterbury University, New Zealand. He then became Reader (1945-8) and later Professor (1948-69) at the London School of Economics. He became a British citizen in 1945 and was knighted in 1965. Despite a notably touchy and quarrelsome disposition, he was much loved by colleagues and students.

During and just after his student days, Popper came to know Rudolf Carnap, Moritz Schlick, Kurt Gödel and other members of the group of positivist philosophers known as the Vienna Circle. This association, coupled with his reading of Kant, kindled in Popper a lifelong interest in the philosophy of science. He became interested in two questions especially: (1) how is science to be demarcated from other activities such as metaphysics, logic, mathematics and what Popper calls 'pseudo-science'; and (b) what reason have we for supposing any scientific theory to be true? He published his thoughts in 1934, in a book called *Logik der Forschung*, translated in 1959 as *The Logic of Scientific Discovery*. When the book came out, friends of Popper sent a copy of it to Einstein, who thought well of it. (Einstein's comments are printed in an appendix to *The Logic of Scientific Discovery*.)

Popper's philosophy of science is often called 'falsificationism'. The simplest way of understanding it is to glance at the 'problem' of induction, identified long ago by David Hume. On the face of it, science is the activity of formulating generalisations based on a large number of observations. This activity of observation and generalisation is (to put it rather simply) what we mean by induction. We take it for granted that a generalisation based on a sufficiently large number of observed past instances is a 'law' that equips us to predict what will happen in the future. Implicit in the procedure of induction, therefore, is the assumption that nature is uniform: that the future will, or even must, resemble the past. The 'problem' of induction lies in the fact that this assumption is unwarranted. No matter how many times the sun has risen in the past, we cannot *know* that it will rise again tomorrow. Bertrand Russell, in his little book called *The Problems of Philosophy*, illustrates the point by asking us to think about a chicken who is fed every morning by the farmer until one day the farmer wrings its neck. The chicken's inductive belief that the farmer would always feed it turned out to be a mistake. It should be noted, however, that the problem is not simply that we may make mistakes in arriving at generalisations; rather, it is that the process of generalisation itself has no warrant independent of our belief in it. To answer this difficulty by saying that our most important generalisations have always held good in the past clearly will not do.

How, then, can science be 'true' in the way that most people think it is? Popper tries to answer this question by denying, in effect, that induction is the proper basis of scientific method. Science does not produce 'laws' if by 'laws' are meant positive, conclusive and universal proofs. Despite what the Vienna Circle thinks, we cannot 'verify' anything. We cannot do so because no amount of confirmation of what we currently believe can show that our beliefs will go on being true in the future. We can, however, falsify. Even a single counter-example

will show that a given generalisation is false; or, more strictly, that it is in need of modification. Properly speaking, therefore, scientific enquiry is not a process of amassing evidence in support of generalisations. It is an activity of 'conjecture and refutation': of formulating hypotheses by the use of a kind of informed imagination and then setting about the task of falsifying or adjusting them. All scientific beliefs are provisional. They are provisional in the sense that our only justification for holding them is that no one has yet made any observation that falsifies them. Once such an observation is made, the hypothesis must be abandoned, or at least revised. If revised, it can be held in its revised form until the arrival of another counter-example requires abandonment or further revision. Intellectual systems such as Freudian psychology or Marxist social science, which are not falsifiable simply because they will not allow anything to count as evidence against what they postulate, are what Popper calls 'pseudo-sciences'.

There is a sense in which Popper's political thought is an outgrowth of his notion of falsifiability. His political ideas are developed in two books: Sir Karl Popper *The Open Society and Its Enemies* (1945) and Sir Karl Popper *The Poverty of Historicism* (1957). Both are written with considerable passion. Popper makes no claim to be engaging in any kind of value-free political theory, and he deliberately writes in a manner accessible to the educated layperson. What he means by 'historicism' is the belief that it is possible to discover 'laws' of historical development and so devise large-scale social and political plans based on the knowledge of the future which such laws are thought to confer. The execution of such plans is called holistic or revolutionary or utopian social engineering. But the belief that there are covering 'laws' of history is of course false. We cannot know what the future will be like. We do not know what discoveries will be made in the future and what effect they will have on the course of history. The very act of predicting the future may influence the future by causing people's behaviour to differ from what it otherwise would have been (the 'Œdipus effect' is Popper's felicitous name for this possibility). Any long-term policy based on a predetermined vision of the future may therefore turn out to have unintended and unforeseen consequences. What may seem to be social laws are at best trends, and no reliable prediction can be made on the basis of a trend. This critique of historicism is accompanied, and to a large extent motivated, by a belief that historicism is a recipe for tyranny because it enables minorities to impose their will on others by virtue of their supposedly superior knowledge. *The Poverty of Historicism* is dedicated to the memory 'of the countless men and women of all creeds or nations or races who fell victim to the fascist and communist belief in Inexorable Laws of Historical Destiny'.

In view, then, of the unknowable and hence unpredictable nature of the future, social reform - 'socal engineering' - must be gradual and piecemeal rather than wholesale and sweeping. In this way, the effects of changes can be monitored, and unforeseen and undesirable effects counteracted as soon as they begin to make themselves felt. But the only way of carrying out this monitoring process is by attending to the criticisms of those whom the changes affect. No one has a monopoly of understanding, and every individual is potentially the source of valid criticism. There are therefore two prerequisites of sustained good government. First, it must be possible for people to express their criticisms effectively; second, it must be possible for them to change by peaceful means a government that is acting to their detriment. A society in which these possibilities are present is what Popper calls an 'open society'. Those who claim that society can be governed according to central plans imposed by virtue of the esoteric knowledge of an elite are what Popper calls 'enemies of the open society'. He has in mind especially Plato, Hegel (for whom his contempt knows no bounds) and Marx.

Popper's political thought combines the kind of liberalism of which John Stuart Mill is a typical exponent, with the fear of change and liking for cautious reform associated with Burke. He is not an original political thinker, nor would he claim to be. His best philosophical work is in the philosophy of science. His political writing is, in essence, the utterance of one who experienced both world wars and whose experiences imbued him with a hatred of violence and authoritarian government. He is a kind of negative utilitarian, who believes in the power of cautious and rational change as a means of minimising avoidable suffering. Popper's reputation as a political thinker rests largely on the appeal that his ideas had for the generation of intellectuals to whom fell the task of rebuilding the academic life of Europe after World War II.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Sir Karl Popper *The Logic of Scientific Discovery* (London: Hutchinson, 1959).
- Sir Karl Popper *The Poverty of Historicism* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961).
- Sir Karl Popper *The Open Society and Its Enemies* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966).

## *Secondary sources*

- Albert, H. : *Treatise on Critical Reason* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985).
- Currie, G. and Musgrave, A. (eds) : *Popper and the Human Sciences* (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1985).
- Magee, B. : *Popper* (London: Fontana, 1973).
- Schilpp, P. A. (ed.) : *The Philosophy of Karl Popper* (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1974).