# **John Locke (1632-1704)**

John Locke was born into a Puritan family in Somerset, England. His father was a country lawyer who raised a troop of horse and fought on the parliamentary side in the Civil War. Locke went up to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1652. Like Hobbes before him, Locke found the old-fashioned Scholastic curriculum uncongenial, though his association with Christ Church was to last, with interruptions, for more than thirty years. He became a senior student - that is, a Fellow - in 1659. His earliest political work, *Essays on the Law of Nature*, was written (in two Latin versions) in 1660, though not edited until the 1950s. He considered, but rejected, the idea of taking orders, and in 1666 was given a dispensation by the college to enable him to hold his studentship without doing so. He began to be interested in medicine in the 1660s and in 1675 took the degree of Bachelor of Medicine, although he never practised medicine as a profession. He was acquainted with many members of the newly formed Royal Society, and was himself elected Fellow in 1668. In 1667 he became medical adviser and general factotum of Anthony Ashley Cooper, created first Earl of Shaftesbury in 1672. When Shaftesbury was appointed Lord Chancellor in 1672, Locke became his secretary. His association with the exclusionist politics of Shaftesbury and his circle meant that when James II succeeded to the throne in 1685, Locke thought it wise to exile himself to Holland. While there - often in real danger of arrest by agents of the British government - he worked on his *Essay Concerning Human Understanding*. In 1689, a year after the accession of William of Orange, Locke returned to England and published the *Essay*. In the same year he published his *Two Treatises of Government* and his first *Letter Concerning Toleration*. His *Thoughts on Education* came out in 1693 and *On the Reasonableness of Christianity* in 1695.

Although Locke's reputation as a philosopher rests almost entirely on the epistemological doctrines expressed in *An Essay Concerning Human Understanding*, he made a great and lasting contribution to political thought. This contribution consists mainly in his *Two Treatises of Government*, especially in the *Second Treatise*. It was for many years assumed that the treatises were written as *ex post facto* justifications of the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Thanks largely to the researches of Professor Peter Laslett, it is now accepted that the *Two Treatises* were composed some ten years before they were published. In all probability Locke withheld them from publication for reasons of prudence. They would have been treasonable beyond doubt had they been published at the time when they were written.

The *First Treatise* is a response to the version of the divine right of kings theory developed by the Royalist author Sir Robert Filmer in his book *Patriarcha* (published in 1680, though probably written in about 1630). Locke's purpose is to rebut Filmer's claim that royal power is patriarchal in nature, and therefore neither conferred nor revocable by the people over whom it is exercised. Filmer had contended, by appeal to the Old Testament, that Adam and his heirs were divinely appointed as rulers of the world and that all subsequent kings somehow derive their authority from this fact. Locke dismantles this argument with ease. In its place he advances the principle that no one is intended by God to be the natural ruler of anyone else. (We may remark in passing that Filmer has more ability as a political thinker than Locke credits him with. It is a little unfortunate that, largely thanks to Locke's smiting of him in the *First Treatise*, Filmer has been consigned so effectively to the ranks of the unregarded.)

It is usual to regard the *First Treatise* as being mainly of antiquarian interest. It is in the *Second Treatise* that Locke presents his own ideas. The proper title of the treatise is 'An Essay Concerning the True Original, Extent and End of Civil Government'. It takes its

departure from the point that it was the purpose of the *First Treatise* to establish: no one is by nature or by the divine will subject to anyone else. All men are born equal; each individual is, as it were, the sovereign ruler of his own person. In curious but intentional language Locke speaks of each man having a 'property' in his own person. From this it follows that no one can become subject to anyone else, or to any law, save by his own consent.

The liberty of man in society is to be under no other legislative power but that established by consent in the commonwealth, nor under the dominion of any will, or restraint of any law, but what the legislative shall enact, according to the trust put in it.

## (*Second Treatise* ch.4)

How, then, are we to account for the existence, or at any rate the legitimacy, of present-day governments?

Like Hobbes, Locke makes use of the idea of a state of nature as an explanatory conceit upon which to build his political theory. As with Hobbes, and despite some ambiguity of language, the argument is not really a historical one. It is an attempt to infer the proper structure of government - and above all to develop a theory of political obligation - from a consideration of what rational people would invent if they were living without a government and wanted to devise one. We are to imagine an original condition, social but non-political, in which human beings are subject only to the law of nature. This is a law, given by God and discernible by human reason, that 'teaches all mankind . . . that being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, liberty or possessions' (*Second Treatise* ch.2). (The fact that the law of nature seems to be the kind of 'innate idea' that Locke is elsewhere so unequivocal in denying has been noted as a serious difficulty, but it is a difficulty to which he offers no solution.) We are then to consider why and how individuals would move from this condition of virtually complete freedom into political society, and what the moral and practical consequences of their doing so would be.

Locke holds that the law of nature confers upon mankind natural rights of life, liberty and property; but it is the natural right to property that interests him most, and to it he devotes most attention. God gave the earth and its fruits to men as a common possession. Labour is the origin and justification of, and confers value on, private property. Private property (by which Locke means landed property) arises when individuals 'mix their labour' with what God has provided (ch.5). In a certain sense they add what they mix their labour with to the original property that they have in their own persons. Their property becomes part of themselves. This process of expropriation is legitimate under the law of nature provided that no one violates anyone else's right: provided, that is, that no one takes more than he needs and so allows resources to spoil which might have been enjoyed by someone else. The right to acquire private property is therefore not unrestricted. No one may take more than he can use, and enough and as good must be left over for others. This proviso fixes a natural limit to property acquisition; it suggests moreover, given that each man's needs and capacity for consumption are roughly the same, that the amount of property that anyone may claim as his own is governed in principle by a standard of approximate equality. But this equality was long ago overridden in practice by the invention of money as a means of exchange. Money allows any given individual to own and profit from more land than he could himself consume the produce of, and for the livelihood of some to depend not directly on the fruits of the earth, but upon cash payments made in exchange for their labour. Again, this arrangement does not violate the law of nature provided that those who sell their labour do so under contracts into

which they have entered freely. Given that the amount of land available for enclosure is not infinite, it is inevitable that some such conventional system of exchange will arise.

Theoretically, all these economic processes could take place spontaneously, without the intervention or regulation of government. Locke does not take Hobbes's pessimistic view of how ungoverned human beings would behave in relation to each other. Unlike Hobbes, he does not depict the state of nature as an intolerable condition in which the amenities of civilisation are impossible. It is not a 'state of war' from which fear would drive men to escape even at the cost of submitting to absolute government. The drawbacks of Locke's state of nature would be no worse than 'inconveniences'. It is inevitable that disputes would arise, especially with the growth of inequalities of property distribution, and in the state of nature there would be no settled and reliable way of resolving such disputes. Men who were, in effect, judges in their own cause would be unduly vigilant of their rights, and would tend to punish with excessive severity those who infringed them. Conscious of these inconveniences, individuals would agree to unite into a community for the purpose of defending one another's rights. There would, in short, be a 'social contract'. Clearly, such a contract would require the consent of each of the parties to it. The community, once established, would then set about creating for itself legislative and other institutions, although Locke thinks that majority consent would be enough to do this. Such institutions would need to be supported by means of taxation, but taxation would be strictly subject to the agreement of property owners, given in person or by means of a representative assembly. This requirement arises from the fact that, since the point of setting up government in the first place was to protect property and other rights, government may not remove or redistribute property without the consent of those whose property it is. It seems, then (although Locke's description is not entirely clear), that the 'social contract' would have three stages: the establishment of a community by the contracting parties, the setting up of governmental institutions, and the authorisation of taxation.

The executive institutions of government would be subject to the rule of law. This, as one might expect of an opponent of divine-right claims, is an important point for Locke. The business of government must be conducted according to fixed and known legal and procedural standards and not by means of fiat or prerogative. Locke does allow a certain degree of prerogative power, but such power is to be exercised only in exceptional circumstances and only for a manifest public good. Absolute rulers, he thinks - he does not mention Hobbes, but the allusion is clearly to him - would be in a state of nature relative to their subjects. Also, Locke thinks it desirable for the various functions of government to be in different hands, and he insists that the executive must be subordinate to the legislature. He does not, however, discuss the 'separation of powers' in detail, nor does he apply the principle consistently. To regard him, as some commentators have, as an early exponent of the doctrine is something of an exaggeration.

Locke's insistence on consent as the basis of political obligation encounters a rather obvious objection. The keystone of his argument, we recall, is that because no one is naturally subject to government, the legitimacy of government depends upon the individual's voluntary submission to it. At what point and by what means, though, does this voluntary submission actually take place? How and when is consent given? This is a difficulty that all versions of the consent theory of authority encounter sooner or later. The fact that there is no plausible sense in which most people can be said to have given active or deliberate consent to be governed is on the face of it a serious obstacle to the kind of argument that Locke wishes to develop. He solves it by recourse to the dubious, if common, expedient of 'tacit' - silent -

consent. Actual or explicit consent, he considers, is not necessary. Anyone who enjoys or uses property under the protection of a government or makes free use of the facilities and protection that the government provides, even if this means 'barely travelling freely on the highway', is deemed to be consenting to its authority not actively, indeed, but tacitly. In short, we give our consent merely by remaining where we are. The weakness of this version of consent was to be pointed out by David Hume.

Locke's political theory is, above all, a theory of resistance. Ultimately, it is a theory of revolution, published, after all, to defend or in some sense celebrate the removal of James II from the throne of England. Men establish government to defend their natural rights and uphold the natural law with a degree of reliability and impartiality impossible in the state of nature; but government does not supersede the natural law and may not infringe or ignore the rights that the natural law confers. Government has the nature of a trust. We entrust the defence of our rights to it, but we do not relinquish those rights to it. A government that violates natural rights is therefore in breach of its trust, and its subjects are entitled to defend their rights and liberties by resisting it: with violence if necessary. In a sufficiently gross case of breach, the people actually have a right of revolution: that is, a right to take back the authority originally conferred on the government. Revolution, Locke thinks, is a kind of appeal to heaven for judgment by the people who consider themselves oppressed by tyrannical government. If the revolution is successful - if the divine judgment is given in favour of the people - sovereignty reverts back to the community constituted by the original agreement that took men out of the state of nature, and the process of creating political institutions can begin again.

In these and like cases where the government is dissolved, the people are at liberty to provide for themselves by erecting a new legislative, differing from the other by the change of persons or form or both, as they shall find it most for their safety and good.

## (*Second Treatise* ch.19)

If a people can simply remove authority from governments if it sees fit, is not this a recipe for anarchy? Locke has two responses to this objection. First, it is not his suggestion that governments are to be overthrown for every trifling offence that they may give to subjects' sensibilities. Tyrants will not be resisted unless large numbers of people are damaged by their exactions. Second, there is in any case a sense in which a tyrannical government overthrows itself, by failing to perform the only functions that justified its existence in the first place.

[W]henever the legislators endeavour to take away or destroy the property of the people, or to reduce them to slavery under arbitrary power, they put themselves into a state of war with the people, who are thereupon absolved from any further obedience, and are left to the common refuge, which God hath provided for all men against force and violence: resistance.

## (*Second Treatise* ch.19)

Locke is interested also in the question of religious toleration; a question that was, of course, topical throughout his lifetime. He produced an *Essay on Toleration* as early as 1667, and later published three John Locke *Letters Concerning Toleration* (1689, 1690, 1692; a fourth letter was published after his death). His defence of religious freedom has three aspects. First, persecution and religious intolerance are at odds with the spirit of the Gospel. Second, the duty of government is to preserve a public and external order only. The business of the law,

he says, is not to regulate people's opinions, but to provide for the safety and security of the commonwealth. Religious observance and belief are private matters: the practice of religion affects no one but the individual whose practice it is. Magistrates therefore have no right to require anyone to act against conscience in any matter of religion. Third, religious faith is in any case a matter of belief, and belief is not an act of will. Since, therefore, magistrates can only coerce the will, it is irrational and futile to try to enforce religious belief. It may be thought that this last argument rather misses the point, inasmuch as what magistrates try to enforce is not religious belief, but religious conformity; but Locke's arguments considered generally are familiar liberal ones, reminiscent in a number of ways of those of J.S. Mill. As *The Reasonableness of Christianity* shows, Locke does not understand Christianity to be an edifice of elaborate and subtle doctrine. The minimum requirements of the Christian faith are not much more than belief in God and in Jesus as the Son of God. He therefore does not find it difficult to ignore the theological niceties that separate the various kinds of dissenters from one another and from the Anglican establishment. Toleration should not, he thinks, be extended to Roman Catholics and atheists: not because of any religious consideration, but because the former owe allegiance to a foreign power and the latter, because they do not believe in a God who is the ground of moral obligation, cannot be relied upon to honour obligations.

Locke - jointly, perhaps, with Hobbes - is the most influential of all English political theorists. His political writing, like all political writing, is a response to the issues and events of a specific time and place, and reflects a particular perception of those issues and events. He is an opponent of the specific ideological claims of the Stuart kings. Arguably, the apparently universal principles and values for which he argues are really no more than the interests of an emergent capitalist class. This is a view that was argued persuasively by C.B. Macpherson in his influential book called *The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism*. Nonetheless, Locke's thought has been promoted into timeless significance by the admiration of generations of liberals. The impact of his ideas on the American Constitution and upon the declarations of the French Revolutionaries is clear, and his theory of property continued to influence liberal political thinkers - Robert Nozick is an obvious example - into the twentieth century.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- John Locke *A Letter Concerning Toleration*, ed. R. Klibansky and J. W. Gough (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968).
- John Locke *Two Treatises of Government*, ed. P. Laslett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
- John Locke *Essays on the Law of Nature*, ed. W. M. von Leyden (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002).

#### *Secondary sources*

- Cranston, M. : *John Locke: a Biography* (London: Longman, 1957).
- Dunn, J. : *The Political Thought of John Locke* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969).
- Gough, J. W. : *John Locke's Political Philosophy* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973).

- Hampsher-Monk, I. : *A History of Modern Political Thought* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992).
- Macpherson, C. B. : *The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1962).