## **Georges Sorel (1847-1922)**

Georges Sorel was born in Cherbourg in 1847 and trained as an engineer. His contributions to theory began relatively late in life, publishing his first article at the age of thirty-nine. Six years later a small inheritance enabled him to retire from his profession as a road engineer to devote himself to study and writing. He wrote on philosophy, politics, economics and social theory, all areas in which he was largely self-taught. Sorel's best-known works, *Reflections on Violence* and *The Illusions of Progress*, were both published in 1908. Although possessed of insight and considerable originality, Sorel was both intellectually and politically restless. He detested bourgeois politics and culture, and mostly saw himself on the political left. Around the time of his retirement in 1892 he became a somewhat unorthodox Marxist, but then shifted his allegiance to anarchism at the beginning of the new century. In the years before World War I, Sorel associated with figures on the anti-parliamentary far right, before switching again when the Russian Revolution seemed to offer (falsely as it turned out) the prospect of power for genuine worker councils of which he approved. He never joined any political party, believing them all dominated by middle-class intellectuals, a group he particularly loathed. He is impossible to classify in conventional terms, and probably his most important influence was on the development of fascism. He died in 1922.

Sorel was one of a number of noted thinkers around the turn of the century - including Nietzsche, Max Weber and Oswald Spengler - who saw contemporary Western civilisation in terms of decadence and decline. Contemptuous of bourgeois culture and convinced that the state was irredeemably corrupt, he put his faith in the skilled working class. Sceptical, iconoclastic and pessimistic, he poured scorn on facile notions of progress. Sorel admired the harsher, warrior virtues of the Ancient world, the courage, fortitude, vigour, moral rectitude and patriotism he found especially in Republican Rome. He saw history as alternating between periods of vigour, when such virtues were to the fore, and periods of decadence. His hope was for a new age of vigour that would sweep away bourgeois decadence and domination. The only possible instrument for such a purpose was the working class. The question was how they could be instilled with the warrior virtues of the past.

Sorel believed that the violence of class war and revolution would purge society and restore these virtues. He looked to a revolutionary transformation of society led by the skilled working class that would be purified and transformed by the act of taking possession of the world and themselves. There are obvious parallels with Marx. Sorel admired and was influenced by Marx, but fully endorsed Bernstein's revisionist criticisms: the baleful influence of Hegel, the falsity of historical materialism, the failure of predictions and the unacceptability of the dictatorship of the proletariat. However, he would not stomach Bernstein's alternative of a socialist party devoted to peaceful parliamentary means. Parties are always dominated by the group he hated most, middle-class intellectuals; this was true even of working-class parties, as Sorel's friend Roberto Michels taught with his famous 'iron law of oligarchy'. Sorel's contempt for the state and political parties turned him towards the social anarchist tradition, and particularly its most recent syndicalist manifestation.

Anarcho-syndicalism developed in the late nineteenth century, most fully in France, and was a form of anarchism that was associated with the trade unions. As such it was the only form of anarchism that had any discipline and organisation. The idea was that it was the trade unions alone that could push through a revolution, using the instrument of the general strike, and could thereafter run society through the voluntary association of trade unions, without any need for parties of middle-class politicians. These were not mass unions with

professional national leaders, since most French unions at the time were small, local and based on crafts. Through them, workers would genuinely take over the economy and society. This is what attracted Sorel.

Sorel foresaw a new age of production, under the autonomous workers, and for all his socialist credentials he was not as hostile to capitalism as might be supposed. He was not against private property, but saw it as a necessary adjunct to personal independence. Furthermore, he saw in the free market a spur to vigour and enterprise, and was far more hostile to the idea of the all-providing state. He was opposed to the capitalist as exploiter of the workers, but not as bold entrepreneur. And while he rejected notions of progress as the bourgeoisification of the world, he was certainly a believer in economic and technological progress. What was to come was a world of greater production and technological sophistication.

Sorel was less concerned with the details of the society to come than with the processes of revolution and change. Rejecting facile liberal notions of progress he insisted that what motivated men was not reason but emotion, and in practical politics it was not theories that drove and inspired great movements but myth. In *Reflections on Violence* he explores what he calls 'social poetry', the myths that have inspired both religious and political movements. These are not to be confused with utopias, which he thought were the products of bourgeois intellectuals who would exploit the working class and lead it towards reformism. He cites as examples of myth the early Christian belief in the Second Coming, Mazzini's belief in a nationalist transformation of Italy and the Marxist belief in a proletarian revolution.

What had attracted Sorel to Marxism was not its much vaunted scientific credentials, which he dismissed as spurious, but the power of its central myth. No amount of theory or rational calculation, he thought, could possibly inspire men to the discipline, courage and selfsacrifice that were necessary to successfully prosecute a revolution. Only myths could do this. What Sorel meant by myth was a vision of the future in which the world is transformed by a catastrophic event. In terms of this vision men can make sense of their lives, as part of the struggle that will eventually bring victory in the final cataclysm. The certainty of victory, based entirely upon faith, is what makes these myths so powerful and compelling.

By the time Sorel formulated his theory of myth, his interest had switched from the Marxist myth of proletarian revolution to the anarcho-syndicalist myth of the general strike that would bring capitalism down, destroy the bourgeoisie and put the workers in control. The result would be, Sorel believed, a world morally transformed. A new 'ethic of production' would prevail, with workers steeled and purified by their struggle, dedicated to their work and their colleagues, and bound by a strict moral code centring on the family. Such a society would have the discipline and the energy to provide the entrepreneurial drive for innovation and improvement that a market economy needs and that the decadent bourgeoisie had lost.

In the meantime, before the general strike, the workers must not themselves become decadent by joining in with bourgeois parties or parliaments, or succumbing to bourgeois offers of improvement. The workers must maintain their purity of spirit by confrontation and violence. In this sense violence is seen as necessary to the renewal and preservation of civilisation.

On the other hand, despite his reputation and much violent and bloodthirsty language, Sorel is not the unambiguous advocate of violence he is sometimes supposed. He hated the mindless atrocities and assassinations then being perpetrated in the name of anarchist revolution, and

he even hated industrial sabotage, which, with his passion for technology, he tended to regard as sacrilege. Violence was for the revolution itself, although Sorel sometimes seemed to think that the mere threat of overwhelming violence by a disciplined and morally determined proletariat would be sufficient to intimidate the middle classes into accepting a new order.

In general, the whole Sorelian theme of transfiguration through the revolutionary violence of the working masses inspired by myth was far more influential among fascists than socialists or anarchists.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Georges Sorel *The Illusions of Progress*, ed. J. Stanley (Los Angeles, CA: California University Press, 1969).
- Georges Sorel *Reflections on Violence*, ed. J. Jennings (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

## *Secondary sources*

- Jennings, J. : *Georges Sorel: The Character and Development of His Thought* (London: Macmillan, 1985).
- Portis, L. : *Georges Sorel* (London: Pluto Press, 1980).
- Stanley, J. L. : *The Sociology of Virtue: The Political and Social Theories of Georges Sorel* (Los Angeles, CA: California University Press, 1982).