## **Mary Wollstonecraft (1759-97)**

Mary Wollstonecraft was born in Spitalfields, London. Her father, John Edward, was a weaver who made several unsuccessful attempts to set himself up as a farmer in various parts of the country. Mary's childhood and early adulthood were disrupted by her family's frequent migrations. In 1775, she met a young woman called Frances Blood. The two became devotedly attached, and in 1784 opened a school in Islington, at which Mary's sisters Eliza and Everina also taught. At this time, Mary began to come under the influence of the rational dissenters Richard Price and Joseph Priestley, thus entering the circle of radical nonconformists to which her future husband, William Godwin, also belonged. (She and William Godwin first met in 1791, though at first neither much liked the other.) In February 1785 Frances Blood married. In November of the same year she died in Mary's arms while giving birth to a child, who also died. Overcome with grief, Mary closed the school and began to throw herself into a literary career. Her first work, a pamphlet called *Thoughts on the Education of Daughters*, appeared in 1786. During 1787 and 1789 she devoted herself to translation, journalism, a novel called *Mary: a Fiction*, and a book called *The Female Reader* (which has not survived). In 1790 she produced *A Vindication of the Rights of Man*, intended to be simultaneously an answer to Burke's *Reflections on the Revolution in France* and a defence of her friend Richard Price. Her most famous work, *A Vindication of the Rights of Woman*, was published in 1792. She had several unsatisfactory relationships with men, including one between 1793 and 1795 with an American businessman, Gilbert Imlay, by whom she had a daughter (named Frances, in memory of Frances Blood). Imlay's treatment of her was such that she tried on two occasions to take her own life, the second time by jumping off Putney Bridge. In March 1797 she married William Godwin, and died shortly after giving birth to their daughter, the future Mary Shelley. In 1798 Godwin published an affectionate biography of his wife - *Memoirs of the Author of a Vindication of the Rights of Woman* - the frankness of which caused much scandal.

It is upon *A Vindication of the Rights of Woman* that Mary Wollstonecraft's enduring reputation depends. In it, she applies standard liberal values and arguments to the specific case of women. She rejects the assumption that the subordinate position of women is an immutable feature of the natural order. Human beings are rational creatures. It is upon their rationality that their claim to rights of liberty and self-determination depends. But women are human beings. As human beings, they are rational creatures and, as rational creatures, they must be entitled to the same rights of liberty and self-determination as male rational creatures claim for themselves. Femaleness is not a morally relevant criterion of discrimination. Women do indeed often seem ill-fitted for roles in the world outside the family. This, however, is because they are not given the opportunity to develop their talents or character through education. They are educated, but they are educated to be adjuncts to men in a world largely conditioned by male values. They are submissive, lightminded, emotional, susceptible to flattery and so on, because they are taught to be. In modern terms, their femininity is socially conditioned. If women could be properly educated, if they could enjoy full civil rights, and if they could be legally independent of their husbands and free to exercise their talents in any capacity they chose, they would be equipped to be full members of society and fit companions for men. As things stand, however, marriage is 'legal prostitution'. Women, she adds, 'may be convenient slaves, but slavery will have its constant effect, degrading the master and the abject dependent'. The values that underwrite such slavery are institutionalised in the monarchy, the Church and the military establishment. Social justice will never be achieved, Wollstonecraft maintains, while these mechanisms of inequality remain.

Despite such flashes, *A Vindication of the Rights of Woman* nowadays looks rather tame. Mary Wollstonecraft is not a 'jobs and careers' liberal feminist of the twentieth-century type, nor does she challenge the institution of the family or women's traditional responsibilities within it. More than anything, her argument is about the enhancement of women's dignity and sense of self-worth, regardless of job or occupation. She has little doubt that only a minority of exceptional women would be able, or would want, to pursue independent careers. She believes also that the majority will find fulfilment in the roles of wife and mother. Nonetheless, a proper education, the end of legal dependence on husbands and the opportunity, even if not taken up, for non-menial occupation outside the family would give women the personal resources necessary to enable them to be effective wives and mothers, and through the exercise of reason and virtue in that role to realise their nature as human beings. These doctrines were, of course, much more radical at the time than they seem now.

It is impossible not to admire Mary Wollstonecraft's drivenness and moral courage. Inevitably, she incurred the displeasure of the contemporary male establishment. Also, she suffered the same kind of attack at conservative hands as other English radicals did in the literary panic created by the French Revolution (Burke called her 'a hyaena in petticoats'). Feminists in the early nineteenth century were reluctant to associate themselves with a woman whose life had included several love affairs, an illegitimate child and two suicide attempts. By the end of the nineteenth century, however, *A Vindication of the Rights of Woman* had achieved recognition as one of the foundation documents of feminism. When American feminists Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Matilda Joslyn Gage published the first volume of their landmark *History of Woman Suffrage* in 1881, they put Mary Wollstonecraft first in the list of names that appears on the dedication page.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Mary Wollstonecraft *A Vindication of the Rights of Woman*, ed. I. Kramnick (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1982).
- Mary Wollstonecraft *A Short Residence in Sweden* (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1987). This edition also contains William Godwin's *Memoirs of the Author of a vindication the Rights of Woman*.

## *Secondary sources*

- Kelly, G. : *Revolutionary Feminism: The Mind and Career of Mary Wollstonecraft* (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1992).
- Taylor, B. : *Eve and the New Jerusalem: Socialism and Feminism in the Nineteenth Century* (London: Virago, 1983).
- Todd, J. : *Mary Wollstonecraft: A Revolutionary Life* (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2000).
- Wardle, R. : *Mary Wollstonecraft: A Critical Biography* (Lincoln, KS: University of Kansas Press, 1966).