## **Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900)**

Nietzsche was born near Leipzig in 1844, the son of a Lutheran pastor. His father died when he was a child and he was brought up by his mother, sister and aunts. At school and at university he was a precocious and brilliant classical scholar, and this led to his appointment as Professor of Classical Philology at the University of Basel at the unprecedentedly young age of twenty-four.

His first book, Friedrich Nietzsche *The Birth of Tragedy* (1872), was something of a shock to the academic community. It was not the expected scholarly treatise based on close argument and detailed evidence, but a work of sweeping generalisations about the course and the future of Western civilisation, written in vivid and unorthodox prose. Consequently, the book was severely criticised; but Nietzsche continued to write in this way for the rest of his career. In 1879 he retired from his professorship on grounds of ill-health and for the next ten years Nietzsche lived as a semi-invalid in various parts of Switzerland, France and Italy, during which time he wrote his most famous works. In 1889, at the age of forty-five, he became insane. He was brought back to Germany, where his mother and sister, Elizabeth Föster-Nietzsche, nursed him until his death in 1900.

It was about the time he sank into madness that his reputation as a philosopher began to grow. Works such as Friedrich Nietzsche *The Gay Science* (1882), Friedrich Nietzsche *Thus Spake Zarathustra* (1883-5), Friedrich Nietzsche *Beyond Good and Evil* (1886) and Friedrich Nietzsche *On the Genealogy of Morals* (1887) were increasingly recognised for their insight and intellectual power. However, his most notorious work, *The Will to Power* (published in several different versions beginning in 1901), was only put together from miscellaneous notes after his death. It is a highly unrepresentative and misleading selection that needs to be treated with caution. This was the responsibility of Elizabeth Föster-Nietzsche, who was a fervent racist and nationalist. She became a devoted follower of Hitler and sedulously promoted her brother's work as anticipating Nazi ideology. But while parts of Nietzsche's thought appear to chime with some aspects of fascist elitism and authoritarianism, Nietzsche was in fact strongly opposed to both racism and nationalism. Nevertheless, the association with Nazism clouded Nietzsche's reputation for many years after World War II. In fact Nietzsche has influenced thinkers across the political spectrum. His most recent and in some ways most direct influence has been upon the post-structuralists and postmodernists of the late twentieth century.

*The Birth of Tragedy* was a response to Schopenhauer's philosophy, which Nietzsche read as a student. He embraced Schopenhauer's vision of the sheer tragic awfulness of the human condition, and Schopenhauer's belief that we can gain some fleeting relief through art, which alone puts us in touch with the true nature of reality. But Nietzsche rejects Schopenhauer's Buddhist-like subjection of the will and renunciation of the world as the only means to genuine peace of mind. He looked to Ancient Greece for an alternative answer.

Nietzsche portrays Greek civilisation in *The Birth of Tragedy* as reaching a pinnacle of achievement *before* Socrates and the great age of Greek philosophy. The greatness of that civilisation lay in its art, above all tragedy. All art arose, he argued, from one of two conflicting principles, which he personified as two Greek gods: Apollo, representing beauty, order, clarity, reason and individualism; and Dionysus, representing sensuality and intoxication, the instinctual, the irrational and individual submergence in the group. Nietzsche argued that the Greeks achieved a perfect balance between these principles in their mythic

drama, which enabled them to witness the true meaningless horror of human existence and yet nevertheless affirm life and live it to the full.

This genuine insight, as Nietzsche sees it, into the true nature of the human condition was undermined by the subsequent Socratic philosophy (by which Nietzsche always meant Socratic/Platonic philosophy - see Plato) and later by Christianity. This undermining ultimately led to what Nietzsche believed to be a crisis of contemporary civilisation, which he saw as reliant upon values that were no longer viable and as therefore trivial, empty and decadent. The philosophy of Socrates and his successors, with their promise of the power of reason to unravel every mystery and provide true values to live by, was the ruination of Greek tragedy and decisively tilted Western culture in favour of the Apollonian at the expense of the Dionysian. The facile optimism of their philosophy has proved false and civilisation is thus in crisis, having sunk into decadence and nihilism. Nietzsche's answer to this crisis - the revival of the arts led by Wagner's operas (also myth-based and combining the Apollonian and the Dionysian) - was soon abandoned, but he retained much of the analysis of civilisation in crisis. In later works he elaborated the nature of the crisis and offered new solutions.

Western civilisation is in crisis because the sources of values in Western society are failing. These are reason and religion, both of which, Nietzsche thinks, are inadequate sources of value. Since Socrates, Western culture had been seduced by the comforting but entirely erroneous belief that reason can provide the right values - values that will lead to harmony, happiness and fulfilment for all. The reality of life was conflict, suffering and a constant striving for power. Nietzsche saw the will to power as all-pervasive, characterising all that exists, but not (as with Schopenhauer) inherently evil. Although responsible for evil, it was also responsible for all that human beings strive for, including culture and philosophy. Nietzsche systematically interpreted human feelings, such as pity, gratitude and self-sacrifice in terms of stratagems for increasing power. All religions and systems of morality are interpreted in the same way.

The major source of Western values was Christianity, which Nietzsche attacks from two different directions: its morality and its metaphysics. He divided moral systems into two kinds: master moralities and slave moralities. Christianity had overthrown the aristocratic warrior-oriented master morality of the Classical world with one that arose among the lower orders. The master morality revelled in its superiority and despised what it deemed base, while the Christian morality was based upon resentment. It too aspired to dominate, but in a more subtle way, by shackling the superior and insisting that all were of equal worth. For all its emphasis on humility and goodness, it was as much an expression of the will to power as its aristocratic rival. It promoted the values of the lower orders - humility, subservience and pity - and condemned aristocratic pride as a cardinal sin. Ideologies derived from Christianity, including liberalism and socialism, are also based upon equality and pity and are equally contemptible. They are herd moralities based upon the resentment of the mass for their superiors. Furthermore, Nietzsche condemned Christianity as life-denying instead of being life-affirming (like Ancient Greek religion), although this aspect was attributed to St Paul rather than to Christ himself.

However, one of the side-effects of Christianity has been to instil in the Western mind a love of truth; one consequence of this has been the growth of science, which in turn has undermined the concept of God, belief in whom, Nietzsche insists, is no longer tenable. Not only does that take away the underlying metaphysics of Christianity, but all metaphysics and all meaning. Among other things, the concept of God underpinned the very notions of objectivity and truth, since it seemed to guarantee that in the last analysis there was a single unified universal point of view. Without God we have to recognise that there are multiple points of view, with none better than any others. This 'perspectivism' is a version of relativism and has the same limitations of self-reference (why is the claim that all truth is relative not itself only relatively true?), which Nietzsche never resolved. Nevertheless, Nietzsche sweeps away all foundations of knowledge and morality, including the unified self.

Nietzsche attacks the whole tradition of Western metaphysics as (anticipating Wittgenstein) largely based on verbal errors, where the nature of language seduces us into making unwarranted metaphysical assumptions. There is no evidence, he insists, for any metaphysical realm beyond the experience of the senses. At the same time, Western faith in science as the road to truth is also misplaced. There is no such thing as absolute objective truth; there are only interpretations. What is true is merely what is useful; that is, Nietzsche has a pragmatic view of truth. Science is a human construct that is useful without being true in any absolute sense. Nietzsche is prepared to say this of his own doctrines, although he is not consistent in this.

Nietzsche believed that, with the death of God, civilisation was in crisis and needed to be refounded on a new basis. Unless we are weak and self-deceiving (as most of us are) we must again learn to stare into the Dionysian abyss of the horror and meaninglessness of life and, like the Greeks, have the courage to live it vigorously nonetheless. In *Thus Spake Zarathustra*, his most famous but not his best book, Nietzsche insists that those capable of doing this are the men of the future. These are the minority who consist of what Nietzsche calls *Übermensch*, traditionally translated (rather melodramatically and absurdly) as 'supermen'. They alone are capable of creativity, of generating their own values unrestrained by conventional morality. This does not mean they all go round brutalising everyone: their greatest achievement will in fact be culture rather than conquest. Nevertheless, Nietzsche believes that these 'supermen' will be as distant from the present humanity as present humanity is from the animals, which is somewhat unconvincing.

After *Zarathustra* the 'superman' is not mentioned again. Some kind of higher being is still Nietzsche's ideal, but something a little less apocalyptic and exemplified in actual human beings such as Napoleon or Goethe. Even so, it is difficult to see what the role of these higher beings would be, since Nietzsche gives us little sense of how society should be organised. All we can say is that he believed they should be untrammelled by laws and customs and that they should 'transvalue values', thereby creating a new morality for a new age. But while the life of the superior specimens of humanity is not too clear, Nietzsche is perfectly clear that unless they can arise and flourish humanity is doomed. But doomed to what? Perhaps Nietzsche's view is best seen in his account in *Zarathustra* of the 'Last Man'. The Last Man is the herd-man, who wants only to be like everyone else, to be comfortable and happy and no more. It is an outlook that Nietzsche clearly feels could prevail but can only lead to mediocrity and nihilism and the denial of all that is best in human potential.

What then of politics in the narrow sense of policies and political organisation? Shortly before his final mental collapse Nietzsche admitted that he had unduly neglected politics, an omission he did not have the opportunity to rectify. However, there is much, both negative and positive, that can be inferred from his writings. Clearly for Nietzsche politics is not about progress or social justice or extending freedom or equality or human rights, these are the selfdeluding ideals of democratic slave moralities. His ideals are aristocratic. Politics is about

creating the conditions for human greatness. It is that greatness that alone can justify our awful existence. It would seem that (as in the Greek city-state) the mass of humanity is there to serve these higher beings. But of laws or institutional arrangements Nietzsche gives no account.

All this may seem absurd, but Nietzsche's value does not lie in specific prescriptions. It lies instead in the challenges he offers to our conventional ways of thinking, and the brilliance and insight he brought to some of our deeper problems. As such he has been widely influential among thinkers and writers of all kinds and across the political spectrum, from socialists to fascists to liberals to anarchists and even (despite his misogyny) to feminists. He has been particularly influential in recent decades among post-structuralists and postmodernists, having been the first to develop many of their themes. Perhaps the most basic and profound of these concern his reasoned rejection of any metaphysical foundations for our knowledge, beliefs and values. How we can know and live and act and create without such foundations is a problem that many struggle with today.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Friedrich Nietzsche *The Will to Power*, ed. W. Kaufmann (New York: Vintage Books, 1968).
- Friedrich Nietzsche *Thus Spoke Zarathustra*, ed. R. J. Hollingdale (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1969).
- Friedrich Nietzsche *The Gay Science*, ed. W. Kaufmann (New York: Vintage, 1974).
- Friedrich Nietzsche *The Birth of Tragedy*, ed. R. J. Hollingdale (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1993).
- Friedrich Nietzsche *On the Genealogy of Morality*, ed. K. Ansell-Pearson (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).

## *Secondary sources*

- Ansell-Pearson, K. : *An Introduction to Nietzsche as a Political Thinker* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994).
- Bergmann, P. : *Nietzsche: The Last Antipolitical German* (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1987).
- Detwiler, B. : *Nietzsche and the Politics of Aristocratic Radicalism* (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
- Higgins, K. and Magnus, B. (eds): *The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
- Thiele, L. P. : *Friedrich Nietzsche and the Politics of the Soul: A Study of Heroic Individualism* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990).