# **Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679)**

Thomas Hobbes was born at Westport near Malmesbury in Wiltshire, England. A wealthy uncle paid for his education and sent him to Magdalen Hall, Oxford. Hobbes lived at a time of immense intellectual excitement, and the universities of his day were far from being at the cutting edge of intellectual advance. The Oxford curriculum still consisted largely of scholastic logic and metaphysics, which he regarded as sterile pedantry and for which he had nothing good to say. On taking his degree in 1608, he became tutor to William Cavendish, eldest son of the Earl of Devonshire. His lifelong connection with the Cavendish family brought him into contact with the leading intellectuals of the day, notably Sir Francis Bacon, by whom he was greatly influenced. It also gave him the leisure and means to devote himself to study. He was something of a late developer. John Aubrey tells us in his *Brief Life* of Hobbes that *He was forty years old before he looked on Geometry, which happened accidentally. Being in a gentleman's library, Euclid's Elements lay open . . . He read the Proposition. By G—, says he (he would now and then swear an emphatical oath by way of emphasis), this is impossible! So he reads the demonstration of it, which referred him back to such a Proposition; which proposition he read. That referred him to another, which he also read . . . This made him in love with Geometry.*

### *(Aubrey, Brief Lives, p.309)*

Henceforth geometrical or demonstrative reasoning - reasoning that leads by clear logical steps to indubitable conclusions - was to be one of the mainstays of his philosophical method. Its influence is already clear in a little work produced in about 1630 called *A Short Tract on First Principles*. Much later he would call Geometry 'the only science which it hath pleased God hitherto to bestow on mankind' (Leviathan 1:4).

In 1634 he set off on a tour of Europe with the young Earl of Devonshire (the son of his original pupil). At Paris, he met Marin Mersenne, who was the centre of a scientific circle including Descartes and Gassendi; at Florence he met Galileo. Returning to England, he wrote a work called *The Elements of Law Natural and Politic*. This was not published as a whole until 1889, but in 1650 its first thirteen chapters appeared under the title *Human Nature*, and the remainder as a separate work called *De Corpore Politico*. In November 1640, with the Civil War imminent, Hobbes returned to France and resumed his former friendships. Mersenne invited him to contribute to a collection of responses to Descartes's projected *Meditationes de prima philosophia*. Hobbes's contributions, with Descartes's replies, appeared as the third set of *Obiectiones* when the treatise was published in 1641. Further correspondence followed on the *Dioptrique*, which had appeared along with the *Discours de la methode* in 1637.

By this time, Hobbes had devised the plan of his own *magnum opus*. It was to be a work in three parts, dealing respectively with matter or body, with human nature, and with society. His original intention was to deal with these subjects in order, but because England was then on the brink of civil war and, as he judged, in urgent need of political counsel, he decided to deal with the third part first, and published *De cive* in Paris in 1642. (*De corpore* came out in 1655 and *De homine* in 1658.) In 1651, stability having been restored by the Commonwealth, he returned to England, where he remained for the rest of his life. In that year he published an English translation of *De cive* called *Philosophical Rudiments Concerning Government and Society*, and his acknowledged masterpiece, *Leviathan*. He remained active to the end of his life, producing several more works of interest - in particular a history of the Civil War called

## *Behemoth* and a treatise called *The Questions Concerning Liberty, Necessity and Chance*. A revised edition of *Leviathan* in Latin came out in 1668.

Hobbes's political theory, then, is that of someone who experienced both the English Civil War and the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century. This fact is important to our understanding of it. He formulated his political ideas several times, but it is in *Leviathan* that they find their most complete and influential statement. His approach to politics is selfconsciously scientific. His technique of enquiry is derived partly from the 'resolutivecompositive' method associated with Galileo and Bacon, and partly from the deductive reasoning that had so impressed him in Euclid. If we are to arrive at a sound understanding of politics, we must first analyse or 'resolve' social wholes into their smallest component parts: namely, individual human beings. Then, having studied the properties and behaviour of those parts in isolation, we can deduce from them, as it were from first principles, rational conclusions about social and political organisation. In this way, Hobbes thinks, politics can be put on as sure a footing as any other science, and we can arrive at an account of politics that will furnish us with indubitable means of securing stability and peace.

What are we to make of the individual human being, of the 'natural' human being, unmodified by manners and civilisation? Hobbes had become convinced as early as 1630 - largely thanks to Bacon's influence - that the whole of the natural order can be explained in terms of 'body' without invoking such things as mind or spirit. The task of science, he argues in *De corpore*, is to examine and describe the effects of various types of corporeal motion; this, he thinks, is as true of physiology and psychology as it is of physics. His materialism - which earned him the condemnation of his contemporaries for 'atheism' - is central to his account of human behaviour. The body of each human being is, he thinks, only a complex mechanism, somewhat like a clock. He develops this imagery at length in *De corpore*. The heart is a spring; the nerves are wires; the joints are the wheels that give motion to the whole. Its behaviour is a series of responses to the stimuli received through the senses from the outside world. Some stimuli are pleasurable because they enhance our 'vital motion'. These we call good. Our feeling towards them is one of desire, and we endeavour to maximise and prolong them. Our condition when we are in a state where pleasure predominates is called 'felicity'. Other stimuli, which impede our vital motions, are painful. These we call evil; our feeling towards them is one of aversion, and we endeavour to avoid them. 'Good' and 'evil' have no other meaning than 'pleasurable' and 'painful': they are the names we give to what we desire and shun respectively. (Hobbes is, generally, a nominalist in his view of language: 'Words are but wise men's counters, they do but reckon with them, but they are the money of fools' (Leviathan 1:4).) 'Reason' is the calculative faculty by which we are enabled most effectively to achieve felicity and avoid the reverse. What we fear and seek to avoid more than anything else is death, death being precisely the event that makes the further continuance of felicity impossible. It is a truth of experience that individuals invariably act in such a way as to maintain themselves in being for as long as they can and by all possible means. In the light of this observation, we are, Hobbes thinks, to attribute to each man a 'right of nature' - an inherent right - 'to use his own power, as he will himself, for the preservation of his own nature' (Leviathan 1:14). To infer a 'right' - an entitlement to act - from what purports to be a factual generalisation about how people actually do act may seem a questionable logical procedure; but Hobbes is prevented by his materialist psychology from giving any other account of what it is to have a right, and he wishes to operate with the idea of right because it is, he thinks, by giving up our 'right of nature' that we create society and government.

Hobbes's materialist and hedonist psychology is worked out with remarkable thoroughness and consistency (although it raises questions about determinism and free will that he never satisfactorily answers). It is associated in his mind with, although it does not strictly imply, a destructive egoism. This feature of his thought is essential to his understanding of the nature and purposes of government. Given that each individual is no more than a self-contained mechanism operated by the attracting and repelling forces of pleasure and pain, no one has any reason to will anything but the greatest possible pleasure for themselves and the least possible pain. Hobbes does not believe that we are incapable of such things as benevolence. We can, after all, take pleasure in another's pleasure. But he thinks that other-directed passions tend to be overridden by immediate and self-centred ones, particularly in circumstances where there is danger, or where there is a shortage of those things that people want and need. If people lived in a world in which there were no government - in what Hobbes calls 'a State of Nature' - the result would be chaos, or at least it would be if the resources in the state of nature were scarce (which is what Hobbes assumes). People unrestrained by government would constantly come into conflict with one another in their efforts to maximise their own pleasure and avoid pain and death. Because they would constantly live in fear of losing what they have, no one would be free from the incessant urge to place themselves beyond the control of others and to achieve control over others. Everyone is naturally in the grip of 'a perpetual and restless desire of power after power, that ceaseth only in death' (Leviathan 1:11). In the absence of government, no one would be required to recognise any restraint or any obligation to anyone else, and so each would regard his natural right 'to use his own power, as he will himself, for the preservation of his own nature' as extending to everything whatsoever. The right of nature would, in effect, be a right to everything. 'And therefore if any two men desire the same thing, which nevertheless they cannot both enjoy, they become enemies' and 'endeavour to destroy or subdue one another' (Leviathan 1:13).

The state of nature, therefore, would be a condition of incessant conflict: 'a war . . . of every man against every man' (Leviathan 1:13). Even in the absence of actual conflict, there would be the ever present fear of it, because no one would trust anyone else not to attack them. No one is so much stronger than everyone else as to be immune from threat. What some lack in physical strength they make up for in guile, and the weak can in any case band together to overcome the strong. In the state of nature there is no safety for anyone. Unlike some of the other political theorists who adopted it, Hobbes does not seriously suppose that the state of nature was ever a historical reality. But we can, he thinks, imagine only too clearly what life would be like if all restraint on us were absent. Even in civilised society, he remarks, no one trusts anyone else: when we go out, we lock our doors and carry arms; we hide our belongings away in chests; even where we have law to protect us, we take it for granted that anyone could be a thief.

If human beings really were ungoverned, then, their condition would be one of fear and wretchedness. Life would, in Hobbes's most quoted phrase, be 'solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short' (Leviathan 1:13). But this fact in itself is enough to ensure that people in the state of nature would be led by their powerful instinct of self-preservation to seek the quickest and most effective way out of it. Each individual would understand that the only way of evading the perils of the state of nature would be to act according to certain rational maxims that Hobbes calls 'laws of nature', a law of nature being defined as *a precept, or general rule, found out by reason, by which a person is forbidden to do that which is destructive of his life, or takes away the means of preserving the same; and to omit that by which he thinks it may be best preserved.*

# *(Leviathan 1:14)*

He would understand (1) that it is rationally necessary to seek peace; (2) that the way to secure peace is to enter into an agreement with others not to harm one another; and (3) that having entered into such an agreement, it would be irrational, in the sense of self-defeating, to break it for as long as the others kept it. By this chain of reasoning, society would be created. It would be created by an agreement - a 'compact', as Hobbes calls it - made by individuals, no one of whom has any interest in anyone else's good *per se*, but each of whom realises that his own good can be secured only by agreeing not to harm others in return for their agreement not to harm him.

But '[t]he force of words [is] too weak to hold men to the performance of their covenants' (Leviathan 1:14). A *mere* compact, a compact not enforceable against anyone, would be of no value because no one of the parties to it could ever be sure that the others would not break it. 'Covenants without the sword are but words, and of no strength to secure a man at all' (Leviathan 2:17). The parties will need to insure themselves against this possibility by including in the compact an agreement to appoint a sovereign power to defend them collectively and punish those who violate its terms. The compact into which Hobbes imagines men entering therefore takes the following form: *I authorise and give up my right of governing myself to this man, or to this assembly of men, on this condition, that thou give up thy right to him, and authorise all his actions in like manner.*

This, he goes on, *is the generation of that great Leviathan, or rather (to speak more reverently) of that Mortal God, to which we owe, under the immortal God, our peace and defence.*

# *(Leviathan 2:17)*

Primarily by making and enforcing law, the sovereign power thus created will establish and maintain the kind of public order and security that it is not possible to enjoy in the state of nature. It will not (contrary to the impression that Hobbes sometimes gives) achieve its ends by coercion alone. It will also inculcate a moral sense into the citizens through education. In Book II of *Leviathan*, called 'Of the Commonwealth', Hobbes describes the various possible constitutional forms. In principle, sovereign power could be vested in any kind of government; but it would, he thinks, be best exercised by a monarch; and by this Hobbes means an absolute monarch. Monarchical power is efficient and enduring because undivided. Human nature being what it is, where power is shared, all who have a share in it will want a larger share than they have and will promptly fall into trying to wrest power from their colleagues, and so the very security and permanence that sovereign power is supposed to achieve will be lost.

The sovereign is created by, but is not a party to, the compact. He therefore cannot be got rid of because he is in breach of the compact. If he could be, his power would not, after all, be sovereign. His power is, however, conditional in a sense. It is conditional upon his continued willingness and effectiveness in relation to the defence and protection of his subjects. For as long as this condition is met, no one has any right of disobedience or resistance; but the subject's 'right of nature' to defend himself reasserts itself if the sovereign threatens his life or fails to protect it. No one can be expected to relinquish this natural right entirely. It was, after all, precisely in order to protect their lives that men submitted to government in the first

place. The subject who finds his life threatened by the sovereign is therefore entitled - even if he is a criminal under sentence of death - to escape or resist if he can. Similarly, subjects are no longer obliged to obey a ruler who is defeated by an invading enemy. In such a case the sovereign would not longer be sovereign, and his subjects would be perfectly entitled to transfer their allegiance to the conqueror: that is, to someone who is better able to protect them than the defeated former sovereign.

The sovereign will be prevented from becoming a tyrant by the fact that, like everyone else, he naturally wishes to preserve a state of affairs favourable to himself. He will therefore allow his subjects as great a degree of freedom as is compatible with protecting them against internal threat and external disorder. Similarly, he will see to it that material goods and other benefits are distributed in such a way as to create the least possible discontent. Everything in the commonwealth must be organised so as to damp down the possibilities of conflict that are always latent in human transactions. It is particularly important, Hobbes thinks, that there be one state religion and that the head of state is also the head of the Church. Any other arrangement - and he is, of course, speaking in the light of his experience of civil war in England - will lead to faction and strife. Religious belief in the strict sense is a private matter, but the public aspects of religion must be completely subordinate to public authority. Where the Bible is ambiguous, the interpretation of the sovereign is to be final; the sovereign is to decide which books of scripture are canonical; he is to decide how religious observance is to be conducted; he is to decide how the Church is to be organised. The Roman Catholic Church - to which Hobbes turns his attention in Part IV of *Leviathan*, significantly called 'Of the Kingdom of Darkness' - is inimical to the autonomy of the commonwealth precisely because it requires of its votaries a loyalty that goes beyond their loyalty to the state.

Hobbes is in the curious position of having developed a theory of absolute government based on the reasoned consent of those subject to it and aimed at their common good. The clarity, force and pungency of his writing and the incisiveness of his arguments have impressed students of politics for more than three centuries. Reduced to its essentials, his doctrine is extremely simple. Taking the worst view of human behaviour, men can only live together in large numbers and for any length of time if they are subject to a government strong enough to control their destructive tendencies. Salvation lies in the fact that we are rational enough to know this. Attempts at refutation and reply - some of them impressive, some unimpressive, some laughable - began almost as soon as *Leviathan* was published; but it seems in the highest degree unlikely that anything will dislodge it from its place in the canon. Hobbes remains one of the most impressive and influential of English political theorists. He is also, though he several times twits himself on his own timidity, a writer of considerable intellectual courage, who expressed unpopular views at a time when it was dangerous mortally dangerous, indeed - to do so. Virtually all subsequent attempts to treat politics and political behaviour philosophically have in some sense had to take Hobbes into account.

### *Further reading*

#### *Primary sources*

- Thomas Hobbes *De cive*, ed. H. Warrender (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983).
- Thomas Hobbes *Leviathan*, ed. R. Tuck (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).

#### *Secondary sources*

- Aubrey, J. : *Brief Lives*, ed. O. L. Dick (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1982).
- Hampsher-Monk, I. : *A History of Modern Political Thought* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992).
- Raphael, D. D. : *Hobbes* (London: Allen & Unwin, 1977).
- Skinner, Q. : *Visions of Politics*, vol. 3: *Hobbes and Civil Science* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
- Warrender, H. : *The Political Philosophy of Hobbes* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1957).
- Watkins, J. W. N. : *Hobbes's System of Ideas* (London: Hutchinson, 1973).