## **John Rawls (1921-2002)**

John Rawls was born in Baltimore, Maryland. He went to Princeton in 1939, taking his degree in 1943. After military service during World War II, he taught at Cornell University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and, finally, at Harvard, where he was a Professor of Philosophy for almost forty years. He became John Cowles University Professor at Harvard in 1976. He published numerous articles and reviews. His articles tended to be preliminary exercises leading to two large and influential books: A Theory of Justice (1971) and Political Liberalism (1993). He died on 27 November 2002.

*A Theory of Justice* is Rawls's major contribution to political theory. The notion of justice that he develops in it is often referred to as 'justice as fairness' ('Justice as Fairness' was the title given to a preliminary article published in the *Philosophical Review* in 1958 and reprinted in several anthologies since). In a certain sense, Rawls's argument is a rehabilitation of the old explanatory device of the social contract. Unlike the social contractarians of the seventeenth century, however, Rawls does not make the device part of a theory of obligation. Rather, he employs it in an attempt to establish what he thinks are rationally necessary principles of social justice. His chief purpose in doing so is to avoid what he regards as the major drawback of utilitarian or consequentialist thinking: namely, that such thinking can sanction the sacrifice or neglect of individual interests for the sake of a 'greater good'. This, he believes, is contrary to our intuitive beliefs about right and wrong. The system of social justice that he envisages will, as a matter of principle, exclude no one from its benefits. Rawls's underlying conviction is that a just or fair political order is one that provides similar opportunities for everyone to live a happy and fulfilled life.

Rawls's procedure is to invite us to engage in a thought-experiment. We are to imagine a group of individuals placed in what he calls an 'original position' - that is, in the Rawlsian equivalent of the seventeenth-century 'state of nature'. Their project is to devise the kind of society into which, on leaving this original position, they might wish to move. But the 'original position' is located behind a 'veil of ignorance': it is characterised by the lack of knowledge possessed by the people in it. They know that it will be useful to them to have what he calls 'primary goods': rights and liberties, opportunities and powers, income and wealth, and the bases of self-respect; and it is assumed that everyone is self-interested enough to want as much of these goods as possible. They do not, however, know anything about their own talents or abilities; nor do they know what position they will occupy in the society that they are to create. In such circumstances - in circumstances, that is, such that self-interested people are required to make decisions without knowing how those decisions will affect them - what principles of 'justice' will they devise for the society into which they are to move? They will, Rawls suggests, arrive at general principles that would leave the least advantaged member of the future society no worse off than any one of them would wish to be if they were to turn out actually to be the least-advantaged member.

There will be two such principles:

1

Each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others.

Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both (a) to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged, and (b) attached to positions and offices open to all under conditions of fair equality of opportunity.

Rawls's two principles are, he thinks, rationally necessary and universal in the sense that any human being capable of thinking at all will arrive at them as a matter of natural reason. We can, he suggests, test them and, if necessary, modify them by a method called 'reflective equilibrium': that is, we can act on them, see if they satisfy our basic requirements of a system of social justice and, to the extent that they do not satisfy our basic requirements, alter them. They are, in other words, capable of fine-tuning. But anyone who knows what it is to behave fairly will assent to them in a general way. They are to that extent reminiscent of the 'laws of nature' that the older social contractarians invoked. The liberty of which the first principle speaks is 'negative' liberty in the familiar liberal sense - that is, freedom from restriction or coercion. This liberty will encompass a range of basic rights, such as freedom of conscience and movement, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly and so on. The second principle - Rawls calls it the 'difference' principle - is intended to overcome the drawback that arises when negative freedom is interpreted in a strictly libertarian way: that is, the possibility that one might be destitute, homeless, starving and so on, yet still be technically free in the sense of unconstrained or uncompelled by anyone. The 'difference' principle is a principle of distributive justice. Under the system that Rawls proposes, even the worst-off members of society will have at least sufficient resources to enable their freedom not to be totally without value in practice. What Rawls's system implies is a welfare state in which the poor are provided with a minimum acceptable standard of living out of taxes paid by the rich. Rawls does not object in principle to there being a difference between rich and poor. He assumes a competitive market economy in which economic inequalities will function as incentives to the wealth creation that makes redistributive or progressive taxation possible. The practical limit to redistributive taxation is the point at which such taxation becomes a disincentive to wealth creation.

*A Theory of Justice* has been subjected to a great deal of analysis and criticism. Perhaps the major objection to which it is vulnerable is that its main argument is a question-begging one. The people in the 'original position' are the usual stereotypes of liberal political theory: rational, risk-averse, utility-maximising individualists. They are assumed to have exactly the characteristics - acquisitiveness, competitiveness, self-interest, caution - that will lead them to formulate the principles of justice at which Rawls wishes to arrive. If one were to imagine an original position full of gamblers or altruists, the kind of society that might be inferred from the anticipated behaviour of such people would be quite different. His theory of justice is to that extent a liberal democratic theory disguised as an abstract and universal one.

This is a point that Rawls came to accept in his later writing. In his second book, *Political Liberalism*, he presents a somewhat modified version of 'justice as fairness'. His purpose now is not to formulate a theory that purports to be universal and abstract, but to show how his theory is amenable specifically to the needs and aspirations of modern liberal democracies. A liberal democracy - a political society such that citizens are free to live their own lives in their own way under the protection of the law - is, Rawls assumes, the kind of society in which any reasonable person would want to live. But modern liberal democracies are strikingly pluralistic in nature. Pluralism or heterogeneity is inevitable precisely because the liberties that liberal democracies exist to protect find expression in a wide range of different moral, religious and philosophical beliefs. How, then, can the life of such a society be ordered in such a way as to minimise conflict between different views without prejudice to freedom?

Rawls's contention is that the institutions and procedures of government should rest upon his conception of 'justice as fairness': justice, that is, as described by slightly modified versions of the two principles stated in *A Theory of Justice*. Justice as fairness minimises the possibility of conflict because it secures the interests of all, while remaining neutral with respect to any one conception of the good life. As such, it is capable of acceptance by all human beings who are rational in any normally recognisable sense of the term, no matter how divergent their other beliefs may be. Justice as fairness is, as Rawls expresses it, capable of being the object of an 'overlapping consensus'. It is therefore capable of forming the basis of a reasonable, humane, well-ordered society in which all citizens can participate at the level of 'public reason', while pursuing their own private versions of the good life in conditions of economic security and personal freedom: a society in which, moreover, tolerance and understanding of others can grow. *Political Liberalism* has not, it must be added, achieved the same degree of critical acclaim accorded to *A Theory of Justice*.

Rawls is a major figure - perhaps *the* major figure - in the Anglo-American political theory of the twentieth century. His courage and intellectual ambition are not in doubt, even to his severest critics - and he has been widely criticised, by those on both the left and right wings of the political spectrum. At a time when philosophy in the English-speaking world was still almost entirely committed to the analysis of language, Rawls persisted in trying to do oldfashioned, prescriptive, deductive system-building. It may be felt that he failed, especially by those who still believe that such an enterprise must fail of necessity, but his work is to be valued not so much for its substantive achievement as for the debate that his attempt at a theory of justice stimulated.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- John Rawls *A Theory of Justice* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971).
- John Rawls *Political Liberalism* (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993).

## *Secondary sources*

- Daniels, N. (ed.) : *Reading Rawls* (New York: Basic Books, 1975).
- Sandel, M. : *Liberalism and the Limits of Justice* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).
- Wolff, R. P. : *Understanding Rawls* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977).