## **Friedrich von Hayek (1899-1992)**

Friedrich August von Hayek was born in Vienna. He studied law and political science at the University of Vienna and worked after World War I with Ludwig von Mises on problems of trade cycles and related matters. His association with von Mises apparently cured him of an early tendency towards socialism. He taught at the University of Vienna between 1921 and 1931. Between 1931 and 1950 he held a chair at the London School of Economics. Hayek then became Professor of Social and Moral Science at the University of Chicago, where he remained until 1962. He also taught at the Universities of Freiburg (1962-8) and Salzburg (1968-77). He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1974.

Hayek is a versatile, though not always an entirely coherent, thinker. His most important work was done in technical economics, in the fields of capital, trade-cycle and monetary theory (his major papers are collected as *Individualism and Economic Order*, 1948), but he was interested also in philosophy, political theory and theoretical psychology. On taking up his appointment at Chicago, he became one of the founders of the so-called 'Chicago School': that is, the group of monetarist economists working at the University of Chicago who believed that the economic policy of governments should be as non-interventionist as possible and that manipulation of the money supply is the only acceptable and non-injurious means of economic control. Hayek's own views on these matters had been formed before World War II, largely under the influence of von Mises, and during the 1930s and 1940s he was a determined opponent of Keynesianism and welfare-state economics. Always a convinced monetarist, in the later part of his career he went so far as to advocate the denationalisation of money: that is, the establishment of public and private currencies that would compete with one another. In 1979, Hayek suggested a restriction of the money supply so drastic that it would end inflation completely, even at the cost of short-term inflation as high as 20 per cent.

Socialism is the ulterior target of much of what Hayek has to say about politics. In particular, he is a determined critic of what Sir Karl Popper calls 'historicism'. Hayek's political views are best described as outgrowths of his economic doctrines combined with what may be called a Burkean conservatism and large helpings of subjective preference. In much the way that Burke does, Hayek believes that human behaviour and the various moral, economic and political institutions to which it gives rise are too complex to be fully understood and explained. Such institutions arise spontaneously over time. They are not really created by anyone. They come about as the more or less unintended consequences of a myriad human actions and interactions. The knowledge of them that any one generation has is tacit, incomplete and non-propositional. We all live within, and contribute to, an intricate structure of law, moral tradition and rules of behaviour, but no one can comprehend it fully, nor can it be said to have been created by anyone's deliberate act. This view of the nature of social organisation leads Hayek to be very sceptical of the claims of the social sciences, including economics. The complexity and irregularity of social phenomena does not lend itself to the kind of generalising explanation that the social sciences attempt to provide. But if social scientific explanation is not possible, nor is social scientific prediction, and economic and social planning purportedly based on such prediction is a mistake. We can predict trends or patterns, and we can explain general principles, but nothing more precise is possible. Only the market itself will, by its own self-regulating processes, set prices and production levels efficiently, and attempts by governments to interfere with this self-regulation are worse than futile. Distributive justice cannot be manufactured or managed by governments, and attempts to do so can only lead to harm because they inevitably interfere with natural mechanisms.

Governments, therefore, should have no regulatory economic powers and no social-welfare roles. Hayek is also hostile to all other institutions and bodies, such as trade unions, which threaten the spontaneous workings of the market.

Thus expressed, Hayek's argument is a predictable enough defence of *laissez-faire* economics. As is commonly the case with such arguments, however, he makes his economic justification of *laissez-faire* serve also as an argument about individual liberty. The greatest harm to which central economic planning tends to lead, he argues in Friedrich von Hayek *The Road to Serfdom* (1944), is totalitarianism. Governments whose aim is to plan the lives of their subjects end, even if unintentionally, by taking away their freedom. There is no masterplan or architectonic human good. The best kind of government defends its citizens' rights by value-neutral laws that treat everyone equally, while allowing them the maximum possible freedom from coercion. Such government will, Hayek thinks, give to each individual the best chance of satisfying their own material and other preferences and avoiding interference by anyone else. A utopian account of the classical liberal constitution that would make such freedom possible is set out in The Constitution of Liberty (1960), with various difficulties and elaborations discussed in a trilogy called Friedrich von Hayek *Law, Legislation and Liberty* (1973-8). It should be added that Hayek's insistence on minimal government is much influenced by an inveterate tendency to mistrust the motives of politicians. He believes, for example, that in managed economies politicians will buy votes by bribing the electorate with measures that will produce inflation.

It is not easy to remember, at the beginning of the twenty-first century, that for much of his life Hayek's views were unfashionable and unpopular. During the 1940s and 1950s, his ideas were eclipsed by those inspired by Keynes. Hayek came fully into his own in the 1970s and 1980s, with the emergence of the 'New Right' in Britain and America. His doctrines, at least in crude and simplified forms, were adopted with enthusiasm by the Thatcherite wing of the Conservative Party in Britain and by the United States government during the presidency of Ronald Reagan. In her book Friedrich von Hayek *The Path to Power* (1995), Margaret Thatcher said: *the most powerful critique of socialist planning and the socialist state which I read [during the late 1940s], and to which I have returned so often since [is] F.A. Hayek's The Road to Serfdom.*

*(p.50)* 

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Friedrich von Hayek *The Constitution of Liberty* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1960).
- Friedrich von Hayek *Individualism and Economic Order* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976).
- Friedrich von Hayek *Law, Legislation and Liberty* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982).
- Friedrich von Hayek *The Road to Serfdom* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976).

## *Secondary sources*

Barry, N. P. : *Hayek's Social and Economic Philosophy* (London: Macmillan, 1979).

- Bosanquet, N. : *After the New Right* (London: Heinemann, 1983).
- Gray, J. : *Hayek on Liberty* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984).