# **John Stuart Mill (1806-73)**

John Stuart Mill was born in 1806 in London, the eldest son of the utilitarian social theorist and economist James Mill. The story of his remarkable childhood is known from his John Stuart Mill *Autobiography* (1870), written towards the end of his life when he knew that he was suffering from consumption. Educated at home by his father, with the assistance of Jeremy Bentham and Francis Place, J.S. Mill began Greek when he was three, Latin when he was eight, logic at twelve and political economy at thirteen. By 1813, when he was seven, he had studied the first six dialogues of Plato, from *Euthyphro* to *Theaetetus*, in the original Greek. Mill saw no one of his own age until he was fourteen. He says, in a manuscript fragment omitted from the published *Autobiography*, that *It was one of the most unfavourable of the moral agencies which acted upon me in my boyhood, that mine was not an education of love, but of fear.*

James Mill's children, he adds, 'neither loved him, nor, with any warmth of affection, anyone else'. During 1821 and 1822 he studied Roman Law with the jurist John Austin and began to read the works of Bentham in Dumont's French edition. In 1823 he was arrested and jailed overnight for distributing literature on birth control to working-class Londoners. At the age of nineteen, working as a clerk in the East India Company and at the same time acting as Bentham's amanuensis, Mill edited Bentham's *Rationale of Judicial Evidence* in five volumes. It is not altogether surprising that these exertions culminated in a nervous breakdown. During 1826 and 1827, Mill found himself exhausted, depressed and unable to concentrate. One of the things that helped him to recover, he tells us, was reading the poetry of Wordsworth. In 1830 he met Harriet Taylor, in whom he at once recognised a soul mate. The two enjoyed an apparently blameless friendship until 1851, when - Mrs Taylor's husband having died - they married. Harriet Taylor died in 1858. Mill sat briefly (1865-8) as MP for Westminster. His journalistic and literary career, too complex to chronicle here, embraced logic, ethics, analytic psychology, economics and politics. Those of his works that are chiefly of interest to us here are his essays John Stuart Mill *On Liberty* (1859), John Stuart Mill *Utilitarianism* and *Considerations on Representative Government* (both 1861). It is convenient to consider them out of chronological order.

*Utilitarianism* was first published in *Fraser's Magazine* (it came out in book form in 1862). Mill's object in writing it is to rescue the utilitarianism of Bentham and James Mill from the charge brought against it by Carlyle and others, that a philosophy which so emphasises quantitative pleasure is a doctrine worthy only of swine. After a few introductory remarks, he offers the following synopsis of utilitarianism: *The creed which accepts as the foundation of morals, Utility, or the Greatest Happiness principle, holds that actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness. By happiness is intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by unhappiness is intended pain, and the privation of pleasure.*

# *(Utilitarianism ch.2)*

Pleasure is the supreme good, in the sense that it is not a means to any end beyond itself. Pleasure is that which everyone desires in and for itself. Since, Mill thinks, it makes no sense to use the word 'desirable' except in reference to what everybody does in fact desire, pleasure is therefore the supremely desirable end. This last point is the same nominalist one that we find in Hobbes and Bentham - that 'good', and therefore 'desirable', are the names we give to what we find pleasant - but Mill's way of making the point is notoriously ham-fisted, and he

was soundly trounced for it in F.H. Bradley's John Stuart Mill *Ethical Studies* (1874) and G.E. Moore's John Stuart Mill *Principia Ethica* (1903).

For Mill as for Bentham, psychological hedonism points to both an individual and a social ethic. The desire for one's own greatest happiness is the sole motive of the individual; the greatest happiness of everyone is the criterion of social good and the object of moral action. But, Mill argues, not all pleasures are equal. Pushpin is not, after all, as good as poetry. Pleasures can be ranked as superior or inferior in moral quality, with pleasures of the mind higher, and hence more desirable, than bodily pleasures. 'It is', Mill says, 'better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied' (*Utilitarianism* ch.2). Any competent judge - anyone who has experienced pleasures of both kinds - will think the same; anyone who does not think the same is not a competent judge. Mill, without quite realising it, has muddied the clear waters of Benthamite utilitarianism by developing his ethics along the same lines as the 'self-realisation' of T.H. Green. Human beings do not achieve the good through the pursuit of pleasure pure and simple, but by achieving for themselves 'a manner of existence which employs their higher faculties' (ch.2).

Marred as it is by fallacy and circularity, Mill's attempt to rehabilitate Bentham's utilitarianism is surprisingly inept. His argument, as it stands, is no more than an undefended assertion that some pleasures, or some kinds of pleasure, are higher than others. He does not appear to notice the difficulty involved in asserting simultaneously that pleasure itself is the highest good, but that pleasures differ in quality and not in quantity only. Mill's argument is not beyond rescue from this difficulty (one might argue, in impeccably Benthamite terms, that pleasures of the mind are more fecund, of greater duration, purer and so forth than pleasures of the body), but Mill himself makes no attempt to rescue it.

The essay *On Liberty* is accepted universally as one of the classic statements of liberal individualism. It created more of a stir during Mill's lifetime than any of his other writings. Liberty, on Mill's account of it, is what would later come to be called 'negative' liberty. The only freedom worthy of the name, he thinks, is the freedom to pursue our own good in our own way, provided that we do not impede other people's efforts to do the same. No one neither individual nor government - has the right to restrict the speech, publication or conduct of anyone for any reason other than to prevent harm to other people; and by 'harm' Mill means substantive, measurable harm. That this 'harm' principle is a good deal easier to state than it is to apply is a problem of which Mill seems oblivious. We have no right to restrain anyone from harming himself. Purely 'self-regarding' actions as distinct from 'social' actions are of no concern to anyone except the individual whose actions they are (again, Mill seems unaware of the difficulties that this distinction involves for anyone who tries to apply it). Even if one man only were to dissent from an opinion held by everyone else, this would not be a reason for silencing him. No one can know what is true and what is false unless all ideas are allowed to be freely discussed. The censor who forbids discussion claims an infallibility that no one can have. Even our most cherished beliefs become lifeless pieties unless they are allowed to compete in the marketplace for recognition. If they are true, they have nothing to fear from competition; if they are false, it is better that we know they are. More broadly, Mill is an advocate of what he calls 'experiments in living'. All members of a community should be allowed, subject to the harm principle, to develop their individuality to the full by living without interference in whatever way they like, no matter how eccentric. Once again, Mill is less of a utilitarian than he thinks he is. He believes himself to be developing an argument about utility, but it is utility of a modified kind. He says, *I regard utility as the ultimate* 

*appeal on all ethical questions; but it must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the permanent interests of a man as a progressive being.*

## *(On Liberty, Introduction)*

The end implicit in what Mill writes is not pleasure or happiness pure and simple, but the pursuit of such things as truth, intellectual clarity, personal robustness and individual selfrealisation. As the obverse of this, he dislikes the possibility that ignorant and intolerant public opinion might swamp minorities and individuals by weight of numbers; that excellence might be drowned in mediocrity.

If it were felt that the free development of individuality is one of the leading essentials of well-being; that it is not only a co-ordinate element with all that is designated by the terms civilisation, instruction, education, culture, but is itself a necessary part and condition of all these things; there would be no danger that liberty should be undervalued.

## (*On Liberty* ch.3)

Perhaps not; but this is a far cry from 'classical' utilitarianism.

Mill's mistrust of majorities is evident also in his essay called *Considerations on Representative Government*. He holds that representative government is the best type of government, at least for a people civilised and sophisticated enough to be able to take responsibility for its own affairs. By 'representative' government he means parliamentary government, with the executive chosen from and answerable to a representative assembly in turn chosen by and answerable to the people. Mill believes that, with a few specified exceptions - the illiterate, the criminal and those incapable of supporting themselves - every adult person, male or female, should have at least one vote. It is as irrational to exclude women from the vote as it would be to exclude some men because they have red hair. (Mill's essay on *The Subjection of Women*, written in 1869 in collaboration with his stepdaughter Helen Taylor, is an early plea for female suffrage.) Representative government is best, he thinks, because it encourages critical reflection, responsibility and participation by the ordinary citizen. 'Despotic' government, on the other hand, makes those subject to it apathetic and passive. Representative government tends to create self-reliant, alert, tough-minded individuals, and a community with such people in it is bound to be one in which order, progress and stability flourish. But representative government is also liable to infirmities and dangers. What Mill fears most is the tyranny of the majority. If government depends on the will of a mere numerical majority, mediocrity and ignorance will inevitably triumph over cultivation and enlightenment. It is also inevitable that governments will prefer policies that please the majority, whatever intrinsic merits or demerits those policies have. Mill insists, therefore, that political enfranchisement must go hand in hand with political education. It would be absurd to have a fully enfranchised electorate whose members are too ignorant to cast their vote responsibly. He believes also that there should be a system of plural voting related to educational attainment, and a scheme of public examinations for which individuals might enter in order to demonstrate that they deserve extra votes. Also, he is an early - though not the first - advocate of proportional representation as a means of securing the effective representation of minorities. The complex system which he favours was devised by a London lawyer named Thomas Hare and described by him in 1859 in a book called *A Treatise on the Election of Representatives, Parliamentary and Municipal*.

It is a testimony to his mental constitution that, after the childhood described in his *Autobiography*, the adult Mill was able to function intellectually at all. He is a complex character, educated, as he acknowledges, by methods that crippled him emotionally, yet imbued with a number of intense, abstract and not always consistent passions. He can never quite bring himself to forsake utilitarianism; nor, however, can he resist reinventing it in a way that makes 'pleasure' mean the kind of activities of which Mill approves. Mill praises unrestricted liberty, but he takes it for granted that unrestricted liberty will produce outcomes that he values rather than indiscipline and chaos. He applauds representative government and the morally invigorating effect that he supposes it would have on ordinary citizens, but he wishes to arrange matters so as to ensure the continued influence of an intellectual and moral elite. Mill's elegant prose sometimes conceals incoherence and shallowness of thought, and he was throughout his life the victim of his own excessively doctrinaire and pedantic education; but he is one of a numerous company of writers - fellow members are John Rawls and Robert Nozick - whose contribution to political thought lies as much as anything in the debate and reflection that their works have tended to promote.

## *Further reading*

### *Primary sources*

- John Stuart Mill *The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill*, ed. F. E. L. Priestley (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963-84).
- John Stuart Mill *Autobiography*, ed. J. Stillinger (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971).

### *Secondary sources*

- Gray, J. : *Mill on Liberty: a Defence* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983).
- Halliday, R. J. : *John Stuart Mill* (London: Allen & Unwin, 1976).
- Hampsher-Monk, I. : *A History of Modern Political Thought* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992).
- Robson, J. M. : *The Improvement of Mankind: The Social and Political Thought of J.S. Mill* (Toronto, Ont.: University of Toronto Press, 1968).
- Ryan, A. : *J.S. Mill* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1974).