## **Karl Marx (1818-83)**

Marx was born in Trier, Germany, in 1818, the son of a successful lawyer. His family was Jewish, but had adopted Lutheranism to avoid the anti-Semitic persecution prevailing in Germany at that time. It is said this gave Marx his cynicism and hostility to religion generally. He was a brilliant scholar, who gave up his law studies for philosophy (he wrote his doctoral thesis on Ancient Greek philosophy). In Berlin, Marx came under the spell of Hegelian philosophy, which influenced his thought profoundly (see G.W.F. Hegel); there he joined the group known as the Young Hegelians, whose members believed that the dialectic of history had yet to achieve its final stage in the full emancipation of humanity. Among the Young Hegelians, Marx met Frederick Engels, who was to be his lifelong friend and collaborator.

Engels came from a rich Protestant family in the Rhineland, who owned cotton mills, including some in Manchester, which at that time was leading the world in industrial development. When he met Marx, Engels was already making a name for himself as a talented radical journalist. But his family wanted him to learn the family business. This he did in Manchester, at the same time as writing an outstanding account of working conditions: Karl Marx *The Condition of the Working Class in England* (1844). It was Engels who convinced Marx that the future lay in industrialisation, and that it was classical economics that had to be mastered to understand how that future would develop.

By this time both Marx and Engels had run into trouble with the authorities in Germany because of their radical journalism and been forced into exile, which they spent mostly in Paris, where Marx associated with French socialists and anarchists and developed his ideas. When the Europe-wide revolutions of 1848 broke out, Marx and Engels responded with the *Communist Manifesto*. Ignored at the time, this is the first outline statement of Marx's complete system, which he went on elaborating for the rest of his life. In the meantime, with the failure of the 1848 revolutions, Marx and Engels moved to England where they both settled. Engels returned to Manchester to run the family business there. Marx took up residence in London, where he worked in the British Museum on his research and lived by occasional journalism (he was Europe correspondent for a New York newspaper) and subsidies from Engels.

In 1867 Marx published the first volume of his major work, *Capital*. After Marx died in 1883, Engels published the remaining two volumes of *Capital* from the mountain of papers left by Marx, along with other works. Engels' own writings were also important: they included a book on the family, as well as popular versions of Marxism for the benefit of the working-class followers in Germany and elsewhere who were looking to Marx for inspiration. In his later years Marx became a major figure in the European working-class movement, and after his death Engels took over this role. When Engels died in 1895, there was no one to give an authoritative interpretation of Marx and the movement began to splinter.

Many of Marx's early writings are concerned with trying to work out his own position in relation to Hegel and the Young Hegelians (a large part of this work was not published during Marx's lifetime). Out of this process Marx's mature ideas began to develop. A crucial stage in the process was a document that has become known as the *Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts* or more simply the *Paris Manuscripts* of 1844 (they did not become widely available until the middle of the twentieth century). This represents Marx's first attempt to

give a general view of his system. Here more than anywhere else he outlines his view of basic human nature and alienation.

In the *Paris Manuscripts* Marx sets out his theory that the human essence is labour. That is, what is distinctly human, what it is that differentiates us from the animals, is not so much reason as such, nor our moral capacity, as various previous thinkers had suggested, but the human capacity for labour. What Marx means by labour has to be understood in terms of human interaction with nature. It is using a combination of mental and physical effort to shape nature according to our needs. Proper physical labour, like craftsmanship or farming, involves intelligence and creativity. Through this labour mankind creates its own world to live in, a kind of second nature in which primary nature is humanised.

In this process human beings are creative: they fashion objects, make things grow, bend nature's processes to their needs. In the act of shaping nature to satisfy human needs, all human beings instinctively express themselves in what they produce; they objectify themselves, so that their product is an extension of their being. The natural feeling of satisfaction at creation is intensified if the products satisfy the needs of fellow human beings as well as the producer. It exemplifies and confirms the social nature of human existence. We create the world together.

However, in actually existing societies, these natural feelings are diminished or denied because of exploitation. Those who do most of the work in any given society, have the product of their labour taken away from them: it is expropriated by those with wealth and power, by those who own the means of production (the slave-owners or land-owners or factory-owners), who in any society are the ruling class. The workers receive a mere pittance; just enough to survive and reproduce. Furthermore, the very wealth that the workers have created becomes a power over them, the means to their exploitation. The world that *they* have created is hostile to them; it stunts their lives and keeps them in misery. Thus, they are alienated from their own world, from the product of their own labour.

Marx argued that under capitalism exploitation - and therefore alienation - are at their most intense. Capitalists are driven by competition to exploit their workers more and more. Labour is reduced to a mere commodity. Skill and creativity are destroyed by machinery and the division of labour, and the worker is reduced to the most miserable condition ever. At the same time the power of wealth is overwhelming. Since labour is part of the human essence, the essential self, the means to self-fulfilment as a human being, the workers can be said to be alienated from themselves. They are thereby dehumanised, only finding satisfaction in animal functions, mere physical pleasures. The human instinct to free, spontaneous creativity, not just for subsistence, is quintessentially human and what capitalism denies. Alienation is complete, and it is from this condition that humanity must be emancipated.

However, Marx completely rejected the idea that political or natural rights were the means to human emancipation, as for example the French Revolutionaries seemed to think (arguing that if the 'inalienable rights of man' could be proclaimed and enforced, then humanity would be free). This kind of freedom to enjoy life, liberty and property was, Marx thought, little more than the right of individuals to exploit other individuals. It merely sanctified their isolation and the competition of capitalist society. Genuine emancipation of humanity can only come about through communism, when private property and with it capitalism, exploitation, alienation and their consequences are all overcome and abolished. Only then will humanity be restored to its fullness, the human psyche made whole, and the individual's

relationship with nature and with fellow human beings be what they ought to be in accordance with essential human nature.

At this stage in Marx's development, communism is seen as both an ideal and an inevitability. But why and how it must come about, Marx had not yet worked out. Over the next few years Marx developed his system in collaboration with Engels in works such as Karl Marx *The German Ideology* (1846) and Karl Marx *The Poverty of Philosophy* (1847). It is complete in outline by the time of the publication of *The Communist Manifesto* in 1848.

At the heart of Marx's mature system is a theory, which he took to be thoroughly scientific, about how society works and how it changes over time. Marx believed that the most basic fact about any society is the nature of its economic organisation, its 'mode of production'. This involves two things: first, the methods of production (the type of agriculture, industry and so on) and, second, the way in which production is socially organised in terms of who owns what and who does which job. The distribution of wealth and work is the basis of the class structure. Although this structure might be quite complicated, Marx insisted that in any class system there is always a fundamental division between those who own the means of production, and thereby constitute the ruling class, and those who do the work.

For Marx, the socio-economic organisation of society - its 'substructure' or 'base' - is fundamental because not only does it make all the other aspects of society possible, it also determines the nature of all those aspects. Consequently, in any society its 'superstructure' of laws, government, education, religion, art, beliefs and values is a direct result of its social and economic organisation. It is a basic principle of Marxist theory that base determines superstructure.

The crucial link between the base and the other elements of society lies in the need of the ruling class to maintain its power. Thus the state - with its instruments of law, its police and its armed forces - exists to protect the property of the ruling class, and therefore its control of the economy. But the ruling class cannot maintain its control by force alone; it needs the active co-operation of most of the population. This is where, according to Marx, religion, education, the arts and prevailing ideas play their role. They help to maintain the position of the ruling class by teaching people to believe that the way society is organised is natural and right and should not be questioned.

The base, therefore, does not just determine the various institutions of society, but also determines the way people think. As Marx puts it in the Preface to his Karl Marx *A Critique of Political Economy* (1859): 'It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence that determines their consciousness.' Marx used the term 'ideology' to refer to ideas, beliefs and values that reflect the interests of a particular class. In any society, he argued, the dominant beliefs and values are always the beliefs and values of the ruling class, while those of the rest of society who accept them (that is, most people most of the time) are in a state of 'false consciousness'. Ideology is also, therefore, an instrument of class domination, along with all the other elements of the superstructure.

Thus, the feudal society of the Middle Ages was based upon subsistence agriculture. The peasant class did all the work, while the nobility owned all the land. The power of the nobility was sustained by law and custom, and upheld by the king's courts and by force if necessary. The Church sanctified feudalism as part of God's order and taught the sinfulness of questioning one's allotted place. Art and literature either supported the Church view or portrayed the ruling class as chivalrous and superior.

In capitalist society the ruling class is the bourgeoisie, who control the finance, the factories and the machines upon which modern industrial production is based, and therefore have the power to exploit the industrial workers (the proletariat). The state and its instruments support the property and interests of the ruling class, and again the beliefs and values that prevail in capitalist society help to portray the existing state of affairs as natural and right. The classical *laissez-faire* liberalism of the early nineteenth century, with its principles of free markets, individual liberty, equality of opportunity and limited parliamentary democracy, is the ideology of capitalism. A society founded upon such principles is portrayed as the good society, which works for the benefit of all. But freedom, equality and democracy are all seen as a sham so long as the ruling class owns the means by which the masses earn their living. Religion also makes its contribution to the bourgeois world-view. Protestantism emphasises individuality, and (in some sects at least) views worldly success as a sign of God's grace; while at the same time, as with medieval religion, it reconciles the exploited to their sufferings by telling them that it is God's will and that their reward will be in Heaven. Art and literature celebrate such bourgeois virtues as individuality, freedom and the accumulation of property. Thus, all the elements of the superstructure operate in the interests of the ruling class and consequently are a direct reflection of the socio-economic organisation of society.

These accounts of feudal and capitalist societies pose an obvious question: how, if the ruling class is so solidly entrenched, can one type of society ever change into another? It is clear from the principle that base determines superstructure that, for Marx, it is social and economic forces that bring about historical change. Great events, such as the Reformation or the French Revolution, do not come about because of changes in people's ideas or because of the actions of great individuals. These are merely the surface manifestations of much deeper substructural changes.

Marx's theory of the basic dynamics of historical change is built around four interconnected ideas: economic development, class conflict, the dialectic and revolution. Each mode of production, Marx believed, had its own inner logic of development. Economies change and develop over time through technological innovation, new financial techniques or growing trade and prosperity. Such developments give rise to strains and contradictions within the system; a new kind of production evolves along with a new class to exploit it. Eventually, the old structure of society can no longer contain these new developments, and the new class challenges the old ruling class for supremacy. All the contradictions and conflicts can only be resolved by a revolution, since the old ruling class will cling on to its power by any means. But once the revolution is complete, the new ruling class will transform society in accordance with its own mode of production and its own ideology.

This intricate mechanism of change was supposed to explain how the various stages of human development evolved into each other, although Marx only applied it consistently to the latter part of the sequence. Before there was any settled civilisation, societies were characterised, Marx believed, by a primitive communism, where all property was the property of the tribe. When people settled down and created the first civilisation proper, something of this early communal ownership was retained in village life, although the surplus was paid as tribute to a despotic state that organised great public works to irrigate or defend the land. Marx called this the 'Asiatic' mode of production, since it had persisted in Asia while other parts of the world had moved on to later stages of development. The Asiatic

mode is succeeded by the 'Classical' mode, which is an economic system based on slavery. This in turn gives way to the feudal mode, which is eventually succeeded by the capitalist or bourgeois mode.

Marx paid particular attention to the transition from feudalism to capitalism. The development of the feudal economy led to a growth in trade, and with trade came towns and, eventually, a new class of merchants: the bourgeoisie. This new class in time became so rich that it could challenge the power of the old aristocratic ruling class in a series of conflicts from the English Civil Wars to the French Revolution. As the new ruling class took over, the old medieval view of the world was replaced by new ideas that were scientific and secular; new art and literature began to flourish; new ideas of liberty and constitutional government began to be advocated.

The capitalist world is not the end of the historical process. By following the dynamic of historical development to its logical conclusion, Marx believed that the transformation of the capitalist stage into one further and final stage, communism, could be predicted. It would necessarily be the final stage since it would resolve all conflicts and contradictions yet synthesise the best in all previous societies.

In the capitalist economy the workers produce all the wealth and yet remain poor, while the capitalist's wealth grows. Using the labour theory of value, borrowed from the British classical economists, Marx explained that the workers generate value by turning raw materials into finished products, but only receive a fraction of this value back in the form of wages; the rest, what Marx called 'surplus value', goes to the capitalist as profit. Because he controls the means of production, the capitalist can buy labour cheaply, paying just enough in wages for the worker to live on, while keeping most of what that labour has earned for himself. The capitalist, therefore, exploits the workers, and the more he can exploit them the more successful he will be. According to Marx, the capitalist himself adds nothing to the process of value-creation, and so the capitalist class as such is entirely parasitic.

At the same time the capitalist, unlike the feudal lord, has to compete. He must constantly strive to better his rivals by producing more goods at lower cost, by exploiting his workers more and more, to extract ever greater quantities of surplus value. This fierce competition inevitably produces winners and losers: the stronger capitalists flourish while the weaker ones go out of business. Thus, the capitalist class grows smaller and richer, while the proletariat grows larger and more wretched.

This is the natural tendency of capitalism, although the process is not smooth or continuous, but is characterised by a regular progression of boom and slump, of rapid growth and sudden collapse of industrial production. Marx explained this 'trade cycle' in terms of what he believed was the most fundamental contradiction of capitalism: the ever greater production of goods is based on ever greater exploitation of the worker, while that same exploitation reduces the workers' ability to buy the goods produced. Consequently, there is always a tendency in capitalism to overproduce, causing a downward spiral of factory closures and reductions in spending power: a slump.

Marx believed that each successive boom would develop faster and higher, and each successive slump would be deeper and more catastrophic than the last. Eventually the slump would be so great that the impoverished working class would be forced by sheer necessity to overthrow capitalism and establish a workers' state. The capitalist system cannot be reformed, but will be driven to destruction by its own nature, by the working out of its own inner logic.

It is a peculiarity of the capitalist system, Marx thought, that it must train its future destroyer. Unlike other modes of production, industrial capitalism must concentrate its workforce (in factories and workshops) and teach it discipline and mutual dependence. In these circumstances the proletariat has the opportunity to organise and achieve a common understanding of its own experience and what needs to be done; in other words, it has the opportunity to achieve what Marx called 'class-consciousness'.

The progressive enmiseration of the proletariat forces it to see its own situation clearly, undistorted by bourgeois ideology. It will see that capitalist society cannot survive, that the proletariat can and must itself take over the means of production. In short, the working class will come to realise (assisted by intellectuals like Marx and Engels who defect to the proletarian cause) that communism is the true outlook of the working class, and the only hope for the future of humanity. Thus, when the revolution does come, the workers will understand their historical task, which is not only to seize control of the means of production and the instruments of the state, but to go on to build a communist society.

Marx believed that the communist revolution would only come when capitalism had reached the full peak of its development. Consequently, he looked to see the revolution begin in the industrially advanced West, above all in Britain (although he was less certain of this towards the end of his life). But wherever it began, it would be a worldwide revolution, because one of the unique features of capitalism was its capacity - through trade and the exploitation of colonies - to bring the whole world within its network. Marx thought that nationalism was an aspect of bourgeois ideology, whereas proletarian class-consciousness was truly international: that is, workers had more in common with fellow workers in other countries than with their own bourgeoisie. When the communist revolution began in one country, therefore, it would quickly spread to others and eventually the whole world, so that the whole of humanity would be emancipated together.

However, Marx did not believe that the communist revolution would be immediately followed by the establishment of the communist society. There would have to be a transitional period, which Marx called the 'dictatorship of the proletariat', in which the workers would be in control. The state and its instruments would still be the means by which the ruling class overtly maintains its domination, only now the ruling class would be the workers, the majority. The dictatorship of the proletariat has two tasks. The first is to preserve and extend the revolution. The second is to prepare the way for the ultimate stage of human history, the establishment of the classless, stateless communist society, the kind of society appropriate for human nature.

Marx was decidedly vague about the nature of communist society and deliberately so, insisting that communist society was not some utopian blueprint that people must aspire to but the actual society that they would build as they thought best. However, some general features can be given. It will be a world without class divisions and without private property; there will be no more poverty or wealth. It will be a world without the state, at least as we have known it, since Marx sees the state as an instrument of class oppression, so that in a classless society the state will, in Engels' phrase, 'wither away'. For the same reason there will be no more ideology, no more distorted perception: people will see the world as it really is.

It will also be a world of abundance. Capitalism has taught humanity the secrets of production, and once production is designed to meet human needs and not the need for profit there will be more than enough for all. Consequently, society can be organised on the principle of 'from each according to his ability, to each according to his need'. In other words, everyone will contribute to society according to their talents and capacities, and all will take whatever they need from the common stock. In this society every individual will be able to develop all their talents - physical, intellectual and creative - to the full.

Finally, Marx did not believe that history would come to an end in a kind of static perfection, but merely that all that oppresses and distorts human nature would be thrown off. Indeed, with humanity at last becoming master of its own destiny, genuine human history could really begin.

Marx firmly believed that the collapse of capitalism and the coming of communism were inevitable, and the whole apparatus of necessary historical stages and mechanisms of change point to a thoroughly deterministic system. On the other hand, Marx also believed (in at least some of his writings) in human free will. There is a strong case for arguing that determinism and free will are incompatible. This is a matter of fierce dispute among proponents of different varieties of Marxism. But determinist or not, Marx certainly made extensive predictions about the future course of events to which the world has resolutely refused to conform. Capitalism periodically reforms itself and continues to prosper, the middle class grows and flourishes, the working class shrinks and fragments as more and more join the middle class, and revolution becomes an ever more distant prospect. The only Marxist revolutions have been in poor and predominantly agricultural nations, and in any case have mostly failed.

Nevertheless, Marx's optimistic vision of humanity's future has had huge appeal. It has inspired many versions of Marxism with many followers down to the present day. And while its plausibility has declined steadily since the middle of the twentieth century, it continues to be a major influence on social and political thought.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Karl Marx *Capital*, vol. 1, ed. F. Engels (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1970).
- Karl Marx *Early Writings*, ed. L. Colletti (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1975).
- Karl Marx *Karl Marx: Selected Writings*, ed. D. McLellan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977).

## *Secondary sources*

- Avineri, S. : *The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968).
- Carver, T. : *The Cambridge Companion to Marx* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
- Kolakowski, L. : *Main Currents of Marxism*, vol. 1 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978).
- McLellan, D. : *The Thought of Karl Marx* (2nd edn; Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1980).
- Wheen, F. : *Karl Marx* (London: Fourth Estate, 1999).

Wood, A. : *Karl Marx* (London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981).