## **Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-78)**

Rousseau was born in Geneva in 1712, the son of a Calvinist watchmaker. It was his father who brought him up, his mother having died in childbirth. His father also gave Rousseau a great love of books, but otherwise he had little formal education. At the age of fifteen he ran away from home and began a life of solitary wandering. His was a difficult, hypersensitive personality, with a towering sense of his own genius. Although capable of intense friendship, his relationships never lasted.

After leaving Switzerland, Rousseau lived in Savoy and worked in Italy, before gravitating to Paris, at the time the leading intellectual centre in Europe. There he associated with the Enlightenment thinkers - the *philosophes* - and particularly Diderot. Rousseau contributed articles (mainly on musicology) to their great project, the *Encyclopedia*, but although he subscribed to some of their beliefs he was never a committed member of the group. He developed his own ideas that differed radically from their fashionable cult of reason and from establishment orthodoxy. Indeed, Rousseau's most striking characteristic is his originality. He changed the thinking of Europe, having an impact on political theory, education, literature, ethics, ideas about the self and its relationship to nature, and much else. These influences, together with his elevation of emotion and will above reason, make him the major precursor of the Romantic movement.

His early 'Discourses' offended the *philosophes*, while his two most famous works, *Emile* and *The Social Contract* (both 1762), outraged the authorities, particularly because of their religious content. They were burned by the public executioner in both Paris and Geneva, and Rousseau's arrest was ordered. He fled France and spent several years seeking refuge in various countries, but returned in 1767 under an assumed name. The authorities turned a blind eye so long as he did not publish. He spent his final years living in solitude on the estate of an admirer-patron near Paris. Here he studied botany and continued to write, mainly autobiographical works. The *Confessions* and *Reveries of a Solitary Walker* were both published after Rousseau's death in 1778.

In his first major published work, Jean-Jacques Rousseau *A Discourse on the Arts and Sciences* (1750), Rousseau sketched a conception of history that would be central to all his later works, in which he endorsed neither traditional views nor the fashionable ideas of progress developed by Enlightenment thinkers. Instead he astounded everyone by claiming that what were thought to be advances in civilisation, far from representing the development of reason and human happiness, were in fact making human beings corrupt, dishonest and unhappy. Rousseau attacked and denigrated all that the *philosophes* held dear: reason, science, philosophy, progress and intellectual sophistication. He extolled the virtues of the common man, his loyalty and patriotism and sense of community, and admired dour, militaristic, anti-intellectual Sparta at the expense of intellectually glittering Athens. As against the orthodox doctrine of original sin, Rousseau insisted that human beings are essentially good, and that it is only society that corrupts them.

These themes were taken up again in his next significant work, Jean-Jacques Rousseau *A Discourse on the Origin of Inequality* (1755). Here he makes use of a common device of Enlightenment thinkers, the state of nature, but portrays human beings not as essentially rational and social, but as free solitary individuals who engage with each other occasionally and who are capable of self-love and sympathy. Under pressure of population this idyllic natural freedom is destroyed, private property is introduced, and with it exploitation,

inequality and all the ills of human society. Social inequality becomes the basic cause of injustice and moral corruption. The *Discourses* suggest that the prospects for humanity are unrelievedly bleak. Yet Rousseau nonetheless makes clear that he believes in the possibility of human perfectibility, of human improvement. This leaves him with the questions of whether, first of all, it is possible to live an individual human life that is not corrupted by society, and, second, whether it is possible to create a non-corrupt society.

Rousseau's answers to these questions constitute his mature social and political philosophy and are set out in the two books published in 1762. The first of these was *Emile*, in which Rousseau put forward his educational ideas and in so doing transformed the European understanding of childhood and how children should be treated and educated. It is a didactic novel, showing how an individual could be educated 'according to nature' away from the corrupting influences of society. However, there comes a point when Emile reaches manhood and his education is complete. It seems that then he will have to suppress his natural self in order to cope with corrupt society, leaving the reader wondering quite what the point of his elaborate education was.

The alternative possibility - of creating a society that is not corrupt - is explored in the second book of 1762, *The Social Contract*, which takes up more directly where *A Discourse on the Origin of Inequality* leaves off. Chapter 1 famously opens with the words 'Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains.' This, of course, immediately follows from the picture of corruption, exploitation and domination coming with society and its inequalities, and imposed upon natural man. But behind the famous slogan there is also a deeper philosophical point that goes to the heart of Rousseau's understanding of human nature. He believed that what makes human beings genuinely human is not, as most previous philosophers had argued, our capacity for reason, but rather it is our capacity for moral choice. It follows from this that, unless human beings have the freedom to make such choices, they cannot live fully human lives; their humanity is being denied. In Rousseau's melodramatic phrase, they are slaves. This raises a dilemma. If human beings are by nature free, and are in fact free in the state of nature, then how can they be free in society, which involves unfreedom (whether as the domination and exploitation that tends to come with social life, or merely in the form of having to live according to laws imposed by others)? How is it possible for men to live in society, yet live full, free human lives? This is the problem that Rousseau sets out to solve in *The Social Contract*.

Rousseau is clear that it is not possible for men to return to the freedom of the state of nature, but it is possible, he insists, to exchange that freedom for the freedom of the citizen. This is done through an act of association that creates the social entity and in which all give up rights and become subjects while at the same time receiving rights as citizens and members of the sovereign. This is the 'social contract', although the manner in which the sovereign expresses itself through laws and government is left to a separate constitution-making process. So long as each person is both a subject and a participating citizen, there can be freedom.

Men can live in freedom if they live according to rules they have made themselves. This means that they must be citizens of a state where they make their own laws: a democracy. However, Rousseau interprets this very strictly indeed. It does not mean electing somebody to make laws on your behalf. In other words, representative democracy is not democracy at all. According to Rousseau, one person cannot represent the will of another. In a representative democracy, therefore, one would still be living according to someone else's laws and still be a slave. Rousseau's conception of democracy is that of direct democracy,

where the whole citizen body gathers in the public place and makes the laws. His model here is the small city-states of Ancient Greece, where this was possible. How it could possibly apply to large modern states, like contemporary France, Rousseau does not make clear. All that is clear is the implication that large modern states cannot be legitimate.

However, direct democracy alone does not solve Rousseau's problem, since majority decisions would mean that minorities would not live according to their own laws. For this to be possible, all laws would have to be passed unanimously. From what we know of democratic politics of any kind, this would seem to be impossible. It is to solve this problem that Rousseau introduces his most famous doctrine, that of the General Will. The basic idea is that each one of us wills or desires a variety of things, but among the things that each of us desires is the good of the community in which we live. It is the aggregate of this desire for the communal good that Rousseau calls the General Will. It follows from this that if a law is passed that is in accord with the General Will, then in obeying this law we are in a sense obeying ourselves.

Conversely, since it is precisely by obeying the General Will that we obey ourselves and are therefore free, disobeying the General Will means that we deny our own freedom. This explains Rousseau's infamous and chilling remark about those who refuse to obey the law being 'forced to be free'. Rousseau is not using here the usual common-sense or 'negative' notion of freedom as simply doing what we want, but rather a 'positive' notion of freedom that insists that we are only truly free when we are obeying our 'higher selves' (in this case our desire for the common good) rather than our baser selfish instincts (when we are merely a 'slave to our passions').

There remains the problem of how to ensure that in the assembly the citizens will vote according to the General Will rather than according to their own selfish interests. Rousseau is initially quite realistic and admits that on any given occasion just one citizen in the assembly, or even none at all, are thinking of the general good, and therefore expressing the General Will rather than their own interests. He insists (Book II, Chapter 3) that the General Will is not the same as the will of all. Unfortunately, he gives us no means of telling who is thinking of the public good and who is not. This is something of a problem, but later in the book (Book IV, Chapter 2) he identifies the will of the majority with the General Will, which does not square at all with his initial account. If the will of all is not necessarily the General Will, then neither is the will of the majority.

Nevertheless, Rousseau believed that a unified collective view would emerge for two reasons. First of all he envisaged a relatively simple society of farmers and artisans with no rich or poor (though he railed against property, he never advocated its abolition), a situation that it is the duty of the sovereign to maintain. All are equal and consequently there would be few conflicts and what is good for society would be relatively simple, a situation in which it would be easy to inculcate love of the community. Second, Rousseau conceived of a political system in which there would be no political parties or pressure groups, where citizens would simply vote on laws spontaneously without debate.

This procedure may seem odd, but Rousseau did not conceive of democracy in terms of discussion or a mechanism for resolving disputes. The good society was not for him a collection of individuals pursuing their own lives and consequently having conflicting interests. He saw the state in Ancient Greek terms, as a moral community and as a corporate person with a single will. Parties and groups were divisive. Like Plato, whom he greatly

admired, he aspired to unity. And like Ancient Sparta and the early Roman Republic, as he pictured them, he wanted a unified citizenship inspired by patriotism and civic virtue.

Rousseau's rather peculiar political system is designed to give optimum opportunity for the expression of the General Will. It is not expected that men, fresh from the state of nature, will set up such a state (women never have a political role for Rousseau, who thinks them only fit to be wives and mothers), will have the wisdom and understanding to hit upon this ideal constitution. Instead, Rousseau sees a lawgiver as providing a constitution. Critics have sometimes seen this figure as dictatorial, even totalitarian, embodying the General Will in his own person. But this was not Rousseau's intention. As so often, his model is the Ancient Greek city-states, where many were given their constitutions by lawgivers, such as Lycurgus at Sparta, who designed the constitution and then retired.

It is always the people who are sovereign (a notion introduced by Rousseau) and that authority cannot be usurped. However, the function of the sovereign is to pass laws, while the executive's function is to administer them. But this is not democratic; indeed Rousseau says (rather confusingly) that democracy is only possible for gods and not men. What he means here is that a democratic executive would be virtually impossible because, according to his idea of democracy, the whole citizen body would have to be equally involved. Besides, those making the law and those who administer it should not be the same. So long as government is strictly the agent of the sovereign people, laws express the General Will and rulers have the same sense of civic duty as in Ancient Rome, it does not really matter what form the executive takes. Even kingship is acceptable, although Rousseau's preference would seem to be for representative democracy - or 'elective aristocracy' as he calls it.

Rousseau was aware that there was no going back to the easy-going freedom of the state of nature. But he believed this could be exchanged for the higher freedom of citizenship in which the individual is merged into a unified moral community sustained by a strict civic virtue. That in turn must, Rousseau insists, be supported by a civic religion. With characteristic ambivalence, he says that while Christianity may be true, it cannot function as a civic religion because it cannot underpin civic virtue in the ways that the religions of Ancient Greece and Rome did. His Roman-like solution - outward conformity to the civic religion combined with tolerance for private belief, except for atheists - is hardly satisfactory.

Rousseau's views on many subjects caused storms of controversy at the time and intense debate ever since. Much criticism has been directed at his notion of the General Will. Even given that such a thing exists, we have seen that Rousseau gives us no sure way of determining what its dictates are. Yet identifying the General Will is vital to Rousseau's system, since he insists that only laws based on the General Will are authentic laws, which are the only ones that need to be obeyed. It would presumably be open to anyone accused of breaking the law to claim that the law did not express the General Will and was therefore not a proper law, with no sure means of proving them wrong. Yet it is only by obeying such laws that freedom, which is the whole point of the exercise, is guaranteed.

Even without these problems, the concept of the General Will is open to question. There is no guarantee that what people will agree upon is what is best for the community, even when they are all genuinely thinking about what is best for the community. Rousseau believes that if citizens vote spontaneously and without debate for the common good, thereby expressing the General Will, then all will vote for the same policy; this policy *ipso facto* will be in the community's best interests, since Rousseau insists that the General Will is always right. But

this plainly does not follow. What is good for the community is not something absolute and unambiguous that can be determined if the correct procedures are followed. There can be legitimate disagreement on what is for the best, a possibility Rousseau does not allow.

Apart from these logical problems, there are severe practical ones in relation to what the implications of Rousseau's ideas might be for modern politics. How could his ideas apply to the modern states of his own day, such as France? He simply does not tell us. Indeed, since only direct democracy is legitimate, then legitimate government is impossible in the modern world.

This is closely connected with another major criticism concerning totalitarianism. In Jean-Jacques Rousseau *The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy* (1952), J.L. Talmon argued that Rousseau, despite his reputation as the first modern democratic thinker, was in fact the father of modern totalitarianism. This is because the opportunity is always there for an individual or party to claim that they alone embody the General Will to which all must conform, thereby obeying their higher selves. Certainly the French Revolutionaries, who were all steeped in Rousseau (though he never advocated revolution), made such claims. Robespierre claimed to embody the will of France and declared those in conflict with that will to be 'enemies of the people' who must be eliminated. Rousseau clearly did not envisage modern totalitarianism.

Nevertheless, whatever the ambiguities of his legacy in respect of totalitarianism, there is no doubt that Rousseau is the key figure in the development of democratic thought. All previous significant thinkers, from Plato onwards, had regarded democracy with suspicion: it was usually equated with the rule of the mob, and at best could only be an element in a wider system that thereby allowed a degree of participation for the better off. It was Rousseau who developed the concept of the sovereignty of the people, and he was the first to insist upon the fitness and right of ordinary people to participate in the political system as full citizens. These were sensational claims in his day, but would eventually permeate modern political thought and practice. More generally, Rousseau profoundly changed the way we think of ourselves as human beings, considering us creatures of feeling and not just of reason. His thought is complex, subtle and original, and he is among the most influential thinkers of modern times.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Jean-Jacques Rousseau *The Discourses and Other Early Political Writings*, ed. V. Gourevitch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
- Jean-Jacques Rousseau *The Social Contract and Other Later Political Writings*, ed. V. Gourevitch (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).

## *Secondary sources*

- Cooper, L. D. : *Rousseau, Nature, and the Problem of the Good Life* (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1999).
- Hall, J. C. : *Rousseau: An Introduction to his Political Philosophy* (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1972).
- Hendel, W. : *Jean-Jacques Rousseau: Moralist* (New York: Library of the Liberal Arts, 1962).

- Talmon, J. L. : *The Origins of Totalitarian Democracy* (London: Sphere Books, 1970).
- Wokler, R. : *Rousseau* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001).