## **Edmund Burke (1729-97)**

Edmund Burke was born in 1729 in Dublin, Ireland, and studied at Trinity College from 1743 to 1748. He went to London to read for the bar, but, like his older contemporary Hume, abandoned law for a literary career. He made a point of attaching himself to the literary lions of the age; he is frequently mentioned in Boswell's *Life of Johnson*. In 1756 he published a satire called *A Vindication of Natural Society*. This was followed in 1757 by a treatise of aesthetics, called *A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful*, that was admired in its day. In 1765 his literary career gave place to a political one. He was elected to the House of Commons and became Lord Rockingham's private secretary. With one short break, he remained a Member of Parliament until his death. As one of the 'Rockingham Whigs', he criticised George III's conception of monarchy in a pamphlet called Edmund Burke *Thoughts on the Causes of the Present Discontents* (1770). From 1770 until the American Revolution, he was the London agent of the State of New York, and in two celebrated speeches ('On American Taxation', 1774, and 'On Moving his Resolutions for Conciliation with the Colonies', 1777) attributed unrest in the American colonies to British misgovernment. The same concern with colonial misgovernment led him to campaign against the activities of the East India Company, and he was largely responsible for the impeachment of Warren Hastings in 1788. His best-known political work, *Reflections on the Revolution in France*, was published in 1790. It made a considerable stir among fellow Whigs, who believed him to be betraying the principles for which he had hitherto stood, and he defended and developed his views in several subsequent publications: Edmund Burke *An Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs* (1791), Edmund Burke *Thoughts on French Affairs* (1791) and Edmund Burke *Letters on a Regicide Peace* (1796-7).

It is customary to describe Burke as the founder of modern conservatism. The keynote of his thought is a mistrust of what Michael Oakeshott was to call 'rationalism' in politics: the belief that politics can be conducted according to *a priori* principles not rooted in previous experience and practice. It was for this belief that he chiefly criticised the French Revolutionaries. The arrangements by which human beings live are, he argues, those that long trial and experience have shown to work. They have emerged during the slow processes by which men have accommodated themselves to changing circumstances. This is true especially of the British constitution, thanks to the importance of precedent in establishing the English common law; but it is true also as a generalisation. The very existence of any longestablished order tends to validate that order. The complex and organic nature of society is all we know about it, and all we need to know. There is no point in looking for the origins of society in a social contract. Society is not a contractual or voluntary association that any one generation has created. It is a vast and seamless historical partnership between those who are living, those who are dead, and those who are yet to be born. So complex an organism cannot be understood by any one individual or group, or during any single generation. To try to destroy it and build another from scratch, which is what Burke takes the French Revolutionaries to have done, is therefore presumptuous folly. Nor can the values that should govern human association be reduced to dogmatic abstractions such as the 'rights of man'. Human beings are not atoms or isolated essences. We are the products of a long and intricate history. We are created by the culture of which we are a part. It makes no sense to consider us except in relation to that culture, or to attribute to us theoretical rights that we have independently of it or in spite of it. Our manners, customs and laws - the general way of doing things that Burke calls 'prejudice' - are parts of that culture. To sweep them away in the name of speculative and untried political doctrines is to conceive human association without any of the things that make human association real.

It follows, therefore, that revolutionary change is a destructive affront to nature: a leap away from the known into the perilous unknown. If reform is to be undertaken at all, it should be brought about in a gradual and *ad hoc* fashion. It should happen in response not to the stipulations of an abstract doctrine, but to changing needs and conditions as they arise. It should be directed towards a specific problem. It should have no purpose more general than the solution of that problem. It should preserve the existing harmonies: there should always be a presumption in favour of leaving things alone. Burke, therefore, though in favour of religious toleration, is also in favour of an established Church. Again, though not a member of it himself, he is convinced that a landed aristocracy - an aristocracy of wealth, leisure and sensibility - is essential to the preservation of the complex fabric of society as he understands it. The House of Commons, too, should dissociate itself from interest and faction and the changing winds of popular opinion. Members of Parliament, he explained in his 'Address to the Electors of Bristol', are not delegates whose job it is to lobby for the interests of their constituencies. They are representatives, sent into parliament to secure the general and longterm good of the community. He advocates political parties, but only in so far as they are mechanisms for concerting and enacting the opinions of the right-minded.

Burke does not, as so many conservatives do, seek to ground his political prescriptions on a mythical ideal constitution or a Golden Age that it should be the purpose of politics to commemorate or restore. He understands that the historical origins of things are unrecoverable. His conservatism consists, in essence, of a few simple generalisations: that the present state of things is the sum total of all past developments; that it is too complex to understand; that meddling with it is therefore dangerous; and that arrangements that work well enough are best left alone. It may seem odd that Burke applauded the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and supported the American colonists' grievances against George III, yet was in 1790 so eloquent in condemning the French Revolutionaries; this apparent inconsistency illustrates the nature of his conservatism. The Glorious Revolution, even while getting rid of a king, had left the traditional institutions of government untouched. The Americans were defending the traditional right of Englishmen not to be taxed without representation. The French, by contrast, were sweeping away an immemorial order in favour of the unhistorical and contextless dogma of the 'rights of man'.

Burke is to a great degree sentimental. When he is at his most sentimental, he is at his most reactionary. He is so upset by the destruction wrought by the French Revolution that he cannot understand the injustices against which the French Revolutionaries believed themselves to be acting. Tom Paine wrote of him in *The Rights of Man*: *He is not affected by the reality of distress touching his heart, but by the showy resemblance of it striking his imagination. He pities the plumage, but sees not the dying bird.*

Some of his contemporaries thought him inconsistent and dishonest. He does not, after all, advocate non-parliamentary, inefficient, absolutist government in Britain, yet he rends his garments over the destruction of precisely such government in France. Mary Wollstonecraft was convinced that, had he been a Frenchman, Burke would have been a Revolutionary himself. Nonetheless, his 'common-sense' preference for established practices against untried theory, his defence of local and national traditions, and his advocacy of cautious and moderate reform, have remained important components of conservative sensibility more than two centuries after his death. Such luminaries of twentieth-century political thought as Karl Popper, Michael Oakeshott and F.A. von Hayek are all to some extent under his influence.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Edmund Burke *Reflections on the Revolution in France*, ed. C. C. O'Brien (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1968).
- Edmund Burke *Edmund Burke on Government, Politics and Society*, ed. B. W. Hill (London: Fontana, 1975).
- Edmund Burke *The Political Philosophy of Edmund Burke*, ed. I. Hampsher-Monk (London: Longman, 1987).

## *Secondary sources*

- Dreyer, F. A. : *Burke's Politics: A Study in Whig Orthodoxy* (Waterloo, Ont.: Laurier University Press, 1982).
- Freeman, M. : *Burke and the Critique of Political Radicalism* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980).
- Macpherson, C. B. : (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982).
- O'Gorman, F. : *Edmund Burke: His Political Philosophy* (London: Allen & Unwin, 1983).