## **Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832)**

Jeremy Bentham was born in Houndsditch, London. He went to Westminster School at the age of seven and to Queen's College, Oxford, at the remarkable age of twelve, taking his degree in 1764. He read for the Bar at Lincoln's Inn and was called in 1767, but never practised law as a profession. He wrote extensively on a number of subjects, although he was somewhat given to undertaking ambitious projects and either leaving them unfinished or losing interest in them when finished. A number of his works were edited and seen through the press by friends and disciples. The French editions published by his friend Etienne Dumont established his literary reputation throughout continental Europe and beyond. In 1790 he produced a *Draught of a New Plan for the Organisation of the Judicial Establishment of France*, for which he was made an honorary French citizen in 1792. He also devoted a number of years to the design and unsuccessful promotion of a new model prison called the Panopticon. But he is chiefly remembered as the most notable early exponent (though not strictly the founder) of utilitarianism: the doctrine that assesses the rightness of acts, policies, decisions and choices in terms of their tendency to promote the happiness of the people affected by them. He seems to have been a perfectly extraordinary person: part genius, part crank, amazingly industrious, capable of inspiring intense love and loyalty in his friends. As the final gesture of a remarkable life, he directed in his will that his body be dissected for the purposes of scientific research. His mummified remains now sit in a glass case in University College, London, which he helped to found.

From the point of view of the history of political thought, the most important of Bentham's numerous works are Jeremy Bentham *A Fragment on Government* (1776) and Jeremy Bentham *An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation* (written in 1780 and published in 1789). The latter was his major work published during his lifetime. A collected edition of his writings called *The Works of Jeremy Bentham* was published in 1838-43 by his literary executor, John Bowring, but this edition is incomplete and unsatisfactory. Its shortcomings have become increasingly clear with the modern study of Bentham's manuscript remains, and a proper scholarly edition, *The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham*, was begun in 1968.

Bentham has a fearsome literary style. It must be admitted also that he is not always the clearest and most logical of thinkers. It seems that his version of utilitarianism - 'classical' utilitarianism, as it is called - has three distinct elements. The most fundamental is a psychological hedonism similar to that favoured by Hobbes. All human beings seek to maximise pleasure or happiness (Bentham tends to use the two words interchangeably) and minimise pain. At the beginning of *Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation*, he asserts: *All men are under the governance of two sovereign masters: pain and pleasure. It is for them to point out what we ought to do, as well as to determine what we shall do.*

Second, utilitarianism nominates pleasure or happiness as the supreme good, in the sense that everyone seeks pleasure as an end and not as a means to some further end. Like Hobbes, Bentham thinks that 'good' and 'bad' are simply the terms we use to designate the things that cause us - or we expect to cause us - pleasure or pain. Moreover, all pleasure is equally good: we are to make no distinction between types of pleasure. What we seek, Bentham thinks, is not the highest quality but the greatest quantity of pleasure. 'Quantity of pleasure being equal', he says, 'pushpin is as good as poetry' (*The Rationale of Reward* 3:1). By 'pleasure' Bentham means a wide variety of things. He lists the pleasures of taste, smell and touch; of acquiring property; of knowing that we have the goodwill of others; of power; of seeing the

pleasure of those for whom we care; and so forth. Third, utilitarianism becomes a theory of action as well as of value by virtue of a simple logical transition: if pleasure is the good, it follows that right action will be action that maximises pleasure and minimises pain, and wrong action the reverse. This, Bentham thinks, is the only meaning that 'right' and 'wrong' can have. Pleasure and pain are the criteria that govern what we ought to do.

But whose pleasure and whose pain? The pleasure and pain, Bentham replies, of whatever party is being considered. If the party under consideration is a single individual, then right actions are those that bear upon the pleasure or pain of that individual. If the party under consideration is a community (as, for example, when legislation is being contemplated), then the standard of right and wrong will be not the pleasure or pain of any particular individual, but of the community taken as a whole. But we must notice the sense in which, for Bentham, there can be such a 'whole'. He insists that a community is no more than the simple aggregate or sum total of the individuals who are its members. There is in Bentham no suggestion of the kind that we find in Rousseau, for example, that there is, over and above the individual members of a community, a corporate identity or social reality that is in some sense more or greater than the sum of the community's parts. For Bentham, there are only individuals; therefore, he maintains, in order to discover whether an action is right or wrong from the point of view of a community, we have to discover what its effect will be on the total pleasure within the aggregate of individuals who comprise the whole. We must add together all the individual pleasures or happinesses in the group or community, and the total that we arrive at will be the communal or social happiness or pleasure at which legislation ought to aim.

How is such an aggregation to be performed? In the *Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation*, Bentham suggests that the rightness or wrongness of an action can in principle be determined by a 'felicific calculus' (sometimes the phrase 'hedonic calculus' is used). In the case of any two actions between which we have to choose, we should consider the pain or pleasure that each may be expected to produce along seven different 'dimensions': (1) intensity; (2) duration; (3) propinquity (nearness or remoteness in time); (4) certainty; (5) fecundity (how fruitful is it of further pleasures and pains after the initial ones?); (6) purity (does a pleasurable action have painful consequences?); and (7) extent (how many people do the pleasures and pains of an action affect?). If, when we have weighed up the likely outcome of each alternative in terms of these seven considerations, one action turns out to be more pleasurable or less painful than the other, then it is right and ought to be done (or at any rate need not be avoided or forbidden), and vice versa. Bentham accepts, of course, that ordinary people cannot apply these criteria to every action of daily life; nor is it seriously suggested that the calculation can be mathematically exact. But if legislators, in particular, keep these seven dimensions in mind, they will (Bentham thinks) be able to achieve the true aim of legislation, which is to secure (as he puts it in his *Commonplace Book*) 'the greatest happiness of the greatest number'. This famous expression, which has become known as the 'principle of utility', was not, incidentally, coined by Bentham. It occurs first in Francis Hutcheson's Jeremy Bentham *Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue* (1725).

Bentham's faith in the principle of utility knows no bounds. His belief in it is always closely coupled with the question of how to put it into practice. He believes that the task of the moral philosopher is to prescribe what morality and law *ought* to be, not merely to describe what they are; and he devoted much time to the application of the principle of utility to the criminal law. No act or motive, he believes, is wrong in itself. There is no such thing as abstract wrong which it is the law's business to punish. The law should not seek to regulate

matters of private morality. Acts are criminal only if they adversely affect the general happiness. The purpose of punishment is deterrence rather than retribution. Punishments should be so calculated as to cause pain enough, but no more than enough, to deter the offender from re-offending, and fear enough, but no more than enough, to deter potential offenders from offending at all. In assigning punishments to crimes, therefore, it will be necessary to calculate the severity of the punishment in such a way as to counterbalance the pleasure that the criminal hopes to achieve from the crime. It will also be necessary to assign severer punishments to crimes that it is more difficult to detect. Clearly, there will be no point in punishing even harmful acts if it can be shown that they were carried out unintentionally or in sufficiently mitigating circumstances.

After about 1809, largely as a result of his friendship with James Mill, Bentham's mind turned more towards issues of political reform as distinct from ethics and jurisprudence. Somewhat after the fashion of Burke, Bentham has no patience with political arguments based on abstractions. He is famously scathing in his criticism of the French Revolutionary doctrine of the rights of man. Natural rights, he says in his *Anarchical Fallacies*, are 'simple nonsense'; 'natural and imprescriptible rights' are 'nonsense upon stilts'. He believes that the interests of the governed will be best secured by the establishment of explicit rights through a legal system. It is futile to claim rights that no legislator has made and that therefore cannot be enforced against anyone. To speak of such rights is like speaking of a child without a father. Bentham became increasingly convinced of the virtues of representative democracy based on universal franchise, a secret ballot and annual parliaments. He expressed this conviction in his Jeremy Bentham *Plan of Parliamentary Reform* (1817). He was also a precursor of modern welfare-state ideas. He believed that legislation should provide subsistence, security, abundance and equality. In different places and at different times he is to be found arguing for sickness benefit, free education, a minimum wage, reform of the law of evidence, recruitment to the civil service by competitive examination and abolition of imprisonment for debt.

Bentham believed himself to have cleared away the obscurities of custom and superstition from the field of lawmaking, and to have placed morality and jurisprudence on an unambiguous footing. The principle of utility has, after all, a certain beguiling simplicity. When called upon to make a decision as to what to do or what law to enact, simply add up the pain and pleasure of all whom the decision will affect, and the decision virtually makes itself. The problem, of course, is that the reality is not as simple as that. Purely practical difficulties apart, the idea of happiness or pleasure itself gives trouble. Pleasures, surely, are qualities rather than quantities. They are subjective rather than objective, and not necessarily commensurable. What gives you pleasure may well not give me pleasure, and may, indeed, give me pain. It is therefore not easy to see how pleasures can be added together, even roughly, to make a 'greatest happiness'. And what of the notion of 'the greatest happiness of the greatest number'? Where choice is necessary, should we choose the 'greatest happiness' (assuming that there can be such a thing) or the 'greatest number'? Can it be right or just to sacrifice the happiness of one individual to secure the happiness of a collection of individuals? Can it be right to 'punish' the innocent in the name of deterrence? Utilitarianism seems to suggest that it can; but, as has been pointed out (by John Rawls, for example), this contradicts most people's intuitive beliefs about right and wrong. These problems, and the many others to which utilitarianism gives rise, have exercised its exponents for two centuries.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary source*

 Jeremy Bentham *The Works of Jeremy Bentham*, ed. J. Bowring (Edinburgh: William Tait, 1838-43). This edition is in the process of being supplanted by *The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham*, ed. J. H. Burns , J. H. Dinwiddy and F. Rosen (London: Athlone Press and Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968-).

## *Secondary sources*

- Halévy, E. (trans. M. Morris ): *The Growth of Philosophic Radicalism* (London: Faber & Faber, 1928).
- Hampsher-Monk, I. : *A History of Modern Political Thought* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992).
- Harrison, R. : *Bentham* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985).
- Hart, H. L. A. : *Essays on Bentham, Jurisprudence and Political Theory* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982).
- Manning, D. J. : *The Mind of Jeremy Bentham* (London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1968).