# **Plato (427-347 bce)**

The philosophy of Plato has the curious property of being delivered almost entirely through the mouth of someone else. Nearly all his surviving works are 'dialogues': transcripts of real or imaginary conversations between groups of acquaintances, in which the chief protagonist is his teacher Socrates. In the dialogues, Socrates is the exponent of the doctrines that Plato wishes to recommend. In principle, it is possible to isolate Socrates' actual opinions from those attributed to him by Plato, but the distinction is problematical, and we shall not try to deal with it. Of Socrates himself we know only what can be gleaned from Plato's dialogues, from the writings of Xenophon, and from the fact that he is sent up in Aristophanes' comedy *Clouds*. A stonemason by trade, he preferred to spend his time discussing philosophy with friends. He wrote nothing. His 'dialectical' method consists in the clarification of concepts by a process of question and answer called *elenchos*. He sees himself not as teaching anything new, but as encouraging people to understand what they know already. He is also a selfproclaimed 'gadfly' whose mission is to pester people into realising that what they think they know is not really knowledge at all.

Plato was Socrates' friend and disciple from *c.*409 until Socrates' death. Plato is the author of three large-scale political works: the *Republic*, the *Politicus* or *Statesman* and the *Laws*. A number of his other dialogues - especially the *Crito* - contain or imply important political doctrines, but it is in the *Republic* that his political philosophy receives its most influential exposition. It is with the *Republic* that we shall be mainly concerned.

Plato's early adulthood coincided with the period of political dislocation following the defeat of Athens in the Peloponnesian War of 431-404 bce. An immediate consequence of defeat was the overthrow of the democratic constitution of Pericles and the establishment of a ruling council of thirty oligarchs. Plato had high hopes that this oligarchy might preside over a successful post-war reconstruction, but such optimism soon foundered. Especially in the behaviour of Plato's uncle Critias, its most prominent member, the oligarchy was distinguished by an extreme disregard for ordinary standards of morality. Critias was by all accounts a brutal and cynical politician. The 'Thirty Tyrants' adopted methods of government so savage that they alienated many of those wealthy Athenians who had initially regarded their rule with favour. In 403 bce, a counter-revolution under the leadership of Thrasybulus swept it away and reinstated the democratic constitution. It was under this new regime that Socrates perished, condemned on the curious and probably specious charge of 'not recognising the gods which the city recognises . . . introducing new gods [and] corrupting young men' (Diogenes Laertius 2:40). It is likely that he was a political casualty. Although not personally associated with the excesses of the Thirty, he was known to be an associate of the hated Critias. The oligarch Charmides was also a member of his circle, and he was a close friend of Alcibiades, a man of pronounced anti-democratic tendencies. The orator Aeschines, speaking in 345 bce, tells us that Socrates was condemned because of his association with Critias.

Socrates' condemnation was a defining moment in Plato's career. The celebration of his revered teacher's life became his mission. In 399 bce, Plato left Athens and remained in voluntary exile until 386 bce. It is not difficult to imagine his feelings. He had seen the oligarchy of the Thirty, which he had hoped might 'lead men out of a bad way of life into a good one', turn into a sanguinary fiasco. He had seen his friend and teacher condemned under the ensuing democracy. The conclusion formed in his mind that all existing states are bad. While still young, he came to believe that *mankind's troubles will never cease until either* 

*true and genuine philosophers achieve political power or, by some dispensation of providence, rulers of states become genuine philosophers.*

## *(Seventh Letter)*

Plato is much inclined to associate the political ills of his youth with the group of teachers and orators active in fifth-century Athens known as the Sophists. It is no accident that the literary device by which the *Republic* is got properly under way is a challenge to Socrates by the 'radical' Sophist Thrasymachus. Notionally, the dialogue is an enquiry into the nature of *dikaiosyne*: justice. After a few pages of amiable conversation, the floor is seized by Thrasymachus. He has been listening with irritation to the polite attempts of the protagonists to discover what justice is. Plato wants us to think him boorish and discourteous. Thrasymachus offers his own definition: 'Justice is nothing else than the interest of the stronger.' This dictum is clearly intended to exemplify the political amoralism that Plato associates with the younger generation of Sophists (of whom Callicles, in the dialogue called *Gorgias*, is another example). In the long discussion that occupies the rest of Book I, Thrasymachus is made to shift his ground several times. What he has in mind, it turns out, is not quite that justice is the interest of the stronger, but that it is in the interest of the stronger for *others* to be just and he himself unjust. His position can be reduced to the following four assertions:

1

The good life consists in disregarding all limit or restriction and enjoying a life of boundless gratification. People are happy to the extent that they do not have to consider anyone else's interests but their own. The same general sentiment is expressed by Callicles in the *Gorgias*.

### 2

'Justice' means 'compliance with the law'. It therefore involves accepting the limits or controls prescribed for one by a superior.

### 3

Laws are rules made by the strong and imposed by them on the weak. They are the devices by which the strong control the weak to their own advantage - or at any rate to what they believe is their own advantage.

### 4

The interest of the ruler is therefore best served when his subjects are just - that is, when they comply with his laws - and he himself is able to be 'unjust' in the sense of not limited by any will opposed to his own. In this sense, Thrasymachus thinks, injustice is better and stronger than justice.

Unsurprisingly, Thrasymachus is a frank admirer of tyranny. The good ruler will be the ruler who takes advantage of his subjects as fully and successfully as possible. Subjects, by contrast, will be people who live stultified and frustrated lives. This is precisely the kind of attitude to which Plato attributes the capricious and violent style of politics that he had

experienced as a young man, and the whole of the rest of the *Republic* is an attempt, using Socrates as a mouthpiece, to rebut it.

Thrasymachus believes that injustice is preferable to justice because justice involves the acceptance of restrictions. The just man is a kind of amiable fool. The naturally superior man knows that the good life is a matter of disregarding all limits. But, Socrates points out, to characterise the good life in this way is obviously a mistake. If we aim at a life in which all limits are ignored, we shall simply not be able to get what we want. A musician who tunes his instrument has to tighten the strings to a suitable degree: neither more nor less. A physician who treats a patient has to give just the right amount of treatment: neither more nor less. Paradoxically, even robbers have to observe a kind of 'justice'. They have to act within the rules that govern the division of labour within the gang. If they do not, the gang will not be able to achieve the purposes for which it came together in the first place. The successful conduct of any human activity depends upon observing the limits that constitute the possibility of that activity. If remaining within limits is what we mean by justice, then, it seems that justice is not, after all, a conventional device invented by the strong to control the weak. 'Justice' is natural in the sense of being indispensable to any kind of coherent action, and injustice is not so much wrong as self-defeating. To the extent that human life is a purposive activity, justice is essential to its successful conduct.

Justice to the individual human being - to the individual soul, as Socrates expresses it - is therefore what sharpness is to a knife or keenness is to the eye. It is the 'virtue' that enables the soul to perform its function properly. Just as you can prune a vine after a fashion with a chisel or a blunt knife, so you can live, after a fashion, with an unjust soul; but it will not be the best kind of life. Clearly, then, it is important for us to understand what the justice of the individual soul actually is, or where in the soul it lies. In order to do this, Socrates says, we should first identify justice in the *polis* or state. By considering justice on a large scale, we shall be better able to understand it on the small or individual scale.

What, then, constitutes the justice of the state? Socrates answers this question not by analysing the constitution of any existing state, but by describing the development of an imaginary or 'ideal' state, which he calls Kallipolis ('Beautiful City'). Such a state would originate in the fact that human beings need to co-operate in order to meet their material needs. But the meeting of basic needs will inevitably produce more sophisticated needs, and so more complex structures will have to be devised to supply them. At the end-point of its evolution, Socrates suggests, the state will contain three occupational groups, between whom the state's 'virtues' will be distributed. These groups are called Guardians, Auxiliaries and Producers. The Guardians will embody the state's wisdom; the Auxiliaries or military class will embody its courage; the Producers will embody temperance or self-restraint, in that they will recognise that it is necessary for them to submit to the rule of the Guardians. Justice, Socrates argues, will not be a separate virtue in addition to courage, wisdom and selfrestraint. It will be the relationship that holds when the Auxiliaries and Producers remain within the limits prescribed for them by the Guardians. Justice, in other words, will obtain when the Guardians, Auxiliaries and Producers function together in such a way as to secure the good of the whole community. Justice is a matter of everyone doing the job for which they are best suited and not interfering with anyone else.

Extrapolating from this, we can now say something about justice in the individual soul. The soul, Socrates suggests, has three parts or functions: reason, appetite and spirit or emotion. He does not explain why he believes there to be three and only three parts, but this does not

affect his argument. What is important to the argument is that we accept that the soul does have parts, corresponding at least roughly to the parts of the state. Clearly, neither appetite nor spirit can function properly without the guidance of reason. A life of undirected appetite or of random and uncontrolled emotion would be a futile and frustrating one. By analogy with the state, then, Justice is present in the soul when appetite and spirit are guided by reason in such a way as to secure the good of the whole. The successful conduct of life successful, that is, in terms of achieving the happiness that all individuals desire - depends upon our having a properly ordered soul; or, as one might nowadays express it, a wellintegrated personality.

Is a version of justice that so emphasises the securing of individual happiness much of an improvement on the Sophist doctrine that self-gratification is really everybody's goal? This objection is developed in the *Republic* by the brothers Glaucon and Adeimantus. The arguments that occur to them are the obvious ones. Why should I not use my reason simply to direct my appetites and emotions so as to get what I want at someone else's expense? Why should I not pretend to be just when it suits me, and grab as much for myself as I can when I can do it without detection? If I could become invisible at will, would there still be any point in being just? Stated generally, Socrates' response to such questions is that people with properly integrated personalities - those whose wants and impulses are proportionate and not irrational and excessive - would *ipso facto* not *want* to grab as much as they could for themselves. The just man would be a happy, contented, well-adjusted individual whose desires would not outstrip his needs. He would have no reason for not spontaneously recognising the moral claims of others and willing their happiness and good as well as his own. Justice understood as a quality of soul certainly secures the interests of the just person, but it is other-regarding also.

In practice, however, we come across few individuals who are just in this sense. This is so, Socrates thinks, because most people lack *knowledge*. They do not *know* the nature of such things as justice, right, goodness and so forth. They therefore cannot conduct their lives according to fixed or stable principles of reason. Experience suggests that most people live in the kind of world described by the Sophists Protagoras and Gorgias: a world in which there is no certain knowledge, but only opinion or belief. Such a world is unstable because opinions or beliefs can so easily be changed. Especially, they can be changed by the influence of demagogues, of persuasive orators. This, Socrates suggests, is a particular danger in democracies, because the conditions of life that democracies furnish tend to produce weakwilled and indecisive people. The only truly just men, Socrates thinks, are those who have knowledge rather than opinion: those who are *philosophoi*, 'wisdom lovers', as distinct from 'lovers of sights and sounds'. Ideally, therefore, it is philosophers who should have responsibility for governing the state.

What, though, is knowledge as distinct from opinion? The Sophists were epistemological sceptics; they had denied the possibility of any such thing as knowledge. As far as they are concerned, we live in a world in which certainty is impossible because no single opinion can be shown to be truer than its contradictory. Socrates agrees that the world of ordinary sense experience is full of uncertainty, but he believes that the right kind of education - a philosophical education - can lead the mind away from the concrete world of appearance into a 'real' world of 'forms' or 'ideas'. This 'theory of forms', as it is called, is a strange and problematical doctrine that is never fully expounded in any of Plato's dialogues, but to which he often refers. (It should be remembered that we are here having to state it very simply.) Every just act, every beautiful object is, he thinks, just and beautiful because, and only

because, it 'participates' in a pure idea of justice and beauty: an idea capable of being apprehended by the trained mind only. These ideas, as Socrates depicts them, are capable of enlightening the mind as to the true nature of the things of which they are the ideas. The ambiguity exhibited by so many things in the 'world of sight' is due to the fact that they are only imperfect copies of the ideas in which they participate. Most people only experience the copies, and do not realise that they are copies. Such people suppose mere appearance to be reality. But the philosopher, by definition, is one who has grasped the ideas themselves, and whose activity is therefore now informed by true knowledge rather than unstable opinion. He is like a prisoner who has escaped into the sun from a cave in which his fellow men are bound in darkness. He has gone beyond the veil of shadowy belief and understood the true nature of things. For this reason, he is uniquely able to rule others.

For Socrates, then, the best state would be an aristocracy presided over by those who have transcended the world of appearance which most of us occupy and who therefore do what is good because they *know* what is good. They will not legislate; they will govern at their own personal discretion. Despite the Sophists' typical assumption, they will not exploit their subjects to secure their own interests. Quite apart from the fact that they are enlightened beings whose acts are informed by knowledge, the educational and social system of the ideal city will require them to live in such a way as to abolish from their minds any thought of private gain or glory. They will have no families and no property. They will seek only the common good, and they will act in such a way as to secure a life of virtue and happiness for all, according to the abilities and station of each.

In recent times, commentators have tended to deplore Plato's mistrust of democracy. Such critics deprecate his lack of belief in the capacity of ordinary human beings to organise their lives without paternalistic supervision. They complain that the regime over which Plato's philosopher-rulers preside is a totalitarian one: that they are despots who, on the strength of the knowledge that they claim, control every aspect of their subjects' lives, by methods just as disreputable as those for which Plato is so ready to reproach the Sophists. The kind of knowledge that Plato values is not used to make people free, but only to create the kind of unfreedom that he regards as benign.

This kind of criticism hardly deserves to be taken seriously. For one thing, it is pointless to censure Plato for not having had the kind of values and opinions that modern liberals applaud. For another, such criticism does not pay heed to what Plato's intentions really are. On the one hand, it is certainly his view that only a few people will have the talent to become rulers, and that the ignorant should follow the leadership of the wise. It is also true that, as far as Plato is concerned, the Guardians will, where necessary, use myth, persuasion and deception as devices for governing the commonwealth. They will lie when they have to; they will secretly fix the ballots that allot mating partners in order to bring about the best combinations; they will perpetuate the 'noble lie' that the gods have made men of gold, silver and bronze and that each should know his place. But, on the other hand, Plato is quite clearly sincere in his belief that these things will be done not for the sake of the rulers themselves, but in order to achieve a collective and long-term good. The Guardians will do such things because they have to shape into a semblance of virtue those who are not equipped with the resources to be virtuous spontaneously. They themselves, however, will be men of supreme goodness of intention. They will live lives of austerity and disinterest; they will deploy all their considerable resources of intellect for the well-being of the community over which they preside; they will strive to see to it that those subject to them live happy and complete lives within the limits of what is possible for them.

In his later political thought, as represented in the *Politicus* and *Laws*, Plato somewhat revised his faith in the sovereign rule of the wise, although he never wholly relinquished it. This later development is usually thought to be related to two things. First, misgivings about his epistemological doctrines may have led Plato to question what he had once taken to be the straightforward link between abstract knowledge and political practice. It is clear that, with the passage of time, he began to have second thoughts about his 'theory of forms'. His revaluation of it is exemplified in the late dialogue called *Parmenides*. This is a remarkable essay in self-criticism, in which Plato anticipates a number of objections later voiced by Aristotle in his *Metaphysics*. Second, and possibly more important, in 367 bce Plato became the political adviser of Dionysius II, the young tyrant of Syracuse. Here, he thought, might be an opportunity to mould a real-life version of the philosophically enlightened statesman. The experiment proved a dismal failure. Plato found himself involved in a series of political imbroglios that left his faith in the idea of a philosopher-ruler much deflated. In the *Politicus* he is still committed in principle to the notion of an ideal statesman, but his theme now is that such a statesman is unlikely to be found and that, in his absence, the second-best form of government will be that of conscientious rulers whose actions are circumscribed by law. Such rulers do not have knowledge strictly so-called. They do not themselves understand the art or science of politics. But wise laws can at least give them true opinion, and the rule of true opinion is better than arbitrariness and favouritism. It is, however, not entirely clear where such wise laws are to come from. Plato's last dialogue, the *Laws*, probably completed shortly before his death, represents the apotheosis of law in his political thought. The ideal state described in it - called 'Magnesia' - is governed in minute detail by laws devised and administered by a 'Nocturnal Council'. The members of this Council are recognisably like the Guardians of the *Republic*, but it is no longer supposed that their wisdom will enable them to rule the state by personal discretion alone. Plato's final position is that the best attainable kind of state is one governed by laws embodying, albeit imperfectly, a kind of collective and accumulated wisdom. Under such an arrangement, civic virtue is the will to obey laws that regulate every detail of life, even down to the most trivial.

# *Further reading*

#### *Primary sources*

- Plato *Republic*, ed. F. M. Cornford (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1941).
- Plato *Statesman*, ed. J. B. Skemp (New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1957).
- Plato *Laws*, ed. T. J. Saunders (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1970).

#### *Secondary sources*

- Annas, J. : *An Introduction to Plato's Republic* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1981).
- Coleman, J. : *A History of Political Thought*, vol. 1 (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000).
- Cross, R. C. and Woozley, A. D. : *Plato's Republic: A Philosophical Commentary* (London: Macmillan, 1964).
- Klosko, G. : *The Development of Plato's Political Theory* (London and New York: Methuen, 1986).
- Sayers, S. : *Plato's Republic: An Introduction* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1999).