## **Herbert Spencer (1820-1903)**

Herbert Spencer was born in Derby, the son of a dissenting schoolmaster. He was the only one of nine children to survive into adulthood. He was educated at home by his father, with the assistance of his uncle, Reverend Thomas Spencer. In superficial respects, his early life resembles that of John Stuart Mill, though Spencer's education was predominantly mathematical and technical. He toyed with the idea of Cambridge, but financial and religious difficulties supervened (these were days when no one could take a degree at Oxford or Cambridge without being a member of the Anglican Church). Between 1837 and 1848, Spencer was a railway engineer, working first for the London and Birmingham and then for the Birmingham and Gloucester railway companies. Between 1848 and 1853, he worked as a journalist, contributing in particular to the *Westminster Review* (a liberal and radical journal edited by the novelist George Eliot) and serving as assistant editor of *The Economist*. In 1853 his uncle Thomas died and left him a substantial sum, which enabled him to devote himself without distraction to a literary career. Spencer was an ambitious and prolific author. Even his autobiography runs to two volumes and some 400,000 words. In the early 1850s he conceived the remarkable idea of synthesising the whole of biology, sociology, psychology, ethics and politics into an integrated whole. This *System of Synthetic Philosophy* was published in ten volumes over a period of thirty years. From our point of view, his chief works are Herbert Spencer *Social Statics* (1850), Herbert Spencer *The Man versus the State* (1884) and Herbert Spencer *The Principles of Ethics* (1892-3). He seems to have been prone to bouts of depression, and in his later years became embroiled in a number of acrimonious controversies that undermined his failing health.

The founding principle of Spencer's philosophy, considered both generally and with regard to his political and social doctrines, is the idea of evolution: the 'principle of continuity', as he called it. The presence of fossil remains in railway cuttings first stimulated his interest in evolution. It was he and not Darwin who coined the phrase 'the survival of the fittest'. Spencer was resistant to Darwin's idea of natural selection, preferring instead the Lamarckian hypothesis that organisms acquire from their environment adaptive characteristics that are then inherited by successive generations. It is, Spencer believes, the nature of all organisms to move from a condition of homogeneity or simplicity towards heterogeneity and complexity. This movement is characteristic of nature as a whole, and societies evolve in this way as well as individuals. Social evolution is a process of development from homogenous primitive societies to complex heterogeneous ones exhibiting an increasingly complex differentiation of functions. Societies, Spencer believes, have a natural tendency to evolve from monarchical and military to industrial and co-operative forms of organisation. But societies, though in a certain sense 'organisms', are nothing more than collections of individuals seeking happiness that is, seeking to achieve a surplus of pleasure over pain (Spencer is in this respect a utilitarian) - and co-operating with one another in order to do so. Individuals begin to cooperate in order to avoid the threat of violence and war. As they become increasingly aware of the benefits of co-operation, so also do they become aware of the individuality of others. This awareness, augmented by the natural sympathy that Spencer thinks human beings feel for one another, leads them to recognise a fundamental law (although Spencer is not wholly clear about whether it is a moral law or a maxim of prudence or a descriptive natural law) called the 'law of equal freedom'. This law states that every man has freedom to do whatever he likes, provided he does not infringe the equal freedom of anyone else to do the same. It will be noticed that, in so far as it purports to describe the development of human associations, Spencer's evolutionary theory also functions as a philosophy of history.

Societies advance from militarism to industry, from primitive to advanced, from barbarism to civilisation.

The development of each individual according to the law of equal freedom will lead eventually to the complete adaptation of the human organism to its environment and hence to the happiness of all. History is progress; but because the evolutionary process is a natural one, we must not interfere with it or try to control it. Anything that artificially restricts the exercise of human freedom will necessarily impede human development. What this implies, as far as politics is concerned, is a minimal or negative state. What it implies for economics is the doctrine of *laissez-faire*. Governments should perform only the functions of protection and defence and leave the individual with the greatest possible freedom to act without interference or control. The liberty of individuals is, Spencer thinks, to be measured not by the nature of the government machinery they live under, but by the degree of restraint that it imposes on them. Anyone whose freedom is infringed by government action has a right to ignore the state. Since law is inevitably a curtailment of individuals' freedom to do all that they wish, there should be as little of it as possible. Eventually a state will be reached at which legislation will not be necessary at all, thanks to the full realisation of human capacities for co-operation and creativity. Meanwhile, to support the unemployed is to encourage idleness; education, economic regulation and the care of the sick and needy are not to be undertaken by the state; there should be no state regulation of industry, even in respect of such things as sanitary regulation and the introduction of safety devices into factories. Nothing must be done to protect the incompetent and idle from the consequences of incompetence and idleness. The industrious and successful will get what they deserve by their own efforts; the weakest must go to the wall, as is nature's way.

In the early part of his career Spencer was an advocate of land nationalisation and a universal franchise, but he abandoned these doctrines as impractical in later years, as youthful radicalism gave place to an increasingly morose and pessimistic conservatism. His 'social Darwinism', with its seemingly abhorrent implications, was one of the main stimuli of the late-nineteenth century 'new' liberalism of which T.H. Green is the most notable exponent.

In his day, Spencer was an enormously popular author in England, Europe and America. He was well regarded by a number of people whose opinions deserve respect, including Darwin himself, George Eliot, Thomas Carlyle and T.H. Huxley. But it is hardly to be denied that his ambitious philosophical schemes are full of inconsistencies and sometimes quite elementary mistakes. His synthetic philosophy is not unjustly described as the product of general knowledge and over-confidence. Born in newly industrialising Derby and trained in technology, he has tended to be seen as a child of the Industrial Revolution, whose project is to give theoretical respectability to the unrestricted exploitation of the weak by the 'industrious'. (It is mildly ironic that his ashes lie buried in Highgate Cemetery immediately opposite the grave of Karl Marx.) This may or may not be fair; but it is certainly true that we have lost the taste for, and abandoned faith in, gigantic syntheses of the kind that Spencer relished. Some exponents of libertarian or 'New Right' ideas - especially Robert Nozick have thought well of him. On the whole, however, Spencer is an eminent Victorian whose work, though of historical interest, has fallen out of fashion.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Herbert Spencer *Social Statics* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1954).
- Herbert Spencer *The Man versus the State*, ed. E. Mack and A. J. Nock (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Classics, 1981).
- Herbert Spencer *The Principles of Ethics*, ed. T. Machan (Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Classics, 1982).

## *Secondary sources*

- Peel, J. D. Y. : *Herbert Spencer* (London: Heinemann, 1971).
- Wiltshire, D. : *The Social and Political Thought of Herbert Spencer* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978).