## **Vladimir Ilich Lenin (1870-1924)**

Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov was born in the small town of Simbirsk (later renamed Ulyanovsk), south of Moscow, in 1870. The Ulyanovs were a middle-class intellectual family, the father being a distinguished inspector of schools. When Vladimir Ilich was seventeen, the family reputation was clouded when his elder brother was hanged for involvement in a plot to assassinate the Tsar. After early expulsion from university for participating in a demonstration, Vladimir Ilich became a full-time revolutionary, adopting the name Lenin.

Thereafter all Lenin's thought and energy was directed, with extraordinary singlemindedness, towards promoting the revolution. All his voluminous writings, including the most abstractly theoretical, were written for polemical revolutionary purposes. This is true of his two most important contributions to theory: the theory of the revolutionary party and that of capitalist imperialism.

A Marxist party (see Karl Marx), the Russian Social Democratic Party (RSDP), was established in Russia towards the end of the nineteenth century and began to recruit among the comparatively small industrial workforce. But, unlike the German Social Democratic Party (SPD), it was not legal: it was hounded by the Tsarist police, its leaders lived in exile, and its effectiveness in organising and supporting the working class was small. This was the party that Lenin joined as a student. There was already a strong revolutionary tradition in Russia before Marxism arrived, and Lenin was already a revolutionary before he became a Marxist.

Lenin's zeal and organising ability soon made him a leading figure in the party and led to his exile. As time went on, Lenin became increasingly disillusioned with the RSDP and became convinced that its whole programme and its strategy were wrong. The leadership was fatalistic about the possibilities of revolution, believing that Russia must first pass through a long capitalist phase before it was ripe for revolution, which would in any case begin elsewhere first. Lenin disagreed and insisted that the party should work for revolution in Russia as soon as possible, irrespective of what was happening in other countries.

Lenin also disagreed with the strategy of building a mass party on the model of the German SPD. The conditions in Russia were just not the same, the party being illegal, wide open to police penetration and largely restricted to backing workers' demands for better pay and conditions. Lenin's alternative was set out in his most important work, Vladimir Ilich Lenin *What Is To Be Done?* (1902). In this he argues that the working class, if left to its own devices, would only develop what he called 'trade union consciousness' and not the necessary 'revolutionary consciousness'. What the workers needed was leadership from a new type of party, which did possess the necessary revolutionary consciousness, plus the theory and tactics to go with it.

Lenin proposed, therefore, the creation of a small party of dedicated professional revolutionaries, trained in revolutionary activity and thoroughly grounded in Marxist theory. The organisation of the party would be based on the principle of 'democratic centralism'. That is, open discussion and opinion passing up through the hierarchy, but once a decision has been made at the top it must be rigidly enforced throughout the party. This new party would be the 'vanguard of the proletariat', meaning that it is not separate from the working class, but is rather its elite, the most class-conscious part of it. Lenin also insisted that whatever was

done to further the revolutionary cause was justified, no matter how immoral it might seem. In other words, the end justifies the means.

Lenin's ideas split the leadership of the RSDP, and his faction broke away to form their own party that came to be called the 'Bolsheviks'. The party he left came to be known as the 'Mensheviks'. Some sympathised with Lenin's belief in working for an immediate revolution, but could not stomach his dictatorial leadership. Most notable was Leon Trotsky, who had an independent reputation as a writer and revolutionary; Trotsky returned to the Bolsheviks after the Revolution broke out.

Lenin's second major contribution to Marxist theory dealt with the problem of the failure of Marx's predictions and at the same time presented a case for why the world revolution should begin in Russia. Contrary to Marx, capitalism had not shown the slightest sign of collapsing in advanced capitalist countries; the classes were not polarising; the middle classes were growing and the working classes becoming more prosperous. In his main work on the subject, Vladimir Ilich Lenin *Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism* (1916), Lenin offered a solution. The late nineteenth century was the period when the major powers competed to carve up Africa and other uncolonised parts of the world. World War I was essentially a war for colonial possessions, so that the capitalists of the winning country could extend their exploitation and profits. Lenin argued that this imperialist expansion constituted a higher stage of capitalism, which Marx could not have foreseen. Capitalism increasingly exploits the undeveloped part of the world and uses part of the profits to 'buy off' the domestic working class with a higher standard of living and state welfare. The exploited masses of the colonial world were thus the new proletariat. Consequently, the communist revolution would not necessarily take place in the advanced West.

The country that was in fact particularly ripe for revolution, Lenin argued, was Russia. It was not economically advanced, but then the workers had not been bought off, and its industry, largely financed by foreign capital, was the 'weakest link' in the chain of capitalist imperialism. A revolution in Russia would begin the process that would spread to the rest of the world and bring the whole system crashing down.

In February 1917 the Tsarist regime collapsed under the strain of World War I, and Lenin's Bolsheviks, joined by Trotsky, seized power in November (in October according to the old Russian calendar that was then still in use, hence the 'October Revolution'). The Bolshevik Party was renamed the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Once in power, Lenin encouraged the peasants and workers to seize the land and the factories and he suppressed all opposition parties. The principles of the revolutionary party, as set out in *What Is To Be Done?*, became the principles of the governing party. They were also reinforced by Lenin's creation in 1919 of the Communist International (known as the 'Comintern'), which he dominated, insisting that all member parties adopt his doctrines and his system of party organisation, as well as recognising Soviet leadership. Despite civil war and foreign intervention, the Soviet Union had been established by the time Lenin died in 1924.

It was Lenin's particular interpretation and extensions of Marx's theory, known as Marxism-Leninism, that became the official doctrine of the Soviet Union and of all subsequent communist regimes (although sometimes with native additions, as in China). It is the version of Marxism that we know as 'communism' and it was to be the only orthodox version until the 1960s. Its reputation as the only authentic Marxism was simply a result of Lenin's success. Marxism-Leninism is in fact a rather crude version of Marxism, relying on Marx's later works and especially Engels' popular expositions. For one thing, it is very mechanical, putting great stress on economic determinism. Democratic centralism is extended from a principle of party organisation, where it amounts to rigid control from the top, to a principle of social organisation, with party control of every significant social organisation and the suppression of any kind of opposition. This is true of all other communist regimes, producing totalitarian one-party states.

The justification of this in Marxist terms is based on Marx's theory of the 'dictatorship of the proletariat', which was seen as the temporary phase of working-class rule prior to full communism. Since, in Lenin's theory, the party *is* the proletariat, its vanguard, the party has the right to rule on behalf of the rest of the workers. Various justifications were also offered on democratic grounds. It was said that multi-party systems reflected class divisions, which did not exist in communist countries, and that the Communist Party can alone represent the interests of the people. It was because of arguments like this that communist regimes styled themselves 'people's democracies' - as distinct from liberal democracies, which were dismissed as a sham because the people had no real power.

On the other hand, while communist regimes claimed to be 'workers' states', they saw themselves as being a long way from achieving a communist society. When Lenin seized power in 1917 he was convinced that his revolution could not succeed unless the workers of other countries followed the Russian lead. This, of course, did not happen. In Marxist terms, all communist states are stuck in the transitional phase of the dictatorship of the proletariat (which Marxists, rather confusingly, sometimes refer to as 'socialism' as distinct from the final phase of 'communism') and must maintain a powerful state so long as they are surrounded by hostile capitalist states. Only when the rest of the world has its revolution and catches up, can humanity progress together towards a truly communist society.

Lenin's theory of the vanguard party still dominates wherever communist regimes remain. But at least since the 1960s, and particularly since the collapse of European communism (1989-91), it has been criticised as a distortion of Marxism by many Marxists in the West. Marx clearly taught that the whole working class needed to be educated and self-consciously ready for revolution, not merely the uncomprehending instrument of an elite who would take power on the workers' behalf. Furthermore, many now argue that the Mensheviks were right all along when they insisted that Russia was far too backward to sustain a genuine proletarian revolution. These, however, are contentious issues within Marxism.

The theory of imperialism, however, retains its appeal for all Marxists since it overcomes objections based on Marx's failed predictions. It is still widely adhered to, despite the ending of Western colonialism after World War II. The argument is that although overt political control may have gone, the Third World is still dominated and exploited by the capitalist West, only now through more subtle economic means. However, the theory lost some of its force as some countries, particularly in the Far East, flourished in the late twentieth century: the theory suggests that latter-day economic imperialism would prevent this.

The failures of communism in recent decades have diminished Lenin's reputation; nevertheless, as the founder of modern communism he remains among the most important and influential figures of the twentieth century.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary source*

Vladimir Ilich Lenin *Selected Works* (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1971).

## *Secondary sources*

- Carr, E. H. : *The Bolshevik Revolution* (3 vols; Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1966).
- Gooding, J. : *Socialism in Russia: Lenin and his Legacy, 1890-1991* (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2001).
- Harding, N. : *Lenin's Political Thought* (2 vols; London: Macmillan, 1981).
- Harding, N. : *Leninism* (London: Macmillan, 1996).
- Service, R. : *Lenin: A Biography* (London: Papermac, 2001).