## **Jean-François Lyotard (1924-98)**

Jean-François Lyotard was born in Versailles in 1924 and came from a modest background. After graduating from the Sorbonne he spent ten years teaching philosophy in schools, beginning in Algeria, where he became a political radical. Thereafter he taught as a lecturer and professor of philosophy in various institutions in the Paris area. As a young academic he joined the revolutionary Trotskyite group associated with the journal *Socialism or Barbarism* and was later active in the student revolt of 1968. His chief concern at this time was to synthesise Marxism and psychoanalysis, but he became disillusioned by both doctrines after 1968. Nevertheless, he sought to retain his uncompromising radicalism. He explored the subversive nature of avant-garde art using his own account of instinctual drives in his book Jean-François Lyotard *Libidinal Economy* (1974), but subsequently became more interested in the analysis of language, influenced by Wittgenstein and by post-structuralists such as his friend Jacques Derrida.

Lyotard became widely known with the publication of his *The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge* (in French in 1979, translated into English in 1984). This arose from a commission from the University of Quebec to produce a report on the state of knowledge in developed countries that might guide future university policy. The subsequent book came to be regarded by many as marking the beginning of the postmodernist movement. The terms 'postmodern' and 'postmodernism' were in fact already in use, especially in the arts, but it was this book that gave it wider currency as representing a comprehensive social and cultural theory. Postmodernism as a general theory of contemporary society and culture thereafter developed rapidly in a number of directions, although Lyotard came in time to question the modern/postmodern distinction. Nevertheless, he continued to be regarded as a major figure in the overall movement and, in books such as Jean-François Lyotard *The Differend* (1983) and many articles, he contributed to postmodern theory and to a postmodern conception of politics. He retired in 1987 and died in 1998.

*The Postmodern Condition* argues that the nature and status of knowledge has changed. The industrial age - characterised by mass production, scientific research and Enlightenment ideals of rationality and progress - is over. We are now living in a new situation, which Lyotard terms 'postmodern', where information technology predominates and the stress is upon efficiency and other pragmatic values. Science has evolved and fragmented into incommensurable areas and scientists no longer all speak the same language. Furthermore, in spite of the apparently objective nature of scientific explanation and procedure, science is in fact underpinned by a series of grand stories or 'metanarratives' that justify its existence. These are modern beliefs in progress that see reason (particularly in its scientific manifestation) as promising happiness, prosperity and freedom. Lyotard claims that we now no longer believe in these underlying justifications. Science has become just one set of language games among others.

Indeed, loss of faith in metanarratives generally is what characterises the new age in which we now live. Lyotard introduces what is still one of the most influential definitions of the postmodern as involving an 'incredulity towards metanarratives'. By 'metanarratives' or 'grand narratives' Lyotard means the overarching stories that we use to justify activities, institutions, values and cultural forms. They include ideologies, religions, notions of progress, the efficacy of psychoanalysis or benefits of capitalism, and other broad assumptions that underpin much of what we think and do. We now tend to think of them as language games valid only to those who participate in them and irreconcilable with each other. We have lost our faith in universal beliefs and theories.

*The Postmodern Condition* is perhaps the best-known primary postmodern text at least partly because of its relative lucidity. Most later texts are extremely difficult and obscure - including those by Lyotard himself. His notion of how we are now living in a postmodern age has been refined and extended by many postmodern theorists, who have developed the thesis in many and often conflicting directions. What is common in their outlook is seeing modernity in terms of what is called the 'Enlightenment Project', which aspired to create a more rational world with freedom, prosperity and happiness for all. This rationality was deemed to be manifested in science and technology, capitalism, the liberal state and in more efficient organisation of society generally, although there are alternative versions of the Enlightenment Project expressed in socialism, Marxism, anarchism and other modern ideologies.

The actual outcomes of the Enlightenment Project have included industrialisation, urbanisation and societies divided by class and class conflict. Great wealth has been created, but also mass poverty. There has been greater freedom, but also world wars and totalitarianism. There have also been great scientific advances, but they are accompanied by threats of nuclear annihilation and environmental destruction that threaten the whole of humanity. These horrors have undermined our faith in reason, science and progress. Furthermore, the writings of various thinkers like Derrida and Foucault have questioned our faith in reason and our capacity for independent reasoning. As a result, the Enlightenment Project has become discredited and has collapsed, and our loss of faith in universal theories is one symptom of this.

There is, however, more to postmodernity than intellectual disillusionment. Industrial classbased society has given way to a post-industrial, consumer-driven, media-dominated, globalised society in which social class and (to some extent) national and other identities are gone - or at least less secure than before. Who and what we are has become much more a matter of choice than in the past. This applies to political and other identities, which are now chosen in a more consumerist way. The new age we have now entered, so postmodernists argue, is an age of fragmentation, loss of identity and multiple points of view. The politics of industrial modernity centred around class-based parties with universal ideologies. The mass parties still exist, but as hollowed-out versions that are less dedicated to socialism or conservatism or other ideologies. They have to chase votes, since they no longer have the mass memberships and automatic voting support of old. The electorate is now more volatile and consumerist. The postmodern account of politics is largely based upon the growth of new social movements and the new political agenda associated with them: the politics of identity and lifestyle, such as sexual politics; the politics of small-scale nationalism and regionalism; and the politics of particular issues, such as the environment.

Although Lyotard came to doubt the extent of the break with modernity, his later writings develop his own version of what is generally recognised as postmodern theory, which derives from Wittgenstein's account of language. That is, language develops naturally along with human practices and forms of life to form a vast network of relatively discrete 'language games', each with its own concepts and rules. Where practices or forms of life clash, the respective language games are incommensurable and there is no higher language that can embrace both - no 'meta-language' that can automatically resolve differences.

Lyotard is implacably hostile to any kind of metanarrative or grand theory that informs political practice, no matter how seemingly benign. These range from full-scale ideologies, such as Marxism, socialism, nationalism, liberalism, fascism and so on, to smaller-scale theories of social engineering or economic policy. All are condemned in equal measure as totalitarian. Lyotard believes that such is the creativity and variety of human social life that no meta-language or metanarrative or grand theory can possibly do it justice. More importantly, any attempt to impose any of these on a society must of necessity involve oppression, injustice and the marginalisation of those who do not conform, with an inevitable diminution of variety and creativity.

This kind of postmodern analysis has resulted, to some degree, in a greater sensitivity to the needs of minorities in liberal democracies, with policies arising from multiculturalism, as well as modifications of liberal theory. However, Lyotard pursues the argument much further. He is fiercely hostile to any kind of general consensus, however 'reasonable' it might appear to be, on the same grounds of the oppressiveness of exclusion and the diminution of variety and creativity. Notions of compromise are firmly rejected along with those of reasonableness. Lyotard sometimes talks as though philosophy can have a role in elucidating differences between colliding language games (between, say, the outlook of employers and workers in a capitalist system), but there seems to be no question of philosophy being the basis of any kind of resolution.

Lyotard's politics is a politics of endless conflict and protest, with seemingly no possibility of constructive agreement - one might even say no possibility of politics at all. He is so extreme and indiscriminate in his rejection of theory and consensus as bad, while any kind of variety and difference is necessarily good, that it is difficult to see how any kind of productive politics is possible. As with other postmodernist or post-structuralist thinkers, like Derrida or Foucault or Baudrillard, a politics of protest on behalf of the marginalised and powerless may be of value, but Lyotard's seems too extreme in practical terms, even though the theoretical underpinnings are of considerable interest.

As to the postmodern outlook in general, it is open to a number of criticisms. One is that there is far too much continuity and overlap with modernity to make postmodernity a genuinely new age; this is a criticism in which Lyotard himself saw some force. Postmodern accounts of modernity are also far too restrictive: to define modernity in terms of the Enlightenment Project is to caricature modernity. Furthermore, postmodernism's relativism and rejection of notions of universal truth undermine its own claims. As to the rejection of metanarratives and grand theory, the whole postmodern account - including Lyotard's contributions - is in itself a metanarrative, and a theory that is at least as grand as any it rejects.

Nevertheless, postmodern theory - and Lyotard's version of it - is interesting and suggestive, challenging and significant.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Jean-François Lyotard *The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge* (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1984).
- Jean-François Lyotard *Political Writings*, ed. B. Readings and K. P. Geiman (London: UCL Press, 1993).

## *Secondary sources*

- Lyon, D. : *Postmodernity* (2nd edn; Buckingham: Open University Press, 1999).
- Sim, S. : *The Routledge Companion to Postmodernism* (London: Routledge, 2001).
- White, S. K. : *Political Theory and Postmodernism* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
- Williams, J. : *Lyotard: Towards a Postmodern Philosophy* (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998).