## **Hannah Arendt (1906-75)**

Hannah Arendt was born into a middle-class Jewish family in Hanover in 1906. She was a brilliant student who studied philosophy under two major existentialist thinkers: Karl Jaspers and Martin Heidegger. With the rise of the Nazis, she was obliged to flee Germany, eventually reaching the USA in 1941, where she became an American citizen. For a number of years Arendt worked for Jewish organisations and in publishing, before gaining her first academic post in Chicago in 1963. Thereafter she held a number of distinguished posts in American universities until her death in 1975.

Although influenced by her existentialist mentors, this was a matter of method rather than content. It gave Arendt an approach to politics very different from the prevailing traditions of political thought. She sought to understand the nature of political experience 'from the inside' rather than construct an external 'objective' theory of how it all works. She strove to be systematic without producing a system. It made her a very individual political thinker, with a distinctive understanding of the nature of politics. This she applied to her particular themes of the nature and origins of totalitarianism and the basis of the optimum form of politics based on a proper understanding of authentic political experience.

Arendt's first major work was Hannah Arendt *The Origins of Totalitarianism* (1951), in which she was the first theorist to show the phenomenon of totalitarianism to be something quite new and peculiar to the twentieth century. Her account is a vivid reconstruction of the totalitarian experience and was much criticised for this imaginative element and its deployment of her wide understanding of literature and culture as well as her subsuming of Nazism and communism within the same category. She saw totalitarianism's essence in terms of the bureaucratisation of terror in the enforcement of an ideology. It was a controversial analysis at the time and remains so. A later book, Hannah Arendt *Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil* (1965), was equally controversial in that it portrayed Eichmann more as an unimaginative bureaucrat than a monster.

These accounts see totalitarianism as exhibiting what Arendt saw as a general weakness in modern political thinking. Existentialism in general sees Western philosophy, beginning with Plato, as at fault in its understanding of human existence. It attempts to view human existence objectively, from 'outside', in the same way we view nature. In nature we see vast complexity and dazzling variety, but through metaphysics and science we perceive an underlying order and clarity and system. The next step, a mistaken step, is to extend the analysis to humanity, indeed to extend the order of nature to human affairs and try to shape those affairs accordingly: that is, to identify the underlying aspect of nature that is 'human nature' and then shape society to fit that nature. Totalitarianism is an extreme version of this.

What then is the basis of a true understanding of political life? Arendt sets out her ideas in The Human Condition (1958), in which she offers an analysis of human activities. There are theoretical and practical activities, with politics coming under the category of the practical. Practical activity comes in a hierarchy of three broad forms: labour, work and action. What Arendt calls 'labour' is at the bottom, and includes everything to do with maintaining our physical well-being on a day-to-day basis, such as preparing food and keeping warm and earning a living. 'Work' is the making of things on a more permanent basis: the creative work of the craftsman and artist, the building of institutions, and so on.

Finally, at the top of the hierarchy is 'action', by which is meant the human capacity to publicly intervene in the world and initiate something new or change the way we do things, however slightly, through word or deed. In this way individuals participate in the public life of the community and more fully realise themselves. The highest form of this participation, and the highest form of action, is politics. The reason that Arendt grants this high status to politics is that she sees it as creating the framework that gives meaning and purpose to all the rest. However, the mistake of most theorists is, in Arendt's terms, to treat politics as a form of work. That is, in terms of designing and creating permanent structures that supposedly 'fit' human nature. Arendt sees politics in terms of a way of life by which citizens actively participate in the public affairs of the community and see that participation in communal discussion and action as a vital part of daily life. She believes that it is only in a true political community of this kind that we have genuine freedom and autonomy and we can completely realise ourselves as human beings.

Arendt's conception has some affinities with Ancient Greek political thought and practice, especially Greek citizens participating in the affairs of the city-state. These could not be recreated in the modern world. However, Arendt has another Classical model in mind, that of Classical Republicanism. This was a tradition of Western political thought that drew its inspiration more from Republican Rome, which stressed unity and patriotism and saw the 'public space' as an arena of competition to serve the public good. This tradition of thought was revived in the Renaissance and influenced thinkers like Machiavelli, Harrington and the American and French Revolutionaries, though it rather died out in the nineteenth century. Arendt believes that we need to create a fuller sense of the political life as embodied in this tradition, to be aware of its fragility and to nurture it in the future.

Arendt's thought has been criticised on a number of grounds. Not all human activities fit into her labour-work-action categories, which in any case overlap with each other. She is also ambiguous on whether politics is ideally seen as an arena of competition or of co-operation. Arendt founded no school of political theory, nor has any genuine followers, but she is nevertheless greatly admired as a political thinker for her originality and insight.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Hannah Arendt *The Human Condition* (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1958).
- Hannah Arendt *Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil* (New York: The Viking Press, 1963).
- Hannah Arendt *The Origins of Totalitarianism* (3rd edn; London: George Allen & Unwin, 1966).

## *Secondary sources*

- Canovan, M. : *The Political Thought of Hannah Arendt* (London: J.M. Dent, 1974).
- Canovan, M. : *Hannah Arendt: A Reinterpretation of Her Thought* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
- Parekh, B. : *Hannah Arendt and the Search for a New Political Philosophy* (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1981).

 Villa, D. : *The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).