## **Simone de Beauvoir (1908-86) and Second Wave Feminism**

Simone de Beauvoir was born in 1908 in Paris into a comfortable bourgeois family. She was educated at the Sorbonne in Paris, where the philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, her lifelong intellectual companion, was a fellow student. Beauvoir taught philosophy during the 1930s at schools in Marseilles, Rouen and Paris, and from the 1940s began to publish - novels, essays, philosophy, articles, autobiography - becoming an internationally famous writer, celebrated as a thinker and feminist. She died in 1986, and was buried next to Jean-Paul Sartre in Paris's Montparnasse Cemetery.

Beauvoir's major feminist work is *The Second Sex*, a wide-ranging, existential analysis of women's situation that is possibly the most influential feminist text of the twentieth century. It was first published in France in 1949 in two volumes, under the title *Le Deuxième Sexe*, and was an immediate publishing success, not least because of its open treatment of women's sexuality. A shorter version in English appeared subsequently, in time to influence the 1960s women's movements in America and Britain.

When Simone de Beauvoir wrote *The Second Sex* in the late 1940s, much had been achieved politically by European and American feminists, and many of the legal disabilities of the past had been overcome. Women in many countries, for example, could vote and own property, and had access to higher education and to the professions. After two world wars, women also had more freedom socially and sexually. However, Beauvoir argued that despite all these gains women were not emancipated from men and remained in a subservient relationship. In *The Second Sex* she focused on women's situation, using a mix of history, anthropology, myth, ethnography, biology, literature and sociology to examine why women were effectively the inferior, the second sex: submissive, uncreative and unfree.

Philosophically, Beauvoir adopted an existentialist perspective in *The Second Sex*. Basic to her argument was the existential ethical concept that freedom is the most desirable of human conditions, particularly the freedom to choose. She adapted the existential categories developed by Sartre in Simone de Beauvoir *Being and Nothingness* (1943), in particular the notions of Subject and Object or Self and Other. These categories ultimately derive from the philosophy of Hegel, which sees the purpose of existence, for the individual and for humanity, as the achievement of self-understanding. Central to this process is defining and understanding oneself in terms of the 'other', or that which is not the self, that which is secondary, inessential and inferior. Modern and most historical societies, Beauvoir argued, objectified woman as Other and man as Self. Humanity had been defined as male and the human condition as masculine, with woman defined always in relation to man. The source of woman's subservience and enslavement, she suggested, lay in woman's 'otherness' in relation to man. Only man had the freedom to choose, to set himself up as essential and Subject, while woman as a consequence became inessential and Object.

*The Second Sex* is a massive text, dealing with a multitude of topics. It explores biological, psychoanalytic and Marxist explanations of women's destiny; reviews the history of relations between the sexes from primitive forms of society to modern times; and looks at the sexuality of women and its relationship with women's 'otherness'. Beauvoir also looks at myths relating to woman, particularly those relating to motherhood; considers the representation of women in male authors' novels; and reviews the evolution of contemporary women's situation from formative years to woman as wife and mother. The special situation of lesbians, independent women and career women is considered, and Beauvoir analyses at length the role of

prostitutes, a role she saw as one where women might, in certain circumstances, use 'otherness' to exploit men.

In analysing why women were Other, Beauvoir rejected explanations of women's subordination offered by theories of biological determinism. Biologically, because women have a reproductive and rearing role, Beauvoir conceded it is difficult for women to be free. But she argued that a woman need not be defined by her womb; it was possible for a woman to have a life beyond her reproductive function. Freud and psychoanalytical theories also did not provide satisfactory explanations of women's 'otherness'. Women's physiology and lack of a penis did not mean that women were inferior or envious of men, or suffered from a castration complex. The 'prestige of the penis', Beauvoir argued, was an aspect of power relations and the 'sovereignty of the father'. Beauvoir was also sceptical of the Marxist view that in a capitalist society everything, including women's oppression, derived from economic relations and the hegemony of the ruling class, and that with the advent of socialism the subordinate position of women would be transformed. Despite being a firm socialist, she saw women's situation not as a consequence of private property and capitalism, but due to male dominance over the female Other.

Central to *The Second Sex* was an examination of women's situation as wives and mothers. Women did not dispute male sovereignty in marriage because of their economic dependency and their reproductive function. Though Beauvoir recognised that the traditional form of marriage was in a period of transition, she maintained that within the institution of marriage women remained subordinate, secondary and parasitic, and that equality in marriage would remain an illusion as long as men retained economic responsibility. Beauvoir felt that women of talent were lost to humanity because they were engulfed in the repetitive routines of housework. She had a particular horror of cleaning, and said that 'few tasks are more like the torture of Sisyphus' than housework.

Motherhood, Beauvoir appreciated, might be for many women a supreme and happy stage in their life history, and in maternity women might be said to fulfil their destiny, but she maintained all women did not enjoy maternity and that pregnancy and motherhood were variously experienced. Some women enjoyed pregnancy, but for others the experience was one of nausea, discomfort or painful trauma. Beauvoir was sceptical of the sacred character of motherhood, and pointed out that it was only married mothers that were glorified, unwed mothers were usually considered disreputable. She recognised that some women found their whole existence justified in fecundity, but Beauvoir considered the notion that having babies made women into full, free human beings to be illusory. She thought that good mother love was a conscious attitude, a moral free choice, and not an instinct, and that there was such a thing as a bad mother. A mother's attitude depended on her total situation, and though circumstances had to be unfavourable not to be enriched by a child, Beauvoir suggested perils in motherhood, such as the mother as slave to the child and as left behind as the child transcends mother love. Beauvoir thought that to be a good mother a woman had to be well balanced, with interests and a life beyond child-rearing. She thought women who undertook paid work outside the home might be the best mothers.

Beauvoir saw the difficulties for women of reconciling work and maternity, and the 'slave labour' nature of women's work outside the home. She saw clearly that child-care outside the home was needed, and she had a very robust attitude for a French woman of her time towards contraception and abortion, and their role in permitting women to have the freedom to choose maternity or not. She advocated contraception, legal abortion, easy divorce and, indeed,

artificial insemination, so that women might maximise their freedoms and choices. Paid employment outside the home, provided it was not exploitative, was a vital means to women's independence. But such things in themselves would not be enough to change women's situation. Attitudes and understanding must also change.

Beauvoir saw women's 'femininity' as supporting male sovereignty and insisted that there was no ready-made essence of femininity - it was a myth. Civilisation, not biology, had constructed the feminine. *The Second Sex* is not an assault on masculinity, but it can be said to be about femininity as a social construct, and a major theme is women's submission in their formative years to the feminine gender role, and the limitations and burdens of that role within the male-dominated power structures of the family. For Beauvoir, femininity was artificially shaped by custom and fashion, and imposed from without. She described how women learned to assume the female gender, and summarised her view in what is probably her most famous and widely quoted sentence: 'One is not born but rather becomes a woman' (The Second Sex, p.295).

Beauvoir concluded that there was no eternal hostility, no battle of the sexes between man and woman. Sexuality was not destiny, a woman's ovaries did not 'condemn her to live her life for ever on her knees' (p.736). There was no eternal feminine, there was no eternal masculine. 'New' woman needed an accompanying infrastructure of moral, social, cultural and attitude changes, as well as economic opportunity. Men and women should recognise each other as equals. 'New' woman needed equilibrium, a free exchange between sexes. They should be in perfect equality. Though she thought a range of relations was possible between men and women, Beauvoir's ideal was the balanced couple; a couple not living as a closed cell, but each integrated individually into society. Such a couple would display 'equality in difference, and difference in equality' (p.740) by mutually recognising each other as Subject. Thus, the slavery of half the human race would be abolished and the human couple would find its true form.

A new women's movement - sometimes called 'second wave feminism' or 'women's liberation' - began to develop during the 1960s, then grew explosively from the end of the decade. The major texts of the period, such as Betty Friedan's Simone de Beauvoir *The Feminine Mystique* (1963), Kate Millet's Simone de Beauvoir *Sexual Politics* (1970), Germaine Greer's Simone de Beauvoir *The Female Eunuch* (1970) and Shulamith Firestone's Simone de Beauvoir *The Dialectic of Sex* (1970), all owe a good deal to *The Second Sex*, in which Beauvoir anticipated many of their themes.

Since this initial phase, feminism has fragmented into a multitude of forms with many varieties - liberal, liberal socialist and radical feminism; psychoanalytical feminism; female supremacism; New Right feminism; eco- and anarcho-feminism; post-structuralist feminism and post-feminism, among others - and inevitably Beauvoir has been criticised by some. She has been accused of failing to celebrate women's nurturing and caring role, and of having little sympathy with women's reproductive function. It is said that she wanted women to be more like men. But despite such criticisms *The Second Sex* is widely recognised as the seminal text of the women's movement of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary source*

Simone de Beauvoir *The Second Sex*, ed. H. M. Parshley (London: Vintage, 1997).

## *Secondary sources*

- Bryson, V. : *Feminist Political Theory: An Introduction* (Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1992).
- Crosland, M. : *Simone de Beauvoir: The Woman and her Work* (London: Heinemann, 1992).
- Gamble, S. : *The Routledge Companion to Feminism and Postfeminism* (London and New York: Routledge, 2001).
- Okley, J. : *Simone de Beauvoir: A Re-Reading* (London: Virago, 1986).
- Tong, R. : *Feminist Thought: A Comprehensive Introduction* (London and New York: Routledge, 1992).