# **Benito Mussolini (1883-1945) and Fascism**

The intellectual standard of fascist thinking is generally agreed to be poor and it is therefore not surprising that fascism produced no outstanding thinker. Nevertheless, it is beyond question that fascism represented something new and quite distinctive in political thinking, that it had a major impact on the politics of the twentieth century, and that Benito Mussolini was the key figure in its initial development. Hitler's national socialism, the major alternative form of fascism, retains the essentials of Mussolini's fascism and supplements them with an elaborate racial theory.

Mussolini was born in 1883, the son of a blacksmith with fierce socialist views and a schoolteacher mother. After an unruly childhood and youth, he had difficulty settling down, doing various jobs including teaching. He was also a Marxist agitator and journalist advocating violent socialist action, although his Marxism was unorthodox in that he believed in the importance of will rather than economics (see Karl Marx). But he became disillusioned by the in-fighting among various socialists and communists at a time when Italy was in chaos and plainly in need of strong leadership. Mussolini gravitated towards a small but vociferous and influential group of extreme nationalists, who were united in advocating Italy's entry into World War I, believing that through war the nation could be purified and regenerated. They all tended to see politics in terms of a heroic elite, contemptuous of democracy and prepared to use force, that would create a new and dynamic Italy. The country was seen as divided and poor, with a weak and corrupt government, yet its glorious past meant that Italy ought to be a Great Power.

Italy did not do well in the war and there was general disappointment at Italian gains. Mussolini, after serving briefly in the army, was among those who blamed the government and demanded an end to the decadent liberalism it represented and the creation of a new, strong, united Italy. World War I confirmed for him that national feeling was a far more powerful political force than social class, a force capable of inspiring sacrifice and total commitment as an antidote to the selfish individualism of decadent liberalism. He built a fascist paramilitary organisation, the Blackshirts, and his followers fought elections, using violence and intimidation. Finally, Mussolini himself seized power after an audacious march on Rome in 1922 (which could easily have been frustrated had his enemies worked together). Opposition was then ruthlessly suppressed and Mussolini ruled Italy for the next twenty-one years.

Mussolini's ambition was to build Italy into a major world power. This meant the creation of a powerful economy as the basis for imperial expansion and European war. An alliance with Hitler, setting up the 'Rome-Berlin Axis' in 1936, seemed initially successful but eventually led to the Allied invasion of Italy and the intervention of a large German army to repel it. Mussolini was dismissed by the king and arrested in July 1943, but was rescued by German paratroops and set up as national leader in Northern Italy, which the Germans still controlled. As the Allies advanced he was seized by anti-fascist partisans and murdered in 1945.

Mussolini was not a consistent theorist, but rather adapted ideas as he went along, according to need. Nevertheless, influenced by extreme nationalists of various kinds, both left and right, and by thinkers such as Nietzsche, Sorel and the Italian theorist of elites, Vifredo Pareto, Mussolini was able to construct a fairly consistent body of belief based upon revolutionary nationalism expressed through the authoritarian state. He sought a rebirth of Italy, a

revolutionary transformation of the country into a strong, united and imperialistic state, controlling all aspects of Italian life. All policies and all propaganda were directed to this end.

The term 'fascism' comes from the Italian *fascio* meaning 'bundle' or 'bound together', which had implications in Italian politics of an insurrectionary brotherhood and had been used by some ultranationalists before 1914. It also comes from the same Latin root as *fasces*, which was the bundle of rods with axe-head carried before the Consuls in Ancient Rome as a symbol of state authority: the bundle represented the unity of the people under the state, which was represented by the axe. Mussolini coined the term 'fascism' and used the *fasces* as a symbol of his regime. Such Roman symbolism was important to Mussolini, the implication being that he was recreating the greatness of Ancient Rome.

On the other hand, Italian fascism was not an especially backward-looking movement (much less so than Hitler's national socialism) and indeed prided itself upon its modernity. It looked above all to the future and to the creation of a new kind of society dominated by a new kind of human being, the 'new man' (fascism is resolutely sexist): young, virile, dynamic, creative, selflessly devoted to the nation and willing to sacrifice himself for its sake. Some of Mussolini's earliest supporters were a group of artists who styled themselves 'Futurists', and who called for the destruction of existing art and culture in order to make way for the new. A later supporter was Gabriele d'Annunzio who, in 1919, led the seizure of the disputed Croatian city of Fiume, which he ruled for fifteen months. He saw himself as a Nietzschean superman, a new man, both poet and man of action, and he pioneered a number of the ideas and methods that Mussolini adopted.

Italian fascist theory is to be found in the writings and speeches of Mussolini and his followers, the most notable of whom was Giovanni Gentile (1875-1944). Gentile was a distinguished philosopher who, after the seizure of power, became convinced that Mussolini was the embodiment of Italy's destiny. Gentile acted briefly as Mussolini's Minister of Education and subsequently as the Fascist Party's chief theorist. He is responsible for a strong Hegelian element in fascist thought. Together, Mussolini and Gentile wrote the best-known epitome of Italian fascist thinking, 'Fascism: Doctrines and Institutions', in the *Encyclopædia Italiano* of 1932.

Fascists glorify the state as representing the unified people, and absolute unity is the ideal. All division and diversity is anathema. Hence fascism is totally opposed to liberal democracy with its divisions of opinion, right of dissent, tolerance, pluralism and party conflict; above all, it rejects liberalism's emphasis on individualism. At the same time, the fascist system is claimed to be superior to liberal democracy and capitalism in that it caters for all groups in society and not just those to whom the system gives an advantage. Equally, fascism rejects socialism's egalitarianism and its insistence on the reality of class division and the necessity of class conflict. Both Hitler and Mussolini talked of their systems as a 'middle way' between liberalism and socialism, while transcending both.

Fascism aspires to total unity with discipline imposed and inspired from above. The individual must be subordinated to and, if necessary, sacrificed for the sake of the state. People are therefore expendable, for value lies not in the individual but only in the unified whole. This is fully understood by the great leader, to whose will the masses must be moulded.

Fascism is consciously and explicitly totalitarian, with no organisation capable of resisting the state allowed to exist. The state has complete control of the media and education, and imposes ideological uniformity. The term 'totalitarian' was coined in Italy to describe Mussolini's regime, and he adopted it and used it with pride (though Hitler ignored the word). In 1932 Mussolini wrote: *The keystone of Fascist doctrine is the conception of the state, of its essence, of its tasks, of its ends. For Fascism the state is an absolute before which individuals and groups are relative. Individuals and groups are 'thinkable' in so far as they are within the state . . . When one says Fascism one says the state. The Fascist conception of the state is all-embracing; outside it no human or spiritual values can exist, much less have value. Thus understood, Fascism is totalitarian, and the Fascist state - a synthesis and a unit inclusive of all values - interprets, develops and potentiates the whole life of a people . . . This is a century of authority, a century tending to the 'right', a Fascist century.*

*('Fascism: Doctrines and Institutions' in Encyclopædia Italiano, 1932; quoted in Lyttleton, p.39)* 

Both Hitler and Mussolini conceived of the state as an organism and its organisation as ideally corporatist. Mussolini wrote: *Every interest working with the precision and harmony of the human body. Every interest and every individual working is subordinated to the overriding purposes of the nation.*

In Italy this meant the different aspects of the economy were represented by corporations of workers and employers (in fact dominated by fascists) who planned everything in cooperation with the state. The system is known as 'corporatism'. Mussolini borrowed the idea from the syndicalists, but instead of just workers there would be capitalists as well. In practice the workers were disciplined while the capitalists could exploit them as they wished so long as they did what the national plan required. The aim was to build up the Italian economy and make it strong and independent, although in fact it ended up corrupt and inefficient. Economic self-sufficiency was one of the preoccupations of the aggressive nationalism of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century (as distinct from the liberal belief in free trade).

Fascists also glorify leadership. Mussolini called himself 'il Duce' and Hitler 'der Führer', both meaning 'the Leader'. The Leader is the symbol of his people and their struggle. Both Mussolini's *Autobiography* and Hitler's *Mein Kampf* (meaning 'my struggle') were romanticised and mythologised versions of their authors' lives with which the people were supposed to identify and from which gain inspiration. It is the great leader alone who can understand and articulate the 'true' will of the people. The great leader has the right to hold absolute authority over his people and demand their absolute obedience; it is what Hitler called the 'leadership principle' or *Führerprinzip*. This was absolute dictatorship, but because the leader was supposed to fully express the people's will, the fascists also claimed it to be the purest democracy.

The leader is the best of his people and has proved this by having struggled to the top. This idea comes from the social Darwinism that both Mussolini and Hitler embraced. Action, struggle and violence are natural and good, hence the fascist glorification of war. Mussolini wrote: *Fascists above all do not believe in the possibility or utility of universal peace. It therefore rejects the pacifism that masks surrender and cowardice. War alone brings all human energies to their highest tension and sets a seal of nobility on the people who have the virtue to face it . . . For Fascism the tendency to empire, that is to say the expansion of* 

*nations, is a manifestation of vitality, its contrary is a sign of decadence. People who rise, or suddenly flourish again are imperialistic; peoples who die are peoples who abdicate.*

# *('Fascism: Doctrines and Institutions' in Encyclopædia Italiano, 1932; quoted in Lyttleton, p.56)*

Fascist values reach their highest expression in war. It is in war that the nation is most united, disciplined and possessed of a sense of purpose and national pride. War is thought to 'purify' and strengthen the people; the individual is submerged in the mass, while the opportunity is presented for individual courage and self-sacrifice for the good of the whole. In war the state is supreme and leadership responds to its greatest challenge. The people forget their difficulties and conflicts and respond to leadership with a heightened sense of national emotion and participation. Not surprisingly, fascist regimes tended to be highly militaristic.

Fascist dictators have not been remote autocrats, but demagogues appealing directly to the mass of the people. They have sought to arouse mass passion and maintain a heightened emotion of mass solidarity against those identified as enemies within and without. Control and use of the mass media (especially radio and film, but also newspapers) is a crucial element in fascism, and helps to make it a peculiarly twentieth-century phenomenon. Emotional rhetoric, especially the rhetoric of hate, played a central part, and Mussolini and Hitler were both masters of swaying mass audiences. Great emphasis was put on symbolism and ritual, with flags, uniforms, insignia, rallies and parades to excite and unify the people with a common emotion. Mass adulation of the leader was generated and sustained, in a way quite different from mere fear of a ruthless dictator. Both Mussolini and Hitler were immensely popular when at the height of their power.

Fascist ideas and methods tend to be intellectually crude; indeed, fascists despise intellectuals and sophisticated theory. Instead, they stress instinct, emotion, will and above all action. There is, therefore, a strong irrationalist element in fascism: emotion and will are the basis for action, rather than reason (Mussolini exhorted his followers to 'think with your blood'). In consequence, fascism is widely understood as a relapse into barbarism, a return to the primitive and a denial of the basic values of civilisation. On the other hand, fascism is not as incoherent as is sometimes claimed and is more than merely an *ad hoc* jumble of ideas thrown together by political opportunists.

At the height of its influence, in the years between the two world wars, there were fascist or quasi-fascist movements in most European countries, and even beyond (most notably in Argentina). This included Britain, where the British Union of Fascists, led by Sir Oswald Mosley, caused a stir but had no electoral success. The crushing defeat of the Axis Powers in World War II discredited fascism as a serious political movement. Since 1945 pure fascism has been mainly associated with racist groups on the political fringe. Only Italy maintained a small non-racist fascist party based in the south. In the 1990s it embraced democracy and achieved a degree of respectability as a partner in the right-of-centre coalitions of Silvio Berlusconi. Elsewhere, right-wing parties with a tinge of racism have had periods of electoral success in France and Germany, and more recently in Austria, Holland and other European countries. But these parties are a long way from the fascism of Hitler or Mussolini.

### *Further reading*

#### *Primary sources*

- Benito Mussolini Lyttleton, A. (ed.) : *Italian Fascisms: Pareto to Gentile* (London: Jonathan Cape, 1973).
- Benito Mussolini Griffin, R. (ed.) : *Fascism* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).

## *Secondary sources*

- Bosworth, R. J. B. : *The Italian Dictatorship: Problems and Perspectives of Mussolini and Fascism* (London: Arnold, 1998).
- Bosworth, R. J. B. : *Mussolini* (London: Arnold, 2002).
- Griffin, R. : *The Nature of Fascism* (London: Routledge, 1991).
- Nolte, E. : *The Three Faces of Fascism* (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1965).
- Ridley, J. : *Mussolini* (London: Constable, 1997).