# **St Augustine of Hippo (354-430)**

Augustine was born at Thagaste (modern Suk Ahras, in Algeria). His mother was a Christian, but he did not respond well to her efforts to educate him in the faith. As a young man he admired Cicero and Plotinus, and flirted with Manichaeism and Scepticism. His mature intellectual position may be described as Christian Neoplatonism. Having in 384 accepted a position at Milan as a teacher of rhetoric, he came under the influence of prominent Christians in that city. After a long mental struggle, recounted in detail in his *Confessions*, he was baptised by St Ambrose on Holy Saturday, 387. He was ordained priest in 391, and in 396 became Bishop of Hippo (the modern Algerian town of Annaba), where he remained until his death. Augustine's literary output was immense, but he is not a political 'theorist' in the ordinary sense. The political doctrines with which he is associated emerged largely as byproducts of the controversies in which he engaged as a Christian bishop and intellectual. The belief that his huge work called *The City of God* is the repository of a completed political philosophy, though common, is false. His political thought needs to be assembled from a range of literature - letters, sermons, scriptural commentaries, polemical works, doctrinal treatises - produced during a span of more than thirty years. A brief summary of it inevitably makes Augustine look more systematic than he is.

To the extent that summary is possible, it must begin with Augustine's doctrines of original sin, grace and predestination. Adam and Eve were created with free will. In eating the forbidden fruit they sinned precisely because they *chose* to disobey God's command. In doing so, they disrupted the natural order of justice: they placed love of self before love of God. They were punished by expulsion from Eden and by the penalties of death and pain. But their sin has had grave consequences for all their offspring also. Each subsequent member of the human race is a vessel made from the same lump of clay, and the impurities introduced into that lump are in us too. Each of us is born guilty of the original sin. Moreover, we have inherited from our first parents a defective will. We are born incapable of acting in any way that is not actuated by avarice, pride and self-love. All that is left of our free will is the freedom to choose which of the many available sins actually to commit. Considered simply as such, we come into this world deserving only damnation. Augustine does not try to deal with the obvious difficulties that this account of the human condition involves. His warrant for it is Holy Scripture, or at any rate his interpretation of Holy Scripture, and the testimony of scripture is, he thinks, beyond question.

Because God is omniscient, He knew from all eternity that Adam would sin, and in His mercy He resolved to rescue a few, but only a few, members of the human race from the wreck. He does this by bestowing upon them the grace that enables them truly to place love of God before love of self, and so to act from motives other than greed, pride and lust. This grace cannot be earned or deserved. It is a free gift of God, bestowed upon the predestined few by His own unmotived choice. These predestined ones, the Elect, are members of the *civitas Dei*, the City of God. The rest of mankind are members of the Earthly City, the *civitas terrena*. They are the unchosen, the reprobate, doomed to damnation without hope of reprieve. We do not know why God has predestined some and not others, or some rather than all, or a few rather than many, but we are not entitled to question His judgement. The fact that God damns the majority of mankind shows His justice; the fact that he saves a few shows His mercy.

Augustine's medieval admirers tended to regard the City of God as a metaphor for the institutional Church, and the Earthly City as symbolising the power of kings and emperors. It is important to understand that this is not what Augustine means. The City of God is not in a particular place or time. It consists partly of the Elect who are alive on earth, but it consists also of the souls of the Elect who have died and gone to heaven, and of those angels who remained loyal to God after Satan's rebellion. It is the *communio sanctorum*, the whole community of those who love God. Similarly, the Earthly City is the community of those united by 'love of self extending even to contempt of God' (*De civitate Dei* 14:28). It includes those of the reprobate who are currently alive, the souls of the reprobate who have died and now suffer in hell, and the demons or fallen angels.

Everyone is a member of one or other of the Cities, depending on how God has predestined them. On earth, however, the two cities are for the time being mingled together. Their members share the same resources and undergo the same tribulations. No one can tell by any outward sign who belongs to which, and all earthly communities, including the Church, contain members of both. The two cities will remain thus mingled until the Final Judgment, when Christ will separate the saved from the damned and each contingent will receive 'the end to which there is no end' (*De civitate Dei* 18:54).

What, then, of politics? Plato and Aristotle had held that political life is natural to man. They considered the life of the *polis*, the city-state, to be peculiarly appropriate to human nature as rational, deliberative and co-operative. But Augustine departs from this principle fundamentally. When God created man, He gave him dominion over the beasts, but not over others of his own kind. Human beings were intended to live together in harmony and equality under a natural law having a single precept: do not do to others what you would not want to have done to you. But the entry of sin into the world corrupted human nature in such a way as to make spontaneous social co-operation impossible. The avarice and self-love that distinguish the behaviour of fallen man manifest themselves above all in what Augustine calls *libido dominandi*: the desire to rule and control. It is this human drive that has brought the state into existence. The state is the institutionalisation of the human lust for dominion.

But the state has positive functions also. If it were not for its controlling and limiting influence, men would destroy one another in their struggle to master each other and control the earth's resources. To the extent that it prevents this by holding human destructiveness in check, the state is a remedy for the material consequences of sin as well as being one of those consequences. Inevitably, it will achieve its purposes largely by terror and pain. Human power, to Augustine's mind, is embodied in the hangman and the torturer. Also, its legal and judicial mechanisms are all too fallible. Often the innocent are condemned and the guilty go free. But here again the state has a divinely intended purpose. The harshness and injustice associated with it serve to punish the wicked for their sins and test and refine the righteous on their earthly pilgrimage. As is His wont, God uses evil to bring forth good.

For Augustine, then, the state is to be understood under three aspects. It is a result of sin, a means of limiting the material damage done by sin, and a disciplinary order. Augustine's opinion of political activity as such is not high. At *De civitate Dei* 4:4 he relates with approval the anecdote (derived from Cicero) of the pirate arrested and brought before Alexander the Great. 'How dare you infest the sea?' the emperor demands. 'I do exactly the same as you,' retorts the pirate, 'but I have only one ship, and you have a navy.' In his lengthy critique of Cicero at *De civitate Dei* 2:21 and 19:21, Augustine argues that no earthly state can embody *vera iustitia*, true justice. Justice, according to the classical definition, consists in rendering to each their due. But the population of all earthly states, even those that are notionally Christian, will contain a majority of individuals who belong to the Earthly City

and who therefore withhold from the true God the worship that is His due. Clearly, then, no such state can be just collectively, even if some of its individual members are just. The state is not a moral community. It has no bearing on our inner lives. The earthly justice which it can enforce is only a pale copy of *vera iustitia*. Earthly justice consists in suppressing strife and enforcing conformity to an external order so that the saved and the damned can live some kind of common life. True justice, by contrast, is a condition from which strife is entirely absent. It is the condition under which those live who are united in fellowship by the love of God. But true justice will only prevail at the end of history, when the City of God, finally divested of all impure associations, enters into its inheritance of bliss.

Not even Christian states, then, can embody *vera iustitia*. Nonetheless, they can achieve a better semblance of justice than non-Christian states can, for two reasons. First, Christian rulers can and should live in such a way as to set a good example to their subjects. Second, Christian rulers should be ready to place their power at the Church's disposal, to defend it against its enemies and further its work. It is important to be clear, however, that Augustine does not say or imply that rulers as such are formally subordinate to the Church or subject to its command. His point is simply that all men, no matter who they are, should serve God in whatever capacity they happen to find themselves. Christian princes should take the opportunities that their office affords to assist the Church's work: as should Christian shoemakers, carpenters or soldiers. By the eleventh century, this kind of reasoning had burgeoned into the claim that the Church, or the pope, can command and depose emperors. Augustine himself certainly has nothing like this in mind.

Augustine's understanding of the duties of Christian princes, particularly in regard to religious persecution, evolved largely during the controversy with the schismatic Donatist church in North Africa in which he was involved from *c.*391 to 417. Originally, he thought that religious differences should be dealt with only by reason and argument. After *c.*400, he became increasingly convinced that the Church is justified in calling upon the secular authorities to enact and enforce laws against heretics and schismatics: partly, indeed, to protect it against acts of violence directed against Catholics and their property, but also to maintain the unity and doctrinal integrity of the Church. His emphasis on this latter aspect becomes increasingly prominent after 406. In this year, he first says outright that he would support a policy of coercion *even if I were opposing men who were only involved in the darkness of error and who had not dared to assault anyone with insane violence.*

## *(Epistulae 89:2)*

His fullest justifications of religious persecution occur in long letters written in 408 and 417. He does not, of course, believe that genuine changes of heart can be effected by coercion, but he did come to think - on the basis, as he tells us, of his own experience and that of colleagues - that stern measures and the fear of them can induce those subject to them to reexamine their beliefs for themselves. In this secondary sense, persecution can bring benefit to those who undergo it. Those brought forcibly into contact with teachers of the truth may thereby come to see the truth; coercion by the Catholic Church may counteract the fear of coercion by one's fellow heretics; coercion can break the bonds of habit and lethargy. Characteristically, Augustine holds that coercion of those outside the Church is, when carried out with the correct intentionality, an act of love. No love can be greater than Christ's; yet when he wished to summon St Paul into His service, He first struck him blind. In Christ's parable of the Great Supper, when the servants are sent out to hunt for guests, their master's

instruction to them is significant: 'Go out into the highways and hedges and compel them to come in.'

Augustine does not, strictly speaking, offer a theory of political obligation. On the whole, the question is not an issue for him. He believes that most people's relationship with the state is explicable simply in terms of prudence or self-interest. Most citizens obey the state not from any sense of duty, but either out of fear of what would happen to them otherwise, or in order to secure the rewards - riches, office, glory - that come to those who serve their country well. In their case, matters of obligation do not really arise. Christians, on the other hand, must recognise a genuine obligation to obey the state and uphold the institutions of society, but this obligation is not distinctively political. It is our duty to submit to government not because government as such has any moral claim on us, but because it is God's will that we should submit. The state is the outcome of sin, but its existence and operation are in accordance with God's plan for the world. He uses even flawed institutions to bring forth at least a tolerable degree of peace and order. The Christian recognises this, and acts accordingly. No earthly ruler has any cause to complain about the standards of citizenship enjoined by the Christian faith.

Augustine recognises the traditional distinction between political and despotic rule, but he accords no particular significance to it in terms of its bearing on our duty as subjects. No matter how wicked or oppressive our ruler, rebellion or active resistance cannot be justified. If he requires of us something that positively contravenes the will of God, our proper course is passive resistance. We should politely decline to comply and willingly suffer the consequences; Augustine never suggests more than this. He is clear that all political power even the power of wicked emperors like Nero - comes from God. Subjects cannot remove what they have not conferred. Augustine is also clear that bad rulers are our just punishment. If the emperor harms us or persecutes us, he does not cease to be our rightful ruler. If he commands us to worship false gods, we must decline to obey not because we do not acknowledge his authority, but because we are all, including the emperor, bound to acknowledge an authority higher than his. Christians' political behaviour in both giving and withholding obedience is governed by no principle other than their allegiance to God. Obedience and refusal both arise out of an obligation that is not political, but religious.

## *Further reading*

#### *Primary sources*

- St Augustine of Hippo *The City of God Against the Pagans*, ed. R. W. Dyson (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
- St Augustine of Hippo *Political Writings*, ed. E. M. Atkins and R. J. Dodaro (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).

#### *Secondary sources*

- Brown, P. : *Augustine of Hippo: A Biography* (London: Faber & Faber, 1967).
- Deane, H. A. : *The Social and Political Ideas of St Augustine of Hippo* (New York: Columbia University Press, 1963).
- Dyson, R. W. : *The Pilgrim City* (Woodbridge: Boydell Press, 2001).
- Markus, R. A. : *Saeculum: History and Society in the Theology of St Augustine* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970).