# **Marcus Garvey (1887-1940) and Black Emancipation**

For almost a century after the formal abolition of slavery African Americans were segregated, discriminated against and denied their rights as full citizens in the country of their birth. The long struggle to achieve genuine emancipation was largely unsuccessful until frustration and anger finally exploded in the mass protests, riots and black radicalism of the late 1950s and 1960s. This explosion would ultimately result in a degree of integration and recognition of rights hardly imaginable to many living in previous decades. The century and a half of black struggle produced a number of outstanding leaders whose ideas are of interest and importance. Among these is Marcus Garvey.

The effective denial of rights to the former slave population after the American Civil War (1861-5) called forth a number of political responses which can be divided into two broad categories: integrationist and separatist. The integrationist case, by far the dominant view, was based upon the demand that former slaves had a right to be treated as full citizens with full civil rights, in accordance with America's ideals as expressed in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. The separatist alternative at that time was represented by societies that were established to encourage black emigration back to Africa, none of which were successful.

By the turn of the century the most successful African-American leader was Booker T. Washington. He counselled blacks to postpone their demands for civil rights until, through hard work and virtuous conduct, they earned the respect and friendship of whites. This view was highly acceptable to the white population, but infuriated black activists who, along with white liberals, founded the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 1909. However, many black Americans joined up to fight for their country during World War I, believing that there would be progress on rights and integration once the war was over. In fact, in the post-war years discrimination and denial of rights were worse than ever, with the racist Klu-Klux Klan coming to the height of its power and political influence. This left many in the black community angry and disillusioned, and some turned to separatist ideas of pan-Africanism and black nationalism. It was Marcus Garvey who turned these ideas into a mass movement.

Marcus Moziah Garvey was born in Jamaica in poor circumstances in 1887. His father was a stonemason and he was the youngest of eleven children. After elementary education, Garvey was apprenticed to a printer. He pursued his craft in various parts of the Caribbean, before moving to London in 1912. There he became associated with a group of African exiles to whose anti-colonial journal he contributed. Inspired by this experience and by the ideas of black self-help he found in Booker T. Washington's autobiographical *Up From Slavery*, Garvey returned to Jamaica and in 1914 founded the Universal Negro Improvement and Conservation Association and African Communities League, better known as the Universal Negro Improvement Association (the UNIA).

The aim of the UNIA was to unite 'all the Negro peoples of the world into one great body to establish a country and Government absolutely their own' (Philosophy and Opinions, p.126). Its first manifesto called upon all people of Negro or African descent to work towards the rehabilitation of the race. The Association's general objectives were: *To establish a Universal Confraternity among the race; to promote the spirit of race pride and love; to reclaim the fallen of the race; to administer to and assist the needy; to assist in civilizing the backward tribes of Africa; to strengthen the imperialism of independent African states; to establish* 

*Commissionaries or Agencies in the principal countries of the world for the protection of all Negroes, irrespective of nationality; to promote a conscientious Christian worship among the native tribes of Africa; to establish Universities, Colleges and Secondary Schools for the further education and culture of the boys and girls of the race; to conduct a worldwide commercial and industrial intercourse.*

## *(Quoted in Cronon, p.17)*

There were later modifications, in particular the addition of 'to establish a central nation for the race'. The motto of the Association was 'One God! One Aim! One Destiny!' and members dedicated themselves to the 'general uplift of the Negro race'. It was all extraordinarily ambitious, but Garvey felt himself destined to lead his race.

In 1916 Garvey moved to New York and made Harlem the headquarters of the UNIA. This was a time when Southern black people were migrating to the Northern cities in large numbers, and Harlem was becoming the centre for black writers and artists and radical ideas, expressed in the 'Harlem Renaissance' or 'New Negro' movement in the 1920s. The UNIA celebrated and complemented this movement, spreading from Harlem to the rest of the USA and beyond. It claimed to have branches in forty countries across four continents and to have millions of members worldwide.

The UNIA was an umbrella organisation for black groups and developments of all kinds. It published newspapers and journals, most notably *Negro World*, which was circulated internationally. There was a paramilitary African Legion and a black church, the African Orthodox Church, complete with black God, Christ and Virgin, although other religions were welcome. There was a women's nursing organisation, the Black Cross, and a host of social and cultural societies. From 1920 the UNIA held annual conventions with delegates from around the world, which were great festivals of activity with parades and celebrations, political discussions and umpteen artistic and social events. The 1920 Convention elected Garvey as the 'Provisional President of the Republic of Africa' together with a 'cabinet' of distinguished people with grandiose titles. It was all rather fanciful and meant little in the real world. More importantly, it passed a Declaration of the Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World demanding, among other things, freedom and civil rights for all people of African descent. The UNIA also strove to create a base in Liberia, which had been created by freed slaves in the early nineteenth century and was one of the few independent black states in Africa, but the plans fell through.

One of the UNIA's major initiatives was to create an organisation, the Negro Factories Corporation, that would provide finance and practical assistance to black people setting up businesses, although in the end it was not a financial success. Garvey also had various schemes for connecting African Americans to Africa and to other black communities. The best known of these was the Black Star Steamship Company, created to take trade, travellers and migrants between Africa and communities of African descent, particularly in North America and the Caribbean. Unhappily, the company was a financial disaster, buying poor ships in bad repair and showing poor business sense. The directors were accused of fraud, although commercial incompetence was perhaps more the reality. At their trial, Garvey conducted his own defence and alienated the jury by using the opportunity to expound his ideas; he alone was convicted. After two years of appeals he went to prison in 1925, although his sentence was commuted and he was deported to Jamaica two years later. The UNIA never really recovered from Garvey's deportation, despite his many attempts to revive it. He moved to London in 1934 and died a somewhat forgotten figure in 1940.

Garvey believed in the creation of a Negro civilisation for the future, but one that black men and women had created for themselves, free of white influence. This could not be done while still under the domination of the white man. Instead, he believed that the black community had to make itself self-sufficient in all things, social, cultural and economic.

The new Negro civilisation had to arise, Garvey believed, from a pure Negro race, and he was opposed to racial mixing. It had to bind together all blacks in all countries. Two things were needed create international racial solidarity. The first was the common African inheritance. A major theme of *Black World* and other Garveyite publications was black pride in the African cultural heritage. The second thing that should bind all Negroes together was the common struggle against racial oppression. Black people in America, the Caribbean and elsewhere should help Africa to throw off colonialism, while Africans should support black struggles in America and beyond.

Garvey believed in the liberation of Africa and the creation of an all-African state, a United States of Africa, of which all black people around the world could have citizenship in addition to being citizens of their own countries. In a 1922 article, 'The True Solution to the Negro Problem', he wrote: *we are determined to solve our own problem, by redeeming our Motherland Africa from the hands of alien exploiters and found there a government, a nation of our own, strong enough to lend protection to the members of our race scattered all over the world, and to compel the respect of the nations and races of the earth.*

### *(Philosophy and Opinions, pp.38-9)*

Garvey is often primarily associated with the 'Back to Africa' movement, but this is misleading. He did not see the fundamental solution to black Americans' particular problems in terms of some future mass exodus to a free Africa, although undoubtedly many of his followers did think in these terms (especially in the Caribbean). He did believe that large numbers, perhaps many tens of thousands, of African Americans would emigrate to a free Africa to help build a new nation, but he knew that the whole black population of America could not return in this way. Garvey also rejected the idea of creating a separate black state carved out of the USA (which proponents called the 'Republic of New Africa'), although the idea was much discussed in the UNIA. Garvey thought more in terms of an African state that would stand up for black people all over the world, similar to the Zionist conception of a Jewish state.

Within the USA itself Garvey envisaged a parallel society, with African Americans recognised and respected as a separate nation. He supported the demands of integrationists for full citizenship, while remaining a convinced separatist. He wanted to see an end to black Americans being exploited and discriminated against, but he had no wish to see them culturally assimilated or the two races amalgamated. African Americans must develop their own society with its own institutions separate from white society and white ideas. They should be less concerned with the struggle for political rights and social equality and more with becoming as independent as possible within the white man's world. Intellectually and culturally they should connect with black people beyond the USA and contribute to international racial solidarity.

Garvey was an autocratic leader, reluctant to delegate. He admired Mussolini and Hitler in so far as they were restoring their respective nations to greatness. This, together with his insistence on racial purity and his paramilitary African Legion (mostly used for ceremonial purposes), have led some to call him a fascist. But this is hardly fair. His 'Declaration of Rights of Negro Peoples of the World' makes clear his view that all peoples have rights of self-determination and all individuals have absolute civil rights. But his high-handedness did make him many enemies. He was disliked and distrusted by integrationists, both black and white, and he had little support from better-off African Americans.

Garvey was a protean figure whose thought was many-sided and not always consistent. One particular weakness was a perhaps surprising ignorance of Africa, of which he had a somewhat romanticised view. Although fairly widely travelled, he never actually set foot on African soil and did not seem to be aware of the variety and complexity there that would have made political unity extremely difficult. Nevertheless, he built an organisation of global importance and promoted what is sometimes called Diaspora Pan-Africanism, concerned not just with African decolonisation and unification, but with the status and future of all peoples of African descent.

The UNIA was very much an organisation for ordinary black people, especially in the northern ghettos. It gave them hope and a sense of purpose and pride in their race and its heritage. It was the first black mass movement and was a precursor of future developments. Garvey also helped to inspire nationalist movements in Africa itself, movements that would eventually lead to independence for all major colonies.

The UNIA declined after Garvey was deported and, with the Great Depression, the 1930s was a bleak time for Americans generally. It was not until the 1950s that the black movement revived again on a mass scale, after another world war in which blacks again fought for their country in large numbers only to return to face the same discrimination and marginalisation as before. By this time, the Nation of Islam had become the leading black nationalist movement. It was a combination of the integrationist civil rights protests of Martin Luther King, together with the separatist protests of the Nation of Islam and more radical groups like the Black Panthers, that shook the white establishment in the 1960s and led to the subsequent progress in the recognition of black rights and dignity in American society. This movement was also in many ways an inspiration and a model for other marginalised and oppressed groups - such as women, gay people and indigenous peoples - whose struggles have helped to create a generally more tolerant and egalitarian society across the Western world today.

Although there has been immense progress in respect of black rights in America, there is still some way to go towards full African-American equality, and there is still the basic dichotomy in the black movement between integrationists and separatists. The latter are still dominated by the Nation of Islam, led by Louis Farrakhan, who demands a rich portion of American soil for a black state in compensation for America's historic crimes against its black people. Much of this echoes the black nationalism of Marcus Garvey, although in his fostering of black pride and a sense of heritage and in his demand for black solidarity, Garvey remains an inspiration for both integrationists and separatists alike.

### *Further reading*

#### *Primary source*

 Marcus Garvey *Philosophy and Opinions of Marcus Garvey*, compiled by A.J. Garvey (2nd edn; London: Frank Cass, 1967).

#### *Secondary sources*

- Cronon, E. D. : *Black Moses: The Story of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association* (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1969).
- Essien-Udom, E. V. : *Black Nationalism: A Search for an Identity in America* (Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press, 1972).
- Stein, J. : *The World of Marcus Garvey* (Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1986).
- Van Deburg, W. L. : *Modern Black Nationalism: From Marcus Garvey to Louis Farrakhan* (New York: New York University Press, 1997).
- Vincent, T. G. : *Black Power and the Garvey Movement* (Berkeley, CA: Ramparts Press, 1972).