## **Robert Nozick (1938-2002)**

Robert Nozick was educated at Columbia University and Princeton, taking his Ph.D. at the latter university in 1963. He taught at Princeton, Harvard and Rockefeller Universities, before becoming Arthur Kingsley Porter Professor of Philosophy at Harvard in 1969. In 1998 he became Joseph Pellegrino University Professor at Harvard. Nozick's political ideas are set forth in the book that made his name as a philosopher: Anarchy, State and Utopia (1974). Political theory was only one of Nozick's interests and, as it turned out, a transient one. In his later work, as expressed in Robert Nozick *Philosophical Explanations* (1981), Robert Nozick *The Examined Life* (1990) and Robert Nozick *The Nature of Rationality* (1993) he concentrated on the nature of the self, free will, ethics and epistemology. Robert Nozick *Socratic Puzzles* (1997) is an eclectic volume of articles, reviews and fiction. His last book, *Invariancies in the Structure of the Objective World*, came out in 2001.

*Anarchy, State and Utopia* is one of several attempts made in the second half of the twentieth century to reaffirm the values and beliefs of 'classical' liberalism. As such, it quickly became one of the key texts of the so-called 'New Right'. Its central premise is, in effect, a traditional Lockean doctrine of inalienable 'natural' rights. Nozick is impatient of the kind of metaphysics that depicts societies or communities as something greater than the sum of their parts. Societies consist simply of individuals, each of whom is assumed to be endowed by nature with rights that no government may infringe or abrogate without their bearer's consent. One consequence of the inviolability and moral supremacy of the individual is that for Nozick, as for Rawls, utilitarian arguments, inasmuch as such arguments can justify the infringement of some person's rights for the sake of a supposedly greater good, are inadmissible in any process of political decision-making. Another consequence is that the only kind of state that is rationally justifiable is a 'minimal' state, equipped with just enough power to perform the functions of protection and defence: a state, that is, that will impinge upon the rights of its subjects as little as possible.

Nozick's semi-anarchist theory of government is intended as a response to the welfare-state position of John Rawls's *A Theory of Justice*. Nozick illustrates his position by what is, in effect, a modernised version of Locke's social-contract argument. Individuals living in a state of nature would inevitably encounter what Locke had called the 'inconveniences' of that state. They would find themselves in need of protection against crime, invasion and breach of contract. They would, Nozick suggests, meet this need by co-operating with one another to form 'mutual protection agencies': 'mutual' in the sense that each individual would secure protection for himself by making some of his own time and effort available for the protection of all. Sooner or later, it would occur to the participants in this arrangement that paying specialists to protect them would be easier and safer than doing it themselves. At this point, the mutual protection agencies would become commercial protection agencies, paid for by the contributions of those in whose interests they functioned. They would be impeccably liberal creations of self-interest and private enterprise. But not all such agencies would be equally efficient. By the operation of what may fairly be described as market forces, weaker agencies would be taken over by stronger ones until a 'dominant' protection agency would emerge. Eventually, virtually everyone would opt to join this dominant protection agency, and so it would acquire a legitimate monopoly on the use of coercive force within given territorial boundaries: it would, in other words, come to answer to the traditional definition of a state. The point of this chain of reasoning is to show that a state might emerge as a result of a 'hidden hand' process involving nothing more than the free consent of rational individuals acting in their own interests, but that such a state would be entitled to do no more than

perform the protective functions for which it was originally set up. It would have no right, for example, to make welfare or social-security provision available to some of its citizens by taxing others.

Nozick believes himself to be writing in defence of liberty, but, in practice, he makes no appreciable distinction between the individual's right to liberty and the individual's right to property. This move - the creation of an effective synonymy between liberty and unrestricted property rights - is a frequent feature of classical and neo-classical liberalism. Nozick's minimal-state argument is linked with, and reinforced by, an uncompromisingly libertarian stand on the question of justice. Justice, he thinks, is in its essence procedural rather than distributive. Property rights arise in two ways. Initially, they arise when property is acquired by a legitimate act of its first proprietor: that is, when someone peacefully appropriates something not already owned by someone else. Subsequent rights arise when property is transferred from one proprietor to another by some such established legitimate process as sale or bequest. These two conditions, legitimate acquisition or legitimate transfer, are what create property rights, and any distribution of property that does not infringe them is *ipso facto* just. It follows - especially since no utilitarian consideration can trump individual rights - that no one can have any other kind of claim against the property of another, no matter how great actual inequalities of distribution may become. If the poor are to be assisted by the rich, this must come about through acts of private benevolence. It cannot rightly come about through social-welfare mechanisms provided by the state and paid for out of taxation. Redistributive taxation, Nozick asserts, is in effect forced labour exacted upon those of whom it is required; as, indeed, is any taxation levied for purposes other than protection and defence.

Nozick, like Rawls, came upon the scene at a time when English-speaking philosophers had long been convinced that political philosophy has nothing substantive to contribute to our understanding of practical life: that it can do no more than analyse and clarify the language in which political arguments are conducted. To many in the 1970s, this view had, rightly or wrongly, come to seem arid and played out. To that extent, Nozick and Rawls were in some quarters welcomed as a breath of fresh air. Whether Nozick is actually saying anything remarkable or novel is a moot point. At heart, he is an old-fashioned *laissez-faire* liberal who really does no more than state the tenets of the old faith in new and often quirky forms. But, again as in the case of Rawls, his contribution lies more in the debate that his arguments have fulled than in the originality or success of the arguments themselves.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary source*

Robert Nozick *Anarchy, State and Utopia* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1974).

## *Secondary sources*

- Paul, J. : *Reading Nozick* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1982).
- Wolff, J. : *Robert Nozick* (Oxford: Blackwell/Polity Press, 1991).