## **Arne Naess (1912-) and Ecologism**

Concern for the environment began to appear as a political issue in the 1930s when a number of policies directed at preserving the countryside began to emerge in several European countries. It was after World War II and especially after a series of massive environmental problems were identified in the 1960s - such as the threat of atomic weapons and other nuclear pollution, acid rain and many other problems that seemed to threaten the survival of the planet as we know it - that the environmental movement began to grow.

Arne Naess was born in Norway in 1912 and pursued an academic career, becoming Professor of Philosophy in Oslo in 1939. In his spare time he developed an international reputation as a mountain climber. It was only after he retired from his university post in 1970 that Naess developed the theoretical position for which he has become famous. This is the position known as 'deep ecology' or 'deep green'. Naess set out the principles of deep ecology in a lecture in Bucharest in September 1972 (summarised in a subsequent article, 'The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecological Movement', 1973). In this lecture, Naess made the distinction between 'shallow ecology' in the form of mere environmentalism, which he characterised in terms of preserving the environment for humanity's purposes, and genuine or 'deep ecology', which was concerned with the whole of the biosphere, including humanity. Ultimately, Naess thought, shallow ecology is concerned with the well-being of people in rich Western countries; what was needed was a move away from anthropocentric values and towards 'biocentric' values, which focused upon all life and the total environment.

The lecture sought to lay down basic principles of deep ecology, by means of which humanity can again begin to live in harmony with nature. They begin with the principle of 'biospherical egalitarianism', which means that all species have an equal right to flourish, including species of no use to human beings. From this flow other, related principles that encourage ecological diversity and the values of living together as opposed to competition and domination. There are also principles of sustainability, having to do with the avoidance of pollution and resource depletion. However, what is crucial is the application of these principles to human behaviour and society.

Naess assumes that his principles apply equally to society as to nature. The principle of diversity includes diversity of human cultures, and points to the necessity of decentralisation and local autonomy. Equality of species includes equality between societies and within societies. Naess seems to assume that one implies the other, which is open to serious question. Nevertheless, deep ecology is meant to be fully consistent with modern notions of human rights, democracy and social justice, as well as with principles of non-violence (Naess is an admirer of Gandhi). However, perhaps the more important point is that these principles imply not just the introduction of environmentally responsible policies and not just an ending of the ideal of economic growth, but a complete abandonment of industrial society.

Allowing all species to flourish includes the prevention of one species crowding out others, which is what the human species has been busily doing. Population reduction is therefore essential. Naess has since argued that the optimum human population of the world is around 100 million: that is, less than a quarter of 1 per cent of its present size. This is based on the idea that a century or more ago there was a much greater variety of human ways of life based upon different environments, a situation to which we should return, and 100 million he feels to be the optimum level of world population for sustaining such a variety. However, Naess

will have no truck with coercive methods, which he deems incompatible with ecosophical values, and recognises that the achievement of such a population may take hundreds of years.

The ideal of a diversity of human cultures, as was evident in the past, comes from a conception of human culture and economy growing out of a close relationship between the form of society, economy and culture and the particular physical environment - climate, vegetation, geology and so forth - in which they flourish. Regions of continents are seen as natural units for such self-sufficient ways of life, hence the term 'bioregionalism'. Naess and others who have developed this conception recognise that a variety of social and political forms would result from such a development; however, there is potential for a conflict with basic ecosophical values. Societies might 'naturally' emerge that are characterised by social hierarchy, male domination and even slavery, which would be directly contrary to the modern social and political values that Naess and most greens subscribe to.

In a later article ('Identification as a Source of Deep Ecological Attitudes', 1985), Naess links his deep green outlook with notions of human self-realisation. That is, an ever widening circle of identification that begins with family and ultimately embraces the whole of nature, and recognises at each stage the intrinsic value of those or that with which we identify and their basic right to live and flourish. Naess calls his whole ecological philosophy 'Ecosophy T'. The 'T' is quite arbitrary (it apparently refers to 'Tvergastein', the name of his Norwegian mountain hut) to suggest that it is only one of many possible 'ecosophies', which Naess welcomes as contributions to the wider movement. Certainly many varieties of ecologism have developed, some of which have been fused with other systems of thought including forms of socialism, conservatism, anarchism, feminism, Christianity and others.

It is often complained that deep green thought in general lacks intellectual rigour, that the values that it asserts, such as 'biocentric equality' and variety for its own sake, are vague and inconsistent, and that the jump from nature to human society is often not warranted. As a professional philosopher Naess recognises the force of these points, both in relation to his own ecological outlook and to others, but he rather sidesteps the issue by claiming that what ecologists are concerned about is wisdom rather than science.

However, despite the philosophical weaknesses and the sheer variety of different forms of green thinking, Naess is widely recognised as a father figure and leading philosopher of the ecology movement, a movement that grew rapidly into a significant strand of political thinking in the late twentieth century and may well grow in importance in the future.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Arne Naess 'The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecological Movement', *Inquiry* 16 (Spring 1973), pp.95-100.
- Arne Naess 'Identification as a Source of Deep Ecological Attitudes', in M. Tobias (ed.) , *Deep Ecology* (Santa Monica, CA: IMT Productions, 1985).
- Arne Naess *Ecology, Community and Lifestyle* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).

## *Secondary sources*

- Deval, B. and Sessions, G. : *Deep Ecology: Living as if Nature Mattered* (Salt Lake City, UT: Peregrine Smith Books, 1985).
- Dobson, A. : *Green Political Thought* (3rd edn; London and New York: Routledge, 2000).
- Mathews, F. : *The Ecological Self* (London and New York: Routledge, 1991).
- Witosz, N. and Brennan, A. : *Philosophical Dialogues: Arne Naess and the Progress of Ecophilosophy* (Savage, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999).