## **T. H. Green (1836-82)**

Thomas Hill Green was born in Birkin, Yorkshire, where his father was rector. The family was descended, or so Green believed, from Oliver Cromwell. His main philosophical influences are Kant and Hegel, though his religious upbringing and beliefs were important factors in his intellectual development. Educated at Oxford, he became a fellow of Balliol College in 1860 and Professor of Moral Philosophy in 1878. He was the first Oxford don to serve on the city council. Important aspects of his philosophy were expounded in a long introduction (1874) to Hume's *Treatise of Human Nature*. Most of Green's writings were published posthumously. *Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation*, reconstructed from his notes and those of his students, appeared in 1882 and *Prolegomena to Ethics* in 1883. Also important is his 'Lecture on Liberal Legislation and Freedom of Contract', occasioned by Gladstone's proposal to regulate contracts between landlords and tenants in Ireland.

Green's political views are best understood as a response to the main currents of social and political thought in his day: 'classical' liberalism, social Darwinism (as advocated by Herbert Spencer) and utilitarianism. He repudiated the idea that civil society can be conceived as a collection of self-interested atoms dedicated to the pursuit of happiness or pleasure. It is, he thinks, factually false to suggest that we find our satisfaction purely as individuals in the pursuit of private versions of the good life. The relation between individual and society is complex; the individual cannot be abstracted from the group. 'Without society, no persons; this is as true as that without persons . . . there could be no such society as we know' (*Prolegomena to Ethics* 288). The sentiment is as much Aristotelian as Hegelian: man is by nature a social creature. 'The self', Green insists, 'is a social self' (ibid.). We achieve happiness and fulfilment as part of a community, and an adequate theory of citizenship has to be a theory of membership rather than of mere contractual association.

Despite its idealist inspiration, Green's apparent 'organicism' does not entail the submergence of the individual in the group. Green does not believe, as Hegel does, that the community is coterminous with the state. He does, however, insist that each individual is a social being whose happiness cannot be separated from that of the community of which he is a member. The basis of society is the mutual recognition by its members that all of them are ends in themselves. If - as, after all, classical liberalism itself postulates - men are moral equals, it does not make sense to suppose that there can be justice in a community that extends the right to happiness and fulfilment to some of its members while withholding it from others. Individual goods cannot claim precedence over - cannot, indeed, strictly speaking exist apart from - the good of the community. Every individual finds his own good in contributing to the common good. An implication of this is that individual rights are not, after all, sacred and indefeasible in the way that traditional liberal political theory insists. Individual rights - that is, individual claims to freedom of action - are in reality social rights: they are justified only if the community within which they are claimed acknowledges that they contribute to, or do not militate against, the common good. In claiming rights, we have also to recognise obligations to a good greater than our own.

Green does not dissent from the liberal conviction that the chief purpose of government is to maximise freedom. He agrees also that the maximisation of freedom is the minimisation of constraint. But, he contends, constraint must be construed more broadly than the mere physical restraint or coercion of one individual by another. Freedom is not simply 'negative' freedom in the sense later to be made famous by Sir Isaiah Berlin. Green also denies that

freedom consists in the pursuit of undifferentiated pleasure. Anyone who lives in this way may appear free, but is really at the mercy of his own inclinations and desires; and to be at the mercy of anything is a kind of bondage. Freedom properly understood is rational freedom. Someone has it in so far as he seeks 'the satisfaction of himself in objects in which it should be found, and [seeks] it in them because it should be found in them' (Principles of Political Obligation, p.2). Green goes on to say that freedom in this 'positive' sense consists in 'the liberation of the powers of all men equally for contributions to a common good'. We are truly free, it seems, when and only when intentionally making as full a contribution as we can to the common good. In this way, we actualise or realise our own potentialities as social and moral beings. Freedom is self-realisation, and whatever stands in the way of self-realisation is a constraint in the required sense: it is a curtailment of freedom.

Green's positive understanding of freedom is at odds with the liberal-utilitarian view of law and legislation. The latter view, predicated on the negative conception of liberty and exemplified in the thought of Jeremy Bentham, is that, since law curtails one's freedom to do as one likes, it is a necessary evil and there should be as little of it as possible. Such a conception of law is, Green thinks, subversive of the very objectives that government should seek to promote. It 'affords a reason for resisting all positive reforms . . . which involve an action of the state . . . promoting conditions favourable to moral life' (Works II, p.345). When freedom is understood positively, he holds, it will follow that the law should seek not merely to remove obstacles to individual freedom of action, but to provide means of and opportunities for self-realisation to those who otherwise would not have them. Law cannot make people good, but it can enable them to make themselves good. Legislatures should take a positive role in the life of the community. They should, for instance, provide education and public health facilities. Without education, he observes, the individual in modern society is, in effect, as much crippled as he would be by the loss of a limb. Legislatures should also control the consumption of alcohol: Green was a keen advocate of temperance reform. Where necessary, the law should even interfere with that most sacred of liberal values, freedom of contract. In his 'Lecture on Liberal Legislation and Freedom of Contract', Green emphasises that serious infringements of liberty can in fact occur under the guise of freedom of contract. Here, he hit upon what is undoubtedly the central moral weakness of the negative definition of liberty. An Irish tenant farmer whose alternative to entering into a tenancy agreement with his landlord is starvation for himself and his family is, he pointed out, a free contractor only in the most empty and formal sense.

Green offered what one might call a humanised revision of liberalism in place of the nineteenth-century Gradgrind-and-Bounderby orthodoxies of *laissez-faire*; orthodoxies that were, in fact, beginning to wear thin well before Green's literary career began. Green emphasises that the identity and happiness of individuals is inseparable from the social whole, and that individual good cannot be considered as separate from the common good. He believes that freedom is not merely freedom from constraint, but freedom *to* be the best that one can be. He insists, although without going into great detail, that government should seek actively to promote the common good, and that where necessary it should do so by providing the means of self-realisation for those who lack them. Despite his philosophical idealism, Green remains a liberal in the sense that the freedom of the individual is his key political value. But his reappraisal of how we are to understand the individual and the individual's freedom identify him as a liberal in whose thought liberalism has begun to look forward to the idea of a socially responsible welfare state. Green's published output is very small, thanks to his early death, but his contribution to political thought is measurable also in the work of

those who regarded themselves as his disciples: notably Bernard Bosanquet (1848-1923), L.T. Hobhouse (1864-1929) and J.A. Hobson (1858-1940).

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- T. H. Green *The Works of Thomas Hill Green*, ed. R. L. Nettleship (5 vols; London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1885-8).
- T. H. Green *Lectures on the Principles of Political Obligation*, reconstructed by his first editor R. L. Nettleship (London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1941).

## *Secondary sources*

- Milne, A. J. M. : *The Social Philosophy of English Idealism* (London: Allen & Unwin, 1962).
- Nicholson, P. : *The Political Philosophy of the British Idealists* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
- Richter, M. : *The Politics of Conscience: T.H. Green and His Age* (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1983).