## **Michael Oakeshott (1901-90)**

Michael Joseph Oakeshott read history at the University of Cambridge, where he fell under the influence of the idealist philosopher John McTaggart. He also came to admire Hegel and F.H. Bradley. After taking his degree in 1923, Oakeshott spent some time extending his philosophical education at the Universities of Marburg and Tübingen before returning to Cambridge in 1925, as a Fellow of Gonville and Caius College. In 1951 he became Professor of Political Science at the London School of Economics. He retired from his chair in 1968. Most of his writings, expressed in an elegant but mannered prose style partly inherited from McTaggart, are in the form of essays collected into several volumes. His only continuous book, *Experience and its Modes*, was published in 1937. Initially, it received little recognition. Its idealism was unfashionable at a time when philosophy in the Englishspeaking world was increasingly devoting itself to logical and linguistic analysis.

*Experience and its Modes* is concerned with nothing less than the elucidation of the nature of our experience of reality. It is a difficult book, which cannot really be explained in simple terms. Oakeshott begins with the characteristically Hegelian assumption that we cannot truly understand human experience other than as a totality of which the mind and the external world are subject and object. In plain English, we cannot fully understand experience unless we understand it 'as a whole' and 'for its own sake'. Everyday experience, however - the kind of experience that ordinary people ordinarily have - is partial, conditional, abstracted. It is reality experienced in a determinate 'mode', or from a particular and limited standpoint. In this sense, human experience may be 'recognised as a variety of independent worlds of discourse'. These 'independent worlds' are history, science and practical experience. History is our experience of reality *sub specie praeteritatis*, 'under the aspect of the past'; science (which Oakeshott does not regard as a sovereign or superior form of experience) is our experience of reality *sub specie quantitatis*, 'under the aspect of quantity'; practical experience is reality experienced *sub specie voluntatis*, 'under the aspect of will': that is, it is that mode of experience through which we devote ourselves to getting what we want. Oakeshott subsequently identified poetry - aesthetic experience - as a fourth 'mode'. Philosophy, Oakeshott thinks, is a form of intellectual activity that stands apart from and above any one mode of experience. Because it is not any one of them, and therefore not bound by any particular set of assumptions or presuppositions, it enables us to see and understand them all - to listen to their 'voices', as he likes to express it - in relation to experience as a whole. Education is the process of learning how to listen to these voices in conversation. This, he argues in The Voice of Liberal Learning (1989), is what distinguishes education from training, in which only one voice is heard.

Much of Oakeshott's career after *Experience and its Modes* was devoted to the explication of that form of practical experience which we call politics, and it is upon his various attempts to do this that his reputation as a political philosopher rests. Because so much of his work consists of essays published periodically during a long and active life, his position is not easy to summarise; nor, taken as a whole, is it without inconsistency. Any paraphrase inevitably makes his thought seem less complex and multi-faceted than it is.

Oakeshott's preferred form of political society is 'nomocratic' as distinct from 'teleocratic'. Both forms have from time to time made their appearance in the history of European states. Teleocratic societies, or *universitates*, are those that take a particular end or goal as a collective aim and in which the task of government is conceived as being the achievement of that end. Nomocratic political societies, on the other hand, do not aim at any particular goal.

Their purpose is to provide a framework of value-neutral laws within which individuals can pursue their own preferred form of felicity. They are, in other words, communities of the kind that the liberal temperament is accustomed to applaud. The freedom which they make possible is the kind of freedom designated as 'negative' by T.H. Green and Sir Isaiah Berlin. But nomocratic societies are moral rather than straightforwardly prudential in nature: their members are united by a bond somewhat like that of friendship. Oakeshott also uses the terms *societas* (he is much addicted to Latin terms: often, it may be thought, to no real purpose) and 'civil association' to denote such societies.

Political activity, he thinks, inevitably takes place against a background from which it cannot be separated: a background furnished by the traditions and practices of the community whose activity it is. This background, or way of doing things, must be accepted as given. There is no point in trying to account for its origin or to imagine what life would be like without it. Its peculiar character conditions the kind of political activity which it is possible for the members of any given community to engage in. The traditions and practices of a particular community form a complex heritage that no one has made, that no one can fully understand and that it is dangerous to ignore or attempt to alter in radical ways. Oakeshott is therefore hostile to what he calls 'rationalism' in politics: that is, the attempt to conduct life according to abstract 'ideological' principles that take no account of the character of the community to which they are applied. Politics is not about collective salvation; it is not about centralised planning according to doctrinaire principles to achieve a redemptive purpose. It is (he says in his 1951 Inaugural Lecture on 'Political Education') an 'art of repair', the point of which is to keep us afloat on a 'boundless and bottomless sea' in which 'there is neither harbour for shelter nor floor for anchorage, neither starting point nor point of departure' ('Political Education', in Laslett, p.15). Political activity properly understood is the activity of pursuing the 'intimations' of the existing traditions of behaviour and attending to whatever changes and adjustments those intimations intimate. To do more than what is necessary to keep the ship afloat and functioning is to risk sinking it altogether.

Oakeshott's political thought takes its departure from a rather complex and unfamiliar metaphysic. The reader sometimes forms the impression that elegantly recondite language is being used to say something rather obvious. It is, however, easy to do injustice to so complex a thinker. It is fair to say that Oakeshott is a member of the family of whom Edmund Burke would be recognised by most people as the head, a family that includes Karl Popper and F.A. von Hayek (although Popper and Hayek are much more 'rationalist' than Oakeshott). Oakeshott is a conservative who mistrusts change, values custom and tradition, recognises historical complexity, and advocates a cautious and piecemeal approach to reform. He is said by those who were taught by him to have been a person of immense charm and magnetism. This no doubt goes some way towards explaining the esteem in which he is held in many early twenty-first century academic circles.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Michael Oakeshott *Experience and its Modes* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1933).
- Michael Oakeshott *Rationalism in Politics and Other Essays* (London: Methuen, 1962).
- Michael Oakeshott *On Human Conduct* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975).

- Michael Oakeshott *History and Other Essays* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1983).
- Michael Oakeshott *The Voice of Liberal Learning* (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1989).
- Michael Oakeshott "Political Education", in P. Laslett (ed) , *Philosophy, Politics and Society* (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1963).

## *Secondary sources*

- Franco, P. : *The Political Philosophy of Michael Oakeshott* (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1990).
- Greenleaf, W. H. : *Oakeshott's Philosophical Politics* (London: Longman, 1966).