## **Tom Paine (1737-1809)**

Thomas Paine, usually called Tom, was born in 1737, into a modest Quaker family in Thetford, Norfolk. He was educated at the local grammar school. His father was a corsetmaker, and Tom himself was for a while apprenticed to this trade (this is the point of the famous Gillray cartoon showing Tom Paine trying to lace a reproachful Britannia into a French corset). He then tried his hand as a schoolteacher, before becoming an excise officer first in Lincolnshire, then in Sussex. While serving as an excise officer at Lewes, he became involved in local politics and established a debating club in a local inn. Campaigning for better pay and conditions (his first publication was a pamphlet called *The Case of the Officers of Excise*) cost him his position. Encouraged by Benjamin Franklin, whom he met in London, he emigrated to America. He arrived in Philadelphia just as the colonies' dispute with Britain was reaching crisis-point, and took up radical journalism. He contributed several articles to the *Pennsylvania Magazine*, including one calling for the abolition of slavery. Paine's first important work, the anti-monarchical pamphlet Tom Paine *Common Sense* (1776), vigorously advocated independence. It was immensely popular - it is said to have sold 150,000 copies in 1776 - and undoubtedly helped create the climate of opinion that led to the Declaration of Independence later in the same year.

After Independence, Paine returned to Britain and in 1791 published his most famous work, *The Rights of Man*. His immediate purpose was to defend the French Revolutionaries against the strictures of Edmund Burke in *Reflections on the Revolution in France*; but he also attacked hereditary government and argued for equal political rights. The book was banned and Paine indicted for seditious libel. He fled to France, where he was given a hero's welcome. He was elected as a deputy in the National Assembly and sat with the Girondin faction. Despite being a passionate opponent of hereditary monarchy, Paine voted against the execution of the king: an act that almost cost him his own life. He was imprisoned by the Jacobins and, while in prison, wrote the first part of *The Age of Reason*, an attack on organised religion. After the fall of Robespierre, Paine was reinstated as a deputy, but in 1803 returned to America. *The Age of Reason*, because of its disparagement of Christianity, had cost him much of the popularity he had enjoyed before the Revolution, but he was able to settle on a farm granted to him by the State of New York, where he spent the remaining six years of his life.

Paine's political thought may fairly be described as a straightforward radical-liberal ideology, informed throughout by European Enlightenment ideas. The past, he thinks, is the story of tyranny and ignorance. The history of humanity is characterised by superstition and uncritical acceptance of the existing order. He is particularly severe on kingship. Hereditary monarchy, he insists, is unnatural and irrational. It creates a distinction between kings and subjects that has no basis beyond the willingness of the credulous to accept it. It places men in positions of power regardless of ability and moral character. It produces and sustains conditions of inequality and injustice. Kings and their hangers-on are parasites merely. They are supported in luxury out of public taxes while thousands of their subjects live in misery. They wage wars for their own glory, which their subjects have to fight in and pay for. The revival of reason in the present age equips us to sweep the mistakes of the past away and begin afresh (this, of course, is exactly the attitude that so frightens Burke). What is needed is a rational reconstruction of society and the installation of the correct form of government to administer it.

Government is a necessary evil. We cannot do without it, but, inevitably, it infringes the right of the individual to do as he likes. The less government there is, therefore, the better. Government should confine itself to the protection of the rights of man and should not take on any more extensive functions than this. It must moreover be responsible to, and removable by, those whose government it is. There is a natural sympathy and harmony of interests among people, and the amount of government needed to regulate their relations is therefore not large. Society, says Paine, in a more radical version of Locke's doctrine of popular sovereignty, is created by a social contract, and the people then have the absolute right to make and unmake governments as and when they see fit.

Predictably enough, Paine is a democrat. Because government exists to manage the affairs of the whole nation, it cannot be the property of any individual or family or faction. All men are equal. Representative democracy, based on full male suffrage, is the only rational, and therefore the only legitimate, form of government. Under such government, the people would live in peace and prosperity. It would be able to levy only such taxes as the populace thought reasonable, and the populace would not, Paine assumed, wish to finance wars. But the present political organisation of England simply entrenches privilege and inequality. The County of Yorkshire, which contains nearly two million souls, returns two county members to Parliament; so does Rutland, with a population of less than 20,000. Manchester, a town with a population of 60,000, is not allowed any parliamentary representation at all. Old Sarum, where almost no one now lives, returns two members. If democracy is really to represent the interests of citizens, it needs to be organised into sensible constituencies.

Paine is an early and eloquent exponent of public welfare measures. In *The Rights of Man* he suggests state education for the poor, old-age pensions and state employment. In his Tom Paine *Agrarian Justice* (1796) he advocates redistributive taxation to create a more equal society, and a complex welfare-state system. In some ways his ideas point towards a later socialism, although his firm belief in the rights of property and the benefits of commerce keep him in the broadly liberal camp. He does not appear to be aware of the difficulties involved in recommending extensive welfare provision while at the same time insisting on minimal government and taxation.

Paine was, clearly, a man of great personal integrity. While living in straitened circumstances in France, he let it be known that he did not wish to make a profit from *The Rights of Man* and that anyone who wished to reprint it could do so. As a result, some 200,000 copies of the book were sold in cheap editions between 1791 and 1793. Paine was an exceptionally able pamphleteer, able to reduce complex issues to eloquent simplicity. His importance lies less in the originality or subtlety of his thought than in the clarity with which he was able to communicate political ideas to ordinary people in an age when ordinary people were increasingly entering into politics.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary source*

 Tom Paine *Paine: Political Writings*, ed. B. Kuklick (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).

## *Secondary sources*

- Claeys, G. : *Thomas Paine: Social and Political Thought* (Boston, MA: Unwin Hyman, 1989).
- Keane, J. : *Tom Paine: A Political Life* (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1995).
- Philp, M. : *Paine* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989).
- Williamson, A. : *Thomas Paine: His Life, Work and Times* (London: Allen & Unwin, 1973).