## **Charles Fourier (1772-1837) and Utopian Socialism**

Utopian socialism was the first significant form of modern socialism. It developed in the aftermath of the French Revolution, but just as importantly it was a response to the impact of industrialisation on European society. Utopian socialism developed simultaneously in various forms in the ideas of a number of thinkers, of whom Charles Fourier may be taken as representative.

Charles Fourier was born in 1772, the son of a successful cloth merchant family from Besançon. Fourier's family lost its fortune in the Revolution, and he himself was nearly executed by the Jacobins. Thereafter he earned his living as a travelling salesman, but detested commerce, believing that making a profit by buying at one price to sell at another was fundamentally dishonest. He lived most of his adult life alone in Paris. He never read books, which he thought mostly full of nonsense, but was an avid reader of newspapers. From these and his own experience he spun all his theories and projects. In 1808 he published *Theory of the Four Movements and the General Destinies*, which set out his vision of the universe, humanity and history. He wrote a great deal more, but never changed his basic ideas.

Fourier had a theory of history in thirty-two stages ordained by God, beginning with savagery and gradually leading - via the present stage of so-called 'civilisation' and the subsequent stage of 'socialism' - to Harmony. Harmony, the highest stage, would last 70,000 years, before descending down the stages back to savagery, at which point the world would end. There was a certain amount of flexibility: the hateful present stage of 'civilisation' could be shortened, and the more desirable stages come sooner and last longer, if the world adopted Fourier's ideas for the ideal society quickly.

Fourier believed that, just as Newton had penetrated the mysteries of attraction and repulsion in physical nature in his theory of gravity, showing how all these conflicting forces could in fact create a perfect equilibrium and harmony in the universe, so he, Charles Fourier, had discovered the same principles in the human world. He would demonstrate that they could be the basis of a perfect equilibrium and harmony in society. His understanding of human nature came from a highly elaborate theory of the passions. These were God-given and, as such, their satisfaction must be natural and right. In fact, Fourier thought, if only the natural passions were given free rein, then a natural social harmony would inevitably result. Unfortunately, society throughout history had systematically denied and repressed 'natural passions'. This was never more so than in contemporary so-called 'civilisation', where moral conventions suffocated and repressed the passions, especially the sexual ones, creating perversion and endless misery. To a considerable extent, Fourier anticipated Freud and some of Freud's followers. In writings not published until long after his death, Fourier even suggested a new religion in which priests would advise individuals on sexual matters.

In 'civilisation', according to Fourier, the repression of natural instincts was compounded by the economic system. He attacked economic liberalism bitterly. Capitalism drives down wages, creating exploitation, poverty and misery. Political liberalism was a sham. Constitutionalism did nothing to check the depredations of economic liberalism and so did nothing to alleviate the suffering of the people. Liberalism was a benefit for the few but a disaster for the many.

A new society needed to be built in which people could be happy. But revolution was not the answer. Fourier detested the Jacobins: not merely for personal reasons, but because they represented methods of violence and terror, as well as authoritarianism and moral selfrighteousness - all of which he abhorred. People should be genuinely free from the artificialities of 'civilisation', free to be themselves and be happy. Fourier's contempt for modern life as artificial and repressive comes from Rousseau, although he had none of Rousseau's puritanism or contempt for women. Fourier had little faith in government and believed that this new world would have to be built from below, in personal relationships and small communities. He was constantly looking for patrons to take up his schemes.

The basic building block of the new society would be the small community, the *phalanstère* or phalanx. Each would have a population of around 1,700 to 1,800 (based upon a calculation of the different emotional types of human being, doubled to account for both men and women, plus a few extras). There would be communal meals and common housing and services, including child-care. Apart from cases where people might be harmed, there would be complete sexual freedom and people would change partners freely. Women would be fully emancipated. Fourier was an ardent feminist, believing that in most things women were the superior sex. The phalanx would replace the family as the primary object of loyalty and affection. Social solidarity would also be maintained by a common education for all.

After sexual freedom, Fourier's second major principle for achievement of happiness for all was pleasure in work. Everyone must be found work according to their interests and aptitude. He disliked factories and thought in terms of crafts. However, he did not believe in abolishing property. Everyone in the phalanx would be properly housed, clothed and fed, but beyond that people would have different levels of investment in their community and profits would be equitably shared among capital, labour and talent. Some would own little, yet they would still be vastly better off than in any previous society.

Fourier says little about political organisation. Each phalanx would be run by a council of all members, but there is a strong suspicion that some would be more equal than others. He believed that the whole population of France, and ultimately the world, would come to live in phalanxes. Once established, they would create networks of co-operation; eventually national networks would direct volunteer armies in great civil engineering projects. Perhaps international armies would one day undertake, for example, the reclaiming of the world's deserts for fertile use. All this would by-pass existing political systems. What would happen to these, Fourier does not say.

In his day Fourier was widely regarded as mad. Certainly some of his ideas sound bizarre, such as sexual relations between stars and planets, but these can perhaps be put down to a poetic imagination. More importantly, he had too many interesting ideas to be dismissed easily. He also attracted many followers, as did the other major utopian socialists: Robert Owen in Britain and Henri de Saint-Simon in France. Owen had similar ideas of small selfsufficient communities in which ultimately all would live and co-operate, though he was more thoroughgoing than Fourier in his abolition of private property; Saint-Simon saw a new industrial society governed by a new elite of industrialists and administrators, scientists and engineers and priests and artists, who would organise society in great detail for the benefit of all.

In many ways these three thinkers were rivals with different schemes, and they certainly did not co-operate. Yet they had much in common. All three believed the old pre-1789 world was dead beyond recall and that a new world had to be created out of the chaos of the Revolutionary period, which had seen constant wars, civil strife and the social upheaval of industrialisation. They were all opposed to revolutionary methods, believing in the power of reason and example. The utopian socialists stressed harmony and community, as against the individualism and sense of alienation of the age. They were less interested in politics than in the psychology and sociology of human needs and values as the basis of new social structures that would be in keeping with human nature.

It was the Charles Fourier *Communist Manifesto* (1848) of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels that airily dismissed Saint-Simon, Fourier and Owen as 'utopian socialists' - and the label stuck. What Marx meant by this was that their theories were not 'scientific' like his own, that they had no understanding of the dynamics of society and history and could not demonstrate that socialism was both necessary and inevitable; for that reason their ideas were little better than useless fantasies. Marx's view is reasonable given his beliefs, but from a non-Marxist standpoint the term 'utopian', used pejoratively, was not entirely fair. Besides, when Marx wrote in 1848 they could each be seen as rival socialisms with many followers. Later, when their influence had declined, Marx and Engels were more generous.

The utopian socialists were not the unrealistic dreamers that their designation as 'utopian' suggests. They did not simply present a picture of what a good society might look like with no thought to how it might be achieved, as had been the tradition of utopian literature over the previous three centuries. All three were practical men with practical proposals for achieving their ideal, each was sufficiently convincing to have a following and create a movement. These movements were the beginnings of socialism as a mass movement.

Interestingly, there has been a revival of interest in recent years in the utopian socialists and similar writers, such as William Morris. This is partly due to the general disillusionment with centralised state socialism, and partly owing to the growth of green ideas.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary sources*

- Charles Fourier *The Utopian Vision of Charles Fourier: Selected Texts on Work, Love and Passionate Attraction*, ed. J. Beecher and R. Bienvenu (London: Jonathan Cape, 1972).
- Charles Fourier *The Theory of the Four Movements*, ed. G. Stedman Jones and I. Patterson (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).

## *Secondary sources*

- Beecher, J. : *Charles Fourier: The Visionary and his World* (Berkeley, CA: University of California, 1986).
- Taylor, K. : *The Political Ideas of the Utopian Socialists* (London: Frank Cass, 1982).