## **Mohandas Gandhi (1869-1948)**

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (the sobriquet 'Mahatma' is a title of respect meaning 'greatsouled') was born in Western India and went to England in 1888 to study law. After practising for some time in India, he moved to South Africa in 1893, where he was a determined opponent of the 'pass laws' and other kinds of racial discrimination. Returning to India in 1914, he became a leading figure in the cause of Indian nationalism. The immense moral authority that he acquired rested chiefly upon the austerity of life that he adopted as a way of identifying himself with the poor. As a young man, Gandhi trained himself to eliminate all moral weakness from his character and to feel only benevolence. It is said that he slept naked with women in order to test his ability to withstand sexual desire. (How he managed to persuade anyone to co-operate in this experiment is not recorded.) He founded the Non-cooperation Movement in 1920, the Civil Disobedience Movement in 1930 and the Quit India Movement in 1940. He was much distressed by the violence that broke out between Hindus and Muslims after Indian independence in 1947. Despite increasing frailty he was by then seventy-eight - he travelled the country in various efforts to restore peace. He was shot dead by a Hindu militant.

Gandhi's fundamental belief is in *satya*, 'truth', which (with an eye to Western audiences) he also calls God. *Satya* is the ruling principle of the universe. *Satya* manifests itself in all living beings, and especially in humans, as self-consciousness or soul or spirit. *Satya* constitutes the essence of the human being. The body is merely material and, as such, unreal. The satisfaction of bodily desire is degrading inasmuch as it represents a concession to the material and inauthentic. It follows that desire for anything beyond what is necessary to sustain life is to be avoided. Western civilisation, in so far as it is centred upon the unrestricted satisfaction of material desire, suffers from a spiritual and moral shallowness that will lead to its downfall. For this reason, Gandhi thinks that Western modernisation is not a suitable model for India's future development. Her future must grow from the traditional rural and agricultural roots of her economy.

Because human beings all participate in *satya*, all are parts of a single whole. External differences - race, caste, class, religion, regional loyalties - are irrelevant. The only appropriate relation between human beings is love. Love, Gandhi says, is the law of our being, and by love he means what we might more usually call compassion: unconditional practical concern for the welfare and happiness of others. Such love implies *ahimsa*, nonviolence, as a principle of social and political action. The achievement of political and moral ends through *ahimsa* is what Gandhi calls *satyagraha*, 'truth force' or non-violent action. This notion of non-violent action is the crucial part of Gandhi's political theory. But *satyagraha* is not merely passive or sullen. It is a theory of *action*. It calls for courage, strength of character and positive commitment to a righteous cause. Nor is Gandhi's doctrine of non-violence absolute or dogmatic. In some circumstances, he thinks, it might be better to choose violence than craven submission to injustice.

On Gandhi's account of the true essence or nature of humankind, the state as we usually encounter it is the antithesis of how human beings should be organised. It institutionalises violence. It commands, compels, constrains. It encourages dependence and undermines selfreliance. In a word, the state dehumanises us. Yet it is a truth of experience that, in the present world, human beings lack the capacity to govern themselves. How, then, should government be organised so as not to be inimical to the real nature and needs of its citizens? The answer is a 'minimal' state: a state that is as non-coercive as possible and that leaves

citizens with the greatest possible degree of freedom to develop their potentialities with dignity and self-respect. Gandhi's ideal is of a state consisting of self-governing village communities small enough for 'love' to be a practical reality and for communal approval and disapproval to be effective moral forces without the need for routine and formalised coercion. The ends of such a state will be achieved not through threats and force, but through persuasion and consensus. Conflict will be resolved constructively, through discussion and negotiation. Crime will be regarded not as wrongdoing to be punished, but as an illness to be treated by help and understanding. Villages will elect district representatives, who will in turn elect provincial and national representatives. Decisions will normally be taken by a majority; but there will be two important antidotes to a possible tyranny of the majority: namely, proper representation of minority interests and an indefeasible right of individual civil disobedience if one is called upon to act against conscience. This right of civil disobedience cannot be taken away, Gandhi thinks, without violating the moral nature of humanity.

The state that Gandhi depicts will above all be committed to *sarvodaya*: that is, to the development or improvement of all human beings rather than a ruling class or favoured few (it must be remembered that he is writing of an India in which there is still a deeply entrenched caste system). Gandhi disapproves of private property in so far as private property involves exploitation and inequality and accords primacy to material desire, but he concedes that, since it is everywhere established, it would not be feasible to abolish it. Instead, he suggests that the rich should hold their property in trust for the community, taking from it what they need and distributing the surplus to the poor. Gandhi was realistic enough to realise that such a proposal will not work unless the state takes a far more interventionist stance; in fact he thinks the state should in principle adopt such a stance. Indeed, he came eventually to recommend concessions to practice hardly consistent with his minimalist view of the state: redistributive taxation, restrictions on the right of inheritance, and nationalisation of land and heavy industry.

Like so many people who have made a contribution to 'political thought', Gandhi is not a political 'thinker' in the strictest sense. He is a moralist and man of action whose prescriptions are rooted in a synthesis of ideas drawn from disparate sources. Gandhi is nothing if not eclectic. He is influenced by the *Bhagavad Gita*, the Sermon on the Mount, Buddhist scriptures and the writings of Emerson, Ruskin, Thoreau and Tolstoy. He is a product of a particular and distinctive period of Indian history. His lofty morality, despite a tincture of self-righteousness that some have found annoying, has commanded almost universal respect, though rather less emulation. Perhaps Gandhi's most important influence has been on the black civil rights movement led by Martin Luther King.

## *Further reading*

## *Primary source*

 Mohandas Gandhi *The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi* (Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 1958).

## *Secondary sources*

 Bondurant, J. V. : *Conquest of Violence: The Gandhian Philosophy of Conflict* (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1965).

- Dhawan, G. : *The Political Philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi* (Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 1962).
- Iyer, R. N. : *The Moral and Political Thought of Mahatma Gandhi* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973).