# 6 The End of NEP

## Policy Changes and their Causes

NEP reached its apogee in 1925. During 1926 the absolute growth of the private sector outside agriculture came to a halt. As already shown in Chapter 4, its relative position began to decline earlier; however, until this date it could be said that it was the general understanding that private enterprise had its legitimate part to play in Soviet life. The decline of NEP cannot be dated precisely, the more so as official statements on the subject were ambiguous or deliberately misleading. Thus Stalin even in 1929 was still indignantly denying rumours to the effect that NEP was to be ended, and in fact as late as 1931 the tenth anniversary of NEP was the occasion for statements that it was still in operation. The five-year plan, in its optimal variant adopted as late as the spring of 1929, envisaged an increase over the five years in the national income generated in the private sector by as much as 23 9 per cent.<sup>1</sup> Yet, as we shall see, the offensive against the Nepmen outside agriculture had already been raging at this date for some time, and the offensive against the private peasants was about to begin. The following tables show the decline in legal private activities:

Trade

|        | Total private<br>turnover<br>( <i>million</i> roubles) trade | Per cent<br>of total |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| 1924-5 | 3.300                                                        | 42.5                 |
| 1925-6 | 4.963                                                        | 42.3                 |

#### 134 The End of NEP

Trade (cont.)

|        | Total private<br>turnover<br>(million roubles) | Per cent<br>of total<br>trade |
|--------|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 1926-7 | 5,063                                          | $30-9$                        |
| 1928   | 3.406                                          | 22.5                          |
| 1929   | 2,273                                          | $13-5$                        |
| 1930   | i,043                                          | $5-6$                         |
| 1931   |                                                |                               |

*{Source:* Malafeyev: *Istoriya* tsenoobrazovaniva v SSSR (Moscow, 1964). p. 134. The author draws attention to the large volume of illegal and unrecorded trade in and after 1929.)

The share of the private sector in the national income is said to have declined as follows:

|            |      | 1925-6 1926-7 1928 |      | 1929       | 1930 | 1931 | 1932 |
|------------|------|--------------------|------|------------|------|------|------|
|            |      |                    |      | (per cent) |      |      |      |
| Socialized | 45.9 | 48.7               | 52.7 | 61.0       | 72.2 | 81.5 | 90.7 |
| Private    | 54.1 | 51.1               | 47.3 | 39.0       | 27.8 | 18.5 | 9.3  |

*Sources:* 1925-6 and 1926-7, *Narodnoe khozyaistvo SSSR*, 1932, pp. xlvi-xlvii, 1928-32. E. Kviring, *Problemy ekonomiki*, Nos. 10-12 (1931) p. 5.

As already indicated earlier, the state had a potential stranglehold on the private trading and manufacturing sectors, in that supplies of raw materials and of goods to sell depended greatly on state industry. Therefore a simple administrative decision could change the situation, even without legal or tax measures specifically directed at the Nepmen. It was not until 1930 that private trade became (*de facto*) the crime of speculation and the employment of labour for private gain became in fact illegal.<sup>2</sup> But well before that date the squeeze was on. The position of 'Nepman' traders was precarious even in the days of 'high NEP': thus as early as February 1924 a thousand traders were accused of

'speculation' and ordered out of Moscow.<sup>3</sup> And already in the autumn of 1925, some materials in short supply were being increasingly reserved for state and cooperative, as distinct from private, use and sale.<sup>4</sup> It is noteworthy that there was a steady increase in surcharges on transport of private goods by rail: 'By 1926 the surcharges for transporting private goods reached 50 to 100 per cent, and in subsequent years were raised up to 400 per cent for some goods.'<sup>5</sup> The year 1926 also saw the first of a series of fiscal measures designed to make private trade less profitable: thus by decree of 18 June 'a temporary state tax on super-profits' was imposed on Nepmen. It was the first of many. On 9 April of the same year the central committee plenum decided that flour mills in private hands should be 'drastically curtailed'. An ever sharper tone crept into party pronouncements about Nepmen and kulaks.

Taxes on better-off peasants were increased, as the following table shows:

|                                   | 1925-6 | 1926-^7 |
|-----------------------------------|--------|---------|
| Poor peasants (roubles per annum) | 1.83   | 0.90    |
| Middle peasants                   | 13.25  | 17.77   |
| Kulaks                            | 63.60  | 100.77  |

*(Source:* **G. Maryakhin,** *Voprosy istorii,* **No. 4 (1967) p. 27.)** 

An amendment to the criminal code adopted in 1926 'envisaged imprisonment for up to three years with total or partial confiscation of property for those guilty of evil-intentioned *{zlostny)*  increases in prices of commodities through purchase, hoarding, or non-placing on the market'.<sup>6</sup> This is the famous Article 107 of the Code, which was to be used by Stalin two years later. At the time at which it was promulgated it remained very largely a dead letter. However, the fact that it was adopted in 1926 is an indication of the evolution of official opinion with regard to private trade in general.

Why this shift of policy? Official party histories tended to underplay the change. The resumption of the offensive against

#### **136 TheEndofNEP**

the private sector, according to such a view, was inherent in the very concept of NEP from the first. The state was now stronger, better able to run trade and industry, and in a position to begin to provide the capital equipment which would ultimately revolutionize social and productive relations in agriculture. Such an interpretation is not wholly wrong. For large numbers of party members NEP was a forced compromise with the hated enemy, who was to be attacked as soon as conditions were ripe, using any weapons at the party's command. However, to see things in this way is gravely to underestimate the extent of the change of policy which was taking shape gradually from the end of 1925. This culminated at the end of the decade in what can best be described as the Soviet great leap forward, involving the destruction of the last bastion of private enterprise in the great collectivization campaign.

The causes of the change of policy were numerous and complex, and interacted with one another.

Firstly, we must note the close relationship between ambitious investment programmes and the end of NEP. As has already been noted, 1925-6 saw the end of what might broadly be called the reconstruction or restoration period. It is true that the metallurgical industry was still below its 1913 level, and that some other industries, notably electricity generation, coal mining and some branches of engineering, were already above it. The essential point was that henceforth further efforts to increase industrial production would cause increasing strain. In December 1925 a resolution of the fourteenth party congress called for industrialization, and also for the victory of the socialist sector. The concentration of resources in the hands of the state seemed inconsistent with the activities of Nepmen, who competed for resources and diverted them from the priority tasks of the moment, and indeed made profits out of the shortages which an investment programme was already causing.

Did the Soviet national income in 1928 exceed the level of 1913, as the Gosplan figures claimed at the time, or was it still below that level, as is asserted by Paul R. Gregory in a challenging recalculation? The difference is essentially due to the choice of price deflator. He suggests that his results imply that recovery was not yet complete. However, whether or not this was so statistically, all the participants in the 'great debate' had solid ground for believing that industrial reconstruction had been completed, and that the resumption of the industrialization process called for new investment on a large scale. It was the pace of this process, its financing, its priorities, that caused controversy.

A second and very important feature of the situation, to which sufficient weight is seldom attached in histories of the period, was the price policy pursued by the government. We have seen in Chapter 4 that its response to the 'scissors' crisis of 1923 was to press the state trusts to reduce their costs and their prices. This policy was continued in subsequent years, although both urban and rural incomes rose faster than the volume of output (though the latter did rise rapidly). Faced with strong market pressure for price increases, the government obstinately persisted with its policy of price cuts, and in order to make them effective extended price control over an ever wider portion of state industry and state and cooperative trade. As might have been predicted, this speedily gave rise to the phenomenon of 'goods famine'. These words occur repeatedly in official and unofficial pronouncements from mid-1925 onwards. A talented young economist, who was to contribute greatly to the rebirth of Soviet economics forty years later, described the situation as follows: 'Commodities no longer seek buyers, the buyers seek commodities .. . There are long queues in front of some shops. In private trade prices are significantly higher than the selling prices of the state trusts, 100 per cent or 200 per cent higher for some commodities. Limitations on purchase are introduced: the goods most in demand are sold by state and cooperative shops not to all those willing to buy them, but to selected categories of buyers, for instance members [of the cooperatives] or members of trade unions. If in big cities the goods shortage has taken such acute forms, the situation in the villages is worse still.' This is due to price policy. 'The shortage of goods, therefore, occurs only when prices cease to carry out their function in balancing supply and demand, when they become inert and unresponsive to market forces.' Surplus purchasing power moved into the area in which price controls did not operate, and so private trade took on the characteristics of

speculation, since it was profitable to buy state-produced goods for resale, thereby in effect transferring resources to the private sector. More seriously, it had a grave adverse effect on peasant purchasing power. Even though the reduction in prices charged by state trusts and state trade may have been originally motivated by the desire to close the price 'scissors', i.e. to improve the peasants' terms of trade, the effect was quite different in practice. Since the official prices were below equilibrium prices, those closest to the factories got at the goods first. 'Towns are closer to the sources of industrial goods, the villages are further away. Therefore the towns appear to obtain a larger share of industrial goods than they would have obtained at prices which balance supply and demand. The policy of low prices not only failed to lower prices for the village, but on the contrary it lowered prices for the towns at the cost of raising them for the village, and by a large percentage too.' The young critic patiently pointed out that this policy was absurd, and would become the more absurd as state investments increased, since they would generate incomes which would constitute still heavier demand on the available consumer goods and services.<sup>7</sup>

This advice was ignored. A whole series of decrees and declarations demanded further cuts in prices. On 2 July 1926 the STO (Council of Labour and Defence) issued a decree the title of which must surely seem unsound even to the dimmest first-year student of economics: 'The reduction in retail prices of goods in short supply made by state industry'. The reduction was to be 10 per cent, and there was another and similar reduction ordered on 16 February 1927.

The pursuit of such a policy was plainly inconsistent with the logic of NEP, and was bound to lead to an attack on private traders who were selling manufactured goods in the villages at prices more than double those charged by state and cooperative shops, in which, however, the goods could not be obtained. Likewise the additional profit made by the still-legal private manufacturers and craftsmen would hardly appeal to the political and fiscal authorities.

Thirdly, a similar kind of blunder distorted agricultural production and procurements. The peasants' willingness to sell was

already adversely affected by the goods famine. This already adversely affected state procurements out of the relatively good harvest of 1925, and it has been argued that many of the leaders (and Stalin himself) were dismayed by the peasants' response (or lack of response) to the concessions made to them in 1924-5; they had anticipated a sizeable exportable surplus of grain, and planned higher imports on this basis. Lack of export earnings made it necessary to cut the import plan. This in turn contributed to the 'goods hunger' that emerged in 1925-6, and this despite very high rates of growth of industrial production.<sup>8</sup> Be this as it may, they made the situation worse by reducing state procurement prices, aiming to reduce the strain on the state budget and on the money supply. In the agricultural year 1926-^7 the general level of state procurement prices fell by about 6 per cent compared with the previous year. No such reduction was justified by the market situation. But worse still, for ever mesmerized by the key role of grain, the government cut prices for this particular crop much more severely, by as much as 20-25 P<sup>e</sup> r cent - The result, as might have been foreseen, was a reluctance to sell grain to the state, a tendency to concentrate on other crops and on livestock, for which prices were more favourable, and the emergence of a large gap between official state prices and those paid to the peasants for their produce by the still legal Nepmen traders. We shall have much more to say about the consequences of this later in the decade.

Why were these price policies adopted? A little reflection clearly shows them to have been totally out of line with the principles of NEP, and indeed the continuance of such price policies was bound to lead to grave conflict and confusion, even in the absence of other factors. No doubt much can be explained by a combination of obstinate blindness with a built-in dislike of market forces which characterized many Bolsheviks. However, part of the obstinacy may have had a political explanation. Trotsky and his friends had favoured increasing the level of savings and investments, and the logic of their position demanded somewhat higher, not lower, prices of manufactured goods, since in this way the state would obtain the necessary revenue. This in itself would have been an argument for Stalin to oppose such a

move, and he doubtless saw political advantages in contrasting his policy of lower prices with that of the opposition. The pressure to increase grain prices, in turn, came especially from Bukharin and his friends of the future 'right-wing deviation'. Here again, Stalin had political reasons for obstinacy. This is not mere surmise. Stalin repeatedly accused various oppositionists of wanting higher prices. The party plenum held on 7-12 February 1927, in reaffirming the need for lower prices all round, emphasized that 'in the problem of prices are interlinked all the basic economic and political problems of the Soviet state'. The policy chosen was basically hostile to market forces in industry, trade and agriculture. Either the policy would have to be amended, or the market and its manifestations would have to be destroyed. The survival of NEP was conceivable only if this price policy was altered. It was not altered, and NEP was doomed. Only after the decisive defeat of the 'privateers' was a very different price policy followed, this time in order to finance the spectacular expansion of state industry. But much more of this later on.

The approach of many, if not most, party members to the whole question of trade and prices is well expressed in a pamphlet by a leading official of the *Tsentrosoyuz* (central consumer cooperative) organization. For him, the whole point of the spread of cooperative shops was that this would combat and gradually squeeze out the private trader. He was well aware of the fact that the latter could charge much higher prices, owing to the 'goods famine'. However, he drew the conclusion that in 'tearing the mass of commodities out of the hands of elemental market forces, of private trading speculation', consumer cooperatives were helping to 'dig defensive trenches around socialist industry'. It was a matter of 'who shall beat whom' *(kto kovo),* part of the battle for socialism. The fact that cooperatives supplied goods cheaper than the private traders, i.e. that they sold at below supply-and-demand prices, was to be used to persuade the peasants to sign contracts undertaking to sell farm produce (at state-fixed prices) in exchange for an undertaking to supply them with manufactured goods (at state-fixed prices), all these prices being below the market level. 'What would it matter if the privateer-speculator paid this or that peasant a few roubles extra per hundredweight of

wheat? After all, this would be offset by his bandit-speculationist overcharging in supplying the peasants with the goods they need.' The last years of the twenties did see an attempt to make contracts of this kind *{kontraktatsiya),* and the author of the pamphlet evidently hoped that these contracts would form the basis of relations between town and village, and grow into 'the higher form of products exchange'.<sup>9</sup> Obviously, such thoughtpatterns as these were unlikely to be affected by economists' arguments about market equilibrium.

### Industrialization and the Draft Five-Year Plans

These were the years of the political triumph of Stalin, and this was accompanied by a change in the whole atmosphere of Soviet life. Whether in literature or in philosophy, in the party's own internal arrangements or in the sphere of economics, the line became one of stern imposition of conformity, centralized authority, suppression of uncontrolled initiatives. The Nepmen were thus to some extent victims of a more general tendency. This same tendency led, as did the logic of the industrialization drive, to growing centralization of the state's own planning mechanism. As already noted in Chapter 4, the intention to plan effectively from above was voiced even during the period of high NEP. There was a procedure by which the industrial and financial plans of trusts *(promfinplany)* were approved by VSNKH . At first this had little practical effect, but it did provide a mechanism by which control could be tightened. As early as 1925 one finds in planning documents such declarations as: 'The state is becoming the real master of its industry. .. . The industrial plan must be constructed not from below but from above.' (I owe the reference to R. W. Davies.) Procedures for price control existed from the early days of NEP and they began to be used to keep prices of some basic industrial materials and fuels, and also of freight transport, at low levels. Subsidies were often called for. A goods famine therefore developed in the field of producers' goods too. This led by 1926-^7 to a more systematic control of production and distribution of some key commodities, particularly metals, by

VSNKH . It was only logical that this should result in closer integration between Gosplan's perspective plans and the VSNKH' S current operations. To cite a Soviet author, at the end of 1925 'there was a new cycle of administrative interference'. Credits ceased to be regulated by interest rates and began to be administratively allocated. 'At the end of classical NEP the market was retreating before war-communism-like methods on the entire front. The unreal industrial and grain-procurement plans of 1925-6 brought the country to the edge of crisis.'<sup>10</sup>

Gradually the extent of administrative controls increased, the role of market forces declined. While many branches of industrial activity still operated with very considerable autonomy until the end of the decade, the contours of the future command economy were becoming increasingly visible, and the acute strains and shortages of the next years would lead to much tighter and systematic centralized planning. The plenum of the central committee held in April 1926, emphasizing the need for more capital accumulation, also spoke of 'the strengthening of the planning and the introduction of a regime of planned discipline into the activities of all state organs'. The fifteenth party conference (26 October to 3 November 1926) declared for 'the strengthening of the economic hegemony of large-scale socialist industry over the entire economy of the country', and spoke of the necessity of striving to achieve and surpass the most advanced capitalist countries 'in a relatively minimal historical period'.

To do this it was necessary to formulate a long-term plan, and so we must now consider the five-year plan. Early drafts of such a plan were widely discussed among economists during the middle twenties.

Preparatory work for a long-term plan began in earnest in 1927. On 8 June 1927 a decree by the Council of People's Commissars called for the creation of 'a united all-union plan, which, being the expression of economic unity of the Soviet Union, would facilitate the maximum development of economic regions on the basis of their specialization .. . and the maximum utilization of their resources for the purpose of industrialization of the country'. The role of Gosplan was strengthened, and the republican Gosplans placed under its authority. But the expansion

of industrial investment did not await the formulation of a longterm plan. In the economic year 1926-7 the total volume of investments increased by 31-7 per cent, but investments in new construction more than doubled.<sup>11</sup> Persistent shortages of metal caused vigorous efforts to expand production of iron and steel, and also ore mining. The great Dnieper Dam was begun, and so was the Turksib railway. While the volume of investments in this year was soon greatly to be surpassed, they imposed a strain on the economy which reacted on the availability of resources for other purposes and so contributed to the 'goods famine'.

Meanwhile the country's leading experts, belonging to various currents of Bolshevik opinion and those belonging to no party, were hard at work formulating a five-year plan. The teleological school increasingly obtained the upper hand, and so the specialists in Gosplan and VSNKH were under continuous pressure to adopt ambitious growth targets. These pressures and revisions, as well as the truly colossal nature of the task, explain why a fiveyear plan which was to operate with effect from October 1928 was submitted to the approval of the sixteenth party conference in April 1929, i.e. when implementation was already in full swing. It proved necessary to formulate the plan in two versions: the initial variant and the optimal variant. As may be seen from the table on p. 145, the initial variant was optimistic enough. It was rejected by the sixteenth party conference in favour of the more ambitious version. We shall see that this in its turn was replaced by yet more fantastic targets.

The formation of the plan required an immense amount of detailed work, for which there was no precedent. True there had been 'control figures' for earlier years, and a balance of the national economy had been drawn up, as was mentioned in the previous chapter. However, the huge task of drafting a five-year development plan to transform the economic structure of Russia required much more information about inter-industry links than could be available in the then existing state of information and statistics. The detailed targets therefore included much that was insecurely based, and contemporary comment made no secret of this. One of the authors of the plan, G. Grin'ko, writing in February 1929, showed that many of the detailed calculations available at this date were still based on the first variant of the plan, and Grin'ko himself treated the lower variant as 'so to speak a guaranteed minimum within the optimal variant', which would be achieved if the favourable assumptions underlying the more optimistic version proved to be ill-founded.<sup>12</sup>

The plan as adopted was, to say the least, over-optimistic. Miracles seldom occur in economic life, and in the absence of divine intervention it is hard to imagine how one would expect simultaneous increases of investment and consumption, not to speak of the output of industry, agriculture and labour productivity, by such tremendous percentages. Efficiency in labour and management was to be such that costs and prices were supposed to be substantially reduced during the five years. It is hard to see how anybody could have regarded this as realistic at the time, let alone in retrospect." Yet the optimal variant was shortly afterwards replaced by a still more fantastic series of targets. However, we will defer consideration of this phase until the next chapter.

The five-year plan as adopted far exceeded in the scale of its investments the demand of the defeated left opposition. In 1926 they had been denouncing as far too modest the plans adopted by the Stalin-Bukharin majority. The latter's line had been that Trotsky and his friends were demanding a tempo of growth Which would be inconsistent with economic and political balance, with the smychka. They may well have been right. Certain it was that the higher tempos now adopted were inconsistent with the maintenance of the alliance between Stalin and Bukharin. The latter published a veiled attack on excessive and unbalanced growth rates in his 'Notes of an economist' *(Zametki ekonomista,*  in *Pravda,* 30 September 1928). Nor were such tempos reconcilable with NEP, and especially with the existing situation in the villages and in agriculture.

The heavy financial expenditures which began in 1927 were partly financed by the placing of industrialization loans, at relatively high rates of interest (thus bonds issued on 1 June 1927 to the value of 200 million roubles, repayable in ten years, carried a 12 per cent interest rate). The need for revenue also encouraged the regime to impose heavier taxes on the Nepmen and kulaks. The policy of charging relatively low prices for the products of

|                                                    | 1927-8<br>actual | 1932-3<br>first<br>version | (per cent 1932-3<br>increase) 'optimal | version' | (per cent<br>increase) |
|----------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------|------------------------|
| Aggregates                                         |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| <b>Employed labour force</b>                       |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (million)                                          | $" \cdot 3$      | 14.8                       | $(30-9)$                               | 158      | $(39-8)$               |
| Investments (all) (1926-7                          |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| prices milliard roubles)                           | 8.2              | 20.8                       | (153)                                  | 27.7     | (237)                  |
| National income (milliard                          |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| roubles)                                           | 24.4             | $44 - 4$                   | (82)                                   | $49-7$   | (104)                  |
| Industrial production                              |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (milliard roubles)                                 | 18.3             | 38.1                       | (108)                                  | $43 - 2$ | (136)                  |
| of which:                                          |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| Producers' goods                                   |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (milliard roubles)                                 | 6.0              | $15-5$                     | (158)                                  | 18.I     | (201)                  |
| Consumers' goods                                   |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (milliard roubles)                                 | 12.3             | 22.6                       | (83)                                   | 251      | (104)                  |
| Agricultural production                            |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (milliard roubles)                                 | 16.6             | $23-9$                     | (41)                                   | 25.8     | (55)                   |
| Consumption: Non-                                  |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| agricultural (index)                               | 100              | 152.0                      |                                        | 171.4    |                        |
| Agricultural population                            |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (index)                                            | 100              | 151.6                      |                                        | 167.4    |                        |
| Industrial output targets<br>Electricity (milliard |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| kWhs)                                              | $5-05$           | 17.0                       | (236)                                  | 22.0     | (335)                  |
| Hard coal                                          |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (million tons)                                     | $35-4$           | 68.0                       | (92)                                   | $75-0$   | (in)                   |
| Oil (million tons)                                 | 11.7             | 19.0                       | (62)                                   | 22.0     | (88)                   |
| Iron ore (million                                  |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| tons)                                              | $5-7$            | 15.0                       | (163)                                  | 19.0     | (233)                  |
| Pig iron (million                                  |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| tons)                                              | $3-3$            | 8.0                        | (142)                                  | 10.0     | (203)                  |
| Steel (million tons)                               | 4.0              | $8-3$                      | (107)                                  | 10.4     | (160)                  |
| Machinery (million                                 |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| roubles)                                           | 1,822            | ?                          |                                        | 4,688    | (157)                  |
| Superphosphates                                    |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (million tons)                                     | 015              | 2.6                        | (1600)                                 | 3.4      | (2100)                 |
| Wool cloth                                         |                  |                            |                                        |          |                        |
| (million metres)                                   | 97               | 192                        | (98)                                   | 270      | (178)                  |

*(Source: Pyatiletnii plan* (3rd edition, 1930), pp. 129 ff. Machinery figures from 'Fulfilment of first five-year plan', 273.)

state industry was persisted with, however. Inflationary pressure grew, and with it the gap between official and free prices for the products of both industry and agriculture.

Did Stalin adopt a plan which he knew to be impossible, as a political manoeuvre? Did Kuibyshev, the chairman of VSNKH , or Strumilin, a leading party planner, adopt propaganda plans? It is difficult to say. Planning as a technique was hardly born. Overoptimism, which contributed to the excesses of the 1929-33 period, had already infected the leadership. Productive capacity, human energy, the consequences of a great drive, the effects of enthusiasm, were all overestimated. It was believed that 'there was no fortress that the Bolsheviks could not take'. The voices which called for caution, which drew attention to difficulties and bottlenecks, were thought to be those of former Mensheviks or SRs, or bourgeois specialists. The latter were discredited and suspect following a show trial, the so-called *Shakhty* affair, held in 1928, which purported to show that a group of such specialists were wreckers and deviationists in the pay of foreign powers. Caution, and emphasis on balance, were also attributes of the right-wing opposition; they were denounced by Stalin with increasing vehemence in and after 1928. Experts who gave unwelcome advice were thrust aside; men whose advice was more congenial were put in their places. Perhaps many of the party leaders were genuinely carried away. Some may also have seen some advantage in the mobilizing force of a plan which would cause maximum effort, and so in the end achieve more than a sound, solid, balanced plan would do.

#### The Peasant Problem Again: The Procurement Crisis

However, it is now time to return to the peasants. It had not escaped the notice of Stalin that the ambitious industrial investment plans and the existing structure of peasant agriculture were inconsistent with one another. In his speech to the fifteenth party congress (December 1927), he spoke about the relatively slow rate of development of agriculture, advanced familiar reasons to explain this backwardness, and then said:

#### **The Peasant Problem Again: The Procurement Crisis 147**

What is the way out? The way out is to turn the small and scattered peasant farms into large united farms based on cultivation of the land in common, to go over to collective cultivation of the land on the basis of a new higher technique. The way out is to unite the small and dwarf peasant farms gradually but surely, not by pressure but by example and persuasion, into large farms based on common, cooperative, collective cultivation of the land .. . There is no other way out.<sup>14</sup>

In the resolution adopted by the fifteenth congress one finds the following words: 'At the present time the task of uniting and transforming the small individual peasant holdings into large collectives must become the principal task of the party in the villages.' Yet, for reasons which have already been explained, this was not understood to mean the imminence of a revolution from above. The general desirability of collective agriculture was not in dispute. If it was to be done voluntarily and by example, there was no danger of anything particularly drastic happening quickly.

Undoubtedly what brought matters to a head was the problem of marketings, in particular of state procurements. Every year the leaders watched anxiously as deliveries mounted in the autumn and winter, wondering if there would be enough to feed the towns and the army and, who knows, something for export too. Attention was particularly concentrated on grain, the key crop since bread was the staff of life in Russia, and because over 80 per cent of all sown land was sown to grain.

Difficulties accumulated after 1925. Some of the reasons have already been mentioned. There was the 'goods famine'. There was the reduction of procurement prices, affecting particularly grain. This naturally discouraged marketings. The peasants tried to sell grain to the still-surviving private traders rather than to the state procurement agencies, to hold grain in expectation of higher prices, or to feed it to livestock. As Stalin subsequently pointed out, the better-off peasants were able to manoeuvre more effectively than their poorer neighbours to take advantage of any possibility of obtaining better terms. The government reacted by measures against Nepmen, by streamlining the state procurement apparatus to avoid a situation in which different procurement agencies bid against one another, and also by measures against

kulaks, who were held responsible for the shortages. Thus the resolution of the fifteenth congress instructed the central committee to devise higher and more progressive taxes on the more prosperous peasants. The tone of party pronouncements on the kulak question became sharper. The idea of liquidating them as a class was not yet born, or at least not yet mentioned. However, they were to be limited, penalized and generally discouraged. This was a policy hardly designed to encourage the more ambitious peasants to expand production or investment.

As already mentioned, the fifteenth congress advocated the spread of collectivization. Of the various kinds of agricultural producers' associations, the most promising seemed to be the loosest, the  $TOZ$  (the letters stand for 'Association for the Joint Cultivation of the Land'). In these associations the members retained ownership of their tools and implements, most of their livestock and control over their land. They simply carried out some of the farm work jointly. The more advanced forms of producers' cooperation which then existed were thought to be unattractive to the peasants; for instance in the decree of 16 March 1927 it was laid down that the TOZ was to be favoured. However, in 1927 all the various types of collectives and cooperatives accounted for only a tiny proportion of peasants and of agricultural production, and a few inefficient state farms made little difference to the general picture.

Collective and state agriculture in 1928

Percentage of sown area

| Individual peasants | 97.3                                      |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Collective farms    | 1.2 (of which about $0.7 \text{ T O Z}$ ) |
| State farms         | 1.5                                       |

(Source: Sotsialisticheskoe stroitefstvo SSSR (Moscow, 1935). P- xxxix.)

It was considered axiomatic that the peasant problem was to be handled cautiously. Coercion was excluded. Had not Lenin, and before him Engels, warned about the need for patience and the preservation of the voluntary principle? The poorer peasants could be allies, the middle peasants should be befriended, or at least neutralized, the kulaks could and should be restricted or taxed. There were still no grounds to suppose that a storm would break over the heads of the entire peasantry.

But the storm clouds were gathering, and the procurement difficulties of 1927 led to the first flash of lightning. There was already a shortfall in procurements of grain before the fifteenth party congress assembled in December, and this was pointed to by the left opposition, which advocated a compulsory grain loan as a way out. (However, their own policies, calling for more vigorous measures against the so-called kulaks, would have made things worse.) The politbureau majority denied that the situation was critical until after the congress, but critical it was.

The shortfall in grain procurements may be seen from the fact that by January 1928 the state had succeeded in purchasing only 300 million poods, as against 428 million on the same date in the previous year. The shortfall was particularly great in Siberia, the Volga and the Urals, where the harvest was reasonably good (bad weather was the cause of difficulties in the North Caucasus).<sup>15</sup> The effect was not only to create acute problems in supplying the cities with bread, but also to threaten supplies of industrial crops. Thus the maintenance of the cotton acreage in Uzbekistan was threatened by grain shortage there. Archive information shows a flow of complaints about this from local party organizations to the central committee.<sup>16</sup> Some of the reasons for this critical situation have already been given: the low price of grain, shortage of manufactured goods, the gap between official and free prices. With grain procurement prices so low, peasants naturally concentrated on other commodities. For example, in the area of the Urals grain sales to the state were only 63 per cent of the previous year, but meat sales increased by 50 per cent, while sales of eggs doubled, bacon quadrupled, and eleven times as much bacon fat was delivered as in the previous year.<sup>17</sup> Naturally the peasants waited for the rise in official grain prices, the necessity for which seemed quite obvious. However, Stalin and his colleagues drew very different conclusions.

Ignoring the proposals of Bukharin and others to increase

grain prices, Stalin decided instead to launch a direct attack, which revived memories of the excesses of war communism. There had been a good harvest in the Urals and West Siberia. There went Stalin with a task force of officials and police. Free markets were closed, private traders thrown out, peasants ordered to deliver grain and punished as criminals if they failed to do so. Stalin made speeches, which were published only twenty years later, denouncing laggard officials, requiring them to seize kulak grain, demanding that they invoke a hitherto unused article of the criminal code (Article 107) against 'speculation', to legalize the seizures. He mocked the 'prosecuting and judicial authorities [who] are not prepared for such a step'. He used extreme language to the party officials, who were slow to understand that a basic change of attitude was expected of them: 'Can it be that you are afraid to disturb the tranquillity of the kulak gentry? You say that enforcement of Article 107 against the kulaks would be an emergency measure, that it would not be productive of good results, that it would worsen the relations in the countryside. Suppose it would be an emergency measure. What of it? .. . As for your prosecuting and judicial officials, they should be dismissed."<sup>8</sup> At the same time, scarce industrial goods were directed to the grain-surplus regions.

Rumours spread that the government 'will pay all foreign debts with grain and is therefore reinstating prodrazverstka, taking all grain away'. Reporting this and citing contemporary archives, a Soviet writer gave the following typical instance: 'In the village of Pankrushino the kulaks spread the rumour that all grain was being collected in one vast storehouse in the town of Kamensk, that the peasants would be given a bread ration, that armed detachments were scouring the villages for bread and that they would soon arrive."<sup>9</sup> The same source quotes numerous reports in the press about alleged kulak opposition, though it seems more than probable that this was simply strong peasant reaction to the seizure of their produce.

The kulaks undertook large-scale agitation, asserting that Soviet power impoverished the peasant, did not allow him to improve his income, that NEP was being abolished. Kulaks, priests, former white-guardists endeavoured to utilize in their counter-revolutionary agitation certain cases of distortion *[sic]* of the Party line in credit and tax policy .. . In the village of Troitskoye in the Don area there was unmasked a priest who hid grain and organized in the cemetery a kulak meeting, where he made a report on 'grain procurements and the international situation'.<sup>20</sup>

This source also admits that there were indeed grounds for agitation.

Not infrequently measures were taken which hit not only the kulaks but the middle peasant. Such measures were: the confiscation of grain surpluses without the judgement of a court under Article 107, administrative pressure on the middle peasant, the use of barrier detachments (i.e. forcible prevention of private transport of grain), the forcible issuing of bond certificates in payment for grain and as a condition for the sale of scarce commodities to the peasants, and so on.<sup>21</sup>

Indeed arbitrary confiscation was a common phenomenon, and by strictly interpreting Article 107 the authorities could choose to regard the mere possession of grain stocks as illegal hoarding with a speculative purpose and, therefore, a fit subject for confiscation without payment. Newspapers of the time were full of reports about evil kulak hoarders of grain, and also of reports concerning peasant meetings in which the delivery of grain to the state was extolled and the kulaks condemned. Such reports must be taken with a pinch of salt. Thus the same source which referred to the payment of peasants with bond certificates instead of money, and referred to it as an impermissible excess, cites approvingly an allegedly spontaneous decision by peasants 'to refuse to accept money and to request payment in bonds for the entire amount of delivered grain', and a resolution worded thus: 'Not a single pound to the private speculator.'<sup>22</sup>

Stalin himself concentrated on West Siberia and the Urals, and other senior officials pursued the procurement campaign in other areas: for example, Zhdanov in the Volga region, Kossior in the Ukraine and the Urals, Andreyev in the North Caucasus. The chief coordinator of the entire operation was said to have been Mikoyan.<sup>23</sup> All the above were devoted members of the Stalin faction.

These arbitrary procedures later 'disguised' as locally initiated, became known as the 'Urals-Siberian method'. In retrospect this must be regarded as a great turning-point in Russian history. It upset once and for all the delicate psychological balance upon which the relations between party and peasants rested, and it was also the first time that a major policy departure was undertaken by Stalin personally, without even the pretence of a central committee or politbureau decision.

Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky, three of the politbureau of the party, protested vehemently. In April 1928, at the plenum of the central committee, Stalin beat an apparent retreat, and accepted a resolution condemning excesses, reasserting legality and promising that nothing similar would be repeated. But events showed that Stalin's compliance was a mere manoeuvre. Forcible procurements were repeated in many areas in 1928-9. Stalin soon made it clear that the 'Urals-Siberian method' would be used whenever necessary. Yet surely it was obvious that peasants would not increase marketed production if the state would seize the produce at whatever price it chose to pay, and imprison anyone who concealed grain. The outbreak of argument among the leaders was carefully concealed from the public, and from the party membership at large. Only later it became known that Bukharin, at last realizing what his erstwhile ally was up to, began to speak of Genghis Khan, of 'military-feudal exploitation' of the peasantry, of 'tribute' *(dan')* levied on the village. It was in the context of these fears and feelings that we must read his plea for balanced growth, mentioned on page 144 above. In the already suffocating political atmosphere, he was unable to voice his real fears in public. These concerned most of all the consequences of the coming clash with the peasants.

Collectivization on the Agenda

Stalin and his faction did not yet show any sign that they had decided on an all-out collectivization campaign. Indeed, there is no evidence at all that such a decision was taken until the early autumn of 1929, and the Soviet public first heard of it on 7 November 1929. Some may consider that Stalin had a secret plan all ready for the propitious moment, but this seems unlikely. What he clearly wished to do after the 'Urals-Siberian' episode of February 1928 was to free the regime from over-dependence on the peasantry. This view he had already expressed during his 'Urals-Siberian' tour: 'In order to put grain procurements on a satisfactory basis other measures are required ... I have in mind the formation of collective farms and state farms. $^{24}$  An immediate consequence of this was the decision, in April 1928, to set up a 'grain trust' (Zernotrest), aiming to create new state farms covering 14 million hectares (36 million acres). However, this was still not to be regarded as a step towards mass collectivization, since these farms were to be set up on unused land. No one was to be expropriated or forced. Consequently this decision was not a challenge to Bukharin and his friends, and may even have been accepted by them. It proved unworkable and inadequate.

The July 1928 plenum of the central committee was still, so far as its official statements were concerned, dominated by the need to reassure the peasants (or to keep the Bukharin group quiet). True, the resolution spoke of 'voluntary union of peasants into collectives on the basis of new techniques', but no one could object to this, the more so as the absence of new equipment was a principal argument of the 'go-slow' school. The resolution admitted that low grain prices contributed to existing difficulties and resolved to increase them, but this was a case of much too little and too late. The resolution also spoke of 'the further raising of the level of small- and medium-size individual (peasant) economies'. So *at the time* there seemed to be a return to moderation. But here again the historian faces the difficulty that some key policy statements were made only behind closed doors. If they were to be included in a chronological account, the surprise and shock which greeted subsequent announcements of policy changes would be incomprehensible. At the same July plenum, Stalin admitted both the need for 'tribute' from the peasants, and that they did and had to overpay for manufactured goods and were underpaid for farm produce. This followed from the need to industrialize the country with the help of internal accumulation'.<sup>25</sup> In other words, Preobrazhensky (and Trotsky) were right

all along. But his speech too was published only in 1949; when it was made, Trotsky was in Alma Ata under effective house-arrest, and Preobrazhensky had been deported. If anyone chose to remind Stalin of the source of his ideas, this was omitted from the belatedly published record.

In a public speech after the July plenum, Stalin took up an apparently moderate position: 'We need neither detractors nor eulogizers of individual peasant farming,' but he did urge once again the gradual development of collective and state farms. His tone sharpened in his first *public* attack on 'right-wing deviationists' (naming, as yet, no names) on 19 October 1928, and at the November 1928 plenum of the central committee one heard more of the inefficiency of agriculture holding back industry, of the encouragement of collective and state farms, and of measures to limit the kulaks. In the winter the 'Urals-Siberian method' was quietly reapplied to the peasants, and under cover of anti-kulak measures the method once again hit the middle peasants hard, since, after all, most of the grain came from them. Stalin attacked Bukharin vigorously in the April 1929 plenum of the central committee, but most of his words remained unpublished at the time.

Confusion in the public mind over peasant policies was heightened by the resolution of this plenum, when the word 'tribute', accepted by Stalin in the previous year in an *unpublished* speech, was now treated as a slanderous and lying accusation directed at Stalin by Bukharin, who was now openly attacked. It was admitted that peasants did overpay for some industrial goods, but this would speedily be put right.

The sixteenth party conference, meeting in the same month, approved the 'optimal' version of the five-year plan, as we have seen. This included a section on agriculture. There was to be a marked advance in collectivization, and by the end of the plan it was hoped to have twenty-six million hectares cultivated by the state and all kinds of collectives (including TOZs); these would provide over 15 per cent of the total agricultural output. It was not at all clear by what means this expansion in agricultural collectivization was to be achieved. However, given five years and the necessary resources, it was not an unrealistic perspective. While in the years 1921-7 there had been no move by the peasants towards any type of collective farming, this could be blamed on the lack of inducement, indeed on the neglect of the few collectives that did exist. Such a programme, if carried out, would still have left the vast majority of the peasantry in the private sector, producing the bulk of every crop and owning most of the livestock.

#### **The Decision to Attack**

Now that Bukharin was at last openly denounced as a right-wing deviationist (he was not expelled from the politbureau until November 1929), Stalin must have felt free to launch the campaign that was maturing in his mind. Yet by not a word or gesture did he prepare the party, the people, the peasants, for the great turn, the 'revolution from above' which was to shake Russia to its foundations. In fact, even as late as 27 June 1929 a decree on agricultural marketing cooperation still assumed the predominance of the private sector in agriculture for an indefinite period, and we shall see that it was not until the campaign had begun that there was an amendment of the plan to achieve a mere 15 per cent collectivization by 1933.

No document exists which can tell us exactly when Stalin made up his mind. During 1929 the strains of the investment programme of the five-year plan began to affect all sectors of the economy. Rationing of consumers in cities was introduced gradually during 1928 in some areas and became general early in 1929, perhaps the first and only recorded instance of the *introduction* of rationing in time of peace. The goods famine increased in intensity. The gap between free and official prices widened, as the table on p. 156 demonstrates. By 1930 the difference increased very rapidly.

Voices from the right urged slowdown, higher farm prices, a modification of the investment programme. Rykov proposed a 'two-year plan', with emphasis on agriculture. Grain procurement prices were in fact raised, far too late, in 1929, by 14-19 per cent,<sup>26</sup> but the market situation was such that private traders

|                 | Retail prices :(i9'3 = 100) |          |              |          |  |
|-----------------|-----------------------------|----------|--------------|----------|--|
|                 | Food                        |          | Manufactures |          |  |
|                 | Private                     | Official | Private      | Official |  |
| 1926 (December) | 198                         | 181      | 251          | 208      |  |
| 1927 (December) | 222                         | 175      | 240          | 188      |  |
| 1928 (December) | 293                         | 184      | 253          | 190      |  |
| 1929 (June)     | 450                         | 200      | 279          | 192      |  |

*(Source:* Malafeyev, *Istoriya tsenoobrazovaniya v SSSR* (Moscow, 1964), pp. 384, 385.)

were buying in that year at prices which rose by over 100 per cent. In the Ukraine,'for instance, private traders were buying at 170 per cent above state procurement prices.<sup>27</sup> However, there were a number of arguments for an all-out drive forward. In the first place, it must have already seemed impossible to continue on the basis of a combination of private agriculture and periodic coercion. Secondly, Stalin's faction wanted to prove the right to be wrong, and would benefit from stealing the clothes of the left opposition now that it had been defeated and its leader, Trotsky, exiled. Thirdly, many party activists had all along hated NEP and were willing to throw their energy and enthusiasm into the great task of 'socialist construction'. *Pravda* described how the delegates to the fifth congress of Soviets, which approved the five-year plan in May 1929, gazed upon a vast map which showed the various construction projects. 'Before our eyes we saw our country, as it will be in five years' time. Exciting prospect! As if by some magic hand the curtains which conceal the future have been parted. The enthusiasm of the congress found expression in a potent rendering of the Internationale.'<sup>28</sup> There were doubtless a few cynics present, yet the enthusiasm must have been genuine. Of course the majority of ordinary people may have felt very differently, but this was hardly considered relevant in a country in which nearly 80 per cent of the public consisted of peasants, most of whom could not be expected to feel the dynamism of a socialist transformation and who in any case, when they were not dangerous enemies of the regime, did not know what was good

for them. Sacrifices? Well, many young communists found great satisfaction in living hard in tents and huts, building the great factories which would change Russia and make a happy future for generations to come. Stalin himself was no romantic, but saw advantages in harnessing such feelings as these.

So the decision was taken: to force up still further the tempos of industrial construction, and launch the campaign to collectivize the peasantry; this meant the majority of the peasantry, not 15 per cent, and immediately, not by 1933. The relevant data are examined in the next chapter.

Why, then, did the 'great turn' happen? Why the revolution from above, why collectivization? Much ink has been expended in discussing these questions. Some of the answers have been indicated in the previous pages. To recapitulate, the following factors were of evident importance:

(1) The desire of many party members, and notably Stalin himself, to eliminate an individual peasantry which, as Lenin had said and Stalin repeated, 'produces capitalists from its midst, and cannot help producing them, constantly and continuously'.<sup>29</sup> True, Lenin advised caution, persuasion, example. True, the brutal methods which will be described in the next chapter were quite unjustified by doctrine and ideology, a fact which explains the secrecy and plain lies which were characteristic of the entire operation. But what if adherence to the voluntary principle meant the indefinite dominance of individualist agriculture?

(2) The problem of industrial development, with priority of heavy industry, and the linked issues of capital accumulation and farm surpluses. Stalin did not deny that there was an alternative road, that of 'making agriculture large-scale by implanting capitalism in agriculture'. He rejected this as he rejected the kulaks.<sup>30</sup> He left himself little choice thereafter. (After all, even kulaks were very modest farmers by Western standards.)

(3) The price policies, in industry and agriculture, which developed in 1926 and were obstinately continued, and which could *of themselves* have destroyed NEP, even if no other complications had ensued.

(4) The political atmosphere, the prejudices against the market and Nepmen generally, the rise of monolithism and of Stalin, the

'leap forward' psychology. Fears of internal class enemies, and also of the hostile environment, affected both the social policies of the regime and the degree of priority accorded to heavy industry, as the basis of military capacity.

Years later, a Menshevik wrote of Stalin's methods as 'primitive socialist accumulation by the methods of Tamerlane'. He added: 'The financial basis of the first five-year plan, until Stalin found it in levying tribute on the peasants, was extremely precarious .. . [It seemed that] everything would go to the devil. ..'"

All this in no way justifies what actually occurred. It did occur, and it was not an accident or a consequence of private whims. To understand is not to forgive. It is simply better than the alternative, which is not to understand.