Pan-African intergovernmental association

The **Africa Rice Center** (**AfricaRice**), formerly known as the **West
Africa Rice Development Association** (**WARDA**), is a pan-African
intergovernmental association and a CGIAR Research organization, currently
headquartered in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire. AfricaRice is an agricultural
research center that was constituted in 1971 by 11 West African countries. By
2023, the center counted 28 African member states. Since 1986, AfricaRice has
been one of the 15 specialized research centers of CGIAR.

The center runs regional research stations in Saint-Louis, Senegal and Ibadan,
Nigeria with country offices in Cotonou, Benin and Antananarivo, Madagascar.

AfricaRice aims to contribute to poverty alleviation and food security in
Africa through research for development. The center has close links to
agricultural research organizations in the African member states, agricultural
universities and research institutes in Europe, Japan, the United States, and
the development sector, including non-governmental organizations, farmers
organizations, and donors. AfricaRice, being part of the CGIAR system, shares
resources with several of the other CGIAR organizations, including the
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) in Los Baños, Philippines, and
the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture in Ibadan, Nigeria. In the
course of reforms at the CGIAR, AfricaRice developed together with IRRI and
International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) the Global Rice Science
Partnership (GRiSP), which sets a global strategic research agenda for rice.

One of AfricaRice's major tasks is developing and introducing new rice seed
varieties suitable for African conditions. NERICA, which stands for "New Rice
for Africa", is two families of interspecific cultivars of African (_Oryza
glaberrima_) and Asian (_Oryza sativa_) rice species, that was developed to
improve the yields of African farmers. For his work on NERICA, Monty Jones
from Sierra Leone was awarded the World Food Prize in 2004, becoming the first
African to win this award.

## Gallery

  * Africa Rice Center staff in Benin, 2011