Multilateral development finance institution

The **African Development Bank** Group (**AfDB** , also known as **BAD** in
French) is a multilateral development finance institution, headquartered in
Abidjan, Ivory Coast, since September 2014. The AfDB is a financial provider
to African governments and private companies investing in the regional member
countries (RMC).

The AfDB was founded in 1964 by the Organisation of African Unity, which is
the predecessor of the African Union.

The AfDB comprises three entities: The African Development Bank, the African
Development Fund and the Nigeria Trust Fund.

## History

Following the end of the colonial period in Africa, a growing desire for more
unity within the continent led to the establishment of two draft charters: one
for the establishment of the Organization of African Unity (established in
1963, later replaced by the African Union) and one for a regional development
bank.

A draft accord was submitted to top African officials and then to the
Conference of Finance Ministers on the Establishment of an African Development
Bank. This conference was convened by the United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa (UNECA) in Khartoum, Sudan, from July 31 to August 4. It was here
that the agreement establishing the African Development Bank (AfDB) was
cosigned by 23 African governments on August 4, 1963. The agreement came into
force on September 10, 1964.

The inaugural meeting of the Board of Governors of the bank was held from 4 to
7 November 1964 in Lagos, Nigeria. The bank's headquarters opened in Abidjan,
Ivory Coast, in March 1965 and the bank's operations commenced on 1 July 1966.

Originally, only African countries were able to join the bank, but in 1982, it
began allowing the entry of non-African countries as well. According to the
AfDB, the inclusion of non-regional members helped contribute to economic and
social development through low-interest loans, additional banking expertise
and access to markets outside of the region.

From February 2003 to September 2014, the bank operated from its Temporary
Relocation Agency in Tunis, Tunisia, owing to the prevailing political
conflict in Ivory Coast during the Ivorian civil war at the time. The bank was
able to return to its original headquarters in Abidjan in late 2013 once the
political crisis was over.

By June 2015, over 1,500 staff had returned to the bank's Abidjan headquarters
out of the more than 1,900 total staff the bank.

Since its founding, AfDB has financed 2,885 operations, for a total of $47.5
billion. In 2003, it received an AAA rating from the major financial rating
agencies and had a capital of $32.043 billion. In November 2019, the bank's
capital was reported as $208 billion.

In the African Development Bank's (AfDB) 2022 Annual Report, a decrease in
Africa's GDP growth to 3.8%, down from 4.8% the previous year, was recorded.
The 16th replenishment of the African Development Fund (ADF-16), which
provides soft loans and grants, served as a significant financial enhancement,
gathering US$8.9 billion. Within this sum, US$429 million was designated
specifically for climate change-related initiatives. The Bank's project
approval amounts reached UA 6.16 billion, which is close to the pre-COVID-19
pandemic benchmark of UA 7.3 billion from 2019. The High 5 strategic priority
areas saw robust increases in funding, with renewable energy projects
receiving notable emphasis as they accounted for 100% of the approvals for
energy generation projects. Investment in other key areas also increased, with
food security receiving UA 1.34 billion, industrialization UA 1.59 billion,
and infrastructure UA 1.13 billion. The Bank's active portfolio grew to UA
44.33 billion, with 58% of projects rated satisfactorily. Disbursements for
the year totaled UA 3.5 billion, and the Bank maintained its AAA credit
rating.

## Group entities

The African Development Bank Group has two other entities: the African
Development Fund (ADF) and the Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF).

### African Development Fund

Established in 1972, the African Development Fund started operations in 1974.
It provides development finance on concessional terms to low-income RMCs which
are unable to borrow on the non-concessional terms of the AfDB. In harmony
with its lending strategy, poverty reduction is the main aim of ADF
activities. Twenty-four non-African countries along with the AfDB constitute
its current membership. The largest ADF shareholder is the United Kingdom,
with approximately 14% of the total working shares followed by United States
with approximately 6.5% of the total voting shares, followed by Japan with
approximately 5.4 percent. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York was designated
as the depositor bank for the fund according to telegraphs sent from the U.S.
Embassy in Abidjan in 1976.

The ADF's general operations are decided by a Board of Directors, six of which
are appointed by the non-African member states and six designated by the AfDB
from among the bank's regional Executive Directors.

The ADF's sources are mainly contributions and periodic replacements by non-
African member states. The fund is usually replenished every three years,
unless member states decide otherwise. The total donations, at the end of
1996, amounted to $12.58 billion. The ADF lends at no interest rate, with an
annual service charge of 0.75%, a commitment fee of 0.5%, and a 50-year
repayment period including a 10-year grace period. The tenth United Kingdom
replenishment of the ADF was in 2006.

### Nigeria Trust Fund

The Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF) was established in 1976 by the Nigerian
government with an initial capital of $80 million. The NTF is aimed at
assisting in the development efforts of the poorest AfDB members.

The NTF uses its resources to provide financing for projects of national or
regional importance which further the economic and social development of the
low-income RMCs whose economic and social conditions require financing on non-
conventional terms. In 1996, the NTF had a total resource base of $432
million. It lends at a 4% interest rate with a 25-year repayment period,
including a five-year grace period. The loans can be used for concessional
loan operations with long and short term maturity.

## Management and control

The AfDB is controlled by a Board of Executive Directors, made up of
representatives of its member countries. The voting power on the Board is
split according to the size of each member's share, currently 60%-40% between
African (or "regional") countries and “non-regional” member countries
(“donors”). The largest African Development Bank shareholder is Nigeria with
nearly 9% of the vote. All member countries of the AfDB are represented on the
AfDB Board of Executive Directors.

Dr. Akinwumi Ayodeji Adesina is the 8th elected [1] President of the African
Development Bank Group, having taken the oath of office on 1 September 2015.
He chairs the Boards of both the African Development Bank and the African
Development Fund. Dr. Adesina served as Nigeria's Minister of Agriculture and
Rural Development from 2010 to 2015.

Member governments are officially represented at the AfDB by their Minister of
Finance, Planning or Cooperation who sits on the AfDB Board of Governors. The
AfDB Governors meet once a year (at the Annual Meetings of the AfDB each May)
to take major decisions about the institution's leadership, strategic
directions and governing bodies. The Governors typically appoint a
representative from their country to serve in the offices of the AfDB's Board
of Executive Directors.

Day-to-day decisions about which loans and grants should be approved and what
policies should guide the AfDB's work are taken by the Board of Executive
Directors. Each member country is represented on the Board, but their voting
power and influence differs depending on the amount of money they contribute
to the AfDB.

In June 2020, the board of the AfDB agreed to a review of Adesina's management
of the bank. Adesina was reelected unanimously for a second five-year term on
27 August 2020.

## Unit of Account

The African Development Bank uses a Unit of Account which is registered as ISO
4217, whose standard currency code is XUA. It is not exchanged directly by
individuals, it is used for accounting between state members.

## Mission

The AfDB's mission is to fight poverty and improve living conditions on the
continent through promoting the investment of public and private capital in
projects and programs that are likely to contribute to the economic and social
development of the region.

## Functions

The primary function of AfDB is making loans and equity investments for the
socio-economic advancement of the RMC. Second, the bank provides technical
assistance for development projects and programs. Third, it promotes
investment of public and private capital for development. Fourth, the bank
assists in organizing the development policies of RMCs.

The AfDB is also required to give special attention to national and
multinational projects which are needed to promote regional integration.

## Status

The AfDB promotes economic development and social progress of its RMCs in
Africa and the bank commits approximately $3 billion annually to African
countries. Its relatively small lending and tendency to follow in the
footsteps of more prominent public institutions like the World Bank, implies
that the African Development Bank has been receiving little interest from
civil society organizations as well as academia.

AfDB emphasizes the role of women along with education reforms, and lent its
support to key initiatives such as debt alleviation for Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries and the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).

The bank is currently based in Abidjan, Ivory Coast again. It employs
approximately 1,865 employees as of 2016, and has 80 members: 54 countries in
Africa and 26 American, European, and Asian countries.

## Recent trends and directions

One of emerging views, repeatedly cited by the AfDB's board of directors and
management, is that the AfDB should be more “selective” and “country-focused”
in its operations. Though this policy has still to be clearly defined, it
appears to be driving certain lending priorities.

The infrastructure sector, including power supply, water and sanitation,
transport and communications, has traditionally received the largest share of
AfDB lending. This focus was re-affirmed in the AfDB's 2003-2007 Strategic
Plan, which identified infrastructure as a priority area for AfDB lending.

In 2005, the AfDB approved 23 infrastructure projects for approximately $982
million, which totaled 40% of AfDB approvals that year. Given the increased
attention to infrastructure development in Africa from donors and borrowers,
it is likely that AfDB's infrastructure lending will increase significantly in
the coming years. In 2007, infrastructure operations accounted for
approximately 60 percent of the bank's portfolio.[_citation needed_]

Regional integration infrastructure projects will be a key part of the AfDB's
future business. According to the AfDB's _2005 Annual Report_ , regional
economic blocs will make Africa “more competitive in the global market”, while
transport and power interconnections between smaller African economies will
help create larger markets in the continent. The AfDB's member countries claim
that AfDB, as a multilateral institution, is particularly suited to support
regional integration projects.

The AfDB has been designated the lead agency to facilitate "NEPAD
infrastructure initiatives", which are regional integration projects led by
African Regional Economic Communities (RECs). Additionally, the AfDB hosts the
Infrastructure Consortium for Africa (ICA). The ICA was established by G8
countries to coordinate and encourage infrastructure development in Africa,
focusing on regional infrastructure development in particular. The AfDB helps
to prepare projects so they may obtain financing from others sources through
an initiative called the Infrastructure Project Preparation Facility (IPPF).
So even if the AfDB is not directly involved in financing a particular
infrastructure project, it may have helped to make it possible.

Another key area of concentration of the AfDB's support of RMCs is the fight
against HIV/AIDS.

The AfDB has five policies towards securing Africa's future through health
funding:

  * Institutional capacity building through assistance of policy/strategy formulation and implementation
  * Human capital development to create an environment for the operation of national AIDS strategies through training and technical assistance support
  * HIV/AIDS multi-sectoral responses with emphasis on prevention and control interventions that include IEC (Information, Education and Communication), STI (sexually transmitted infections) control, VCT (voluntary counselling and testing), infrastructure support for the establishment of laboratories and blood transfusion facilities, and provision of equipment and supplies, including antiretroviral drugs
  * Advocacy through participation in international and regional forums to raise political commitment and leadership towards a collaborative effort in the fight against the pandemic among RMCs and development partners
  * Partnership development with a view of forging new alliances and revitalizing existing collaboration to cover critical development concerns such as HIV/AIDS and to bringing partnership activities within the framework of the bank's vision

The bank's contribution in the fight against HIV/AIDS is estimated at over UA
500 million. The bank is among the initiating partners of "AIDS in Africa –
Scenarios for the future," a project whose outcome will enable governments and
development partners alike to make strategic choices of current and future
development paths and define their activities accordingly in order to face the
challenges posed by HIV/AIDS.

Energy projects are likely to become a more important area of the AfDB's
infrastructure work, given the lack of access to energy services across Africa
and continued high oil prices affecting oil-importing countries. It is not
clear if the AfDB's role in the energy sector will prioritize energy projects
for domestic consumption or for export, although the AfDB has supported both
in the past. The AfDB is currently drafting an energy policy and developing
its contribution to the G8-mandated Clean Energy Investment Framework.

Although there is no official statement or consensus to this effect, AfDB
lending for agriculture, (non-infrastructure) rural development and social
sectors, such as health and education, is reportedly likely to decrease over
the coming years.

In 2010, the African Development Institute became the focal point of the
African Development Bank Group for capacity-building. The institute had been
established in 1973 to enhance the effectiveness of the AfDB's funded
operations. Its mandate was reoriented in 1992 and it was restructured in
2001.

In response to the global coronavirus pandemic, the AfDB has increasingly
focused on selling social bonds as a means to raise funds for poor countries
to deal with the pandemic. Since the pandemic, it has issued four bonds, for a
total of seven since 2017.

In 2023, the African Development Bank Group launched country-by-country
economic reports to guide African policymakers in their discussions about
climate resilience and green growth policies.[2]

In February 2025, the AfDB and Interpol signed a letter of intent to pursue
greater cooperation to combat corruption across the continent. According to
AfDB president Akinwumi Adesina, the partnership is expected to "help African
countries build robust systems against money laundering and financial crime.”

## Prospects

The AfDB's financial standing has been restored from the near collapse of
1995, but its operational credibility remains a work-in-progress. A working
group convened by the Center for Global Development, an independent Washington
think tank, released a report in September 2006 that offered six
recommendations for Bank's president and board of directors on broad
principles to guide the bank's renewal. The report contains six
recommendations for management and shareholders as they address the urgent
task of reforming Africa's development bank. Prominent among the
recommendations is a strong focus on infrastructure.[_citation needed_]

While the AfDB's lending had not expanded significantly in recent years, 2006
figures indicate that things may be changing. Between 2005 and 2006, the
AfDB's lending activities increased by more than 30 percent to $3.4 billion.
Over the same period, private sector operations doubled in value. The AfDB has
specific mandates from the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD)
and other international organizations to take the lead amongst financial and
development institutions in areas such as infrastructure, regional
integration, and banking and financial standards in Africa. These mandates
have also increased the AfDB's profile in the media. The increased
international emphasis on Africa's development needs in recent years (for
example, surrounding the 2005 Gleneagles G8 Summit), and on the importance of
infrastructure investment in Africa, has highlighted the role of the
AfDB.[_citation needed_]

Some research has indicated that a high percentage of respondents in African
countries has a marked preference for additional aid from the African
Development Bank, despite the fact its relatively low rating against most of
the aid effectiveness criteria found to be important by donor recipients. This
suggests that donor recipients in Africa views on the ‘multilateral donor of
choice’ are informed by additional aid effectiveness criteria that are not
commonly identified or reported against, though exactly what those criteria
have not been discussed.

In general, whereas there has been progress at all levels with regard to
democracy, growth and restoring the macro-economic balances in Africa over the
past fifteen years, half of sub-Saharan Africa lives on under one dollar a
day, and AIDS is threatening the social fabric of the continent. The studies
conducted by various organizations (including the African Development Bank and
the World Bank) show that, with the exception of northern and southern Africa,
the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (reducing by half the number
of persons living in poverty and without access to potable water by 2015) will
in most cases not be attained. Nevertheless, these same studies indicate that
the majority of the African countries can make notable progress to these ends.

## African Development Bank annual conferences

African Development Bank's (AfDB) 4th annual conference outside Africa held in
India (Gandhinagar, Gujarat) on May 22–26, 2017, at an event inaugurated by
India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Previous conferences outside Africa were
in Spain, China, Portugal.

## Membership

Regional member countries

Non-regional member countries

Non-regional member countries - ADF only

Countries eligible for...

ADF resources only

a blend of ADB and ADF resources

ADB resources only

### Regional member countries

Note: All countries in the African Union including Mauritania but excluding
the SADR are eligible for NTF benefits.

#### ADF eligibility

  * Benin
  * Burkina Faso
  * Burundi
  * Central African Republic
  * Chad
  * Comoros
  * DR Congo
  * Djibouti
  * Eritrea
  * Ethiopia
  * Gambia
  * Ghana
  * Guinea-Bissau
  * Guinea
  * Lesotho
  * Liberia
  * Madagascar
  * Malawi
  * Mali
  * Mauritania
  * Mozambique
  * Niger
  * Rwanda
  * Sierra Leone
  * Somalia
  * South Sudan
  * Sudan
  * São Tomé and Príncipe
  * Tanzania
  * Togo
  * Uganda
  * Zimbabwe

#### ADB and ADF eligibility

  * Cameroon
  * Ivory Coast
  * Kenya
  * Senegal
  * Zambia

#### ADB eligibility

  * Algeria
  * Angola
  * Botswana
  * Cape Verde
  * Egypt
  * Equatorial Guinea
  * Eswatini
  * Gabon
  * Libya
  * Mauritius
  * Morocco
  * Namibia
  * Nigeria
  * Congo
  * Seychelles
  * South Africa
  * Tunisia

### Non-regional member countries

  * Argentina
  * Austria
  * Belgium
  * Brazil
  * Canada
  * China
  * Denmark
  * Finland
  * France
  * Germany
  * India
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Japan
  * Kuwait
  * Luxembourg
  * Netherlands
  * Norway
  * Portugal
  * Saudi Arabia
  * South Korea
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Turkey
  * United Arab Emirates
  * United Kingdom
  * United States

## Regional offices

Region | Headquarters   
---|---  
Central Africa |  Yaoundé  
East Africa |  Nairobi  
North Africa |  Tunis  
Southern Africa |  Pretoria  
West Africa |  Abidjan  
  
## List of 20 largest countries by voting powers

The following table are amounts for the 20 largest countries by voting powers
at the African Development Bank as of September 2021.

The 20 largest countries by voting powers at the African Development Bank  Rank | Country | Voting powers  
(% of total)  
---|---|---  
| _**World**_ | 100.000   
1 |  Nigeria | 10.077   
2 |  United States | 7.581   
3 |  Japan | 6.284   
4 |  South Africa | 5.863   
5 |  Algeria | 5.758   
6 |  Germany | 4.779   
7 |  Canada | 4.395   
8 |  Morocco | 4.386   
9 |  France | 4.299   
10 |  Egypt | 3.062   
11 |  Italy | 2.780   
12 |  Libya | 2.749   
13 |  Ghana | 2.552   
14 |  United Kingdom | 2.083   
15 |  Ivory Coast | 1.988   
16 |  Sweden | 1.802   
17 |  Switzerland | 1.683   
18 |  Kenya | 1.660   
19 |  China | 1.389   
20 |  Denmark | 1.351   
  
## United Nations _Development Business_

The United Nations launched _Development Business_ in 1978 with the support of
the World Bank and many other major development banks from around the world.
Today, _Development Business_ is the primary publication for all major
multilateral development banks including the African Development Bank, United
Nations agencies, and several national governments, many of whom have made the
publication of their tenders and contracts in _Development Business_
mandatory.