| The **neutrality of this article is disputed**. Relevant discussion may be
found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to
do so are met. _( August 2025)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
Confederation of Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso

The **Confederation of Sahel States** (French: _Confédération des États du
Sahel_), also known as the **Alliance of Sahel States** (French: _Alliance des
États du Sahel_), or **AES Confederation** (**AES**) is a confederation formed
between Mali, Niger, and Burkina Faso, located in the Sahel region of Africa.
It originated as a mutual defense pact created on 16 September 2023 following
the 2023 Nigerien crisis, in which the West African political bloc ECOWAS
threatened to intervene militarily following a successful coup d'état in Niger
earlier that year. All three member states are former members of ECOWAS and
currently under the control of juntas following a string of successful coups,
the 2021 Malian coup d'état, the September 2022 Burkina Faso coup d'état, and
the 2023 Niger coup d'état. The confederation was established on 6 July 2024.

The confederation's stated goal is to pool resources to build energy and
communications infrastructure, establish a common market, implement a monetary
union under proposed currency, allow free movement of persons, enable
industrialization, and invest in agriculture, mines and the energy sector,
with the end goal of federalizing into a single sovereign state. The
confederation is against neo-colonialism and has demonstrated this with acts
such as downgrading the status of the French language and renaming of colonial
street names. It is also anti-French and anti-ECOWAS in outlook, as it
disagrees with many of their policies.

The economic outlook for AES countries is positive (Burkina 5.494%, Mali
3.751%, and Niger 9.869% GDP growth in 2024), with Niger becoming the 3rd
fastest growing economy in the world and the fastest growing economy in Africa
in 2024. The nations of the AES are among the least developed in the world as
measured by the Human Development Index. Factors such as prolonged periods of
ineffective governance, external geopolitical influences, jihadist groups, and
imbalanced trade agreements that provided minimal infrastructure improvement
or benefits to local populations, contributed to economic and social
challenges in these countries. By definition AES countries are considered
undemocratic as their military governments came to power by coup. The UK-based
NGO Amnesty International has accused AES governments of engaging in routine
human rights violations including arbitrary detentions, forced disappearances,
and massacres of civilians. AES states have all pledged to suspend military
rule and return to civilian rule, but these plans have been delayed in each of
these countries as the governments work towards increased integration.

A project to set up passport and identity card travel documents between the
three member countries of the AES is part of a more advanced integration
between the member states before approval of the project by the three heads of
state of the member countries.

Within the territory of the AES, there are various terrorist and insurgent
groups including ISSP, Jama'at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin, and various
separatist rebels fighting in Northern Mali such as the Azawad Movement. In
2024, the AES cut off military relations with Western powers and replaced
Western military forces on their territory with Russian mercenaries,
specifically the Wagner Group. It has also cut diplomatic ties and expelled
ambassadors from some Western countries such as Sweden following critical
statements regarding its rapprochement with Russia.

## History

### Regional insurgencies and successive coups

Areas where the Islamic State – Sahel Province operates, July 2021

The Sahel has been the site of an ongoing jihadist insurgency since 2003,
which has led to many conflicts in the region, such as the Mali War and the
Boko Haram insurgency. All three member states have had their pro-Western
civilian governments overthrown by their militaries, and each is ruled by a
military junta as part of the Coup Belt. In 2022, Mali withdrew from the
internationally backed G5 Sahel alliance. Niger and Burkina Faso did so in
2023, leading to announcement of the dissolution of the framework by its last
two members Chad and Mauritania three days later.

In the 2020 Malian coup d'état, Assimi Goïta and the National Committee for
the Salvation of the People seized power in Mali after overthrowing the
elected president, Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta. Goïta later led a second coup in
2021 which deposed the interim president Bah Ndaw who had been nominated to
lead a transitional military government.

Just months later, in the 2021 Guinean coup d'état, the National Committee of
Reconciliation and Development removed the elected president Alpha Condé and
installed Mamady Doumbouya as transitional president. Guinea is not a member
of the AES, but has been offering diplomatic support to the confederation.

A faction of Burkina Faso's military overthrew their existing military
government in the September 2022 coup d'état, installing Ibrahim Traoré over
Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba, who had come to power in the January 2022 coup
d'état which toppled the democratic government of president Roch Marc
Christian Kaboré.

In July 2023, the National Council for the Safeguard of the Homeland removed
the elected government of Niger's Mohamed Bazoum, installing Abdourahamane
Tchiani and a new junta in the 2023 coup d'état.

### ECOWAS suspensions and Nigerien crisis

All three of the alliance's member states were suspended by ECOWAS shortly
after the ouster of their elected governments. After the coup in Niger, ECOWAS
threatened to intervene militarily and restore president Bazoum's government,
resulting in a regional crisis. The juntas of Mali and Burkina Faso promised
military aid to Niger in the event of an intervention, while Guinea's provided
diplomatic support. The promises of military aid resulted in the creation of
the Alliance of Sahel States as a mutual defense bloc for the three nations,
successfully staving off an ECOWAS intervention. The West Africa Peoples
Organisation denounced the intervention, calling it a "pretext to carry out
imperialist plans to keep Niger (rich in mineral resources, notably uranium
and hydrocarbons) continually in the imperialist fold."

On 28 January 2024, the three countries announced via a joint statement that
they were withdrawing from ECOWAS. With the situation at an impasse, later
that year ECOWAS appointed three mediators to begin dialogues with the AES
countries. Soon after, on 15 December 2024, the Conference of Heads of State
of ECOWAS adopted an exit transition period for Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali,
which begins on 29 January 2025, and ends on 29 July 2025. The AES has
rejected the timetable extension proposed by ECOWAS for their withdrawal and
is adhering to the January 2025 withdrawal timeline.

### Formalization of the Confederation

In May 2024 at a meeting in Niamey, representatives of Burkina Faso, Mali and
Niger finalized a draft text creating the AES, with its objective to finalize
the details of the project before the signature of an official treaty.

In July 2024, at a summit in Niamey, the leaders of the states of the AES
signed a confederation treaty to strengthen the existing mutual defense pact,
assorted with the release of a 25-point communique. This included agreement on
a one-year rotating presidency, chaired by one of the leader of the country
currently holding the presidency. Assimi Goïta, the current interim president
of the republic of Mali, started his term on the same day, and it was agreed
that the first joint parliamentary summit of the AES would be hosted in
Burkina Faso.

### Departure from ECOWAS

On 29 January 2025, Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger formally withdrew from the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) after providing the
required 1-year notice. AES countries were all founding members of ECOWAS in
May 1975.

On 29 January, to consolidate their exit from ECOWAS and strengthen their
alliance, the three countries began circulating new AES passports, and
announced that a new unified 5,000-strong military unit will soon join the
fight against jihadists and terrorists on AES territory.

Details of how ECOWAS will treat AES citizens are to be worked out, but until
further notice ECOWAS says it will continue to recognize passports and
identity cards bearing the ECOWAS logo held by citizens from Mali, Niger and
Burkina Faso. AES citizens will continue to enjoy the right of visa-free
movement, residence, and establishment in accordance with ECOWAS protocols and
goods and services from the three countries will be treated under the ECOWAS
Trade Liberalisation Scheme (ETLS) and investment policy until further notice.

The withdrawal has resulted in ECOWAS losing 76 million of its 446 million
people and a significant portion of its total geographical land area. The AES
is now geographically larger than ECOWAS, covering 2,781,392 km2 compared to
ECOWAS's adjusted 2,087,596 km2.

### Relations with the West African Economic and Monetary Union

Officially members of the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(UEMOA/WAEMU), AES countries have not shown their readiness to break ties with
UEMOA. Leaving UEMOA is a more complex decision than leaving ECOWAS. Reasons
that could impact the decision to remain in UEMOA include: 1. Burkina Faso
hosts the UEMOA headquarters, and 2. leaving UEMOA could result in some
economic instability. It should also be noted the AES adopted a confederal
levy on imports originating outside the UEMOA to support operations of the
newly created AES regional development bank. UEMOA member countries share a
single currency, the CFA franc, which is based on a convertibility guarantee
by the French Treasury. If a country leaves UEMOA, it will have to recover its
foreign exchange reserves, currently divided between the UEMOA Central Bank in
Abidjan (50%) and the French Treasury (50%).

## Initiatives

The Confederation of Sahel States has announced various measures towards its
stated goals of regional stability, economic independence, and self reliance.

### Economic integration

Proposals have been made regarding a common central bank jointly with the
introduction of a new currency to replace the CFA franc. In an effort to boost
agricultural and energy self-reliance, joint infrastructure programs are
envisioned, and export controls on grain towards the rest of ECOWAS have been
implemented. Energy regulators from Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger met in
Bamako in May 2025 to harmonise their policies on energy security and promote
renewable energy.

### Investment Bank

The AES announced the creation of the Confederal Bank for Investment and
Development (CBID) in May 2025. The bank is designed to provide autonomous
financing for critical infrastructure and development projects across the
Sahel and to reduce dependence on external institutions. The creation of the
bank is a step toward financial sovereignty, one of the four pillars guiding
the AES along with collective security, economic integration, and cultural and
educational identity.

### Flag and emblem

On 22 February 2025, the ministers of the Confederation of Sahel States
officially launched the flag of the AES, after its validation by the heads of
state of the member countries of the organization.

### Joint military force

The AES countries have been increasing transnational coordination in the fight
against terrorist groups. In January 2025, a previously announced joint
military force was described as being in development by Niger's Minister of
Defense Salifou Modi. Modi announced that the force will have 5,000 personnel
and will be tasked with fighting Islamist groups across the three countries.

### Common Culture

On 5 February 2025, the Member States of the Confederation of Sahel States
signed a historic convention, establishing a common cultural policy.

### Common Parliament

The ministers of the Sahel Confederation states are working on the creation of
a joint parliament for the three Sahelian member states.

### Judicial Cooperation & Regional Court

The ministers of the Sahel Alliance states met in May 2025 to establish
judicial cooperation within the AES. The meeting, chaired by Malian Prime
Minister General Abdoulaye Maiga, focused on creating a common legal framework
to address transnational challenges, including insecurity, arms proliferation,
and money laundering. The goal is to enhance judicial convergence without
unifying laws and to make systems interoperable while improving governance,
legal protections, and institutional stability.

The meeting resulted in the establishment of a regional criminal court aimed
at addressing terrorism, violent extremism, and human rights violations within
the Sahel region. This initiative shows a commitment to unified judicial
responses against security and governance challenges in the region. A decision
has not yet been made on the location of the proposed court. A high-security
prison of "international standards" will also be built to house convicted
prisoners.

### APSA-Sahel

The AES has created the Alliance of Agricultural Seed Producers of the Sahel
(APSA-Sahel) to strengthening regional food sovereignty and promote seed
systems locally adapted to the Sahel’s climate. The initiative is designed to
reduce dependence on foreign seed imports, promote indigenous seed varieties,
and increase seed research, production, and distribution in the sahel.

### AES Games

From 21 to 28 June 2025, Mali hosted the first annual Alliance of Sahel States
Games. More than 500 professional athletes from AES states competed in soccer,
traditional wrestling, archery, and other events. The games are part of an
effort by the AES to build solidarity under their confederation.

### Other measures

Roaming charges for telephone communications between the three countries have
been abolished. A joint biometric passport for AES citizens was recently
introduced, but is already facing obstacles, with Senegal currently refusing
to recognize the passport, putting in question the viability of the scheme.
The establishment of a common passport for the AES member states will come
into being from 29 January 2025. At the end of March 2025, the three members
of the confederation will introduce a common customs duty of 0.5% on imports
from countries that are not members of the confederation of the alliance of
Sahel states. In May 2025, the Ministers of Culture of the Confederation of
Sahel States (CES) validated the adoption of the official anthem of the
confederation. Experts from the road authorities of Mali, Burkina Faso and
Niger met in May 2025, to define a common approach to road safety.

## Member states

AES Confederation member states  Country  | Capital  | Official language  | Population (thousands)  | Area (km2)  | GDP (millions USD)  | GDP (PPP) (millions Intl$.)   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Burkina Faso | Ouagadougou | Mooré, Dyula | 24,451  | 274,200  | 27,056  | 72,820   
Mali | Bamako | Bambara | 24,790  | 1,240,192  | 23,208  | 72,738   
Niger | Niamey | Hausa | 29,126  | 1,267,000  | 21,874  | 61,035   
Total  | 78,367  | 2,781,392  | 72,138  | 206,593   
  
## Resources

| This section may contain information **notimportant or relevant to the
article's subject.** Please help improve this section. _( May 2025)__(Learn
how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The AES countries are resource rich. For example, Niger is among the world's
biggest uranium exporters and for many years has been a major uranium exporter
to the EU. Niger was among the top 4 providers of uranium to the EU in both
2022 and 2023 according to the Supply Agency of the European Atomic Energy
Community (Euratom). In 2022, Niger delivered 2,975 tonnes of natural uranium,
or 25.4% of the EU's supplies, making it the second largest supplier. In 2023,
shipments dropped by 29.78%, making Niger the 4th largest supplier to the EU.
Niger produces just under 5% of all mined uranium worldwide.

Niger was working to begin oil exports to China through the Niger–Benin Oil
Pipeline until the efforts were frustrated in early 2024. China intervened in
May 2024, resulting in the resumption of crude oil exports via the Chinese-
funded pipeline. The pipeline was closed again after just one shipment of oil
due to damages after a terror attack.

Some major known resources in AES territory include:

Country  | Natural Resources  | Other Resources   
---|---|---  
Niger  | uranium, coal, iron ore, tin, phosphates, gold, molybdenum, gypsum, salt, petroleum, copper, lithium  |   
Burkina Faso  | gold, manganese, zinc, limestone, marble, phosphates, pumice, salt, lithium, copper  | cotton   
Mali  | gold, phosphates, kaolin, salt, limestone, uranium, gypsum, granite, hydropower, lithium  | cotton   
  
The AES is renegotiating relationships with Western and Chinese companies to
assert greater control over their resources and operations. French firms such
as Orano, TotalEnergies, and Air France are navigating challenges, with Orano
and TotalEnergies under scrutiny and Air France seeking to resume suspended
operations. Canadian companies like GoviEX and Barrick Gold are impacted, as
GoviEX has had its uranium licenses revoked in Niger, and Barrick Gold is
renegotiating terms in Mali. In 2025 some mining assets within the AES were
nationalized to increase government ownership in industrial mines operated by
foreign entities and to boost earnings from mineral wealth.

Chinese companies, including the China National Nuclear Corporation (CNNC) and
Zijin Mining Group, are also facing challenges, with CNNC targeted for mining
contract renegotiations and Zijin Mining Group working to meet AES sovereignty
goals. In March 2025, Niger requested top local officials of China National
Petroleum Corp, Zinder Refining Company and the West African Gas Pipeline
Company Ltd. (responsible for the construction and operation of the
Niger–Benin Oil Pipeline) depart the country due to contract issues. This is a
result of AES desire to update partnerships across industries and ensure
equitable resource management.

## Relations with neighboring countries

### Chad

Chad has been working to strengthen relationships with AES countries to
enhance regional security and counter-terrorism efforts. Chad recently ended
its defense cooperation agreement with France, signalling a desire to assert
its sovereignty and redefine its strategic partnerships. This move aligns Chad
with the AES countries, which have also distanced themselves from France. In
May 2025, the Chadian Minister of Communications and government spokesperson
stated “I think it would be a good thing for Chad to join the Alliance of
Sahel States.”

### Guinea

Guinea's government, like those of the AES states, is the result of a military
coup. Guinea has been supportive of the AES and its goals, for example defying
border closures imposed by ECOWAS and giving the Sahel states access to its
ports. This allowed Mali to receive Russian grain and fertilizer in a time of
crisis. President Doumbouya was a member of the French Foreign Legion (a
corporal) and therefore took an oath to serve France and protect French
interests, before leading the coup that brought him to power in Guinea in
2021. Doumbouya is also married to Lauriane Doumbouya (Darboux), a French
woman with a career as a gendarme.

### Senegal

Senegal's President Bassirou Diomaye Faye has been urging both ECOWAS and the
AES states to engage in dialogue and work together to address common
challenges such as terrorism, climate change, and poverty.

In November 2024, Senegal decided to ban the new AES passport and close its
borders to holders of the Malian NINA ID card. This sparked significant outcry
from Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger, raising questions about regional
integration and the future of free movement in West Africa.

### Togo

Togo has been actively collaborating with AES member countries on security and
economic initiatives. Togo has also launched the Global Peace and Security
Alliance (GPSA), an initiative aimed at fostering dialogue and collaboration
among various global platforms dedicated to peace and security. This
initiative was announced during the Lomé Peace and Security Forum in November
2024. Through this initiative, Togo can further collaborate with the AES as
well as other countries.

In January 2025, Togo's Foreign Minister Robert Dussey announced that the
Togolese government had not ruled out Togo joining the Confederation of Sahel
States. "It's not impossible," he said. In March 2025, Robert Dussey
reaffirmed that Togo was considering joining the Confederation of Sahel
States. This coincided with a poll published in March 2025 stating the
majority in Togo favor their country joining the AES.

The AES and Togo are working to establish an interconnected customs area. This
would also allow the landlocked AES countries to use Togo's Lomé port without
large tariffs. Use of ports has been a source of tension between the AES and
the coastal countries in ECOWAS. Togo and Burkina Faso signed an agreement to
eliminate roaming charges for incoming calls between the two countries
starting 30 May 2025.

### Ghana

While president-elect John Dramani Mahama, elected on 7 December 2024,
proposed an initiative to support the AES in combating terrorism. He urged
neighboring countries and international organizations, like ECOWAS, to address
the crisis in the Sahel, which has become a hub for terrorist activity. The
Sahel region has seen a rise in terrorist threats from groups linked to Al-
Qaeda and the Islamic State in recent, affecting both safety and development.
Mahama stated that this instability threatens not only the Sahel but all of
West Africa. He called on countries like Ghana, Senegal, Côte d'Ivoire, and
Benin to play a more active role in supporting the region. Mahama has also
decided to seek revised IMF terms to stabilize Ghana's economy, which is a
pivot from the policies of his predecessor.

On 18 December 2024, outgoing President Nana Akufo-Addo approved visa-free
entry for all Africans seeking to come to Ghana starting 6 January 2025,
fulfilling his pledge made in January 2024 to increase regional integration by
introducing visa-free travel to Ghana for citizens of all African nations.
This will make Ghana the 5th African country to allow entry to all holders of
African passports. This policy is compatible with both the African Union's
African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) and the AES goals of regional
integration.

On 21 January 2025, Ghana appointed a special envoy to the Confederation of
Sahel States, Larry Gbevlo-Lartey, who was tasked with bridging Ghana's
relations with members of the Alliance of Sahel States.

### Algeria

For many years the Algerian government played a role as a mediator in Mali's
internal conflicts, especially with Tuareg rebel groups in northern Mali, but
recent developments have distanced the two sides. A Malian drone was shot down
near the Algerian border on 31 March 2025. The AES has called the act a
violation of international law and "proof" of state-sponsored terrorism by
Algeria. Mali's Prime Minister denied Algerian claims that the drone had
violated Algerian airspace, adding that Mali would file a complaint with
international bodies.

Mali has withdrawn its ambassador to Algeria over the issue, stating "The
destruction of the drone has the effect, if not the aim of hindering the
neutralization of armed groups that have claimed responsibility for terrorist
acts.'". This incident highlights rising tensions and a strained relationship
between Algeria and the AES.

## Foreign partners & relations

The AES has been taking actions to diminish the influence and control of
former colonial power France over its resources, territory, diplomatic
relations, and trade. As part this realignment, the nations of the AES have
been seeking new partnerships to fill the vacuum left by France's exit. This
has resulted in an intention to increase economic and security cooperation
with Russia, Turkey, China, Iran, North Korea, and Afghanistan.

Russian involvement notably includes a joint satellite program with
Roscosmos,[_deprecated source?_] and military assistance from the Wagner Group
to counter insurgencies.

In June 2025, Russia signed nuclear cooperation agreements with Burkina Faso
and Mali for the peaceful use of atomic energy, infrastructure development,
and energy security. The Burkina Faso–Russia Agreement, Finalized during the
St Petersburg International Economic Forum, includes building a nuclear power
plant, developing regulations, and training specialists. Rosatom also pledged
scholarships and technical support, aiming to address Burkina Faso's severe
electricity shortage. In June 2025 only about 20% of Burkinabes had access to
power. The Mali–Russia Agreement, Signed during Assimi Goita’s visit to
Russia, includes nuclear infrastructure, safety regulations, training, and
applications in medicine, agriculture, and industry. The agreement is expected
to boost Mali's energy autonomy and reduce reliance on imports.

Turkey's foreign, defense, and energy ministers met with their counterparts in
Niger to discuss new deals in the areas of security and defense, trade,
energy, and mining on 17 July 2024 and had military contractors in Niger as of
January 2025. Iran and Niger signed a joint cooperation agreement during the
third meeting of their Joint Economic Committee on the sidelines of the Iran
Expo 2025 in April 2025.

In March 2025, Niger, Burkina Faso, and Mali further distanced themselves from
France by announcing their decisions to withdraw from the Organisation
Internationale de la Francophonie (OIF), an international organization
established in 1970 in Niamey, Niger, to promote the French language and
encourage cooperation among French-speaking nations. Although the three AES
countries are founding members of the OIF, they were suspended from the
organization following the coups that brought military leadership to power,
and consider the organization "a politically manipulated instrument".

The AES has expressed strong opposition to Ukrainian support of rebels in the
Sahel after comments by Ukrainian officials in August 2024 stating they had
supported separatists that killed Malian soldiers. The AES has called on the
United Nations to take action against Ukraine and accused Ukraine of
supporting terrorism in the Sahel. As a result, Mali and Niger have severed
diplomatic relations with Ukraine. In response, Sweden severed several million
kronor worth of aid to Mali and cut diplomatic ties.

## Leadership

Country  | Name  | Role  | Start of term  | End of term   
---|---|---|---|---  
Mali | Assimi Goïta | President of Alliance of Sahel States  | 6 July 2024  | 6 July 2025   
Niger | Abdourahamane Tchiani | President of Niger  | 26 March 2025  | 26 March 2030   
Niger | Abdourahamane Tchiani | President of Niger – National Council for the Safeguard of the Homeland  | 28 July 2023  | 26 March 2025   
Niger | Salifou Modi | Vice President of Niger – National Council for the Safeguard of the Homeland  | 27 July 2023  | —   
Niger | Ali Lamine Zeine | Prime Minister of Niger  | 8 August 2023  | —   
Burkina Faso | Ibrahim Traoré | President of Burkina Faso  | 30 September 2022  | Incumbent   
Burkina Faso | Jean Emmanuel Ouédraogo | Prime Minister of Burkina Faso  | 7 December 2024  | —   
Burkina Faso | Apollinaire J. Kyélem de Tambèla | Prime Minister of Burkina Faso (Former)  | 21 October 2022  | 6 December 2024   
Mali | Assimi Goïta | President of Mali  | 8 July 2025  | 8 July 2030   
Mali | Assimi Goïta | Interim President of Mali  | 28 May 2021  | 3 July 2025   
Mali | Abdoulaye Maïga | Prime Minister of Mali  | 21 November 2024  | —   
Mali | Choguel Kokalla Maïga | Prime Minister of Mali (Former)  | 6 June 2021  | 21 November 2024