1951 collective security treaty between Australia, New Zealand, and the US

The **Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty** (**ANZUS** or
**ANZUS Treaty**) is a collective security agreement between Australia, New
Zealand, and the United States that was signed in 1951, and from which New
Zealand has been partially suspended since 1986. It firstly recommits the
parties to the purposes of the United Nations, prohibiting the use of force or
threats except in self-defence. The following provisions require the parties
to maintain their "capacity to resist armed attack", consult with each other
on security matters in the Pacific and declare that an armed attack on any of
the parties "would be dangerous to [each signatory's] peace and safety" and
that each signatory "would act to meet the common danger in accordance with
its constitutional processes". It also provides for a council of the
signatories foreign ministers, in which the implementation of the treaty can
be discussed.

The treaty was one of a series that the United States formed in the 1949–1955
era as part of its collective response to the threat of communism during the
Cold War. New Zealand was suspended from ANZUS in 1986 as it initiated a
nuclear-free zone in its territorial waters. In late 2012, the United States
lifted a 26-year-old ban on visits by New Zealand warships to US Department of
Defense and US Coast Guard bases around the world. New Zealand maintains a
nuclear-free zone as part of its foreign policy and is partially suspended
from ANZUS, as the United States maintains an ambiguous policy whether or not
the warships carry nuclear weapons and operates numerous nuclear-powered
aircraft carriers and submarines; however New Zealand resumed key areas of the
ANZUS treaty in 2007.

## Treaty structure

The treaty was previously a full three-way defence pact, but was disrupted
following a dispute between New Zealand and the United States in 1984 over
visiting rights for ships and submarines capable of carrying nuclear arms or
nuclear-powered ships of the US Navy to New Zealand ports. The treaty has
lapsed between the United States and New Zealand, but remains separately in
force between both of those states and Australia. In 2000, the United States
opened its ports to the Royal New Zealand Navy once again, and under the
presidency of Bill Clinton in the US and the government of Helen Clark in New
Zealand, the countries have since reestablished bilateral cooperation on
defence and security.

While ANZUS is commonly recognised to have split in 1984, the Australia–US
alliance remains in full force. Heads of defence of one or both states often
have joined the annual ministerial meetings, which are supplemented by
consultations between the US Combatant Commander Pacific and the Australian
Chief of Defence Force. There are also regular civilian and military
consultations between the two governments at lower levels. Annual meetings to
discuss ANZUS defence matters take place between the United States Secretaries
of Defense and State and the Australian Ministers of Defence and Foreign
Affairs, and are known by the acronym AUSMIN.

Unlike the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), ANZUS has no integrated
defence structure or dedicated forces. Nevertheless, Australia and the United
States conduct a variety of joint activities. These include military exercises
ranging from naval and landing exercises at the task-group level to battalion-
level special forces training, assigning officers to each other's armed
services, and standardising equipment and operational doctrine. The two
countries also operate several joint-defence facilities in Australia, mainly
ground stations for spy satellite, and signals intelligence espionage in
Southeast and East Asia as part of the ECHELON network.

During the 2010s, New Zealand and the US resumed a close relationship,
although it is unclear whether the revived partnership falls under the aegis
of the 1951 trilateral treaty. The Wellington Declaration of 2010 defined a
"strategic partnership" between New Zealand and the US, and New Zealand joined
the biennial Rim of the Pacific military exercise off Hawaii in 2012, for the
first time since 1984. The US prohibition on New Zealand ships making port at
US bases was lifted after the 2012 exercise.

## History

| This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "ANZUS" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar
**·** JSTOR _( August 2019)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
Australian, New Zealand, and United States aircraft during a military exercise
in 1982

### Origins

Following the fall of Singapore and the decline of British power in Asia,
Australia began to search for other partners to ensure its security. Australia
and New Zealand also felt threatened by the possibility of a resurgent Japan
and the spread of communism to their North. Percy Spender, Australia's
minister for external affairs, sought a broader Pacific security agreement in
1950 which would include Australia, the UK, other Commonwealth countries and
the United States. The latter's participation was essential, with Spencer
stating the agreement "would be meaningless without the United States". At
this point however, both the UK and the US were uninterested in such an
agreement, with both seeking to limit their engagement with Asia.

The beginning of the Korean War in mid-1950 changed American views. Australia
committed to the Korean War before the United Kingdom and continued to further
court the Americans. While Australia could not convince the US to sign a
harsher peace treaty with Japan to restrain future military aggression, they
did press for further assurances that they would retain a voice in Pacific
security decisions and for an American security commitment in return for their
approval of the treaty. The United States was initially reluctant, but the
need to strengthen the West against communism grew with the communist victory
in the Chinese Civil War in 1949 and the 1950–1953 Korean War. The treaty
allayed antipodean fears that such a peace would allow Japan to threaten them
again.

The United States was initially reluctant, with the president instead offering
an informal guarantee of protection. However, Australia pushed for a more
formal agreement, with Spender noting that "Presidents come and presidents
go." However, the treaty did not include an automatic commitment to armed
assistance like in NATO, with Spender expecting that this could not be
ratified by the US Senate, who would wish to retain the congressional power to
declare war. Instead, the text of the treaty mirrored the text of the Monroe
Doctrine which stated that attacks on the American continent would be seen as
"dangerous to its own peace and security".

The resulting treaty was concluded at San Francisco on 1 September 1951, and
entered into force on 29 April 1952.

### Korea, Malaysia, Borneo and Vietnam

U.S. General Westmoreland talks to the commander of the New Zealand artillery
battery alongside Australian senior officers in Vietnam, in 1967.

The treaty itself was not a source of debate for over 30 years, with New
Zealand participating as part of the British Commonwealth Forces in the Korean
War and the Malayan Emergency, followed by the Indonesia–Malaysia
confrontation, and directly as part of ANZUS in the Vietnam War. The Vietnam
War was the first conflict New Zealand entered that did not involve the
British or any other Commonwealth countries outside of Australia. As an ANZUS
member New Zealand contributed military and non military assistance to the
United States war effort in Vietnam from 1963 until 1975. New Zealand and
Australian combat forces were withdrawn in 1972 and New Zealand non-military
medical aid continued until 1975.

### Australian reservations about the MX missile

In 1983, the Reagan Administration approached Australia with proposals for
testing the new generation of American intercontinental ballistic missiles,
the MX missile. American test ranges in the Pacific were insufficient for
testing the new long-range missiles and the United States military wished to
use the Tasman Sea as a target area. Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser
of the Liberal Party had agreed to provide monitoring sites near Sydney for
this purpose. However, in 1985, the newly elected Prime Minister Bob Hawke, of
the Labor Party, withdrew Australia from the testing programme, sparking
criticism from the Reagan Administration. Hawke had been pressured into doing
so by the left-wing faction of the Labor Party, which opposed the proposed MX
missile test in the Tasman Sea. The Labor left-wing faction also strongly
sympathized with the New Zealand Fourth Labour Government's anti-nuclear
policy and supported a South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone.

To preserve its joint Australian-US military communications facilities, the
Reagan Administration also had to assure the Hawke Government that those
installations would not be used in the Strategic Defense Initiative project,
which the Australian Labor Party strongly opposed. Despite these
disagreements, the Hawke Labor Government still remained supportive of the
ANZUS security treaty. It also did not support its New Zealand counterpart's
ban on nuclear-armed and nuclear-powered ships. Following the ANZUS Split in
February 1985, the Australian government also endorsed the Reagan
Administration's plans to cancel trilateral military exercises and to postpone
the ANZUS foreign ministers conference. However, it still continued to
maintain bilateral military ties and continued to share intelligence
information with New Zealand. Unlike New Zealand, Australia continued to allow
US warships to visit its ports and to participate in joint military exercises
with the United States.

### New Zealand bans nuclear material

In 1985, the nature of the ANZUS alliance changed significantly. Due to a
current of anti-nuclear sentiment within New Zealand, tension had long been
present between ANZUS members as the United States is a declared nuclear
power. France, a naval power and a declared nuclear power, had been conducting
nuclear tests on South Pacific Islands. Following the victory of the New
Zealand Labour Party in election in 1984, Prime Minister David Lange barred
nuclear-powered or nuclear-armed ships from using New Zealand ports or
entering New Zealand waters. Reasons given were the dangers of nuclear
weapons, continued French nuclear testing in the South Pacific, and opposition
to US President Ronald Reagan's policy of aggressively confronting the Soviet
Union.

Given that the United States Navy had a policy of deliberate ambiguity during
the Cold War and refused to confirm or deny the presence of nuclear weapons
aboard its warships and support ships, these laws essentially refused access
to New Zealand ports for all United States Navy vessels. In February 1985, a
port-visit request by the United States for the guided-missile destroyer USS
_Buchanan_ was refused by New Zealand, as the _Buchanan_ was capable of
launching RUR-5 ASROC nuclear depth bombs. As this occurred after the
government unofficially invited the United States to send a ship, the refusal
of access was interpreted by the United States as a deliberate slight.

According to opinion polls taken before the 1984 election, only 30 per cent of
New Zealanders supported visits by US warships with a clear majority of 58 per
cent opposed, and over 66 per cent of the population lived in locally declared
nuclear-free zones. An opinion poll commissioned by the 1986 Defence Committee
of Enquiry confirmed that 92 per cent now opposed nuclear weapons in New
Zealand and 69 per cent opposed warship visits; 92 per cent wanted New Zealand
to promote nuclear disarmament through the UN, while 88 per cent supported the
promotion of nuclear-free zones.

### United States suspends obligations to New Zealand

After consultations with Australia and after negotiations with New Zealand
broke down, the United States announced that it was suspending its treaty
obligations to New Zealand until United States Navy ships were re-admitted to
New Zealand ports, citing that New Zealand was "a friend, but not an ally".
The crisis made front-page headlines for weeks in many American newspapers.
David Lange did not withdraw New Zealand from ANZUS, although his government's
policy led to the US's decision to suspend its treaty obligations to New
Zealand.

An opinion poll in New Zealand in 1991, showed 54% of those sampled preferred
to let the treaty lapse rather than accept visits again by nuclear-armed or
nuclear-powered vessels. The policy did not become law until 8 June 1987 with
the passing of the New Zealand Nuclear Free Zone, Disarmament, and Arms
Control Act 1987, more than two years after the _Buchanan_ was refused entry
after the US refused to declare the presence or absence of nuclear weapons,
and a year after the US suspended its treaty obligations to New Zealand. This
law effectively made the entire country a nuclear-free zone. Despite the ANZUS
split, US Secretary of State George P. Shultz maintained that the ANZUS
structure was still in place, should NZ decide in the future to reverse its
anti-nuclear policy and return to a fully operational defence relationship
with the US. President Reagan also maintained in _NSDD 193_ (National Security
Decision Directive) that New Zealand still remained a "friend, but not an
ally".

On 10 July 1985, agents of the French Directorate-General for External
Security bombed the Greenpeace protest vessel _Rainbow Warrior_ in Auckland,
causing one death. The lack of condemnation by Western leaders to this
violation of a friendly state's sovereignty caused a great deal of change in
New Zealand's foreign and defence policy, and strengthened domestic opposition
to the military application of nuclear technology in any form. New Zealand
distanced itself from its traditional ally, the United States, and built
relationships with small South Pacific countries, while retaining its good
relations with Australia, and, to a lesser extent, the United Kingdom.

The suspension of New Zealand in ANZUS has had significant effect on New
Zealand–United States relations and on New Zealand domestic policy. The anti-
nuclear policy has been a part of New Zealand political culture for years now.
However, that has not stopped United States politicians from trying to change
the policy. [_citation needed_]

### Afghanistan and Iraq

US President George W. Bush and Australian Prime Minister John Howard on 10
September 2001. Howard was in Washington during the 11 September attacks.

Australia and New Zealand both provided military units, including special
forces and naval ships, in support of the US-led "Operation Enduring Freedom"
for support for anti-Taliban forces in response to the 11 September 2001
terrorist attacks. Providing 1,550 troops, Australia was the largest non-NATO
contributor of military personnel in Afghanistan. New Zealand committed 191
troops.

In response to the War in Afghanistan, New Zealand sent transport aircraft,
maritime patrol aircraft, and frigates to the Persian Gulf, and sent a very
small number of soldiers, SAS soldiers, medical and assorted and peace-keeping
forces to Afghanistan in 2001.

Despite Prime Minister Helen Clark being openly critical of American
justifications for the 2003 Iraq war, New Zealand sent engineer troops to Iraq
following the 2003 invasion. These troops were however officially engaged in
reconstruction under UN Security Council Resolution 1483 and were non-
combatant.

### East Timor

Between 1999 and 2003, the armed forces of Australia and New Zealand deployed
together in a large scale operation in East Timor, to prevent pro-Indonesian
militia from overturning a vote for independence on the region. The United
States provided only limited logistical support but the USS  _Mobile Bay_
provided air defence for the initial entry operation. The operation was taken
over by the United Nations.

### Taiwan

One topic that became prominent in the 2000s was the implications in the case
of a hypothetical attack by the People's Republic of China against Taiwan, who
would likely receive American support. While Australia has strong cultural and
economic ties with the United States, it also has an increasingly important
trade relationship with mainland China.

In August 2004, Foreign Minister Alexander Downer implied in Beijing that the
treaty would likely not apply to that situation, but he was quickly corrected
by Prime Minister John Howard. In March 2005, after an official of the
People's Republic of China stated that it may be necessary for Australia to
reassess the treaty and after China passed an Anti-Secession Law regarding
Taiwan, Downer stated that in case of Chinese aggression on Taiwan, the treaty
would come into force, but that the treaty would require only consultations
with the United States and not necessarily commit Australia to war.[_citation
needed_]

### 1985 to present

Annual bilateral meetings between the US Secretary of State and the Australian
Foreign Minister replaced annual meetings of the ANZUS Council of Foreign
Ministers. The first bilateral meeting was held in Canberra in 1985. At the
second meeting, in San Francisco in 1986, the United States announced that it
was suspending its treaty security obligations to New Zealand pending the
restoration of port access. Subsequent bilateral Australia–US Ministerial
(AUSMIN) meetings have alternated between Australia and the United States.

In 1996, under 22 U.S. Code § 2321k, United States President Bill Clinton,
designated New Zealand as a major non-NATO ally, effectively recognizing New
Zealand not only as a friend but also an ally.

The alliance engenders some political controversy in Australia. Particularly
after Australian involvement in the 2003 Iraq war, some quarters of Australian
society have called for a re-evaluation of the relationship between the two
nations. Nonetheless, the alliance enjoyed broad support during the Cold War
and continues to enjoy broad support in Australia. One commentator in
Australia has argued that the treaty should be re-negotiated in the context of
terrorism, the modern role of the United Nations and as a purely US–Australian
alliance. Australia is also a contributor to the National Missile Defense
system.

In May 2006, US Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs
Christopher Hill described the New Zealand anti-nuclear issue as "a bit of a
relic", and signalled that the US wanted a closer defence relationship with
New Zealand. He also praised New Zealand's involvement in Afghanistan and
reconstruction in Iraq. "Rather than trying to change each other's minds on
the nuclear issue, which is a bit of a relic, I think we should focus on
things we can make work" he told an Australian newspaper.

While there were signs of the nuclear dispute between the US and NZ thawing
out, pressure from the United States increased in 2006 with US trade officials
linking the repeal of the ban of American nuclear ships from New Zealand's
ports to a potential free trade agreement between the two countries. On 4
February 2008, US Trade Representative Susan Schwab announced that the United
States would join negotiations with four Asia–Pacific countries: Brunei,
Chile, New Zealand and Singapore to be known as the "P-4". These countries
already had a FTA called the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership and
the United States was looking to become involved in the "vitally important
emerging Asia-Pacific region". A number of US-based organisations supported
the negotiations including, but not limited to, the United States Chamber of
Commerce, National Association of Manufacturers, National Foreign Trade
Council, Emergency Committee for American Trade and Coalition of Service
Industries.

In 2010, the United States and New Zealand signed the Wellington Declaration
in Wellington, New Zealand, during a three-day visit by US Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton. The signing of the declaration ended the ANZUS dispute of the
previous 25 years. It was later revealed the US and New Zealand had resumed
military co-operation in eight areas in 2007.

On 16 November 2011, US President Obama and Australian Prime Minister Julia
Gillard met in Canberra, Australia, to announce plans for a sustained new
American presence on Australian soil. 2,500 American troops are to be deployed
to Darwin, Australia.

New Zealand and the United States signed the Washington Declaration on 19 June
2012 "to promote and strengthen closer bilateral defense and security
cooperation". On 20 September 2012, while on a visit to New Zealand, US
Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta announced that the United States was lifting
the 26-year-old ban on visits by New Zealand warships to US Department of
Defense and US Coast Guard bases around the world; US Marines had trained in
New Zealand and New Zealand's navy took part in the RIMPAC maritime exercises
alongside the US earlier that year.

The Royal New Zealand Navy (RNZN) invited the United States Navy to send a
vessel to participate in the RNZN's 75th Birthday Celebrations in Auckland
over the weekend of 19–21 November 2016. The guided-missile destroyer USS
_Sampson_ became the first US warship to visit New Zealand in 33 years. New
Zealand Prime Minister John Key granted approval for the ship's visit under
the New Zealand Nuclear Free Zone, Disarmament, and Arms Control Act 1987,
which requires that the Prime Minister has to be satisfied that any visiting
ship is not nuclear armed or powered. Following the 7.8 magnitude Kaikōura
earthquake on 14 November 2016 the _Sampson_ and other naval ships from
Australia, Canada, Japan and Singapore were diverted to proceed directly to
Kaikōura to provide humanitarian assistance.

In late 2021 Australia, the UK and the USA signed the AUKUS agreement, a
trilateral security partnership between Australia, the United Kingdom, and the
United States. New Zealand did not participate and any nuclear submarines
developed under the pact will be banned from New Zealand waters under their
existing nuclear restrictions.