| This article **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "Asia–Europe Foundation" – news **·** newspapers **·** books
**·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( April 2019)__(Learn how and when to remove this
message)_  
---|---  
  
The **Asia–Europe Foundation (ASEF)** is an intergovernmental not-for-profit
organization located in Singapore. Founded in 1997, it is the only institution
of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM). Its purpose is to promote mutual
understanding and cooperation between the people of Asia and Europe through
intellectual, cultural, and people-to-people exchanges.

Every year, ASEF runs about 20 projects in Asia and Europe together with over
100 partner organisations, mainly conferences, seminars and workshops. More
than 1,000 Asians and Europeans actively participate in its activities
annually and it reaches much wider audiences through its networks, web-
portals, publications, lectures and exhibitions.

## History

In March 1996, the leaders of 25 Asian and European countries as well as the
European Commission, met in Bangkok, Thailand, for the 1st Asia-Europe Meeting
(ASEM) Summit (ASEM1). At this inaugural meeting, they agreed on the
establishment of the Asia–Europe Foundation (ASEF) on 15 February 1997 as a
central institution of ASEM's social, cultural and educational pillar. The
main tasks of ASEF are to bring the civil societies of Asia and Europe
together and to become an interface between civil society and governments by
facilitating interactions among people from diverse fields and transmitting
the resulting outputs as recommendations to policy-makers.

By nature, ASEF is different from other organisations, as it works with both
the civil societies and public sectors of the ASEM Partners as well as the
private sector. It works on creating sustainable networks and it injects civil
society inputs into the ASEM Process, enhancing the ASEM Process. This unique
attribute allows ASEF's activities to generate ideas and solutions that would
not normally emerge from pure civil society or inter-governmental processes.

To date, ASEF is the only permanently established institution of the ASEM
Process.

## Thematic Areas

ASEF focuses in its work on the following key thematic areas: culture,
education, governance, economy, sustainable development, public health, and
media.

### Culture

ASEF promotes various forms of cultural cooperation between Asia and Europe,
including policy dialogue, bi-regional networks and artistic collaborations.
It fosters sustainable partnerships between Asian and European arts
organisations, while also facilitating dialogue between the arts sector and
government agencies responsible for culture.

### Education

7th ASEF Rectors Conference & Students Forum (ARC7) in May 2019 in Bucharest,
Romania.

ASEF has set in motion projects which contribute to education policy dialogue
and facilitate youth networks. Through interdisciplinary and pragmatic
approaches, as well as the integration of ICT as an essential component,
ASEF’s education projects strengthen collaboration between education
institutions and exchange among young people, while linking them to the ASEM
Education Process and ASEM Leaders' Meetings.

### Governance

Respect for human rights, rule of law, effective participation, and
accountability of public institutions are some areas that lay the foundation
for good governance. ASEF encourages informal, open and non-confrontational
dialogue between civil society, government and international organisation
representatives on human rights topics of common interest to the 2 regions.
Public diplomacy is being promoted in Asia and in Europe for a better
understanding of ASEM challenges.

### Economy

Together with its partners of the Asia Europe Economic Forum (AEEF) ASEF
addresses current economic issues and long-term trends impacting Asian and
European societies in line with ASEM’s political and economic agenda
concerning the international financial and economic situation across ASEM
constituencies.

### Sustainable Development

Since its inception, ASEF has initiated several dialogue platforms on
sustainable development and climate change issues in Asia and Europe.
Reflecting priorities of the ASEM Process as well as the needs of stakeholders
at international, regional, and national levels, ASEF’s activities in this
field focus on contributing to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.

### Public Health

The ASEF Public Health Network (ASEF PHN) is part of the ASEM Initiative for
the Rapid Containment of Pandemic Influenza. The initiative was officially
launched in 2009 with the financial support from the Government of Japan. The
ASEF PHN has been promoting bi-regional exchange of public health priorities
with a strong focus on emerging infectious diseases, including pandemic
influenza.

### Media

Through its media projects, ASEF creates unique networking platforms for an
exchange of views and ideas as well as cooperation among mass media
representatives of Asia and Europe. The media projects include events with
themes aligned with the agenda of Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) which can examine
current issues relevant to Asia-Europe relations, challenges faced by the
media industry, as well as the professional development of media personnel.

## Members

ASEF's members are the 53 Partners of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM): 30
European countries, 21 Asian countries, and 2 regional organisations (the
European Union and the ASEAN Secretariat).

## Funding

ASEF is funded by annual voluntary contributions from the 54 ASEM Partners and
shares the financing of its projects with its civil society, public and
private sector partners across Asia and Europe.

## Structure

ASEF reports to a Board of Governors whose members are appointed by each of
the 53 ASEM Partners and who meet twice a year. At its permanent office in
Singapore, ASEF is composed of 4 program departments, a Culture Department, an
Education Department, a Governance & Economy Department, and a Sustainable
Development & Public Health Department as well as a Communications Department,
a Finance & Administrative Department, a Human Resource Department, and an
Executive Office.

### Executive Directors

  * 2020–current  Mr MORIKAWA Toru
  * 2020–2020  Mr SUN Xiangyang (acting)
  * 2016–2020  Ambassador Karsten WARNECKE
  * 2012–2016  Ambassador ZHANG Yan
  * 2011–2012  Ambassador Michel FILHOL
  * 2008–2011  Ambassador Dominique GIRARD
  * 2004–2008  Ambassador CHO Wonil
  * 2000–2004  Ambassador Delfín COLOMÉ
  * 1997–2000  Ambassador Professor Tommy KOH

### Deputy Executive Directors

  * 2020–current  Mr Leon FABER
  * 2017–2019  Mr SUN Xiangyang
  * 2012–2016  Mr Karsten WARNECKE
  * 2008–2012  Ambassador NGUYEN Quoc Khanh
  * 2006–2008  Mr Bertrand FORT
  * 2004–2006  Mr Hendrik KLONINGER
  * 2000–2004  Mr KIM Sung-Chul
  * 1997–2000  Mr Pierre BARROUX