Regional intergovernmental organization

The **Association of Caribbean States** (**ACS** ; Spanish: _Asociación de
Estados del Caribe_ ; French: _Association des États de la Caraïbe_) is an
advisory association of nations centered on the Caribbean Basin. It was formed
with the aim of promoting consultation, cooperation, and concerted action
among all the countries of the Caribbean coastal area. The 5 main purposes of
the ACS is to promote greater trade between the nations, enhance
transportation, develop sustainable tourism, facilitate greater and more
effective responses to local natural disasters, and to preserve and conserve
the Caribbean Sea.

It has twenty-five member states and seven associate members. The convention
establishing the ACS was signed on July 24, 1994, in Cartagena, Colombia and
is deposited with the Government of the Republic of Colombia in English,
French and Spanish languages. In the convention the founding observers were
declared as the CARICOM Secretariat, the Latin American Economic System, the
Central American Integration System, and the Permanent Secretariat of the
General Agreement on Central American Economic Integration.

## ACS objectives and goals

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various
multinational organizations in the Americas

  * v
  * t
  * e

The Association of Caribbean States is intended to promote regionalism among
the member states. The success and functionality of the ACS is greatly debated
among scholars. The main goals of the association are "to confirm the new
concept of the Caribbean Basin by (A) accentuating those interests the
Caribbean nations hold in common and (B) working to eliminate barriers left
over from its colonial past."

The organization seeks to use geographic proximity and regional cooperation
(regionalism) for political and economic advantage with respect to the global
economy and trade blocs such as the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), European Union, Arab League, and the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation. The ACS has four distinct areas of interest: Trade,
Transport, Sustainable Tourism, and Natural Disasters. Each is pursued by a
Special Committee which meets at least twice yearly in order to discuss
current regional issues and draft treaties.

  * The Special Committee on Trade Development and External Economic Relations works in an effort to create larger economic actions in the Caribbean by uniting its member states through integration and cooperation. Through various annual forums the ACS attempts to create economic cooperation in an attempt to benefit and expand the region's economy.
  * The Special Committee on Transport works to promote an Air Transport Agreement amongst the countries which have ratified the agreement. Security of travelers and the policing of airborne crime like drug trafficking also falls under the auspices of the Special Committee on Transport.
  * The Special Committee on Sustainable Tourism aims to promote tourism which is environmentally friendly. The committee promotes the use of sustainable tourism which is healthy for the environment, and at the same time economically beneficial to the Caribbean as a region.
  * The Special Committee on Disaster Risk Reduction which aims to coordinate the prevention and response to natural disasters in the Caribbean. The main focus of this committee is to maintain organisation and attempt to maintain a high level of ability to cope with disasters.

Additionally there is a Council of National Representatives of the Special
Fund that is in charge of overseeing the resource mobilization and project
development of the Association.

### Caribbean Sea agenda

One agenda adopted by the ACS has been an attempt to secure the designation of
the Caribbean Sea as a special zone in the context of sustainable development,
it is pushing for the UN to consider the Caribbean sea as an invaluable asset
that is worth protecting and treasuring. The organisation has sought to form a
coalition among member states to devise a United Nations General Assembly
resolution to ban the transshipment of nuclear materials through the Caribbean
Sea and the Panama Canal.

### VERB programme

VERB (Value, Empowerment, Resources, Betterment) programme aimed by ACS for
empowering Caribbean peoples in all sectors (agriculture, education, fishery,
etc.) with better resources and betterment of infrastructures in Caribbean by
prioritising ecological and community welfare values and using renewable
natural resources.

## Performance evaluation

The success of the ACS is debated by many scholars on both sides. Those who
suggest the ACS is successful would point to the many initiatives the
developmental coalition has undertaken, as well as its large membership and
relations with other international organisations like the European Union.
Those who suggest it is unsuccessful note how by the end of the 1990s, unlike
CARICOM, the ACS had failed to establish a track record which was worthy
enough to allow for the evaluation of the ACS as a developmental coalition.
Furthermore, some scholars suggest that the ACS is unlikely to become a true
player on the international level. Skeptics often point to other failed
attempts at economic coalition building like the Central American Common
Market (CACM) as an example of the instability of the region. The influence of
NAFTA on the Caribbean outlines the future struggle of the ACS. The future of
the ACS in relation to the western hemisphere is uncertain. "Despite
governmental statements of commitment to liberalisation, it will be difficult
for Caribbean countries to succeed in putting their economies on a firmer
footing that would enable them to compete effectively."

## Summits

The summits held by the ACS are the most important meetings, and are attended
by the Heads of State or Government of all the member countries, observer
countries, social actors, and observer organizations. These meetings are where
they will reaffirm and recommit to the organizations goals, objectives, and
plans of action. The summit is a time for careful examination of issues faced
by the region and to bring collaborative action towards the issues. The so
called highlight of the summit is the adoption and signing of the Declaration,
where leaders reaffirm and instruct the successful implementation of the
proposed policies and actions that are outlined in the Declaration.

The ACS has held nine summits:

  * I ACS Summit, at Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, August 17–18, 1995.
  * II ACS Summit, at Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, April 16–17, 1999.
  * III ACS Summit, at Isla Margarita, Venezuela, December 12, 2001.
  * IV ACS Summit, at Panama City, Panama, July 29, 2005.
  * V ACS Summit, at Pétion-Ville, Haiti, April 23–26, 2013.
  * VI ACS Summit, at Mérida, Mexico, April 28–30, 2014.
  * VII ACS Summit, at Havana, Cuba, June 4, 2016.
  * VIII ACS Summit, at Managua, Nicaragua, March 29, 2019.
  * IX ACS Summit, at Antigua Guatemala, Guatemala, May 8–12, 2023.

## Membership

### Member states

  * Antigua and Barbuda
  * Bahamas
  * Barbados
  * Belize
  * Colombia
  * Costa Rica
  * Cuba
  * Dominica
  * Dominican Republic
  * El Salvador
  * Grenada
  * Guatemala
  * Guyana
  * Haiti
  * Honduras
  * Jamaica
  * Mexico
  * Nicaragua
  * Panama
  * Saint Kitts and Nevis
  * Saint Lucia
  * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
  * Suriname
  * Trinidad and Tobago
  * Venezuela

### Associate member states

  * Aruba
  * British Virgin Islands
  * Curaçao
  * France on behalf of: 
    * French Guiana
    * Saint Barthélemy
  * Guadeloupe
  * Martinique
  * Saint Martin
  * Netherlands on behalf of: 
    * Bonaire
    * Saba
    * Sint Eustatius
  * Sint Maarten

### Observer states

Source:

  * Argentina
  * Belarus
  * Bolivia
  * Brazil
  * Canada
  * Chile
  * Ecuador
  * Egypt
  * Finland
  * India
  * Italy
  * Japan
  * Kazakhstan
  * South Korea
  * Morocco
  * Netherlands
  * Palestine
  * Peru
  * Russia
  * Saudi Arabia
  * Serbia
  * Slovenia
  * Spain
  * Turkey
  * Ukraine
  * United Arab Emirates
  * United Kingdom
  * Uruguay

### Observer organisations

  * The Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America - People's Trade Treaty
  * Central American Bank for Economic Integration
  * Arab League
  * European Union
  * Group of 77
  * International Organization for Migration
  * Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
  * Pacific Islands Forum
  * United Nations

### Social Actors

  * Caribbean Medical Association
  * Regional Coordination for Economic and Social Research
  * Caribbean Shipping Association
  * Caribbean Association of Industry and Commerce
  * CCA
  * ACURIL
  * Association of Caribbean Universities and Research Institutes
  * The Antilles-French Guiana Regional Centre of the National Institute of Agronomical Research
  * Latin American Faculty of Social Science

### Non-participants

Montserrat does not directly participate in the ACS, though it is affiliated
with an observer state, being a British Overseas Territory. The United States
and U.S. territories Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands also do
not participate.

## Relationship with other supranational organisations

| Parts of this article (those related to Anguilla) need to be **updated**.
Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available
information. _( March 2012)_  
---|---  
A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various
Supranational Caribbean Organisations and agreements

  * v
  * t
  * e

### Observer organisations

  * Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Secretariat
  * Caribbean Tourism Organization (CTO)
  * Central American Integration System (SICA)
  * General Agreement on Central American Economic Integration (SIECA) Permanent Secretariat
  * Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
  * European Union
  * Latin American Economic System (SELA)
  * MERCOSUR
  * United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
  * Organization of American States (OAS)
  * Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)