Multilateral export control regime established in 1985

Australia group participation map Weapons of mass destruction  
---  
By type  
  
  * Biological
  * Chemical
  * Nuclear
  * Radiological

  
By country  
  
  * Albania
  * Algeria
  * Argentina
  * Australia
  * Belgium
  * Brazil
  * Bulgaria
  * Canada
  * China
  * Egypt
  * France
  * Germany
  * India
  * Indonesia
  * Iran
  * Iraq
  * Israel
  * Italy
  * Japan
  * Kazakhstan
  * Libya
  * Mexico
  * Myanmar
  * Netherlands
  * North Korea
  * Pakistan
  * Philippines
  * Poland
  * Rhodesia
  * Romania
  * Russia (Soviet Union)
  * Saudi Arabia
  * South Africa
  * South Korea
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Syria
  * Taiwan
  * Turkey
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom
  * United States
  * Yugoslavia

  
Proliferation  
  
  * Chemical
  * Nuclear
  * Missiles

  
Treaties  
  
  * List of treaties (treaty parties)

  
  
  * Category

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The **Australia Group** is a multilateral export control regime (MECR) and an
informal group of countries (now joined by the European Commission)
established in 1985 (after the use of chemical weapons by Iraq in 1984) to
help member countries to identify those exports which need to be controlled so
as not to contribute to the spread of chemical and biological weapons.

The group, initially consisting of 15 members, held its first meeting in
Brussels, Belgium, in June 1985. With the incorporation of India on 19 January
2018, it now has 43 members, including Australia, New Zealand, the European
Commission, all 27 member states of the European Union, United Kingdom, the
United States, Canada, India, Ukraine, and Argentina. The name comes from
Australia's initiative to create the group. Australia manages the secretariat.

The initial members of the group had different assessments of which chemical
precursors should be subject to export control. Later adherents initially had
no such controls. Today, members of the group maintain export controls on a
uniform list of 90 compounds, including several that are not prohibited for
export under the Chemical Weapons Convention, but can be used in the
manufacture of chemical weapons. Additionally, the Australia Group expanded
its standardization of licensing and export controls to cover technology
related to the manufacturing of chemical weapons or controlled components.

In 2002, the group took two important steps to strengthen export control. The
first was the "no-undercut" requirement, which stated that any member of the
group considering making an export to another state that had already been
denied an export by any other member of the group must first consult with that
member state before approving the export. The second was the "catch-all"
provision, which requires member states to halt all exports that could be used
by importers in chemical or biological weapons programs, regardless of whether
the export is on the group's control lists. Delegations representing the
members meet every year in Paris, France.

## Members

### Sovereign states

  * Argentina (1993)
  * Australia (1985)
  * Austria (1989)
  * Belgium (1985)
  * Bulgaria (2001)
  * Canada (1985)
  * Croatia (2007)
  * Cyprus (2000)
  * Czech Republic (2004)
  * Denmark (1985)
  * Estonia (2004)
  * Finland (1991)
  * France (1985)
  * Germany (1985)
  * Greece (1985)
  * Hungary (1993)
  * Iceland (1993)
  * India (2018)
  * Ireland (1985)
  * Italy (1985)
  * Japan (1985)
  * South Korea (1996)
  * Latvia (2004)
  * Lithuania (2004)
  * Luxembourg (1985)
  * Malta (2004)
  * Mexico (2013)
  * Netherlands (1985)
  * New Zealand (1985)
  * Norway (1986)
  * Poland (1994)
  * Portugal (1985)
  * Romania (1995)
  * Slovakia (1994)
  * Slovenia (2004)
  * Spain (1985)
  * Sweden (1991)
  * Switzerland (1987)
  * Turkey (2000)
  * Ukraine (2005)
  * United Kingdom (1985)
  * United States (1985)

### International organisations

  * European Commission (1985)

### Adherents

According to Australia Group website "AG Adherents notify the AG Chair in
writing of their political commitment to adhere to the AG Guidelines and
Common Control Lists and any subsequent changes. This adherence is unilateral
by the non-member country and not subject to any acceptance decision by the AG
membership." As November 2024 the following countries are adherents:

  * Kazakhstan (2015)