International financial institution owned by central banks

The **Bank for International Settlements** (**BIS**) is an international
financial institution which is owned by member central banks. Its primary goal
is to foster international monetary and financial cooperation while serving as
a bank for central banks. With its establishment in 1930 it is the oldest
international financial institution. Its initial purpose was to oversee the
settlement of World War I war reparations.

The BIS carries out its work through its meetings, programmes and through the
Basel Process, hosting international groups pursuing global financial
stability and facilitating their interaction. It also provides banking
services, but only to central banks and other international organizations.

The BIS is based in Basel, Switzerland, with representative offices in Hong
Kong and Mexico City.

## History

### Background

French economist Raphaël-Georges Lévy (1853–1933) was a precocious proponent
of an international bank, for which he suggested a location in Switzerland.
Belgian statesman Léon Delacroix (1867–1929) was an early promoter of the BIS
and died during the negotiations to create it.

International monetary cooperation started to develop tentatively in the
course of the 19th century. An early case was a £400,000 loan in gold coins,
in 1825 and facilitated by the Rothschilds, from the Bank of France to the
Bank of England, which was facing a bank run. The Bank of England again
borrowed from its French counterpart (and from the Hamburger Bank) in 1836 and
1839, and lent to it in return in 1847.

In 1860–1861, because of the disruption from the incipient American Civil War,
the Bank of France entered a series of swap agreements in specie with the Bank
of England as well as the State Bank of the Russian Empire and De
Nederlandsche Bank. That episode was recorded as the "war of the banks",
ostensibly because of friction between the Bank of France and the Bank of
England about the transaction.

A few years later, monetary cooperation took a novel form with a series of
international monetary conferences devoted to better coordination of the
coinage system, even though these initiatives, like the Latin Monetary Union
started in 1865, did not extend to money other than coins, and therefore
involved treasury and mint officials rather than bankers.

At the Brussels Conference in 1892, German academic Julius Wolff submitted a
blueprint for an international currency that would be used for emergency
lending to national central banks and would be issued by an institution based
in a neutral country. In 1893, French economist Raphaël-Georges Lévy suggested
the establishment of an international central bank in Bern.

In 1907, Italian statesman Luigi Luzzatti published an article in the Austrian
Neue Freie Presse, referencing past examples of bilateral cooperation between
central banks and emphasizing the need for more institutionalized cooperation
at the international level.

The practice of formalized central bank cooperation made unprecedented
advances among allies in the course of World War I. In 1916, the Bank of
England and Bank of France made agreements on bilateral lending and
established a direct telegraph line between their respective offices to
facilitate communication. Similar formal agreements were made that year
between those two banks and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and in 1917
the Bank of Italy opened an office in New York.

In the war's immediate aftermath, Dutch central banker Gerard Vissering
advocated an international currency without reliance on a common gold pool.
Similar ideas burgeoned at the Brussels Conference of 1920, the first major
discussion of international financial challenges following the war, endorsed
by luminaries such as Belgian prime minister Léon Delacroix and American
banker Frank A. Vanderlip, who suggested reorganizing Europe's national
central banks along similar lines to the U.S. Federal Reserve which he had
helped establish in the previous decade. At the Genoa Conference of 1922,
following advocacy by several experts that included Ralph Hawtrey, Robert
Horne and John Maynard Keynes, a resolution was passed that recommended the
creation of "an association or permanent understanding for cooperation amongst
central banks, not necessarily limited to Europe, to coordinate credit
policies, without detriment to the freedom of each individual central bank."

It was decided to create the BIS in the context of negotiations over World War
I reparations which plagued international relations in Europe throughout the
1920s. Following the Treaty of Versailles, a Reparation Commission was set up
in January 1920 to determine the amount of German reparations. Conferences at
Spa in July 1920 and London in March 1921 were followed by the occupation of
the Ruhr in January 1923, and eventually the Dawes Plan approved at another
London conference in July–August 1924. The Dawes Plan allowed for a more
constructive atmosphere, materialized in diplomacy by the Locarno Treaties in
October 1925 and encouraging Montagu Norman, the influential governor of the
Bank of England, to envisage the creation of what he described in September
1925 as "a private and eclectic Central Banks' 'Club', small at first, larger
in the future." That vision was first materialized at a meeting in early July
1927 which brought together Montagu, his friend Benjamin Strong, head of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Reichsbank president Hjalmar Schacht, and
Bank of France vice governor Charles Rist at a private home on Long Island
(the Bank of Italy had hoped for an invitation but was not included). A second
meeting was scheduled in Algeciras, but was not held because of the bad health
of Strong, who eventually died in October 1928.

### The Young Plan and the Hague Conference

American banker Owen D. Young (1874–1962) played a central role in the
conception and establishment of the BIS in 1929–1930 Hôtel Stéphanie in Baden-
Baden (demolished in 1964), where the charter and statutes of the BIS were
drafted

A deadline for French repayment of its bilateral debt to the United States
provided impetus for a new initiative, which took the form of a Committee of
Experts appointed to work out a final settlement of the German reparations,
known as the Young Committee for its chairman the American banker Owen D.
Young. The committee first met at the Bank of France on 9 February 1929, then
in 28 successive sessions ending on 7 June 1929 at the Hotel George V. The
seven participating countries were Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
United Kingdom and the United States. The need for a jointly governed bank
emerged in these discussions as a means to overcome information asymmetries
and increase the likelihood that commitments would be effectively met, not
least by helping the creditors to act collectively and facilitating the
reinvestment of German payments into the German economy. The first draft
concept for the new bank was presented by Belgian banker Émile Francqui on 23
February 1929, and amended with suggestions from Bank of France governor Émile
Moreau. It was envisaged as a private institution with shareholders from all
participating countries (including Germany) that would settle reparation
payments, issue bonds to be serviced by the reparation transfers, and (as
advocated by Schacht) provide international long-term credit for countries in
need, including Germany. In a memo to Young a few days later, Schacht first
used the name "International Settlements Bank" while referring to the
projected new institution. Young asked his American peers Warren Randolph
Burgess, Shepard Morgan and Walter W. Stewart to sail promptly to Paris, and
on 7 March 1929 they presented a compromise text that formed the basis for
subsequent developments.

Under the Young Committee's consensus concept, made public on 10 March 1929,
the bank would serve a threefold purpose as a trustee, bank, and international
organization of central bankers:

  1. receiving, managing, and distributing German reparation annuities as a trustee;
  2. facilitating German transfers by issuing counterpart bills, notes, and bonds; and
  3. serving national central banks by taking their deposits, granting them credit, and carrying out currency and gold transactions on their behalf.

It would rely on nonpolitical staff located in a country not directly involved
in the reparations disputes. Subsequent fine-tuning discussions revolved
around the scope for the bank's lending to foster economic growth and trade,
which would have given it a role similar to that of the later World Bank. Such
a role was advocated by Schacht but opposed by France and by commercial
bankers, on the grounds that it could be inflationary and create unfair
competition to private-sector lenders. An overall agreement on the future
bank, with draft statutes prepared by the Bank of England's Charles Stewart
Addis, was achieved by the Young Committee on 25 March 1929.

Political positions within the Herbert Hoover administration made it
impossible for U.S. Federal Reserve System officials to be formally involved
in the initiative, but the U.S. was still able to retain major influence in
the proceedings because of a shared perception amongst negotiators that the
project would fail without U.S. participation. Major figures of the U.S.
financial world would participate in the joint bank, and act in close
cooperation with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The leverage held by
the U.S. allowed Young and J. P. Morgan Jr. to make sure that Americans would
be in leadership position at the bank when it started operations, as indeed
happened.

The BIS concept was agreed to in August 1929 at the first part of the Hague
conference on reparations. The bank's Charter, Statutes, Trust Agreement, and
Convention on its relations with the host country were subsequently drafted by
a special Organisation Committee chaired by Jackson Reynolds, president of the
First National Bank of New York, which met in the discreet location of Hôtel
Stéphanie (part of which later became Brenners Park-Hotel & Spa [de]) at
Baden-Baden from 3 October to 13 November 1929; the intense work was marred by
the death of Delacroix from a heart attack during the proceedings. Aside from
Reynolds, American participants in Baden-baden also included Melvin Alvah
Traylor, president of the First National Bank of Chicago, Warren Randolph
Burgess, Shepard Morgan, and Leon Fraser [de] (a legal expert with the Agent
General for Reparation Payments), with J. P. Morgan Jr. monitoring the
proceedings and advising from London.

As in the Paris discussions earlier in the year, the Baden-Baden committee had
to reconcile the different visions for the future BIS, from purely a creation
of central banks (as espoused by Italy's Alberto Beneduce and by Montagu
Norman) to a supranational development bank with policy tasks such as
developing world trade (as advocated by Schacht and UK Chancellor Philip
Snowden). Other points of contention included the future institution's
official language(s), for which the committee endorsed French, and location.
For the latter, several delegates favored London, but that was vetoed by the
French who proposed Brussels instead, which in turn was vetoed by the British;
after Amsterdam failed to gain sufficient support, a consensus was eventually
found on Basel, which combined neutral country status and good railway
connections. The founding texts of the BIS were then approved at the second
part of the Hague conference, on 20 January 1930, with only minor changes from
the Baden-Baden drafts such as the addition of English to French as official
language. These texts included the constituent Charter and Statutes for the
bank, and a Convention (intergovernmental agreement) between Germany, Belgium,
France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Japan, the United States, and Switzerland,
establishing the bank's special status on Swiss soil and committing
Switzerland to grant the Charter and approve the Statutes.

### Creation

Bank of Italy Governor Bonaldo Stringher (1854–1930) chaired the BIS's
founding meeting

The Convention and Charter were approved by the Swiss Federal Council and thus
obtained force of law on 26 February 1930. The governors met that day and the
next to formally approve and sign the statutes in Rome, out of consideration
for the Bank of Italy's governor Bonaldo Stringher who was both the most
senior in the group, and in poor health (he would pass away in December 1930).
Aside from Stringher, who chaired the meeting, the other participants were:
Vincenzo Azzolini and Alberto Beneduce, for Italy; Bank of England governor
Montagu Norman and Harry Arthur Siepmann, for the UK; Bank of France governor
Émile Moreau, Clément Moret [fr] and Pierre Quesnay, for France; Reichsbank
governor Schacht, for Germany; National Bank of Belgium governor Louis Franck
and Paul van Zeeland, for Belgium; and the Bank of Japan's London
representative Tetsuzaburo Tanaka [ja] and diplomat Hiroshi Saito, for Japan.
Thus the BIS was formally created in Rome on 27 February 1930. The BIS
promptly opened its doors in Basel on 17 May 1930, ahead of the first German
annuities under the Young Plan due in June.

The legal status of the bank combined features of a private-sector company and
of a public international organization. It was a limited-liability company
incorporated under Swiss law, whose shares could be held by individuals and
non-governmental entities. However, the rights of voting and representation at
the Bank's General Meeting were to be exercised exclusively by the central
banks of the countries in which shares had been issued. At the same time, the
BIS possessed _de facto_ international legal personality, was exempted from
Swiss taxation and banking supervision, and its senior management enjoyed
diplomatic status. The Charter stipulated that "The Bank, its property and
assets and all deposits and other funds entrusted to it shall be immune in
time of peace and in time of war from any measure such as expropriation,
requisition, seizure, confiscation, prohibition or restriction of gold or
currency export or import, and any other similar measures." Under the
Statutes, the governor of each of the founding central banks was a member of
the BIS Board of Directors _ex officio_ , and had the right to appoint a
second Board member, plus additional right for France and Germany to appoint a
third Board member each or the duration of the Young Plan. In principle the
Board could appoint up to nine additional directors, in practice however only
the Dutch, Swedish and Swiss central bank governors in the BIS's first
decades. The inaugural BIS Board had 16 members: Franck and Francqui
(Belgium); Moreau, Georges Brincard [fr] and Melchior de Vogüé [fr] (France);
Hans Luther, Carl Melchior and Paul Reusch [de] (Germany); Stringher and
Beneduce (Italy); Tanaka and Daisuke Nohara (Japan); Norman and Addis (UK);
and Gates McGarrah and Fraser (United States).

### Early activity

Early-20th-century former building of _Savoy Hôtel Univers_ at
Centralbahnstrasse 7 in Basel, the seat of the BIS from 1930 to 1977

The BIS had a quick start, even though its intended task of facilitating World
War I reparation payments soon became obsolete. Even before the founding
meeting in Rome, the Organisation Committee had secured a two-year lease of a
convenient building in Basel, the former _Grand Hôtel et Savoy Hôtel Univers_
across the street from Basel railway station. By mid-April, Fraser had arrived
from the United States and was working on the BIS's behalf from the Paris
office of the Agent General for Reparation Payments, joined by McGarrah in
April. The board members first met for an informal meeting in Basel on 22–23
April 1930, and adopted the bank's Statutes. They unanimously elected McGarrah
as President of the BIS and Chairman of its Board, Fraser as alternate
President, and Addis, Melchior and Moreau as Vice-Chairmen "with equal rank".
Quesnay was appointed General Manager, albeit with the three German Board
members voting against "for serious reasons of principle" (i.e. objecting to
the choice of a French national rather than to Quesnay as an individual).
These foundational decisions were later ratified by the first formal Board
meeting on 17 May 1930, as the April meeting had also agreed that the ordinary
meetings of the Board would henceforth take place in Basel on the second
Monday of each month. On 17 May the BIS opened for business and formally took
over the funds, accounts, capital, and records of the Agent General for
Reparation Payments. On 20 May, the bank's shares were publicly issued.

Reparation payments were first suspended for one year (Hoover moratorium, June
1931) and then stopped altogether after the Lausanne Agreement of July 1932
failed to be ratified. Instead, the BIS focused on its second statutory task,
i.e. fostering the cooperation between its member central banks. It acted as a
meeting forum for central banks and provided banking facilities to them. For
instance, in the late 1930s, the BIS was instrumental in helping continental
European central banks ship out part of their gold reserves to London.

As a purportedly apolitical organization, the BIS was unable to prevent
transactions that reflected contemporaneous geopolitical realities, but were
also widely regarded as unconscionable. As a result of the policy of
appeasement of Nazi Germany by the UK and France, in March 1939 the BIS was
obliged to transfer 23 tons of gold it held, on behalf of Czechoslovakia, to
the German Reichsbank, following the German annexation of Czechoslovakia. The
decision to do so is still considered the most controversial action by BIS.

### World War II

At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, the BIS Board of Directors
– on which the main European central banks were represented – decided that the
Bank should remain open, but that, for the duration of hostilities, no
meetings of the Board of Directors were to take place and the Bank should
maintain a neutral stance in the conduct of its business. But as the war
dragged on, evidence mounted that the BIS conducted operations that were
helpful to the Germans. Also, throughout the war, the Allies accused the Nazis
of looting and pleaded with the BIS not to accept gold from the Reichsbank in
payment for prewar obligations linked to the Young Plan. This was to no avail,
as remelted gold was either confiscated from prisoners or seized in victory,
and was thus unacceptable as payment to the BIS. Operations conducted by the
BIS were viewed with increasing suspicion in London and Washington. The fact
that top-level German industrialists and advisors sat on the BIS Board seemed
to provide ample evidence of how the BIS might be used by Hitler throughout
the war, with the help of American, British and French banks. Between 1933 and
1945 the BIS Board of directors included Walther Funk, a prominent Nazi
official, and Emil Puhl, responsible for processing dental gold looted from
concentration camp victims, as well as Hermann Schmitz, the director of IG
Farben, and Baron von Schroeder, the owner of the J. H. Stein Bank [de], all
of whom were later convicted of war crimes or crimes against humanity.

The 1944 Bretton Woods Conference recommended the "liquidation of the Bank for
International Settlements at the earliest possible moment". This resulted in
the BIS being the subject of a disagreement between the U.S. and British
delegations. The liquidation of the bank was supported by other European
delegates, as well as Americans (including Harry Dexter White and Secretary of
the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr.). Abolition was opposed by John Maynard
Keynes, head of the British delegation.

Keynes went to Morgenthau hoping to prevent or postpone the dissolution, but
the next day it was approved; however the bank was never actually liquidated.
In April 1945, the new U.S. president Harry S. Truman ended U.S. involvement
in the scheme. The British government suspended the dissolution, and the
decision to liquidate the BIS was officially reversed in 1948.

### Postwar decades

Botta building in Basel, acquired by the BIS in 1998

After World War II, the BIS retained a distinct European focus. According to
an announcement made by the Swiss Government on 26 December 1952, Japan
renounced all rights, titles and interests in the BIS it had acquired under
the Hague Convention of January 1930. The BIS acted as Agent for the European
Payments Union (EPU, 1950–58), an intra-European clearing arrangement designed
to help the European countries in restoring currency convertibility and free,
multilateral trade. During the 1960s – the heyday of the Bretton Woods fixed
exchange rate system – the BIS once again became the locus for transatlantic
monetary cooperation. It coordinated the central banks' Gold Pool and a number
of currency support operations (e.g. Sterling Group Arrangements of 1966 and
1968)[_citation needed_]. The Group of Ten (G10), including the main European
economies, Canada, Japan, and the United States, became the most prominent
grouping.

The BIS acquired land near the Basel SBB railway station between 1966 and
1972. Architect Martin Burckhardt made three design proposals in 1969, among
which the Board of the BIS selected an 82-meter high round tower. This was
opposed by locals and their representation in the Swiss Heritage Society,
which led to a public referendum in 1971 in which 69% of voters endorsed a
revised design with reduced height. The BIS moved into the new premises,
sometimes dubbed the "Tower of Basel," in 1977.

With the end of the Bretton Woods system (1971–73) and the return to floating
exchange rates, financial instability came to the fore. The collapse of some
internationally active banks, such as Herstatt Bank (1974), highlighted the
need for improved banking supervision at an international level. The G10
Governors created the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), which
remains active. The BIS developed into a global meeting place for regulators
and for developing international standards (Basel Concordat, Basel Capital
Accord, Basel II and III). Through its member central banks, the BIS was
actively involved in the resolution of the Latin American debt crisis (1982).

From 1964 until 1993, the BIS provided the secretariat for the Committee of
Governors of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European Community
(Committee of Governors). This committee had been created by the European
Council decision to improve monetary cooperation among the EC central banks.
Likewise, the BIS in 1988–89 hosted most of the meetings of the Delors
Committee (Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union), which
produced a blueprint for monetary unification subsequently adopted in the
Maastricht Treaty (1992). In 1993, when the Committee of Governors was
replaced by the European Monetary Institute (EMI – the precursor of the ECB),
it moved from Basel to Frankfurt, cutting its ties with the BIS.

In 1998, the BIS acquired a second building on Aeschenplatz 1 in Basel,
designed in 1986 by Mario Botta and previously owned and used by UBS. Since
then, the BIS has used that building to host its banking operations on behalf
of member central banks.

### 21st century

The BIS representative office for Asia and the Pacific is located in the
International Financial Centre Tower 2 (left) in Hong Kong

In the 1990s–2000s, the BIS successfully globalized, breaking out of its
traditional European core. This was reflected in a gradual increase in its
membership (from 33 shareholding central bank members in 1995 to 60 in 2013,
which together represent roughly 95% of global GDP), and also in the much more
global composition of the BIS Board of Directors. In 1998, the BIS opened a
Representative Office for Asia and the Pacific in the Hong Kong SAR. A BIS
Representative Office for the Americas was established in 2002 in Mexico City.

The BIS was originally owned by both central banks and private individuals,
since the United States, Belgium and France had decided to sell all or some of
the shares allocated to their central banks to private investors. BIS shares
traded on stock markets, which made the bank an unusual organization: an
international organization (in the technical sense of public international
law), yet allowed for private shareholders. Many central banks had similarly
started as such private institutions; for example, the Bank of England was
privately owned until 1946. In more recent years the BIS has bought back its
once publicly traded shares. It is now wholly owned by BIS members (central
banks), but still operates in the private market as a counterparty, asset
manager and lender for central banks and international financial institutions.
Profits from its transactions are used, among other things, to fund the bank's
other international activities.

After the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, in March 2022 the BIS suspended
the Bank of Russia's membership.

**Project Nexus**

The Bank for International Settlements signed an agreement with Central Bank
of Malaysia, Bank of Thailand, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Monetary Authority
of Singapore, and the Reserve Bank of India on 30 June 2024 as founding member
of Project Nexus, a multilateral international initiative to enable retail
cross-border payments. Bank Indonesia involved as a special observer. The
platform, which is expected to go live by 2026, will interlink domestic fast
payment systems of the member countries.

## Membership

The BIS members are central banks of 63 jurisdictions: 34 in Europe, 16 in
Asia, 5 in South America, 3 in North America, 3 in Africa, and 2 in Oceania.
The United States is represented by two members, the United States Federal
Reserve System and Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Central Bank of
Russia is a member but its engagement with the BIS has been suspended since
early March 2022 (see History section above). In the list below, (*) indicates
members of the BIS Global Economy Meetings (see below) and (**) indicates
observers to these meetings.

  * Bank of Algeria**
  * Central Bank of Argentina*
  * Reserve Bank of Australia*
  * Oesterreichische Nationalbank (Austria)**
  * National Bank of Belgium*
  * Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Central Bank of Brazil*
  * Bulgarian National Bank
  * Bank of Canada*
  * Central Bank of Chile**
  * People's Bank of China*
  * Bank of the Republic of Colombia**
  * Croatian National Bank
  * Czech National Bank**
  * Danmarks Nationalbank (Denmark)**
  * Bank of Estonia
  * European Central Bank*
  * Bank of Finland**
  * Bank of France*
  * Deutsche Bundesbank (Germany)*
  * Bank of Greece**
  * Hong Kong Monetary Authority (China)*
  * Magyar Nemzeti Bank (Hungary)**
  * Central Bank of Iceland
  * Reserve Bank of India*
  * Bank Indonesia*
  * Central Bank of Ireland**
  * Bank of Israel**
  * Bank of Italy*
  * Bank of Japan*
  * Bank of Korea*
  * Central Bank of Kuwait**
  * Bank of Latvia
  * Bank of Lithuania
  * Central Bank of Luxembourg**
  * Central Bank of Malaysia*
  * Bank of Mexico*
  * Bank Al-Maghrib (Morocco)**
  * De Nederlandsche Bank (Netherlands)*
  * Reserve Bank of New Zealand**
  * National Bank of North Macedonia
  * Central Bank of Norway**
  * Central Reserve Bank of Peru**
  * Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Philippines)**
  * Narodowy Bank Polski (Poland)*
  * Banco de Portugal (Portugal)**
  * National Bank of Romania**
  * Central Bank of the Russian Federation*
  * Saudi Central Bank*
  * National Bank of Serbia
  * Monetary Authority of Singapore*
  * National Bank of Slovakia
  * Bank of Slovenia
  * South African Reserve Bank*
  * Bank of Spain*
  * Sveriges Riksbank (Sweden)*
  * Swiss National Bank*
  * Bank of Thailand*
  * Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey*
  * Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates**
  * Bank of England*
  * Federal Reserve Board (United States)
    * United States Federal Reserve System*
    * Federal Reserve Bank of New York*
  * State Bank of Vietnam**

## Central banking cooperation

The original goal of the BIS was "to promote the co-operation of central banks
and to provide additional facilities for international financial operations;
and to act as trustee or agent in regard to international financial
settlements entrusted to it under agreements with the parties concerned", as
stated in its Statutes of 1930. The BIS pursues its mission by:

  * fostering discussion and facilitating collaboration among central banks;
  * supporting dialogue with other authorities that are responsible for promoting financial stability;
  * carrying out research and policy analysis on issues of relevance for monetary and financial stability;
  * acting as a prime counterparty for central banks in their financial transactions; and
  * serving as an agent or trustee in connection with international financial operations.

### Basel Meetings

Brass plaque sign at the entrance of the BIS building in Basel, displaying its
name in four languages

The activity of the BIS has always revolved around the regular meetings of its
membership in Basel. In the 1930s, these meetings were held every month, with
two interruptions resulting in ten meetings per year. Since 1998, these
meetings have been held every other month, so six times a year.

The meetings follow a perennial sequence. On Sunday evening, the inner group
of governors gather at 7pm for the so-called Economic Consultative Committee,
which typically lasts for about an hour followed by dinner, a key moment for
informal exchange and coordination. On Monday morning, the Global Economy
Meeting (GEM) brings together a broader group of central banks, typically from
9:30am to 12:30pm. On Monday afternoon, the so-called Governors' Meeting lasts
from 2pm to 5pm. With the suspension of Russia since March 2022, 30
jurisdictions are members of the GEM and an additional 22 participate as
observers.

### Basel Committee on Banking Supervision

Basel Framework  
International regulatory standards for banks  
---  
  
  * Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
  * Basel Accords
    * Basel I
    * Basel II
    * Basel III
      * LCR
      * NSFR
      * FRTB
      * Final BIII Reforms

  
Background  
  
  * Banking / Regulation
  * Monetary policy / Central bank
  * Risk / Risk management

  
Pillar 1: Regulatory capital  
  
  * Capital requirement
    * Capital ratio
    * Leverage ratio
    * Tier 1
    * Tier 2
  * Credit risk
    * SA-CR
    * IRB
      * F-IRB
      * A-IRB
    * EAD
      * SA-CCR
      * IMM
    * CCF
  * Market risk
    * Standardized
    * IMA
  * CVA vol
    * BA-CVA
    * SA-CVA
  * Operational risk
    * Basic
    * Standardized
    * AMA

  
Pillar 2: Supervisory review  
  
  * Economic capital
  * Liquidity risk
  * Legal risk

  
Pillar 3: Market disclosure  
  
  * Disclosure

  
Business and Economics Portal  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
The BIS hosts the Secretariat of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(BCBS), colloquially referred to simply as the "Basel Committee", and with it
has played a central role in establishing the Basel Capital Accords (now
commonly referred to as Basel I) of 1988, Basel II framework in 2004 and more
recently Basel III framework in 2010–2017.

Capital adequacy policy applies to equity and capital assets. These can be
overvalued in many circumstances because they do not always reflect current
market conditions or adequately assess the risk of every trading position.
Accordingly, the Basel standards require the capital adequacy ratio of
internationally active commercial banks to be above a prescribed minimum
international standard, to improve the resilience of the banking sector.

### Committee on the Global Financial System

The Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) was established in 1971 as
the Euro-currency Standing Committee, and adopted its current name in 1999. It
reports to the Global Economy Meeting.

As of 2023, it had 28 members: Central Bank of Argentina, Reserve Bank of
Australia, National Bank of Belgium, Central Bank of Brazil, Bank of Canada,
People's Bank of China, European Central Bank, Bank of France, Deutsche
Bundesbank, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Reserve Bank of India, Bank of
Italy, Bank of Japan, Bank of Korea, Central Bank of Luxembourg, Bank of
Mexico, De Nederlandsche Bank, Central Bank of Russia, Saudi Central Bank,
Monetary Authority of Singapore, South African Reserve Bank, Bank of Spain,
Sveriges Riksbank, Swiss National Bank, Bank of Thailand, Bank of England,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Federal Reserve Bank of
New York.

### Markets Committee

The Markets Committee is the oldest of the BIS-hosted committees, originally
established in 1962 as the Committee on Gold and Foreign Exchange. It also
reports to the Global Economy Meeting.

As of 2023, it had 27 members: Reserve Bank of Australia, National Bank of
Belgium, Central Bank of Brazil, Bank of Canada, People's Bank of China,
European Central Bank, Bank of France, Deutsche Bundesbank, Hong Kong Monetary
Authority, Reserve Bank of India, Bank of Indonesia, Bank of Italy, Bank of
Japan, Bank of Korea, Central Bank of Malaysia, Bank of Mexico, De
Nederlandsche Bank, Central Bank of Russia, Monetary Authority of Singapore,
South African Reserve Bank, Bank of Spain, Sveriges Riksbank, Swiss National
Bank, Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye, Bank of England, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

### Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure

Another of the committees hosted at the BIS is the Committee on Payments and
Market Infrastructures (CPMI). The Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
(CPSS) was established in 1990 and extended the prior work of the Group of
Experts on Payment Systems (1980) and Committee on Interbank Netting Schemes
(1989), and was in turn renamed to CPMI in 2014. Its membership was extended
in 1997–98, 2009, and 2018 to reach the following 28 members: Central Bank of
Argentina, Reserve Bank of Australia, National Bank of Belgium, Central Bank
of Brazil, Bank of Canada, People's Bank of China, European Central Bank, Bank
of France, Deutsche Bundesbank, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Reserve Bank of
India, Bank Indonesia, Bank of Italy, Bank of Japan, Bank of Korea, Bank of
Mexico, De Nederlandsche Bank, Central Bank of Russia, Saudi Central Bank,
Monetary Authority of Singapore, South African Reserve Bank, Bank of Spain,
Sveriges Riksbank, Swiss National Bank, Central Bank of the Republic of
Türkiye, Bank of England, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

One of the Group's first projects, a detailed review of payment system
developments in the G10 countries, was published by the BIS in 1985 in the
first of a series that has become known as "Red Books". Currently, the red
books cover countries participating in the CPMI. A sample of statistical data
in the red books appears in the table below, where local currency is converted
to US dollars using end-of-year rates.

Banknotes and coin in circulation  
(31 December 2018)  Per capita  | Country or  
region  | Total  
($ billions)  
---|---|---  
$10,194 | Switzerland | $87   
$8,471 | Hong Kong SAR | $63   
$8,290 | Japan | $1,048   
$6,378 | Singapore | $36   
$5,238 | United States | $1,719   
$4,230 | Eurozone | $1,446   
$2,404 | Australia | $60   
$2,003 | Korea | $103   
$1,924 | Canada | $71   
$1,683 | Saudi Arabia | $56   
$1,417 | United Kingdom | $94   
$1,009 | Russia | $148   
$825 | China | $1,151   
$682 | Sweden | $7   
$680 | Mexico | $85   
$513 | Argentina | $23   
$327 | Brazil | $68   
$311 | Turkey | $26   
$230 | India | $307   
$205 | South Africa | $12   
$196 | Indonesia | $52   
  
### Irving Fisher Committee

The Irving Fisher Committee on Central Bank Statistics gathers 100 members,
mostly national central banks as well as a few regional organizations such as
the Center for Latin American Monetary Studies [es] (CEMLA), Central American
Monetary Council [es], and South East Asian Central Banks Research and
Training Centre (SEACEN). It is led by an 11-member executive elected by its
members.

Reserve policy is also important, especially to consumers and the domestic
economy. To ensure liquidity and limit liability to the larger economy, banks
cannot create money in specific industries or regions without limit. To make
bank depositing and borrowing safer for customers and reduce the risk of bank
runs, banks are required to set aside or "reserve".

Reserve policy is harder to standardize, as it depends on local conditions and
is often fine-tuned to make industry-specific or region-specific changes,
especially within large developing nations. For instance, the People's Bank of
China requires urban banks to hold 7% reserves while letting rural banks
continue to hold only 6%, and simultaneously telling all banks that reserve
requirements on certain overheated industries would rise sharply or penalties
would be laid if investments in them did not stop completely. The PBoC is thus
unusual in acting as a national bank focused on the country and not on the
currency, but its desire to control asset inflation is increasingly shared
among BIS members who fear "bubbles", and among exporting countries that find
it difficult to manage the diverse requirements of the domestic economy,
especially rural agriculture, and an export economy, especially in
manufactured goods.

Effectively, the PBoC sets different reserve levels for domestic and export
styles of development. Historically, the United States also did this, by
dividing federal monetary management into nine regions, in which the less-
developed western United States had looser policies.

For various reasons, it has become quite difficult to accurately assess
reserves on more than simple loan instruments, and this plus the regional
differences has tended to discourage standardizing any reserve rules at the
global BIS scale. Historically, the BIS did set some standards which favoured
lending money to private landowners (at about 5 to 1) and for-profit
corporations (at about 2 to 1) over loans to individuals. These distinctions
reflecting classical economics were superseded by policies relying on
undifferentiated market values – more in line with neoclassical economics.

### Financial Stability Institute

The Financial Stability Institute is dedicated to debates and exchanges of
practices among supervisors and financial stability policymakers. It was
established in 1999 in the wake of the 1997 Asian financial crisis. It has
been led by Josef Tošovský from December 2000 to December 2016, and by
Fernando Restoy since January 2017.

### BIS Innovation Hub

The BIS Innovation Hub, launched in 2019, extends the BIS mission of
collaboration through digital innovation, developing technology-based public
goods to support central banks and enhance the functioning of the financial
system.

The BIS Innovation Hub has offices in Hong Kong SAR, Singapore, Switzerland,
London, Stockholm and Toronto.

### Other associations hosted by the BIS

The BIS hosts the secretariats of the Financial Stability Board, the
International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and International
Association of Deposit Insurers. These entities, unlike the above listed
committees, have no direct reporting links to the BIS.

## Financials

BIS denominates its reserve in IMF special drawing rights. The balance sheet
total of the BIS on 31 March 2019 was SDR 291.1 billion (US$403.7 billion) and
a net profit of SDR 461.1 million (US$639.5 million).

## Leadership

The Chairmen concurrently held the role of President from April 1930 to May
1937. Johan Beyen of the Netherlands served as President from May 1937 to
December 1939, succeeded by American national Thomas H. McKittrick from
January 1940 to June 1946. The position of President remained vacant from June
1946 to June 1948, when the roles of President and Chair of the Board were
again reunited until the former was abolished on 27 June 2005. Meanwhile, the
Chair had been left vacant from May 1940 to December 1942.

### BIS Chairs

Chair  | Nationality  | Dates   
---|---|---  
Gates McGarrah |  United States | April 1930 – May 1933   
Leon Fraser [de] |  United States | May 1933 – May 1935   
Leonardus Trip [nl] |  Netherlands | May 1935 – May 1937   
Otto Niemeyer |  United Kingdom | May 1937 – May 1940   
Ernst Weber |  Switzerland | December 1942 – November 1945   
Maurice Frère |  Belgium | July 1946 – June 1958   
Marius Holtrop [nl] |  Netherlands | July 1958 – June 1967   
Jelle Zijlstra |  Netherlands | July 1967 – December 1981   
Fritz Leutwiler |  Switzerland | January 1982 – December 1984   
Jean Godeaux |  Belgium | January 1985 – December 1987   
Wim Duisenberg |  Netherlands | January 1988 – December 1990   
Bengt Dennis [sv] |  Sweden | January 1991 – December 1993   
Wim Duisenberg |  Netherlands | January 1994 – June 1997   
Alfons Verplaetse |  Belgium | July 1997 – February 1999   
Urban Bäckström |  Sweden | March 1999 – February 2002   
Nout Wellink |  Netherlands | March 2002 – February 2006   
Jean-Pierre Roth |  Switzerland | March 2006 – February 2009   
Guillermo Ortiz |  Mexico | March 2009 – December 2009   
Christian Noyer |  France | March 2010 – October 2015   
Jens Weidmann |  Germany | November 2015 – December 2021   
François Villeroy de Galhau |  France | January 2022 – present   
  
### BIS General Managers

General Manager  | Nationality  | Dates   
---|---|---  
Pierre Quesnay |  France | April 1930 – September 1937   
Roger Auboin |  France | January 1938 – September 1958   
Guillaume Guindey [fr] |  France | October 1958 – March 1963   
Gabriel Ferras  |  France | April 1963 – December 1970   
René Larre  |  France | March 1971 – February 1981   
Gunther Schleiminger  |  Germany | March 1981 – April 1985   
Alexandre Lamfalussy |  Belgium | May 1985 – December 1993   
Andrew Crockett |  United Kingdom | January 1994 – March 2003   
Malcolm Knight |  Canada | April 2003 – September 2008   
Jaime Caruana |  Spain | April 2009 – November 2017   
Agustín Carstens |  Mexico | December 2017 – June 2025   
Pablo Hernández de Cos |  Spain | July 2025 – present   
  
### Board of directors

As of August 2024:

  * Andrew Bailey (Bank of England)
  * Roberto Campos Neto (Central Bank of Brazil)
  * Shaktikanta Das (Reserve Bank of India)
  * Thomas Jordan (Swiss National Bank)
  * Klaas Knot (De Nederlandsche Bank)
  * Christine Lagarde (European Central Bank)
  * Tiff Macklem (Bank of Canada)
  * Joachim Nagel (Deutsche Bundesbank)
  * Pan Gongsheng (People's Bank of China)
  * Fabio Panetta (Bank of Italy)
  * Jerome H. Powell (Federal Reserve Bank)
  * Rhee Chang-yong (Bank of Korea)
  * Victoria Rodríguez Ceja (Bank of Mexico)
  * Erik Thedéen (Sveriges Riksbank)
  * Kazuo Ueda (Bank of Japan)
  * François Villeroy de Galhau (Bank of France), Chairman
  * John C. Williams (Federal Reserve Bank of New York)
  * Pierre Wunsch [nl] (National Bank of Belgium)

## Criticism

The financial institution has been strongly criticised by Ronald Bernard, who
claims to be an economist and author. Bernard claims that that numerous
ethically or legally dubious transactions have been passed through the _BIS_
since its founding.