Economic union between Belgium and Luxembourg

The **Belgium–Luxembourg Economic Union** (Dutch: _Belgisch-Luxemburgse
Economische Unie_ , French: _Union économique belgo-luxembourgeoise_ , German:
_Belgisch-Luxemburgische Wirtschaftsunion_ , Luxembourgish: _Belsch-
Lëtzebuerger Wirtschaftsunioun_), abbreviated to **BLEU** or **UEBL** , is an
economic union between Belgium and Luxembourg, two countries in the Benelux
Union.

BLEU was created by a treaty, signed on 25 July 1921, despite a referendum
against such a proposal, between Belgium and Luxembourg, and came into effect
upon ratification by the Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies on 22 December 1922.
Under the terms of the treaty, the economic frontier was lifted and the
Belgian franc and Luxembourg franc were set at a fixed parity (though revised
in 1935 and 1944) establishing a fixed exchange rate system, which existed
until the introduction of the euro. The original treaty lasted for fifty
years, expiring in 1972; this was extended for ten years in 1982 and again in
1992. On 18 December 2002, the two countries signed a new convention.

It has been seen as the forerunner of the Benelux Union, which was established
as the Benelux Customs Union in 1944 by the London Customs Convention and also
includes the Netherlands. While many aims of the BLEU have been subsumed by
the Benelux Union, and later the European Union, it still has some relevance
in being able to decide more precise measures than these organisations.
International trade statistics were available for BLEU only as a combined
entity until 1999 when European Community rules required split information.

## History

Compared with the Zollverein, the UEBL had several advantages for Luxembourg.
Belgium was only allowed to alter its customs tariffs or conclude trade
treaties after consultation with the Luxembourgish government, whereas before
1918 Luxembourg had to go along with German decisions. Similarly, only
Luxembourgish customs agents would operate in Luxembourg, while under the
Zollverein Prussian officials had operated in Luxembourg.

The functioning of the UEBL was entrusted to a board of directors consisting
of two Belgian members (including the chairman) and one Luxembourgish member,
and the Higher Council of the Union (with three Belgian and two Luxembourgish
members).