International financial institution

The **Caribbean Development Bank (CDB)** is a development bank that helps
Caribbean countries finance social and economic programs in its member
countries through loans, grants, and technical assistance. The CDB was
established by an Agreement signed on October 18, 1969, in Kingston, Jamaica,
which entered into force on January 26, 1970. The idea for the bank originated
from the 1966 Canada/Commonwealth Caribbean Conference.

The permanent headquarters of the CDB is located in Wildey, St. Michael,
Barbados, adjacent to the campus of the Samuel Jackman Prescod Polytechnic. On
September 21, 2018, the Bank officially opened its Country Office in Haiti,
the first outside its Headquarters in Barbados. The headquarters in Barbados
serves all of the regional borrowing member countries, with staff recruited
from its member states.

## History

The Caribbean Development Bank was established by an agreement between sixteen
members of the Commonwealth of Nations in the Caribbean region, along with
Canada and the United Kingdom. Signed on October 18, 1969, in Kingston,
Jamaica, the Agreement entered into force on January 26, 1970 when 15 of the
18 signing states ratified it. The bank's initial capital was 50 million USD,
equivalent to 100 million Eastern Caribbean dollar, with main contributions
from Jamaica (11,200,000 USD and 19.52% of votes), and the United Kingdom and
Canada contributing 10,000,000 USD each with 17.55% of votes in bank.

The bank was created with the purpose of promoting sustainable economic growth
and reducing poverty in the region, aligning with W. Arthur Lewis's vision of
economic development. During the first meeting of governors in Nassau, Lewis,
who was an economist, was appointed the first president of the Caribbean
Development Bank. His leadership was essential to establishing the bank's
operations, emphasizing the importance of financial discipline and efficiency
in development through agriculture and infrastructure projects. At this time,
the bank aimed to reduce economic disparities among its member states by using
soft loans to finance public works and agricultural development in the less
developed states.

Lewis set the CDB's independence up by retaliating against political
interference in the financial decisions of the bank. He also ensured there
would be efficient administration and a focus on the Caribbean states to
become a key financial instrument for the countries that lacked access to
international financial institutions. Lewis also played a key role in building
strong relationships with other international organizations like the Inter-
American Development Bank (IDB) and USAID that helped the bank gain legitimacy
and credibility.

## Organization

### Board of Governors

The Board of Governors is the apex governing body of the CDB. It meets
annually and has the authority to:

  * Admit new members
  * Amend the charter
  * Elect the Board of Directors and President
  * Change the bank's outstanding capital
  * Dissolve the bank.

Each country is represented by one governor and one alternate, with the
British Overseas Territory members counted as one country.

### Board of directors

The Board of Directors is responsible for:

  * Determining the bank's programs and annual budget
  * Overseeing its operations
  * Appointing the Oversight and Assurance Committee

As with the Board of Governors, each country is represented by one director
and one alternate. Directors serve renewable two-year terms.

### President

The President is the chief executive officer of the CDB, and also serves as
the Chairman of the Board of Directors. Different offices for communication,
risk management, and compliance are part of the Office of the President.

Presidential candidates are nominated by individual country members. A
candidate must receive votes from two-thirds of the Board of Governors
(representing 75% of the member countries) in order to be selected. The
President serves for a five-year term, with the possibility of re-election.

### List of presidents

The Bank has had seven presidents since its inception.

Name  | Dates  | Nationality   
---|---|---  
William Arthur Lewis | 1970–1973  |  Saint Lucia  
William G. Demas | 1974–1988  |  Trinidad and Tobago  
Neville Nicholls  | 1988–2001  |  Barbados  
Compton Bourne  | 2001–2011  |  Guyana  
William Warren Smith  | 2011–2021  |  Jamaica  
Hyginus 'Gene' Leon  | 2021–2024  |  Saint Lucia  
Daniel Best  | 2025 - Present  |  Barbados  
  
### Corporate leadership

The two corporate leaders that report to the boards are the Vice-President
Finance and Corporate Services and the Vice-President (Operations).

## Financial Overview

As of December 31, 2021, the CDB's total assets stood at US$3.71 billion,
which included US$2.21 billion of Ordinary Capital Resources and US$1.50
billion of Special Funds Resources.

The Bank holds a high credit rating from international agencies:

  * Aa1 (Stable) by Moody's
  * AA+ (Stable) by Standard & Poor's
  * AA+ (Stable) by Fitch Ratings.

In 2021, the Bank approved US$269.5 million in loans and grants. At the end of
2020, the total value approved projects by the bank was US$122.6 million,
including US$71.2 million in loans and US$51.4 million in grants.

## Membership

The CDB's membership consists of 28 countries, including:

  * 19 regional borrowing members
  * 4 regional, non-borrowing members: Brazil, Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela 
  * 5 non-regional, non-borrowing members: Canada, China, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom

### Member states

Regional in green, other regional blue, non-regional members in red

As of 2023, there are nineteen borrowing members and nine non-borrowing
members.

#### Regional

  * Anguilla
  * Antigua and Barbuda
  * Bahamas
  * Barbados
  * Belize
  * British Virgin Islands
  * Cayman Islands
  * Cuba pending
  * Dominica
  * Dominican Republic pending
  * Grenada

|

  * Guyana
  * Haiti
  * Jamaica
  * Montserrat
  * Saint Kitts and Nevis
  * Saint Lucia
  * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
  * Suriname
  * Trinidad and Tobago
  * Turks and Caicos Islands

  
---|---  
  
### Other regional

  * Argentina (pending)
  * Brazil
  * Colombia
  * Mexico
  * Venezuela

  
---  
  
### Non-regional

  * Canada
  * China
  * Germany
  * Italy
  * United Kingdom

  
---  
  
## United Nations Development Business

The United Nations launched _Development Business_ in 1978 with the support of
the Caribbean Development Bank, the World Bank, and many other major
development banks from around the world. Today, Development Business is the
primary publication for all major multilateral development banks, United
Nations agencies, and several national governments, many of whom have made the
publication of their tenders and contracts in Development Business a mandatory
requirement.

## Recent Developments and Risk Management

In 2012, the CDB experienced a credit downgrade due to weaknesses in the banks
credit profile. The downgrade reflected concerns about the deteriorating
financial conditions of its borrowing member countries, this posed risks the
banks ability to finance loans effectively. There were also inefficiencies in
CDB's risk management practices which prompted the bank to adopt a Enterprise
Risk Management framework to address these issues. This design was meant
strengthen the bank's governance, risk management, and operational processes,
ensuring better oversight, accountability, and financial stability.

## Partnerships

The CDB collaborates with distinct institutions like the Green Climate Fund to
promote sustainable development and climate resilience across the region. The
bank also facilitates soft loans and technical assistance for its smaller
member states by working closely with partners like the Inter-American
Development Bank and the World Bank.