Political association which developed from the British Empire

The **Commonwealth of Nations** , often referred to as the **British
Commonwealth** or simply **the Commonwealth** , is an international
association of 56 member states, the vast majority of which are former
territories of the British Empire from which it developed. They are connected
through their use of the English language and cultural and historical ties.
The chief institutions of the association are the Commonwealth Secretariat,
which focuses on intergovernmental relations, and the Commonwealth Foundation,
which focuses on non-governmental relations between member nations. Numerous
organisations are associated with and operate within the Commonwealth.

The Commonwealth dates back to the first half of the 20th century with the
decolonisation of the British Empire through increased self-governance of its
territories. It was created as the **British Commonwealth of Nations** through
the Balfour Declaration at the 1926 Imperial Conference, and formalised by the
United Kingdom through the Statute of Westminster in 1931. In 1949, the London
Declaration allowed India to remain in the Commonwealth as a republic, marking
a significant evolution of the association.

The Head of the Commonwealth is Charles III. He is king of 15 member states,
known as the Commonwealth realms, while 36 other members are republics, and
five others have different monarchs. Although he became head upon the death of
his mother, Elizabeth II, the position is not technically hereditary.

Commonwealth citizens enjoy benefits in some member countries, particularly in
the United Kingdom, and Commonwealth countries are represented to one another
by high commissions rather than embassies. Member states have no legal
obligations to one another, though various economic, judicial and military
arrangements exist between countries. The Commonwealth Charter defines their
shared values of democracy, human rights and the rule of law, as promoted by
the quadrennial Commonwealth Games.

A majority of Commonwealth countries are small states, with small island
developing states constituting almost half its membership.

## History

### Conceptual origins

Draft of the 1921 Anglo-Irish Treaty, with "British Empire" crossed out and
"British Commonwealth of Nations" added by hand The prime ministers of five
members at the 1944 Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference: (L-R) Mackenzie
King (Canada), Jan Smuts (South Africa), Winston Churchill (United Kingdom),
Peter Fraser (New Zealand) and John Curtin (Australia)

Queen Elizabeth II, in her address to Canada on Dominion Day in 1959, pointed
out that the Confederation of Canada on 1 July 1867 had been the birth of the
"first independent country within the British Empire". She declared: "So, it
also marks the beginning of that free association of independent states which
is now known as the Commonwealth of Nations." As long ago as 18 January 1884
Lord Rosebery, while visiting Adelaide, South Australia, had described the
changing British Empire, as some of its colonies became more independent, as a
"Commonwealth of Nations". Conferences of British and colonial prime ministers
occurred periodically from the first one in 1887, leading to the creation of
the Imperial Conferences in 1911.

The Commonwealth developed from the imperial conferences. A specific proposal
was presented by Jan Smuts in 1917 when he coined the term "the British
Commonwealth of Nations" and envisioned the "future constitutional relations
and readjustments in essence" at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, attended
by delegates from the Dominions as well as the United Kingdom. The term first
received imperial statutory recognition in the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921,
when the term _British Commonwealth of Nations_ was substituted for _British
Empire_ in the wording of the oath taken by members of parliament of the Irish
Free State.

### Adoption and formalisation

In the Balfour Declaration at the 1926 Imperial Conference, the United Kingdom
and its dominions agreed that they were "autonomous Communities within the
British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another in any
aspect of their domestic or external affairs, though united by a common
allegiance to the Crown, and freely associated as members of the British
Commonwealth of Nations." The term 'Commonwealth' was officially adopted to
describe the community.

These aspects of the relationship were formalised by the Statute of
Westminster in 1931, which applied to Canada without the need for
ratification, but Australia, New Zealand and Newfoundland had to ratify the
statute for it to take effect. Newfoundland never did as due to economic
hardship and the need for financial assistance from London, Newfoundland
voluntarily accepted the suspension of self-government in 1934 and governance
reverted to direct control from London. Newfoundland later joined Canada as
its tenth province in 1949. Australia and New Zealand ratified the statute in
1942 and 1947 respectively.

Although the Union of South Africa was not among the Dominions that needed to
adopt the Statute of Westminster for it to take effect, two laws — the Status
of the Union Act, 1934, and the Royal Executive Functions and Seals Act, 1934
— were passed by the Parliament of South Africa to confirm South Africa's
status as a sovereign state, and to incorporate the Statute of Westminster
into the law of South Africa.

### Second World War

Poster from the Second World War, depicting soldiers from Britain, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, the Colony of Southern Rhodesia, South Africa and
imperial India

Commonwealth countries and the Empire were involved in every major theatre of
the Second World War. The British Commonwealth Air Training Plan was
established for pilots from across the Empire and Dominions, created by the
governments of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Troops
from Australia, Britain, the British Raj and New Zealand made up the British
Commonwealth Occupation Force in post-war Japan.

### Decolonisation and self-governance

After the Second World War ended, the British Empire was gradually dismantled.
Most of its components have become independent countries, whether Commonwealth
realms or republics, and members of the Commonwealth. There remain the 14
mainly self-governing British overseas territories which retain some political
association with the United Kingdom. In April 1949, following the London
Declaration, the word "British" was dropped from the title of the Commonwealth
to reflect its changing nature.

Burma (Myanmar since 1989) and Aden (now part of Yemen) are the only states
that were British colonies at the time of the war not to have joined the
Commonwealth upon independence. Former British protectorates and mandates that
did not become members of the Commonwealth are Egypt (independent in 1922),
Iraq (1932), Transjordan (1946), Palestine (part of which became the State of
Israel in 1948), Sudan (1956), British Somaliland (which united with the
former Italian Somaliland in 1960 to form the Somali Republic), Kuwait (1961),
Bahrain (1971), Oman (1971), Qatar (1971) and the United Arab Emirates (1971).

The post-war Commonwealth was given a fresh mission by Queen Elizabeth II in
her Christmas Day 1953 broadcast, in which she envisioned the Commonwealth as
"an entirely new conception – built on the highest qualities of the Spirit of
Man: friendship, loyalty, and the desire for freedom and peace". However, the
British treasury was so weak that it could not operate independently of the
United States. Furthermore, the loss of defence and financial roles undermined
Joseph Chamberlain's early 20th-century vision of a world empire that could
combine Imperial Preference, mutual defence and social growth. In addition,
the United Kingdom's cosmopolitan role in world affairs became increasingly
limited, especially with the losses of India and Singapore. While British
politicians at first hoped that the Commonwealth would preserve and project
British influence, they gradually lost their enthusiasm, argues Krishnan
Srinivasan. Early enthusiasm waned as British policies came under fire at
Commonwealth meetings. Public opinion became troubled as immigration from non-
white member states became large-scale (see also: Commonwealth diaspora).

The term "New Commonwealth" gained usage in the UK (especially in the 1960s
and 1970s) to refer to recently decolonised countries, predominantly non-white
and developing countries. It was often used in debates regarding immigration
from these countries. The United Kingdom and the pre-1945 dominions became
informally known as the "Old Commonwealth", or more pointedly as the "white
Commonwealth", in reference to what had been known as the "White Dominions".

### Commonwealth republics

On 18 April 1949, Ireland formally became a republic in accordance with the
Irish Republic of Ireland Act 1948; in doing so, it also formally left the
Commonwealth. While Ireland had not actively participated in the Commonwealth
since the early 1930s, other dominions wished to become republics without
losing Commonwealth ties. The issue came to a head in April 1949 at a
Commonwealth prime ministers' meeting in London. Under the London Declaration,
as drafted by V. K. Krishna Menon, India agreed, when it became a republic in
January 1950, it would remain in the Commonwealth and accept the British
Sovereign as a "symbol of the free association of its independent member
nations and as such the Head of the Commonwealth". Upon hearing this, King
George VI told Menon: "So, I've become 'as such'." Some other Commonwealth
countries that have since become republics have chosen to leave, while others,
such as Guyana, Mauritius and Dominica, have remained members.

India's inaugural prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru declared on 16 May 1949,
shortly following the Declaration, during the Constituent Assembly Debates
that:

> We join the Commonwealth obviously because we think it is beneficial to us
> and to certain causes in the world that we wish to advance. The other
> countries of the Commonwealth want us to remain there because they think it
> is beneficial to them. It is mutually understood that it is to the advantage
> of the nations in the Commonwealth and therefore they join. At the same
> time, it is made perfectly clear that each country is completely free to go
> its own way; it may be that they may go, sometimes go so far as to break
> away from the Commonwealth...Otherwise, apart from breaking the evil parts
> of the association, it is better to keep a co-operative association going
> which may do good in this world rather than break it.

The London Declaration is often seen as marking the beginning of the modern
Commonwealth. Following India's precedent, other nations became republics, or
constitutional monarchies with their own monarchs. While some countries
retained the same monarch as the United Kingdom, their monarchies developed
differently and soon became (or had already become) essentially independent of
the British monarchy. The monarch is regarded as a separate legal personality
in each realm, even though the same person is monarch of each realm.

### Proposals to include Europe

At a time when Germany and France, together with Belgium, Italy, Luxembourg,
and the Netherlands, were planning what later became the European Union, and
newly independent African countries were joining the Commonwealth, new ideas
were floated to prevent the United Kingdom from becoming isolated in economic
affairs. British trade with the Commonwealth was four times larger than its
trade with Europe. In 1956 and 1957, the British government, under Prime
Minister Anthony Eden, considered a "Plan G" to create a European free trade
zone while also protecting the favoured status of the Commonwealth.

At the time of the Suez Crisis in 1956, and in the face of colonial unrest and
international tensions, French prime minister Guy Mollet proposed to British
prime minister Anthony Eden that their two countries be joined in a "union".
When that proposal was turned down, Mollet suggested that France join the
Commonwealth, possibly with "a common citizenship arrangement on the Irish
basis". These ideas faded away with the end of the Suez Crisis.

### Expansion and renewed focus

The first member admitted without any constitutional link to the British
Empire was Mozambique – a former Portuguese colony – in 1995 following its
first democratic elections. Its entry preceded the Edinburgh Declaration and
the current membership guidelines. In 2009, Rwanda became the second country
admitted to the Commonwealth without any constitutional links to Britain. It
was a Belgian trust territory that had been a district of German East Africa
until World War I.

In 2022, Togo, a former French mandate territory, and Gabon, a former French
colony, joined the Commonwealth, despite never having been under British rule.
Togolese foreign minister Robert Dussey expected Commonwealth membership to
provide opportunities for Togolese citizens to learn English, and increase
access to education and culture. The country sought closer ties with the
Anglophone world. Gabon was partially suspended from the Commonwealth in
September 2023 following a military coup, with two years given by the
Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group for the country to hold new elections
before a full suspension of Commonwealth membership would be considered. In
2024 alone, trade between Togo and Britain increased by 94 percent; the
country also sought to expand trade with India. Gabon's partial suspension was
lifted in July 2025, following a presidential election.

Commonwealth relations saw renewed interest during the second term of United
States president Donald Trump. In 2025, during Russia's invasion of Ukraine,
Commonwealth countries Australia, Canada, Cyprus and New Zealand aligned
themselves with the "coalition of the willing" spearheaded by British prime
minister Keir Starmer to provide support for Ukraine. During the 2025 Liberal
Party leadership contest in Canada, in light of aggressive actions taken by
the United States, the ultimate victor Mark Carney expressed support for
deepening relations with Britain, Australia and New Zealand. Trump expressed
interest in the United States becoming a member or "associate" member
following tabloid reporting that this would be offered by Britain.

Writing about America's shirking of global responsibility and the supposed
ineffectiveness of the United Nations, Australian-British lawyer Geoffrey
Robertson opined that "Europe and the Commonwealth countries, plus Japan and
Brazil and Indonesia, might together have more impact than the Security
Council – if for example China moved to invade Taiwan." In the midst of the
Gaza war, Commonwealth countries Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand
imposed sanctions on two Israeli ministers, in tandem with Norway.

## Structure

### Head of the Commonwealth

Queen Elizabeth II, the longest-serving Head of the Commonwealth, was in
office for 70 years.

Under the formula of the London Declaration, Charles III is the Head of the
Commonwealth. However, when the monarch dies, the successor to the crown does
not automatically become the new head of the Commonwealth. Despite this, at
their meeting in April 2018, Commonwealth leaders agreed that Prince Charles
should succeed his mother Elizabeth II as head after her death. The position
is symbolic, representing the free association of independent members, the
majority of which (36) are republics, and five have monarchs of different
royal houses (Brunei, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malaysia and Tonga).

### Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting

The main decision-making forum of the organisation is the biennial
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), where Commonwealth Heads of
Government, including (among others) prime ministers and presidents, assemble
for several days to discuss matters of mutual interest. CHOGM is the successor
to the Commonwealth Prime Ministers Meetings and, earlier, the Imperial
Conferences and Colonial Conferences, dating back to 1887. There are also
regular meetings of finance ministers, law ministers, health ministers and
others. Members in arrears, as special members before them, are not invited to
send representatives to either ministerial meetings or CHOGMs.

The head of government hosting the CHOGM is called the chair-in-office (CIO)
and retains the position until the following CHOGM.

### Commonwealth Secretariat

Marlborough House, London, the headquarters of the Commonwealth Secretariat,
the Commonwealth's principal intergovernmental institution

The Commonwealth Secretariat, established in 1965, is the main
intergovernmental agency of the Commonwealth, facilitating consultation and
co-operation among member governments and countries. It is responsible to
member governments collectively. The Commonwealth of Nations is represented in
the United Nations General Assembly by the Secretariat as an observer. The
secretariat organises Commonwealth summits, meetings of ministers,
consultative meetings and technical discussions; it assists policy development
and provides policy advice, and facilitates multilateral communication among
the member governments. It also provides technical assistance to help
governments in the social and economic development of their countries and in
support of the Commonwealth's fundamental political values.

The secretariat is headed by the Commonwealth secretary-general, who is
elected by the CHOG for no more than two four-year terms. The secretary-
general and two deputy secretaries-general direct the divisions of the
Secretariat. The present secretary-general is Shirley Ayorkor Botchwey, from
Ghana, succeeding Patricia Scotland. The first secretary-general was Arnold
Smith of Canada (1965–1975), followed by Sir Shridath Ramphal of Guyana
(1975–1990), Chief Emeka Anyaoku of Nigeria (1990–1999), Don McKinnon of New
Zealand (2000–2008), and Kamalesh Sharma of India (2008–2016).

### Commonwealth citizenship and high commissioners

The high commission of The Gambia in New Delhi

Some member states grant particular rights to Commonwealth citizens. The
United Kingdom and several others, mostly in the Caribbean, grant the right to
vote to resident Commonwealth citizens. Some countries, including the United
Kingdom, have preferential citizenship acquisition or residency policies for
Commonwealth citizens. Initially, Commonwealth countries were not considered
to be "foreign" to each other as their citizens were British subjects.
Citizenship laws evolved as the Commonwealth developed from the Empire. In
Australia, for the purpose of considering certain constitutional and legal
provisions in the High Court case of _Sue v Hill_ , the United Kingdom was
held to be a "foreign power". Similarly, in _Nolan v Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs_ , the nationals of other Commonwealth realms were held to
be "aliens" though they were subjects of the Queen.

Commonwealth citizens may receive consular assistance from other Commonwealth
countries. In particular, British embassies and consulates may provide
assistance to Commonwealth nationals in non-Commonwealth countries if their
own country is not represented. Commonwealth citizens are eligible to apply
for British emergency passports. Australia issues Documents of Identity in
exceptional circumstances to resident Commonwealth citizens who are unable to
obtain valid travel documents from their countries of origin and must travel
urgently.

The close association among Commonwealth countries is reflected in their
diplomatic protocols. For example, when engaging bilaterally with one another,
Commonwealth governments exchange high commissioners instead of ambassadors.

### Additional components

Various judicial and military arrangements exist within the Commonwealth.

#### Judicial

The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the highest court of appeal for
several Commonwealth nations.

The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the supreme court of 14
Commonwealth countries, including the Cook Islands and Niue which are under
the Realm of New Zealand (though New Zealand itself does not make appeals to
the Privy Council).

Commonwealth nationals are eligible for appointment to the High Court of Fiji,
with the court relying on judges from other Commonwealth nations.

#### Military

Soldiers of the Indian Army 5th Gurkha Rifles in post-war Japan as part of the
British Commonwealth Occupation Force, 1946

Commonwealth citizens are eligible to serve in the British Armed Forces.
According to the British Army, "Commonwealth soldiers are, and always will be,
an important and valued part of the fabric of the British Army."

The Five Power Defence Arrangements is a defence partnership between
Commonwealth countries Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore and
Britain.

Gurkha soldiers from Nepal, a non-Commonwealth country, have long served in
the British Army and the forces of several Commonwealth countries. They are
employed by the British Army (Brigade of Gurkhas), Indian Army (Gorkha
regiments) and Royal Brunei Armed Forces (Gurkha Reserve Unit), as well the
Gurkha Contingent of the Singapore Police Force. Most members of Brunei's
Gurkha Reserve Unit are veterans from the British Army and Singaporean police.

## Membership

The members of the Commonwealth shaded according to their political status.
Commonwealth realms are shown in blue, while republics are shaded pink, and
members with their own monarchies are displayed in green.

### Criteria

The criteria for membership of the Commonwealth of Nations have developed over
time from a series of separate documents. The Statute of Westminster 1931, as
a fundamental founding document of the organisation, laid out that membership
required dominionhood. The 1949 London Declaration ended this, allowing
republican and indigenous monarchic members on the condition that they
recognised King George VI as "Head of the Commonwealth". In the wake of the
wave of decolonisation in the 1960s, these constitutional principles were
augmented by political, economic, and social principles. The first of these
was set out in 1961, when it was decided that respect for racial equality
would be a requirement for membership, leading directly to the withdrawal of
South Africa's re-application (which they were required to make under the
formula of the London Declaration upon becoming a republic). The 14 points of
the 1971 Singapore Declaration dedicated all members to the principles of
world peace, liberty, human rights, equality, and free trade.

These criteria were unenforceable for two decades, until, in 1991, the Harare
Declaration was issued, dedicating the leaders to applying the Singapore
principles to the completion of decolonisation, the end of the Cold War, and
the end of apartheid in South Africa. The mechanisms by which these principles
would be applied were created, and the manner clarified, by the 1995 Millbrook
Commonwealth Action Programme, which created the Commonwealth Ministerial
Action Group (CMAG), which has the power to rule on whether members meet the
requirements for membership under the Harare Declaration. Also in 1995, an
Inter-Governmental Group was created to finalise and codify the full
requirements for membership. Upon reporting in 1997, as adopted under the
Edinburgh Declaration, the Inter-Governmental Group ruled that any future
members would "as a rule" have to have a direct constitutional link with an
existing member.

In addition to this new rule, the former rules were consolidated into a single
document. These requirements are that members must accept and comply with the
Harare principles, be fully sovereign states, recognise King Charles III as
head of the Commonwealth, accept the English language as the means of
Commonwealth communication, and respect the wishes of the general population
with regard to Commonwealth membership. These requirements had undergone
review, and a report on potential amendments was presented by the Committee on
Commonwealth Membership at the 2007 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
New members were not admitted at this meeting, though applications for
admission were considered at the 2009 CHOGM.

New members must "as a general rule" have a direct constitutional link to an
existing member. In most cases, this is due to being a former colony of the
United Kingdom, but some have links to other countries, either exclusively or
more directly (e.g., Bangladesh to Pakistan, Samoa to New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea to Australia, and Singapore to Malaysia). Mozambique, in 1995, was the
first country to join without such a constitutional connection, leading to the
Edinburgh Declaration and the current membership guidelines.

In 2009, Rwanda, formerly under Belgian and German rule, joined. Consideration
for Rwanda's admission was considered an "exceptional circumstance" by the
Commonwealth Secretariat. Rwanda was permitted to join despite the
Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative (CHRI) finding that "the state of
governance and human rights in Rwanda does not satisfy Commonwealth
standards", and that it "does not therefore qualify for admission". CHRI
commented that: "It does not make sense to admit a state that already does not
satisfy Commonwealth standards. This would tarnish the reputation of the
Commonwealth and confirm the opinion of many people and civic organisations
that the leaders of its governments do not really care for democracy and human
rights, and that its periodic, solemn declarations are merely hot air."

In 2022, the former French territories of Togo and Gabon joined the
Commonwealth.

### Members

Flags of the Commonwealth countries in Parliament Square, London on
Commonwealth Day The Commonwealth flag flying at the Parliament of Canada in
Ottawa

The Commonwealth comprises 56 countries, across all inhabited continents. 33
members are small states, including 25 small island developing states. In
2023, the Commonwealth had a population of 2.5 billion. The Commonwealth is
the largest association of 'Third World' or 'Global South' countries.

With a population of 1.4 billion in 2023, India is the most populous
Commonwealth country. Tuvalu is the smallest member, with about 12,000 people
at the time.

The status of "member in arrears" is used to denote those that are in arrears
in paying subscription dues. The status was originally known as "special
membership", but was renamed on the Committee on Commonwealth Membership's
recommendation. There are currently no members in arrears. The last member in
arrears, Nauru, returned to full membership in June 2011. Nauru previously
alternated between special and full membership since joining the Commonwealth,
depending on its financial situation.

### Economy of member countries

In 2019, the Commonwealth members had a combined gross domestic product of
over $9 trillion, 78% of which is accounted for by the four largest economies:
India ($3.737 trillion), United Kingdom ($3.124 trillion), Canada ($1.652
trillion), and Australia ($1.379 trillion).

### Applicants

In 1997 the Commonwealth Heads of Government agreed that, to become a member
of the Commonwealth, an applicant country should, as a rule, have had a
constitutional association with an existing Commonwealth member; that it
should comply with Commonwealth values, principles and priorities as set out
in the Harare Declaration; and that it should accept Commonwealth norms and
conventions.

South Sudanese politicians have expressed interest in joining the
Commonwealth. A senior Commonwealth source stated in 2006 that "many people
have assumed an interest from Israel, but there has been no formal approach".
Israel and Palestine are both potential candidates for membership.

President Yahya Jammeh unilaterally withdrew the Gambia from the Commonwealth
in October 2013. However, newly elected president Adama Barrow returned the
country to the organisation in February 2018.

Other eligible applicants could be any of the remaining inhabited British
Overseas Territories, Crown Dependencies, Australian external territories and
the Associated States of New Zealand if they become fully independent. Many
such jurisdictions are already directly represented within the Commonwealth,
particularly through the Commonwealth Family. There are also former British
possessions that have not become independent. Although Hong Kong has become
part of China, it continues to participate in some of the institutions within
the Commonwealth Family, including the Commonwealth Lawyers Association, the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Association of Commonwealth
Universities, the Commonwealth Association of Legislative Counsel and the
Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC).

All three of the Crown dependencies regard their existing situation as
unsatisfactory and have lobbied for change. In 2012, the States of Jersey
called on the UK foreign secretary to request that the Commonwealth heads of
government "consider granting associate membership to Jersey and the other
Crown Dependencies as well as any other territories at a similarly advanced
stage of autonomy". Jersey proposed that it be accorded "self-representation
in all Commonwealth meetings; full participation in debates and procedures,
with a right to speak where relevant and the opportunity to enter into
discussions with those who are full members; and no right to vote in the
Ministerial or Heads of Government meetings, which is reserved for full
members". The States of Guernsey and the Government of the Isle of Man made
calls of a similar nature in the same year for a more integrated relationship
with the Commonwealth, including more direct representation and enhanced
participation in Commonwealth organisations and meetings, including
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings. The Chief Minister of the Isle of
Man said that a "closer connection with the Commonwealth itself would be a
welcome further development of the Island's international relationships".

### Suspension

Members can be suspended "from the Councils of the Commonwealth" for "serious
or persistent violations" of the Harare Declaration, particularly in
abrogating their responsibility to have democratic government. Suspensions are
agreed by the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group (CMAG), which meets
regularly to address potential breaches of the Harare Declaration. Suspended
members are not represented at meetings of Commonwealth leaders and ministers,
although they remain members of the organisation.

Zimbabwe was suspended from the Commonwealth during the presidency of Robert
Mugabe (pictured), subsequently withdrawing. The country applied to rejoin
following Mugabe's removal from power.

Nigeria was suspended between 11 November 1995 and 29 May 1999, following its
execution of Ken Saro-Wiwa on the eve of the 1995 CHOGM. Pakistan was the
second country to be suspended, on 18 October 1999, following the military
coup by Pervez Musharraf. The Commonwealth's longest suspension came to an end
on 22 May 2004, when Pakistan's suspension was lifted following the
restoration of the country's constitution. Pakistan was suspended for a second
time, far more briefly, for six months from 22 November 2007, when Musharraf
called a state of emergency. Zimbabwe was suspended in 2002 over concerns
regarding the electoral and land reform policies of Robert Mugabe's ZANU-PF
government, before it withdrew from the organisation in 2003. On 15 May 2018,
Zimbabwe applied to rejoin the Commonwealth.

The declaration of a Republic in Fiji in 1987, after military coups designed
to deny Indo-Fijians political power, was not accompanied by an application to
remain. Commonwealth membership was held to have lapsed until 1997, after
discriminatory provisions in the republican constitution were repealed and
reapplication for membership made. Fiji has since been suspended twice, with
the first imposed from 6 June 2000 to 20 December 2001 after another coup.
Fiji was suspended yet again in December 2006, following the most recent coup.
At first, the suspension applied only to membership on the Councils of the
Commonwealth. After failing to meet a Commonwealth deadline for setting a date
for national elections by 2010, Fiji was "fully suspended" on 1 September
2009. The secretary-general of the Commonwealth, Kamalesh Sharma, confirmed
that full suspension meant that Fiji would be excluded from Commonwealth
meetings, sporting events and the technical assistance programme (with an
exception for assistance in re-establishing democracy). Sharma stated that
Fiji would remain a member of the Commonwealth during its suspension, but
would be excluded from emblematic representation by the secretariat. On 19
March 2014 Fiji's full suspension was amended to a suspension from councils of
the Commonwealth by the Commonwealth Ministerial Action Group, permitting Fiji
to join a number of Commonwealth activities, including the Commonwealth Games.
Fiji's suspension was lifted in September 2014. The Commonwealth Ministerial
Action Group fully reinstated Fiji as a member following elections in
September 2014.

Most recently, during 2013 and 2014, international pressure mounted to suspend
Sri Lanka from the Commonwealth, citing grave human rights violations by the
government of President Mahinda Rajapaksa. There were also calls to change the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2013 from Sri Lanka to another member
country. Canadian prime minister Stephen Harper threatened to boycott the
event, but was instead represented at the meeting by Deepak Obhrai. UK prime
minister David Cameron also chose to attend. These concerns were rendered moot
by the election of opposition leader Maithripala Sirisena as president in
2015.

### Withdrawal and termination

As membership is purely voluntary, member governments can choose at any time
to leave the Commonwealth. The first state to do so was Ireland in 1949
following its decision to declare itself a republic, although it had not
participated in the Commonwealth since 1932. At the time, all members accepted
the British monarch as head of state as a condition of membership. This rule
was changed after Ireland's departure to allow India to retain membership when
it became a republic in 1950, although Ireland did not rejoin. Now, the
majority of the Commonwealth members, including all those from Africa, are
republics or have their own native monarch.

Pakistan left on 30 January 1972 in protest at the Commonwealth's recognition
of breakaway Bangladesh, but rejoined on 2 August 1989. Zimbabwe's membership
was suspended in 2002 on the grounds of alleged human rights violations and
deliberate misgovernment, and Zimbabwe's government terminated its membership
in 2003. The Gambia left the Commonwealth on 3 October 2013, and rejoined on 8
February 2018.

The Maldives withdrew from the Commonwealth on 13 October 2016, citing the
Commonwealth's "punitive actions against the Maldives since 2012" after the
allegedly forced resignation of Maldivian President Mohamed Nasheed among the
reasons for withdrawal. Following the election of Ibrahim Mohamed Solih as
president in November 2018, the Maldives announced its intention to reapply to
join the Commonwealth. It rejoined on 1 February 2020.

Having left the Commonwealth over its apartheid policies, South Africa was
readmitted in 1994 following non-racial elections.

No country has been formally expelled from the Commonwealth. However, South
Africa's application to remain a member of the organisation after becoming a
republic in 1961 was effectively blocked due to hostility from many members,
particularly those in Africa and Asia as well as Canada, to apartheid. The
South African government withdrew its application when it became clear at the
1961 Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference that it would be rejected. South
Africa was re-admitted to the Commonwealth in 1994, following its first
multiracial elections that year. The Commonwealth provided technical
assistance and training for a peacekeeping force prior to election, with
Commonwealth observers significantly present during the election itself.

The transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997 ended the territory's
status as a part of the Commonwealth through the United Kingdom. Non-sovereign
states or regions are not permitted to become members of the Commonwealth. The
government of China has not pursued membership. Hong Kong has nevertheless
continued to participate in some of the organisations of the Commonwealth
Family, such as the Commonwealth Lawyers Association (hosted the Commonwealth
Lawyers Conference in 1983 and 2009), the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association (and the Westminster Seminar on Parliamentary Practice and
Procedures), the Association of Commonwealth Universities and the Commonwealth
Association of Legislative Counsel, as well as the Commonwealth War Graves
Commission (CWGC).

## Politics

### Objectives and activities

The Commonwealth's objectives were first outlined in the 1971 Singapore
Declaration, which committed the Commonwealth to the institution of world
peace; promotion of representative democracy and individual liberty; the
pursuit of equality and opposition to racism; the fight against poverty,
ignorance, and disease; and free trade. To these were added opposition to
discrimination on the basis of gender by the Lusaka Declaration of 1979, and
environmental sustainability by the Langkawi Declaration of 1989. These
objectives were reinforced by the Harare Declaration in 1991.

The Commonwealth's highest-priority aims concern the promotion of democracy
and development, as outlined in the 2003 Aso Rock Declaration, which built on
those in Singapore and Harare and clarified their terms of reference, stating,
"We are committed to democracy, good governance, human rights, gender
equality, and a more equitable sharing of the benefits of globalisation."

### Competence

In October 2010, a leaked memo from the Secretary General instructing staff
not to speak out on human rights was published, leading to accusations that
the Commonwealth was not being vocal enough on its core values.

The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 2011 considered a report by a
Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group (EPG) panel which asserted that the
organisation had lost its relevance and was decaying due to the lack of a
mechanism to censure member countries when they violated human rights or
democratic norms. The panel made 106 "urgent" recommendations including the
adoption of a Charter of the Commonwealth, the creation of a new commissioner
on the rule of law, democracy and human rights to track persistent human
rights abuses and allegations of political repression by Commonwealth member
states, recommendations for the repeal of laws against homosexuality in 41
Commonwealth states and a ban on forced marriage. The failure to release the
report, or accept its recommendations for reforms in the area of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law, was described as a "disgrace" by former British
foreign secretary Malcolm Rifkind, a member of the EPG, who told a press
conference: "The Commonwealth faces a very significant problem. It's not a
problem of hostility or antagonism, it's more of a problem of indifference.
Its purpose is being questioned, its relevance is being questioned and part of
that is because its commitment to enforce the values for which it stands is
becoming ambiguous in the eyes of many member states. The Commonwealth is not
a private club of the governments or the secretariat. It belongs to the people
of the Commonwealth."

In the end, two-thirds of the EPG's 106 urgently recommended reforms were
referred to study groups, an act described by one EPG member as having them
"kicked into the long grass". There was no agreement to create the recommended
position of human rights commissioner, instead a ministerial management group
was empowered with enforcement: the group includes alleged human rights
offenders. It was agreed to develop a charter of values for the Commonwealth
without any decision on how compliance with its principles would be enforced.

The result of the effort was that a new Charter of the Commonwealth was signed
by Queen Elizabeth II on 11 March 2013 at Marlborough House, which opposes
"all forms of discrimination, whether rooted in gender, race, colour, creed,
political belief or other grounds".

## Economy

### Economic data by member

Economies of the Commonwealth of Nations 2012  
---  
| Member states | Population  
(2021) | GDP (nominal, US$)  | GDP (PPP, US$)   
---|---|---|---  
millions  | per capita  | millions  | per capita   
Antigua and Barbuda | 93,219  | 1,176  | 12,480  | 1,778  | 18,492   
Australia | 25,921,089  | 1,520,608  | 61,789  | 1,008,547  | 41,974   
Bahamas | 407,906  | 8,149  | 22,431  | 11,765  | 31,978   
Bangladesh | 169,356,251  | 115,610  | 743  | 291,299  | 1,777   
Barbados | 281,200  | 3,685  | 13,453  | —  | —   
Belize | 400,031  | 1,448  | 4,059  | 2,381  | 6,672   
Botswana | 2,588,423  | 14,411  | 8,533  | 34,038  | 14,746   
Brunei | 445,373  | 16,954  | 40,301  | 21,992  | 51,760   
Cameroon | 27,198,628  | 24,984  | 1,260  | 50,820  | 2,359   
Canada | 38,155,012  | 1,821,424  | 50,344  | 1,489,165  | 40,420   
Cyprus | 1,244,188  | 22,981  | 30,670  | 26,720  | 32,254   
Dominica | 72,412  | 480  | 7,154  | 906  | 13,288   
Eswatini | 1,192,271  | 3,747  | 3,831  | 6,458  | 6,053   
Ghana | 32,833,031  | 40,710  | 1,570  | 51,943  | 1,871   
Grenada | 124,610  | 790  | 7,780  | 1,142  | 10,837   
Guyana | 804,567  | 2,851  | 3,408  | 2,704  | —   
India | 1,407,563,842  | 3,732,224  | 2,171  | 11,468,022  | 7,874   
Jamaica | 2,827,695  | 14,840  | 5,335  | —  | —   
Kenya | 53,005,614  | 37,229  | 808  | 76,016  | 1,710   
Kiribati | 128,874  | 176  | 1,649  | 248  | 2,337   
Lesotho | 2,281,454  | 2,448  | 1,106  | 4,027  | 1,691   
Malawi | 19,889,742  | 4,264  | 365  | 14,344  | 893   
Malaysia | 33,573,874  | 303,526  | 9,977  | 501,249  | 16,051   
Maldives | 521,457  | 2,222  | 6,405  | 3,070  | 8,871   
Malta | 526,748  | 8,722  | 21,380  | 12,138  | 27,504   
Mauritius | 1,298,915  | 10,492  | 8,755  | 20,210  | 14,420   
Mozambique | 32,077,072  | 14,588  | 533  | 25,805  | 975   
Namibia | 2,530,151  | 12,807  | 5,383  | 16,918  | 6,801   
Nauru | 12,511  | —  | —  | —  | —   
New Zealand | 5,129,727  | 139,768  | 36,254  | 139,640  | 31,082   
Nigeria | 213,401,323  | 262,606  | 1,502  | 449,289  | 2,533   
Pakistan | 231,402,117  | 231,182  | 1,189  | 517,873  | 2,745   
Papua New Guinea | 9,949,437  | 15,654  | 1,845  | 20,771  | 2,676   
Rwanda | 13,461,888  | 7,103  | 8,874  | 15,517  | 1,282   
Saint Kitts and Nevis | 47,606  | 748  | 13,144  | 966  | 17,226   
Saint Lucia | 179,651  | 1,186  | 7,154  | 2,016  | 11,597   
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines | 104,332  | 713  | 6,291  | 1,202  | 10,715   
Samoa | 218,764  | 677  | 3,485  | 853  | 4,475   
Seychelles | 106,471  | 1,032  | 12,321  | 2,371  | 25,788   
Sierra Leone | 8,420,641  | 3,796  | 496  | 8,125  | 1,131   
Singapore | 5,941,060  | 274,701  | 46,241  | 328,323  | 60,688   
Solomon Islands | 707,851  | 1,008  | 1,517  | 1,718  | 2,923   
South Africa | 59,392,255  | 384,313  | 8,070  | 585,625  | 10,960   
Sri Lanka | 21,773,441  | 59,421  | 2,835  | 126,993  | 5,582   
Tanzania | 63,588,334  | 28,249  | 532  | 74,269  | 1,512   
Tonga | 106,017  | 472  | 4,152  | 527  | 4,886   
Trinidad and Tobago | 1,525,663  | 23,986  | 16,699  | 35,638  | 25,074   
Tuvalu | 11,204  | 37  | 3,636  | —  | —   
Uganda | 45,853,778  | 19,881  | 487  | 49,130  | 1,345   
United Kingdom | 67,281,039  | 3,124,650  | 38,974  | 3,174,921  | 35,598   
Vanuatu | 319,137  | 785  | 3,094  | 1,139  | 4,379   
Zambia | 19,473,125  | 20,678  | 1,425  | 24,096  | 1,621   
Commonwealth | **2,418,964,000** | **9,766,209** | **3,844** | **13,119,929** | **4,035**  
  
### Postwar

During the Second World War, the British Empire played a major role in
supporting British finances. Foreign exchange reserves were pooled in London,
to be used to fight the war. In effect the United Kingdom procured £2.3
billion, of which £1.3 billion was from British India. The debt was held in
the form of British government securities and became known as "sterling
balances". By 1950, India, Pakistan and Ceylon had spent much of their
sterling, while other countries accumulated more. The sterling area included
all of the Commonwealth except for Canada, together with some smaller
countries especially in the Persian Gulf. They held their foreign-exchange in
sterling, protecting that currency from runs and facilitating trade and
investment inside the Commonwealth. It was a formal relationship with fixed
exchange rates, periodic meetings at Commonwealth summits to coordinate trade
policy, and domestic economic policies. The United Kingdom ran a trade
surplus, and the other countries were mostly producers of raw materials sold
to the United Kingdom. The commercial rationale was gradually less attractive
to the Commonwealth; however, access to the growing London capital market
remained an important advantage to the newly independent nations. As the
United Kingdom moved increasingly close to Europe, however, the long-term ties
began to be in doubt.

#### UK joins the European Economic Community

By 1961, with a sluggish economy, the United Kingdom attempted to join the
European Economic Community, but this was repeatedly vetoed by Charles de
Gaulle. Entry was finally achieved in 1973. Queen Elizabeth was one of the few
remaining links between the UK and the Commonwealth. Historian Ben Pimlott
argues that joining Europe "constituted the most decisive step yet in the
progress of severance of familial ties between the United Kingdom and its
former Empire... It reduced the remaining links to sentimental and cultural
ones, and legal niceties."

The newly independent countries of Africa and Asia concentrated on their own
internal political and economic development, and sometimes their role in the
Cold War. The United States, international agencies, and the Soviet Union
became important players, and the British role receded. While there was
opposition to British entry into the EEC from many countries, such as
Australia, others preferred the economic advantages brought by British access
to the Common Market. The historic ties between the former dominion nations
and the United Kingdom were rapidly fraying. The Canadian economy increasingly
focused on trade with the United States, and not on trade with the United
Kingdom or other Commonwealth nations. Internal Canadian disputes revolved
around the growing American cultural and economic presence, and the strong
force of Quebec nationalism. In 1964, the Maple Leaf flag replaced the
Canadian Ensign, with Gregory Johnson describing it as "the last gasp of
empire". Australia and New Zealand were generally opposed to the United
Kingdom's entry and exerted considerable influence on the eventual terms of
accession in 1972, for which the United Kingdom agreed to transitional
arrangements and monetary compensation to protect important export markets.
Russell Ward summarises the period in economic terms: "In fact the United
Kingdom, as Australia's chief trading partner, was being very rapidly replaced
just at this time by the United States and an economically resurgent Japan,
but most people were scarcely aware of this.... It was feared that British
entry into the Common Market was bound to mean abolition, or at least scaling
down, of preferential tariff arrangements for Australians goods."

### Trade

Although the Commonwealth does not have a multilateral trade agreement, 2010
research by the Royal Commonwealth Society showed that trade with another
Commonwealth member is up to 50% greater than with a non-member on average,
with smaller and less wealthy states having a higher propensity to trade
within the Commonwealth. In 2024 alone, trade between Togo and Britain
increased by 94 percent, two years after the former joined the Commonwealth.
At the 2005 Summit in Malta, the heads of government endorsed pursuing free
trade among Commonwealth members on a bilateral basis. Commonwealth Secretary-
General Shirley Ayorkor Botchwey endorsed the idea of a Commonwealth free
trade area in 2025.

Following its vote in June 2016 to leave the European Union, some in the
United Kingdom suggested the Commonwealth as an alternative to its membership
in the EU; however, it was far from clear that this would either offer
sufficient economic benefit to replace the impact of leaving the EU or be
acceptable to other member states. In 2021, following the United Kingdom's
exit from the European Union, Australia and the United Kingdom signed the
Australia–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement, which on ratification
eliminated tariffs and increased opportunities for movement between the two
countries.

Canada exempts most goods from the Commonwealth Caribbean, consisting of
Commonwealth countries and British Overseas Territories in the region, from
import duties.

## Commonwealth Family

The University of Cape Town, a member of the Association of Commonwealth
Universities

Commonwealth countries share many links outside government, with various non-
governmental organisations, notably for sport, culture, education, law, and
charity claiming to operate on a Commonwealth-wide basis. Some, such as Sight
Savers International and the English-Speaking Union, also operate outside the
Commonwealth, though their operations began and largely remain within the
association.

The Commonwealth Secretariat regulates formal accreditation with the
Commonwealth through its Accreditation Committee. The admittance criteria
includes upholding a commitment to the Commonwealth Charter. Formally
accredited organisations include the Association of Commonwealth Universities,
which manages the Commonwealth Scholarship allowing students to study in other
Commonwealth countries, and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association which
links together over 180 Commonwealth parliaments.

### Commonwealth Foundation

The Commonwealth Foundation is an intergovernmental organisation, resourced by
and reporting to Commonwealth governments, and guided by Commonwealth values
and priorities. Its mandate is to strengthen civil society in the achievement
of Commonwealth priorities: democracy and good governance, respect for human
rights and gender equality, poverty eradication, people-centred and
sustainable development, and to promote arts and culture.

The Foundation was established in 1965 by the Heads of Government. Admittance
is open to all members of the Commonwealth, and in December 2008, stood at 46
out of the 53 member countries. Associate Membership, which is open to
associated states or overseas territories of member governments, has been
granted to Gibraltar. 2005 saw celebrations for the Foundation's 40th
Anniversary. The Foundation is headquartered in Marlborough House, Pall Mall,
London. Regular liaison and co-operation between the Secretariat and the
Foundation is in place. The Foundation continues to serve the broad purposes
for which it was established as written in the Memorandum of Understanding.

### Commonwealth Games

The Commonwealth Games are the third-largest multi-sport event in the world,
bringing together globally popular sports and peculiarly "Commonwealth"
sports, such as rugby sevens, shown here at the 2006 Games in Melbourne.

The Commonwealth Games, a multi-sport event, is held every four years; the
2018 Commonwealth Games were held in Gold Coast, Australia, 2022 Commonwealth
Games in Birmingham and 2026 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. As well as the
usual athletic disciplines, as at the Summer Olympic Games, the games include
sports particularly popular in the Commonwealth, such as bowls, netball, and
rugby sevens. Started in 1930 as the Empire Games, the games were founded on
the Olympic model of amateurism, but were deliberately designed to be "the
Friendly Games", with the goal of promoting relations between Commonwealth
countries and celebrating their shared sporting and cultural heritage.

The games are the Commonwealth's most visible activity and interest in the
operation of the Commonwealth increases greatly when the Games are held. There
is controversy over whether the games—and sport generally—should be involved
in the Commonwealth's wider political concerns. The 1977 Gleneagles Agreement
was signed to commit Commonwealth countries to combat apartheid through
discouraging sporting contact with South Africa (which was not then a member),
while the 1986 games were boycotted by most African, Asian, and Caribbean
countries for the failure of other countries to enforce the Gleneagles
Agreement.

### Commonwealth Youth Games

The Commonwealth Youth Games is the youth version of the Commonwealth Games
and it is aimed from younger athletes aged between 14 and 18 years. The 2000
Commonwealth Youth Games was the inaugural edition of the Commonwealth Youth
Games, first held in Edinburgh, Scotland.

The most recent edition of the games was held in 2023 in Trinidad and Tobago.

### Commonwealth War Graves Commission

The Commonwealth War Graves Commission commemorates 1.7 million Commonwealth
war dead and maintains 2,500 war cemeteries around the world, including this
one in Gallipoli.

The Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) is responsible for maintaining
the war graves of 1.7 million service personnel who died in the First and
Second World Wars fighting for Commonwealth member states. Founded in 1917 (as
the Imperial War Graves Commission), the commission has constructed 2,500 war
cemeteries, and maintains individual graves at another 20,000 sites around the
world. The vast majority of the latter are civilian cemeteries in the United
Kingdom. In 1998, the CWGC made the records of its buried available online to
facilitate easier searching.

Commonwealth war cemeteries often feature similar horticulture and
architecture, with larger cemeteries being home to a Cross of Sacrifice and
Stone of Remembrance. The CWGC is notable for marking the graves identically,
regardless of the rank, country of origin, race, or religion of the buried. It
is funded by voluntary agreement by six Commonwealth members, in proportion to
the nationality of the casualties in the graves maintained, with 75% of the
funding coming from the United Kingdom.

### Commonwealth of Learning

The Commonwealth of Learning (COL) is an intergovernmental organisation
created by the heads of government to encourage the development and sharing of
open learning/distance education knowledge, resources and technologies. COL is
helping developing nations improve access to quality education and training.

### Commonwealth Local Government Forum

The Commonwealth Local Government Forum (CLGF) is a global local government
organisation, bringing together local authorities, their national associations
and the ministries responsible for local government in the member countries of
the Commonwealth. CLGF works with national and local governments to support
the development of democratic values and good local governance and is the
associated organisation officially recognised by Commonwealth Heads of
Government as the representative body for local government in the
Commonwealth.

CLGF is unique in bringing together central, provincial and local spheres of
government involved in local government policy and decision-making. CLGF
members include local government associations, individual local authorities,
ministries dealing with local government, and research and professional
organisations who work with local government. Practitioner to practitioner
support is at the core of CLGF's work across the Commonwealth and within the
region, using CLGF's own members to support others both within and between
regions. CLGF is a member of the Global Taskforce of Local and Regional
Governments, the formal partner of the UN Major Group of Local Authorities.

## Culture

Commonwealth countries share a common culture which includes the English
language, sports, legal systems, education and government. These commonalities
are the result of the Commonwealth's heritage, having developed out of the
British Empire. Symbols of the Commonwealth include the Commonwealth Flag and
Commonwealth Day. Remembrance Day is commemorated across the Commonwealth.
Celebrations for Guy Fawkes Night take place in some Commonwealth countries.

### Sport

Rwanda Cricket Stadium, Kigali, Rwanda. Commonwealth membership has been
credited with popularising the game in the country, which was never in the
British Empire.

Many Commonwealth nations play similar sports that are considered
quintessentially British in character, rooted in and developed under British
rule or hegemony, including cricket, association football, rugby football,
field hockey and netball. These ties are particularly strong between the
United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa across rugby union,
cricket, netball, and field hockey, with Australia in rugby league, with the
Caribbean nations in cricket and netball, and with the Indian subcontinent in
cricket and hockey. Canada, by contrast, is dominated by North American
sports, including baseball instead of cricket, basketball rather than netball,
ice hockey rather than field hockey and Canadian football, rather than rugby
union or league. Canada does, however, maintain small enthusiastic communities
in all the more traditional Commonwealth sports, having reached the World Cup
in each of them, and is the homeplace of the Commonwealth Games, hosting the
inaugural edition in Hamilton in 1930.

This shared sporting landscape has led to the development of friendly national
rivalries between the main sporting nations that have often defined their
relations with each other, and in the cases of India, Australia and New
Zealand, have played a major part in defining their emerging national
character (in cricket, rugby league and rugby union). Indeed, said rivalries
preserved close ties by providing a constant in international relationships,
even as the Empire transformed into the Commonwealth. Externally, playing
these sports is seen to be a sign of sharing a certain Commonwealth culture;
the adoption of cricket at schools in Rwanda is seen as symbolic of the
country's move towards Commonwealth membership. More broadly, Rwanda's
membership of the Commonwealth has been credited with helping popularise
cricket in the country, with both men and women playing it in orphanages,
schools, universities and cricket clubs.

The Commonwealth Games alongside the youth version, a quadrennial multi-sports
event held in the middle year of an Olympic cycle is the most visible
demonstration of these sporting ties. The Games include standard multi-sports
disciplines like athletics, swimming, gymnastics, weightlifting, boxing, field
hockey, and cycling, but also includes sports popular in the Commonwealth that
are distinct to the Games such as netball, squash and lawn bowls. They are
also more avowedly political than events like the Olympics, promoting what are
seen as Commonwealth values; historically, a history of shared military
endeavour was celebrated and promoted, parasport and disability sport is fully
integrated, and the Commonwealth Games Federation has publicly backed the
rights of LGBT people, despite the continuing criminalisation of homosexuality
in many Commonwealth countries.

### Literature

The shared history of British presence has produced a substantial body of
writing in many languages, known as Commonwealth literature. The Association
for Commonwealth Literature and Language Studies (ACLALS) has 11 branches
worldwide and holds an international conference every three years.

Ugandan-British novelist Jennifer Nansubuga Makumbi won the Commonwealth Short
Story Prize in 2014.

In 1987, the Commonwealth Foundation established the annual Commonwealth
Writers' Prize "to encourage and reward the upsurge of new Commonwealth
fiction and ensure that works of merit reach a wider audience outside their
country of origin". Prizes are awarded for the best book and best first book
in the Commonwealth; there are also regional prizes for the best book and best
first book in each of four regions. Although not officially affiliated with
the Commonwealth, the prestigious annual Man Booker Prize, one of the highest
honours in literature, used to be awarded only to authors from Commonwealth
countries or former members such as Ireland and Zimbabwe. Since 2014, however,
writers of any nationality have been eligible for the prize providing that
they write originally in English and their novels are published by established
publishers in the United Kingdom. Today, the Commonwealth Foundation awards
the annual Commonwealth Short Story Prize.

South African writer Olive Schreiner

South African writer Olive Schreiner's famous novel _The Story of an African
Farm_ was published in 1883 and New Zealander Katherine Mansfield published
her first collection of short stories, _In a German Pension_ , in 1911. The
first major novelist, writing in English, from the Indian sub-continent, R. K.
Narayan, began publishing in England in the 1930s, thanks to the encouragement
of English novelist Graham Greene. Caribbean writer Jean Rhys's writing career
began as early as 1928, though her most famous work, _Wide Sargasso Sea_ , was
not published until 1966. South Africa's Alan Paton's famous _Cry, the Beloved
Country_ dates from 1948. Doris Lessing from Southern Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe,
was a dominant presence in the English literary scene, frequently publishing
from 1950 on throughout the 20th century. She won the Nobel Prize in
Literature in 2007.

Salman Rushdie is another post-Second World War writer from the former British
colonies who permanently settled in the United Kingdom. Rushdie achieved fame
with _Midnight's Children_ (1981). His most controversial novel, _The Satanic
Verses_ (1989), was inspired in part by the life of Muhammad. V. S. Naipaul
(born 1932), born in Trinidad, was another immigrant, who wrote, among other
things, _A Bend in the River_ (1979). Naipaul won the Nobel Prize in
Literature in 2001.

Many other Commonwealth writers have achieved an international reputation for
works in English, including Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe, and playwright
Wole Soyinka. Soyinka won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1986, as did South
African novelist Nadine Gordimer in 1995. Other South African writers in
English are novelist J. M. Coetzee (Nobel Prize 2003) and playwright Athol
Fugard. Kenya's most internationally renowned author is Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o,
author of novels, plays and short stories in English. Poet Derek Walcott, from
Saint Lucia in the Caribbean, was another Nobel Prize winner in 1992. An
Australian, Patrick White, a major novelist in this period, whose first work
was published in 1939, won in 1973. Other noteworthy Australian writers at the
end of this period are poet Les Murray, and novelist Peter Carey, who is one
of only four writers to have won the Booker Prize twice.

### Politics and judiciary

Parliament House, New Delhi, India. The Commonwealth Charter states the
Commonwealth's commitment to democracy, and many Commonwealth countries use
the Westminster system. Lighting of a jubilee beacon for Queen Elizabeth II's
Platinum Jubilee in 2022 in Wellington, New Zealand

Commonwealth countries have similar legal and government systems, whilst the
Commonwealth Charter includes commitments to democracy, human rights and the
rule of law. Most Commonwealth countries have a Westminster system of
parliamentary democracy, with elected legislatures, multi-party elections,
responsible government and often two chambers. The Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association facilitates co-operation between legislatures across the
Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth Local Government Forum promotes good
governance among local government officials.

Nonetheless, Commonwealth leadership was criticised for admitting Gabon as a
member at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Kigali, Rwanda
– a country with poor human rights record – despite the fact that Gabon had
been governed for 56 years by the kleptocratic Bongo family, until they were
overthrown in a coup in 2023.

Most Commonwealth countries use common law, modelled on English law. The
Latimer House Principles adopted in 2003 reflect the separation of powers.
Judges are appointed by independent commissions in most Commonwealth
countries, a change which took place across the Commonwealth in the late 20th
and early 21st centuries and is reflected in the Cape Town Principles.

### Symbols

The Commonwealth has adopted a number of symbols that represent the
association of its members. The English language is recognised as a symbol of
the members' heritage; as well as being considered a symbol of the
Commonwealth, recognition of it as "the means of Commonwealth communication"
is a prerequisite for Commonwealth membership.

The flag of the Commonwealth consists of the symbol of the Commonwealth
Secretariat, a gold globe surrounded by emanating rays, on a dark blue field;
it was designed for the second CHOGM in 1973, and officially adopted on 26
March 1976. 1976 also saw the organisation agree to a common date on which to
commemorate Commonwealth Day, the second Monday in March, having developed
separately on different dates from Empire Day celebrations.

Also to mark the 60th anniversary (Diamond Jubilee) of the Commonwealth in
2009, the Commonwealth Secretariat commissioned Paul Carroll to compose "The
Commonwealth Anthem". The lyrics of the Anthem are taken from the 1948
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Commonwealth Youth Orchestra
published renditions of the Anthem with and without an introductory narrative.

### Recognition

In 2009, to mark the 60th anniversary of the founding of the Commonwealth, the
Royal Commonwealth Society commissioned a poll of public opinion in seven of
the member states: Australia, Canada, India, Jamaica, Malaysia, South Africa
and the United Kingdom. It found that most people in these countries were
largely ignorant of the Commonwealth's activities, aside from the Commonwealth
Games, and indifferent toward its future. Support for the Commonwealth was
twice as high in developing countries as in developed countries; it was lowest
in the United Kingdom.