International treaty about the rights of children

Youth rights  
---  
Activities

  * _Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co._
  * Child Labor Deterrence Act
  * Children's Online Privacy Protection Act
  * Kids Online Safety Act
  * Convention on the Rights of the Child
  * Fair Labor Standards Act
  * _Hammer v. Dagenhart_
  * History of youth rights in the United States
  * _Morse v. Frederick_
  * Newsboys' strike of 1899
  * _Prez_
  * Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms
  * _Wild in the Streets_

  
Theory / concepts

  * Adultcentrism
  * Adultism
  * Ageism
  * Criminalization
  * Democracy
  * Ephebiphobia
  * Fear of children
  * Free-range parenting
  * Intergenerational equity
    * Future generations
  * Paternalism
  * Social class
  * Suffrage
  * Taking Children Seriously
  * Universal suffrage
  * Unschooling
  * Youth activism
  * Youth detention center
  * Youth empowerment
  * Youth exclusion
  * Youth suffrage
  * Youth voice

  
Issues

  * Adolescent sexuality
  * Age of candidacy
  * Age of consent
  * Age-of-consent reform
  * Age of majority
  * Age of marriage
  * Behavior modification facility
  * Child labour
  * Children in the military
  * Child marriage
  * Compulsory education
  * Conscription
  * Corporal punishment
    * at home
    * at school
    * in law
  * Curfew
  * Child abuse
  * Emancipation of minors
  * Gambling age
  * Human rights and youth sport
  * In loco parentis
  * Juvenile delinquency
  * Juvenile court
  * Juvenile law
  * Legal drinking age (U.S. history)
  * Legal working age
  * Minimum driving age
  * Marriageable age
  * Minor (law)
  * Minors and abortion
  * Restavec
  * School leaving age
  * Smoking age (U.S. history)
  * Status offense
  * Underage drinking in the US
  * Voting age
  * Youth-adult partnership
  * Youth participation
  * Youth politics
  * Youth unemployment
  * Youth voting

  
Organizations

  * United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
  * Akt
  * Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions
  * Canadian Youth for Choice
  * Human Rights and Youth Rights Commission
  * Common Cents
  * Community Alliance for the Ethical Treatment of Youth
  * DoSomething
  * Future Coalition
  * Global Youth Action Network
  * High School Democrats of America
  * Indian Youth Climate Network
  * International Falcon Movement â€“ Socialist Educational International
  * Mermaids
  * National Union of Students LGBT+ Campaign
  * National Youth Rights Association
  * One World Youth Project
  * Queer Youth Network
  * Students for a Democratic Society
  * Freechild Project
  * Three O'Clock Lobby
  * UK Youth Parliament
  * Youth International Party
  * Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor
  * The Youth Cafe
  * Young Communist League of Canada
  * Young Democrats of America
  * World Federation of Democratic Youth

  
People

  * Fletcher
  * Hanson
  * Henry
  * Holt
  * Koroknay-Palicz
  * Duff
  * Males
  * Postman
  * Yaco

  
Related

  * Ages of consent in Asia
  * Ages of consent in Europe
  * Ages of consent in North America
  * Ages of consent in Oceania
  * Ages of consent in South America
  * Ages of consent in the United States
  * Animal rights
  * Anti-racism
  * Direct democracy
  * Egalitarianism
  * Feminism
  * French petitions against age-of-consent laws
  * Legal status of tattooing in European countries
  * Legal status of tattooing in the United States
  * Libertarianism
  * Students' rights
  * Youth Olympic Games
  * Youth sports
  * Youth wing
  * Liberation theology
  * Communism
  * Socialism
  * Marxism

  
  
  * Youth rights
  * Society portal

  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
Logo the UNCRC

The **United Nations** **Convention on the Rights of the Child** (commonly
abbreviated as the **CRC** or **UNCRC**) is an international international
human rights treaty which sets out the civil, political, economic, social,
health and cultural rights of children. The convention defines a child as any
human being under the age of eighteen, unless the age of majority is attained
earlier under national legislation.

Nations that have ratified this convention or have acceded to it are bound by
international law. When a state has signed the treaty but not ratified it, it
is not yet bound by the treaty's provisions but is already obliged to not act
contrary to its purpose.

The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, composed of eighteen independent
experts, is responsible for supervising the implementation of the convention
by the states that have ratified it. Their governments are required to report
to and appear before the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child periodically
to be examined on their progress regarding the advancement of the
implementation of the convention and the status of child rights in their
country. Their reports and the committee's written views and concerns are
available on the committee's website.

Individuals can appeal to the Committee on the Rights of the Child if they
believe that rights, according to the convention, have been violated. The
third possibility for monitoring the implementation of the convention is
inquiries that the Committee on the Rights of the Child can carry out on their
own initiative if they have reliable information that leads them to believe
that a member state has violated the convention's rights. However, "states ...
may opt-out from the inquiry procedure, at the time of signature or
ratification or accession". Once a year, the committee submits a report to the
Third Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, which also hears a
statement from the CRC Chair, and the Assembly adopts a Resolution on the
Rights of the Child.

The UN General Assembly adopted the convention and opened it for signature on
20 November 1989 (the 30th anniversary of its Declaration of the Rights of the
Child). It came into force on 2 September 1990, after it was ratified by the
required number of nations. As of 12 August 2025, 196 countries are party to
it, including every member of the United Nations except the United States.

Two optional protocols were adopted on 25 May 2000. The First Optional
Protocol restricts the involvement of children in military conflicts, and the
Second Optional Protocol prohibits the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography. More than 170 states have ratified both protocols. A
third optional protocol relating to communication of complaints was adopted in
December 2011 and opened for signature on 28 February 2012. It came into
effect on 14 April 2014.

## Contents

The UNCRC Articles with Icons

The convention deals with child-specific needs and rights. It requires that
the "nations that ratify this convention are bound to it by international
law." Ratifying states must act in the best interests of the child.

In all jurisdictions implementing the convention requires compliance with
child custody and guardianship laws as every child has basic rights, including
the right to life, to their own name and identity, to be raised by their
parents within a family or cultural grouping, and to have a relationship with
both parents, even if they are separated.

The convention obliges states to allow parents to exercise their parental
responsibilities. The convention also acknowledges that children have the
right to express their opinions and to have those opinions heard and acted
upon when appropriate, to be protected from abuse or exploitation, and to have
their privacy protected. It requires that their lives not be subject to
excessive interference.

The convention also obliges signatory states to separate legal representation
for a child in any judicial dispute concerning their care and asks that the
child's viewpoint be heard in such cases.

The convention forbids capital punishment for children. In its General Comment
8 (2006) the committee stated that there was an "obligation of all state
parties to move quickly to prohibit and eliminate all corporal punishment and
all other cruel or degrading forms of punishment of children". Article 19 of
the convention states that state parties must "take all appropriate
legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect the
child from all forms of physical or mental violence", but it makes no
reference to corporal punishment. The committee's interpretation of this
section to encompass a prohibition on corporal punishment has been rejected by
several state parties to the convention, including Australia, Canada and the
United Kingdom.

The European Court of Human Rights has referred to the convention when
interpreting the European Convention on Human Rights.

### Global standards and cultural relativism

Global human rights standards were challenged at the World Conference on Human
Rights in Vienna (1993) when a number of governments (prominently China,
Indonesia, Malaysia and Iran) raised serious objections to the idea of
universal human rights. There are unresolved tensions between "universalistic"
and "relativistic" approaches in the establishment of standards and strategies
designed to prevent or overcome the abuse of children's capacity to work.

### Child marriage and slavery

Some scholars link child marriages to slavery and slavery-like practices.
Child marriage as slavery is not directly addressed by the convention.

## States party and signatories

The term "party" refers to a State that gives its explicit consent to be bound
by the treaty.

As of 12 July 2022, 196 countries are parties to the UNCRC treaty (some with
stated reservations or interpretations). Every member of the United Nations
except the United States has either ratified or accepted the rights
articulated for the child under eighteen or below the age of majority in that
state. The most recent ratifications of the convention were by Cook Islands,
Niue, the State of Palestine, and the Holy See. South Sudan ratified the
convention in January 2015. Somalia's domestic ratification finished in
January 2015 and the instrument was deposited with the United Nations in
October 2015. Taiwan incorporated the convention into domestic law on 20
November 2014, and signed an Instrument of Accession to the CRC on 16 May
2016.

All successor states of Czechoslovakia (Czech Republic and Slovakia) and
Yugoslavia (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Slovenia) made declarations of succession to the treaty and currently
apply it.

The convention does not apply in the territories of Tokelau, Akrotiri and
Dhekelia and Gibraltar. Guernsey was also excluded until 2020.

### Azerbaijan

Azerbaijan ratified the convention on 21 July 1992. In terms of the
ratification of the convention, a significant number of laws, decrees and
resolutions were approved in Azerbaijan by the President and the Cabinet of
Ministers focusing on the development of the child welfare system. In this
regard, the Convention No. 182 of the International Labour Organization, i.e.
the Convention on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, the
Recommendation No. 190 of the International Labour Organization and the Hague
Adoption Convention were ratified by Milli Majlis, the parliament of
Azerbaijan, in 2004.

There is a concern over the administration of juvenile justice in Azerbaijan,
mostly regarding compliance with articles 37, 39, and 40 of the convention, as
well as other relevant standards such as the Beijing Rules, the Riyadh
Guidelines, and the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles
Deprived of their Liberty. Therefore, international organizations assisted
Azerbaijan to improve the situation in the field of juvenile justice. Juvenile
offenders have been added to the Presidential pardons on a regular basis.

Azerbaijan has built cooperation with many international organizations,
particularly with UNICEF in child protection. In 1993, UNICEF began its
activity in Azerbaijan. In 2005, Azerbaijan and UNICEF signed a five-year
country program. The country program for 2005-2009 was implemented in child
protection, children's health and nutrition, children's education and youth
health, and their development and participation. Also, UNICEF supports
Azerbaijan in improving its juvenile justice system, establishing an
alternative care system and raising awareness among youth about HIV/AIDS.

### Bangladesh

Bangladesh ratified the convention on 3 August 1990, initially reserving
Article 14 on freedom of thought, conscience, and religion, and fully withdrew
the reservation on 2 March 2011. As required under the UNCRC, Bangladesh
enacted the Children Act, 2013 (amended 2018), replacing the Children Act 1974
to provide comprehensive legal protection for children. The Act was explicitly
drafted with regard to UNCRC principles, including juvenile justice, custody,
and child welfare, though implementation gaps remain. Bangladesh ratified ILO
Convention No 182 on the worst forms of child labour and later ratified
Minimum Age Convention No 138 in March 2022.

Despite legal frameworks, juvenile justice remains problematic where the
minimum age of criminal responsibility is still nine years, below the UNCRC-
recommended 12 years. Child Development Centres (JDCs) established under the
Children Act are few, overcrowded, and frequently accused of torture and
inhumane treatment. Although every district is meant to have a separate
Childrenâ€™s Court, most areas still rely on overburdened Women and Children
Tribunals with no dedicated courtrooms.

In response, Bangladesh partnered with UNICEF to develop a national child
protection system aligned with UNCRC standards through its Child-Friendly
Justice initiative. On 24 March 2025, UNICEF welcomed government plans to
establish separate Childrenâ€™s Courts nationwide as part of implementing the
Children Act and aligning with international norms. Civil society and
international monitors continue to call for stronger enforcement and resources
to fully realize child protection commitments.

### Canada

Canada became a signatory to the convention on 28 May 1990 and ratified in
1991. Youth criminal laws in Canada underwent major changes resulting in the
Youth Criminal Justice Act (YCJA) which went into effect on 1 April 2003. The
Act specifically refers to Canada's different commitments under the
convention. The convention was influential in the administrative law decision
of _Baker v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)_ , although the
Supreme Court of Canada ultimately held that "Its provisions [...] have no
direct application within Canadian law".

### India

India ratified UNCRC on 11 December 1992, agreeing in principle to all
articles but with certain reservations on issues relating to child labor. In
India, there is a law that children under the age of 18 should not
work,[_citation needed_][_contradictory_] but there is no outright ban on
child labor. The practice is generally permitted in most industries except
those deemed "hazardous", for which minimum ages apply. Although a law in
October 2006 banned child labor in hotels, restaurants, and as domestic
servants, there continues to be a high demand for children as hired help in
the home. There are different estimates as to the number of child laborers in
the country. According to the government's conservative estimate, in 2011 4.4
million children under 14 years of age were working in India, while the NGO
Save the Children in a statement of 2016 cites a study by the Campaign Against
Child Labour that estimates the number of child laborers in India at 12.7
million.

In 2016, the Child and Adolescent Labour (Amendment) Act was introduced, which
prohibited children's economic employment under the age of 14 years and the
employment of adolescents (14â€“17 years of age) in hazardous occupations. Some
exceptions exist for children under 14 â€”they can aid in the family enterprise
and participate in the entertainment industry. It must not harm their school
education and they must not work between 7 p.m. and 8 a.m.

### Iran

Iran has adhered to the convention (except for alleged child slavery) since
1991 and ratified it in the Parliament in 1994. Upon ratification, Iran made
the following reservation: "If the text of the Convention is or becomes
incompatible with the domestic laws and Islamic standards at any time or in
any case, the Government of the Islamic Republic shall not abide by it." Iran
has also signed both optional protocols which relate to the special protection
of children against involvement in armed conflict and the sale of children and
sexual exploitation.

Although Iran is a state party to the convention, international human rights
organisations and foreign governments routinely denounced executions of
Iranian child offenders as a violation of the treaty. But on 10 February 2012,
Iran's parliament changed the controversial law of executing juveniles. In the
new law, the age of 18 (solar year) would be considered the minimum age for
adulthood and offenders under this age will be sentenced under a separate law.
Based on the previous law, which was revised, girls at the age of 9 and boys
at 15 (lunar year, 11 days shorter than a solar year) were fully responsible
for their crimes.

"According to Islamic sources, the criterion for criminal responsibility is
reaching the age of maturity which, according to the Shi'ite School of the
IRI, is 9 lunar years (8 years and 9 months) for girls and 15 lunar years (14
years and 7 months) for boys."

### Ireland

Ireland signed the convention on 30 September 1990 and ratified it, without
reservation, on 28 September 1992. In response to criticisms expressed in the
1998 review by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child in Geneva, the
Irish government established the office of Ombudsman for Children. It drew up
a national children's strategy. In 2006, following concerns expressed by the
committee that the wording of the Irish Constitution does not allow the State
to intervene in abuse cases other than in very exceptional cases, the Irish
government undertook to amend the constitution to make a more explicit
commitment to children's rights.

### Israel

Israel ratified the convention in 1991. In 2010, UNICEF criticized the country
for its failure to create a government-appointed commission on children's
rights or adopt a national children's rights strategy or program to implement
various Israeli laws addressing children's rights. The report criticizes
Israel for holding that the convention does not apply in the West Bank and for
defining Palestinians under the age of 16 in the occupied territories as
children, even though Israeli law defines a child as being under 18, in line
with the convention. A contemporaneous report by the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development found that Israel's investment in children is
below the international average. The actual investment had fallen between 1995
and 2006. In 2012, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child
criticized Israel for its bombing attacks on Palestinians in the Gaza Strip,
stating, "Destruction of homes and damage to schools, streets and other public
facilities gravely affect children" and called them "gross violations of the
convention on the Rights of the Child, its Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and international humanitarian law".
It also criticized Palestinian rocket attacks from Gaza on southern Israel,
which traumatized Israeli children, calling on all parties to protect
children.

### New Zealand

New Zealand ratified the convention on 6 April 1993 with reservations
concerning the right to distinguish between persons according to the nature of
their authority to be in New Zealand, the need for legislative action on
economic exploitationâ€”which it argued was adequately protected by existing
law, and the provisions for the separation of juvenile offenders from adult
offenders.

In 1994, the Court of Appeal of New Zealand dismissed the suggestion that the
Minister for Immigration and his department were at liberty to ignore the
convention, arguing that this would imply that the country's adherence was "at
least partly window-dressing".

The Children's Commissioner Act 2003 enhanced the Children's Commissioner,
giving it significantly stronger investigative powers. The Children's
Commissioner is responsible for convening the UNCROC Monitoring Group, which
monitors the New Zealand Government's implementation of the Children's
Convention, its Optional Protocols and the Government's response to
recommendations from the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child.
The monitoring group comprises members from the Human Rights Commission (New
Zealand), UNICEF New Zealand, Action for Children and Youth Aotearoa and Save
the Children New Zealand.

In May 2007, New Zealand passed the Crimes (Substituted Section 59) Amendment
Act 2007, which removed the defence of "reasonable force" for the purpose of
correction. In its third and final vote, Parliament voted 113â€“8 in favour of
the legislation.

### Saudi Arabia

Saudi Arabia ratified the convention in 1996, with a reservation "with respect
to all such articles as are in conflict with the provisions of Islamic law"
which is the national law. The Committee on the Rights of the Child, which
reviewed Saudi Arabia's treatment of children under the convention in January
2005, strongly condemned the government for its practice of imposing the death
penalty on juveniles, calling it "a serious violation of the fundamental
rights". The committee said it was "deeply alarmed" over the discretionary
power judges hold to treat juveniles as adults: In its 2004 report, the Saudi
Arabian government had stated that it "never imposes capital punishment on
persons ... below the age of 18". The government delegation later acknowledged
that a judge could impose the death penalty whenever he decided that the
convicted person had reached his or her maturity, regardless of the person's
actual age at the time of the crime or at the time of the scheduled execution.
But the death penalty was ended for minors in April 2020.

On 20 October 2020, Human Rights Watch said that Saudi Arabia was seeking the
death penalty against eight Saudi men who were accused of committing protest-
related crimes at the age of 14 and 17. One of the boys who turned 18 in 2020
was charged with a nonviolent crime that he allegedly committed aged 9. Under
the hudud â€“ an Islamic law â€“ prosecutors have reportedly sought the death
penalty for the eight men, which if granted will make them ineligible for
pardon.

### South Korea

South Korea ratified the Convention of the Rights of the Child in 1991. The
country then created further legislation to protect children experiencing
physical and sexual abuse. However, a 2002 report indicated that South Korea
had not yet satisfied article 12 of the CRC and that corporal violence of
children in certain settings is not prohibited. A 2017 review by the Committee
on the Rights of the Child concluded that further legal protections had been
enacted such as legislation against child pornography, prostitution, and the
ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. A
2017 decision by the National Human Rights Commission of Korea ruled that no
kid zones were discriminatory, but this did not legally restrict them from
existing. The decision concluded that no-kid zones conflict with a child's
right to equality under the constitution and the CRC. South Korea joined the
Hague convention on International Child Abduction in 2012, but was criticized
for its repetitive pattern of non-compliance. The pattern continued even after
the 2023 Special Commissioner meeting of the Hague Conference, held in The
Hague, Netherlands, in 2023, when the shared goal was reaffirmed between the
Hague Convention and UNCRC.

### Sweden

The Convention on the Rights of the Child has status as Swedish law since 1
January 2020. Also, before that, Swedish legislation was well in line with the
convention and went in some cases further. It was given this status because
Swedish authorities and the government thought the childs right perspective
was not applied sufficiently in Swedish social welfare decisions and law
enforcement.

### Thailand

Upon accession to the convention on 27 March 1992, Thailand registered the
following reservation: "The application of Articles 7, 22 and 29 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child shall be subject to the national laws,
regulations and prevailing practices in Thailand." This reservation was
withdrawn on 11 April 1997 with respect to article 29 (goals of education), on
13 December 2010 with respect to article 7 (birth registration, name,
nationality, care) and finally on 30 August 2024 with respect to article 22
(refugee children).

### United Kingdom

The United Kingdom ratified the convention on 16 December 1991, with several
declarations and reservations, and made its first report to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child in January 1995. Concerns raised by the committee
included the growth in child poverty and inequality, the extent of violence
towards children, the use of custody for young offenders, the low age of
criminal responsibility, and the lack of opportunities for children and young
people to express views. The 2002 report of the committee expressed similar
concerns, including the welfare of children in custody, unequal treatment of
asylum seekers, and the negative impact of poverty on children's rights. In
September 2008, the UK government decided to withdraw its reservations and
agree to the convention in these respects.

Although child slavery is difficult to gauge within the UK, child slaves are
imported into the UK and sold. Laws and enforcement mechanisms against slavery
and human trafficking were consolidated and strengthened in the Modern Slavery
Act 2015.

#### Wales

The National Assembly for Wales, now known as the Senedd passed the Rights of
Children and Young Persons (Wales) Measure 2011, partially incorporating the
Convention into domestic law.The National Assembly for Wales passed the
Children (Abolition of Defence of Reasonable Punishment) (Wales) Act 2020,
banning smacking, by abolishing the "reasonable punishment defence."

#### Scotland

The Scottish Parliament passed the Children (Equal Protection from Assault)
(Scotland) Act 2019, banning smacking, by removing the defence of "justifiable
assault". In March 2021, the Scottish Parliament unanimously passed the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (Incorporation) (Scotland) Bill,
which partially incorporated the Convention into Scots law. The Bill was
challenged by the UK Government and specified sections were found by the
Supreme Court to be outwith the competence of the Scottish Parliament. The
bill was amended and again passed in December 2023, receiving Royal Assent on
16 January 2024 and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
(Incorporation) (Scotland) Act 2024 came into force on 16 July 2024.

#### Jersey

The States Assembly passed the Children and Young People (Jersey) Law 2022,
banning smacking, by abolishing the defence of "reasonable corporal
punishment". The States Assembly incorporated the Convention into domestic law
through the passage of the Children (Convention Rights) (Jersey) Law 2022.

### United States

The United States government played an active role in the drafting of the
convention and signed it on 16 February 1995, but has not ratified it. It has
been claimed that American opposition to the convention stems primarily from
political and religious conservatives. For example, The Heritage Foundation
considers that "a civil society in which moral authority is exercised by
religious congregations, family, and other private associations is fundamental
to the American order," and the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA)
argues that the CRC threatens homeschooling. Other Christian right
organizations such as Concerned Women for America have argued that the CRC is
an effort by globalists to remove children from their religious and family
contexts; Christian right figures such as John Whitehead state that it will
limit parental rights.

Most notably, at the time several states permitted the execution and life
imprisonment of juvenile offenders, a direct contravention of Article 37 of
the convention. The landmark 2005 Supreme Court decision in _Roper v. Simmons_
declared juvenile executions to be unconstitutional as "cruel and unusual
punishment"; in the 2012 case _Miller v. Alabama_ , the court held that
mandatory sentences of life without the possibility of parole are
unconstitutional for juvenile offenders. However, the Court issued a ruling in
_Jones v. Mississippi_ that Miller does not require States to make an
independent finding of "permanent incorrigibility" before sentencing the
juvenile to life imprisonment without parole.

State laws regarding the practice of closed adoption may also require an
overhaul in light of the Convention's position that children have a right to
identity from birth.

During his 2008 campaign for president, Senator Barack Obama described the
failure to ratify the convention as "embarrassing" and promised to review the
issue but, as president, he never did. No president of the United States has
submitted the treaty to the Senate requesting its advice and consent to
ratification since the US signed it in 1995.

The United States has ratified two of the optional protocols to the
convention: the Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict, and the Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child
Prostitution and Child Pornography.

## Optional protocols

There are three optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The first, the Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict requires parties to ensure that children under the age of 18
are not recruited compulsorily into their armed forces and calls on
governments to do everything feasible to ensure that members of their armed
forces who are under 18 years do not take part in hostilities. This protocol
entered into force on 12 July 2002. As of 12 August 2025, 172 states are party
to the protocol, and another 8 states have signed but not ratified it.

The second, the Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution
and Child Pornography, requires parties to prohibit the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography. It entered into force on 18 January
2002. As of 12 August 2025, 178 states are party to the protocol, and another
7 states have signed but not ratified it.

A third, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
a Communications Procedure, which would allow children or their
representatives to file individual complaints for violation of the rights of
children, was adopted in December 2011 and opened for signature on 28 February
2012. The protocol currently has 52 signatures and 50 ratifications: it
entered into force on 14 April 2014 following the tenth ratification three
months beforehand.

Proposals for additional optional protocols have also been made. In 2020, the
independent "Lancet-WHO-UNICEF Commission" proposed the development of an
optional protocol to protect children from the marketing of tobacco, alcohol,
formula milk, sugar-sweetened beverages, gambling, and potentially damaging
social media, and the inappropriate use of their personal data. (The WHO also
has its own framework for making treaties.) In 2022, a group of international
child rights and education experts joined a call for an update to the right to
education under international law to explicitly guarantee children's right to
free pre-primary and free secondary education. Human Rights Watch has
suggested doing so through a fourth optional protocol to the CRC. In June
2024, the UN's Human Rights Council approved the establishment of a working
group with the mandate of "exploring the possibility of, elaborating and
submitting to the Human Rights Council a draft optional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child with the aim to: (a) Explicitly
recognize that the right to education includes early childhood care and
education; (b) Explicitly state that, with a view to achieving the right to
education, States shall: (i) Make public pre-primary education available free
to all, beginning with at least one year; (ii) Make public secondary education
available free to all."

## Parental rights

On 7 October 2020, the vote on United Nations Draft Resolution
A/HRC/45/L.48/Rev.1 â€“ "Rights of the child: Realizing the rights of the child
through a healthy environment" submitted by Germany (on behalf of the European
Union) and Uruguay (on behalf of GRULAC) was adopted.

The Russian Federation's Amendments L.57 and L.64 to include parental rights
were rejected. The Russian delegate, Kristina Sukacheva, remarked that
governments voting against parents deliberately shirk their international
responsibilities to provide for the rights of the child. At the time of
adoption, Uruguay stated that the incorporation of parental rights language as
proposed by the Russian Federation would "bring imbalance to the resolution
and would also go against the spirit of the resolution".