International treaty on biological diversity

The **Convention on Biological Diversity** (**CBD**), known informally as the
**Biodiversity Convention** , is a multilateral treaty. The Convention has
three main goals: the conservation of biological diversity (or biodiversity);
the sustainable use of its components; and the fair and equitable sharing of
benefits arising from genetic resources. Its objective is to develop national
strategies for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity,
and it is often seen as the key document regarding sustainable development.

The Convention was opened for signature at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro
on 5 June 1992 and entered into force on 29 December 1993. The United States
is the only UN member state which has not ratified the Convention. It has two
supplementary agreements, the Cartagena Protocol and Nagoya Protocol.

The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity
is an international treaty governing the movements of living modified
organisms (LMOs) resulting from modern biotechnology from one country to
another. It was adopted on 29 January 2000 as a supplementary agreement to the
CBD and entered into force on 11 September 2003.

The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable
Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ABS) to the Convention on
Biological Diversity is another supplementary agreement to the CBD. It
provides a transparent legal framework for the effective implementation of one
of the three objectives of the CBD: the fair and equitable sharing of benefits
arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. The Nagoya Protocol was
adopted on 29 October 2010 in Nagoya, Japan, and entered into force on 12
October 2014.

2010 was also the International Year of Biodiversity, and the Secretariat of
the CBD was its focal point. Following a recommendation of CBD signatories at
Nagoya, the UN declared 2011 to 2020 as the United Nations Decade on
Biodiversity in December 2010. The Convention's _Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity 2011–2020_ , created in 2010, include the Aichi Biodiversity
Targets.

The meetings of the Parties to the Convention are known as Conferences of the
Parties (COP), with the first one (COP 1) held in Nassau, Bahamas, in 1994 and
the most recent one (COP 16) in 2024 in Cali, Colombia.

In the area of marine and coastal biodiversity CBD's focus at present is to
identify Ecologically or Biologically Significant Marine Areas (EBSAs) in
specific ocean locations based on scientific criteria. The aim is to create an
international legally binding instrument (ILBI) involving area-based planning
and decision-making under UNCLOS to support the conservation and sustainable
use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction (BBNJ
treaty or High Seas Treaty).

## Origin and scope

The notion of an international convention on biodiversity was conceived at a
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts on
Biological Diversity in November 1988. The subsequent year, the Ad Hoc Working
Group of Technical and Legal Experts was established for the drafting of a
legal text which addressed the conservation and sustainable use of biological
diversity, as well as the sharing of benefits arising from their utilization
with sovereign states and local communities. In 1991, an intergovernmental
negotiating committee was established, tasked with finalizing the Convention's
text.

A Conference for the Adoption of the Agreed Text of the Convention on
Biological Diversity was held in Nairobi, Kenya, in 1992, and its conclusions
were distilled in the Nairobi Final Act. The Convention's text was opened for
signature on 5 June 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development (the Rio "Earth Summit"). By its closing date, 4 June 1993, the
Convention had received 168 signatures. It entered into force on 29 December
1993.

The Convention recognized for the first time in international law that the
conservation of biodiversity is "a common concern of humankind" and is an
integral part of the development process. The agreement covers all ecosystems,
species, and genetic resources. It links traditional conservation efforts to
the economic goal of using biological resources sustainably. It sets
principles for the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from the
use of genetic resources, notably those destined for commercial use. It also
covers the rapidly expanding field of biotechnology through its Cartagena
Protocol on Biosafety, addressing technology development and transfer,
benefit-sharing and biosafety issues. Importantly, the Convention is legally
binding; countries that join it ('Parties') are obliged to implement its
provisions.

The Convention reminds decision-makers of the finite status of natural
resources and sets out a philosophy of sustainable use. While past
conservation efforts were aimed at protecting particular species and habitats,
the Convention recognizes that ecosystems, species and genes must be used for
the benefit of humans. However, this should be done in a way and at a rate
that does not lead to the long-term decline of biological diversity.

The Convention also offers decision-makers guidance based on the precautionary
principle which demands that where there is a threat of significant reduction
or loss of biological diversity, lack of full scientific certainty should not
be used as a reason for postponing measures to avoid or minimize such a
threat. The Convention acknowledges that substantial investments are required
to conserve biological diversity. It argues, however, that conservation will
bring us significant environmental, economic and social benefits in return.

The Convention on Biological Diversity of 2010 banned some forms of
geoengineering.

## Executive secretary

As of April 2024, the acting executive secretary is Astrid Schomaker.

The previous executive secretaries were: David Cooper (2023–2024), Elizabeth
Maruma Mrema (2020–2023), pl:Cristiana Pașca Palmer (2017–2019), Braulio
Ferreira de Souza Dias (2012–2017), Ahmed Djoghlaf (2006–2012), Hamdallah
Zedan (1998–2005), Calestous Juma (1995–1998), and Angela Cropper (1993–1995).

## Issues

Some of the many issues dealt with under the Convention include:

  * Measures the incentives for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity.
  * Regulated access to genetic resources and traditional knowledge, including Prior Informed Consent of the party providing resources.
  * Sharing, in a fair and equitable way, the results of research and development and the benefits arising from the commercial and other utilization of genetic resources with the Contracting Party providing such resources (governments and/or local communities that provided the traditional knowledge or biodiversity resources utilized).
  * Access to and transfer of technology, including biotechnology, to the governments and/or local communities that provided traditional knowledge and/or biodiversity resources.
  * Technical and scientific cooperation.
  * Coordination of a global directory of taxonomic expertise (Global Taxonomy Initiative).
  * Impact assessment.
  * Education and public awareness.
  * Provision of financial resources.
  * National reporting on efforts to implement treaty commitments.

## International bodies established

### Conference of the Parties (COP)

The Convention's governing body is the Conference of the Parties (COP),
consisting of all governments (and regional economic integration
organizations) that have ratified the treaty. This ultimate authority reviews
progress under the Convention, identifies new priorities, and sets work plans
for members. The COP can also make amendments to the Convention, create expert
advisory bodies, review progress reports by member nations, and collaborate
with other international organizations and agreements.

The Conference of the Parties uses expertise and support from several other
bodies that are established by the Convention. In addition to committees or
mechanisms established on an ad hoc basis, the main organs are:

### CBD Secretariat

The CBD Secretariat, based in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, operates under UNEP,
the United Nations Environment Programme. Its main functions are to organize
meetings, draft documents, assist member governments in the implementation of
the programme of work, coordinate with other international organizations, and
collect and disseminate information.

### Subsidiary Body for Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice
(SBSTTA)

The SBSTTA is a committee composed of experts from member governments
competent in relevant fields. It plays a key role in making recommendations to
the COP on scientific and technical issues. It provides assessments of the
status of biological diversity and of various measures taken in accordance
with Convention, and also gives recommendations to the Conference of the
Parties, which may be endorsed in whole, in part or in modified form by the
COPs. As of 2024[update] SBSTTA had met 26 times, with a 26th meeting taking
place in Nairobi, Kenya in 2024.

### Subsidiary Body on Implementation

In 2014, the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity established the Subsidiary Body on Implementation (SBI) to replace
the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Review of Implementation of the
Convention. The four functions and core areas of work of SBI are: (a) review
of progress in implementation; (b) strategic actions to enhance
implementation; (c) strengthening means of implementation; and (d) operations
of the Convention and the Protocols. The first meeting of the SBI was held on
2–6 May 2016 and the second meeting was held on 9–13 July 2018, both in
Montreal, Canada. The latest (fifth) meeting of the SBI was held in October
2024 in Cali, Colombia. The Bureau of the Conference of the Parties serves as
the Bureau of the SBI. The current chair of the SBI is Ms. Clarissa Souza
Della Nina of Brazil.

## Parties

Parties to the convention

Signed, but not ratified

Non-signatory

As of 2016, the Convention has 196 Parties, which includes 195 states and the
European Union. All UN member states—with the exception of the United
States—have ratified the treaty. Non-UN member states that have ratified are
the Cook Islands, Niue, and the State of Palestine. The Holy See and the
states with limited recognition are non-Parties. The US has signed but not
ratified the treaty, because ratification requires a two-thirds majority in
the Senate and is blocked by Republican Party senators.

The European Union created the Cartagena Protocol (see below) in 2000 to
enhance biosafety regulation and propagate the "precautionary principle" over
the "sound science principle" defended by the United States. Whereas the
impact of the Cartagena Protocol on domestic regulations has been substantial,
its impact on international trade law remains uncertain. In 2006, the World
Trade Organization (WTO) ruled that the European Union had violated
international trade law between 1999 and 2003 by imposing a moratorium on the
approval of genetically modified organisms (GMO) imports. Disappointing the
United States, the panel nevertheless "decided not to decide" by not
invalidating the stringent European biosafety regulations.

Implementation by the Parties to the Convention is achieved using two means:

### National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAP)

**National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans** (**NBSAP**) are the
principal instruments for implementing the Convention at the national level.
The Convention requires that countries prepare a national biodiversity
strategy and to ensure that this strategy is included in planning for
activities in all sectors where diversity may be impacted. As of early 2012,
173 Parties had developed NBSAPs.

The United Kingdom, New Zealand and Tanzania carried out elaborate responses
to conserve individual species and specific habitats. The United States of
America, a signatory who had not yet ratified the treaty by 2010, produced one
of the most thorough implementation programs through species recovery programs
and other mechanisms long in place in the US for species conservation.

Singapore established a detailed _National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
Plan_. The _National Biodiversity Centre_ of Singapore represents Singapore in
the Convention for Biological Diversity.

### National Reports

In accordance with Article 26 of the Convention, Parties prepare national
reports on the status of implementation of the Convention.

## Protocols and plans developed by CBD

### Cartagena Protocol (2000)

The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, also known as the Biosafety Protocol, was
adopted in January 2000, after a CBD Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on
Biosafety had met six times between July 1996 and February 1999. The Working
Group submitted a draft text of the Protocol for consideration by Conference
of the Parties at its first extraordinary meeting, which was convened for the
express purpose of adopting a protocol on biosafety to the Convention on
Biological Diversity. After a few delays, the Cartagena Protocol was
eventually adopted on 29 January 2000. The Biosafety Protocol seeks to protect
biological diversity from the potential risks posed by living modified
organisms resulting from modern biotechnology.

The Biosafety Protocol makes clear that products from new technologies must be
based on the precautionary principle and allow developing nations to balance
public health against economic benefits. It will, for example, let countries
ban imports of a genetically modified organism if they feel there is not
enough scientific evidence the product is safe and requires exporters to label
shipments containing genetically modified commodities such as corn or cotton.

The required number of 50 instruments of
ratification/accession/approval/acceptance by countries was reached in May
2003. In accordance with the provisions of its Article 37, the Protocol
entered into force on 11 September 2003.

### Global Strategy for Plant Conservation (2002)

In April 2002, the Parties of the UN CBD adopted the recommendations of the
Gran Canaria Declaration Calling for a Global Plant Conservation Strategy, and
adopted a 16-point plan aiming to slow the rate of plant extinctions around
the world by 2010.

### Nagoya Protocol (2010)

The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable
Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on
Biological Diversity was adopted on 29 October 2010 in Nagoya, Aichi
Prefecture, Japan, at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, and
entered into force on 12 October 2014. The protocol is a supplementary
agreement to the Convention on Biological Diversity, and provides a
transparent legal framework for the effective implementation of one of the
three objectives of the CBD: the fair and equitable sharing of benefits
arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. It thereby contributes to
the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.

### Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020

Also, at the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, held from 18 to
29 October 2010 in Nagoya, a revised and updated "Strategic Plan for
Biodiversity, 2011–2020" was agreed and published. This document included the
"Aichi Biodiversity Targets", comprising 20 targets that address each of five
strategic goals defined in the plan. The strategic plan includes the following
strategic goals:

  * Strategic Goal A: Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by mainstreaming biodiversity across government and society
  * Strategic Goal B: Reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and promote sustainable use
  * Strategic Goal C: To improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, species and genetic diversity
  * Strategic Goal D: Enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem services
  * Strategic Goal E: Enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building

Upon the launch of Agenda 2030, CBD released a technical note mapping and
identifying synergies between the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and
the 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets. This helps to understand the contributions
of biodiversity to achieving the SDGs.[_citation needed_]

### Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework

A new plan, known as the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF) was
developed to guide action through 2030. A first draft of this framework was
released in July 2021, and its final content was discussed and negotiated as
part of the COP 15 meetings. Reducing agricultural pollution and sharing the
benefits of digital sequence information arose as key points of contention
among Parties during development of the framework. A final version was adopted
by the Convention on 19 December 2022. The framework includes a number of
ambitious goals, including a commitment to designate at least 30 percent of
global land and sea as protected areas (known as the "30 by 30" initiative).

### Marine and coastal biodiversity

The CBD has a significant focus on marine and coastal biodiversity. A series
of expert workshops have been held (2018–2022) to identify options for
modifying the description of Ecologically or Biologically Significant Marine
Areas (EBSAs) and describing new areas. These have focused on the North-East,
North-West and South-Eastern Atlantic Ocean, Baltic Sea, Caspian Sea, Black
Sea, Seas of East Asia, North-West Indian Ocean and Adjacent Gulf Areas,
Southern and North-East Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, North and South
Pacific, Eastern Tropical and Temperate Pacific, Wider Caribbean and Western
Mid-Atlantic. The workshop meetings have followed the EBSA process based on
internationally agreed scientific criteria. This is aimed at creating an
international legally binding instrument (ILBI) under UNCLOS to support the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas
of national jurisdiction (BBNJ or High Seas Treaty). The central mechanism is
area-based planning and decision-making. It integrates EBSAs, Vulnerable
Marine Ecosystems (VMEs) and High Seas (Marine Protected Areas) with Blue
Growth scenarios. There is also linkage with the EU Marine Strategy Framework
Directive.

## Criticism

There have been criticisms against CBD that its implementation has been
weakened due to resistance of Western countries to the implementation of pro-
South provisions of the Convention. CBD is also regarded as a case of a hard
treaty gone soft in the implementation trajectory. The argument to enforce the
treaty as a legally binding multilateral instrument with the Conference of
Parties reviewing the infractions and non-compliance is also gaining strength.

Although the Convention explicitly states that all forms of life are covered
by its provisions, examination of reports and of national biodiversity
strategies and action plans submitted by participating countries shows that in
practice this is not happening. The fifth report of the European Union, for
example, makes frequent reference to animals (particularly fish) and plants,
but does not mention bacteria, fungi or protists at all. The International
Society for Fungal Conservation has assessed more than 100 of these CBD
documents for their coverage of fungi using defined criteria to place each in
one of six categories. No documents were assessed as good or adequate, less
than 10% as nearly adequate or poor, and the rest as deficient, seriously
deficient or totally deficient.

Scientists working with biodiversity and medical research are expressing fears
that the Nagoya Protocol is counterproductive, and will hamper disease
prevention and conservation efforts, and that the threat of imprisonment of
scientists will have a chilling effect on research. Non-commercial researchers
and institutions such as natural history museums fear maintaining biological
reference collections and exchanging material between institutions will become
difficult, and medical researchers have expressed alarm at plans to expand the
protocol to make it illegal to publicly share genetic information, e.g. via
GenBank.

William Yancey Brown, when with the Brookings Institution, suggested that the
Convention on Biological Diversity should include the preservation of intact
genomes and viable cells for every known species and for new species as they
are discovered.

## Meetings of the Parties

A Conference of the Parties (COP) was held annually for three years after
1994, and thence biennially on even-numbered years.

     COP  | Year  | Country  | Begin  | End  | Days  | City  | Link   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1 | 1994 |  Bahamas | 28.11.1994 | 09.12.1994 | 12 | Nassau | COP 1  
2 | 1995 |  Indonesia | 06.11.1995 | 17.11.1995 | 12 | Jakarta | COP 2  
3 | 1996 |  Argentina | 04.11.1996 | 15.11.1996 | 12 | Buenos Aires | COP 3  
4 | 1998 |  Slovakia | 04.05.1998 | 15.05.1998 | 12 | Bratislava | COP 4  
5 | 2000 |  Kenya | 15.05.2000 | 26.05.2000 | 12 | Nairobi | COP 5  
6 | 2002 |  Netherlands | 07.04.2002 | 19.04.2002 | 13 | The Hague | COP 6  
7 | 2004 |  Malaysia | 09.02.2004 | 20.02.2004 | 12 | Kuala Lumpur | COP 7  
8 | 2006 |  Brazil | 20.03.2006 | 31.03.2006 | 12 | Curitiba | COP 8  
9 | 2008 |  Germany | 19.05.2008 | 30.05.2008 | 12 | Bonn | COP 9  
10 | 2010 |  Japan | 18.10.2010 | 29.10.2010 | 12 | Nagoya  | COP 10  
11 | 2012 |  India | 08.10.2012 | 19.10.2012 | 12 | Hyderabad | COP 11  
12 | 2014 |  South Korea | 06.10.2014 | 17.10.2014 | 12 | Pyeongchang | COP 12  
13 | 2016 |  Mexico | 04.12.2016 | 17.12.2016 | 14 | Cancun | COP 13  
14 | 2018 |  Egypt | 13.11.2018 | 29.11.2018 | 17 | Sharm El Sheik | COP 14  
15 | 2022 |  Canada | 07.12.2022 | 19.12.2022 | 13 | Montreal | COP 15  
16 | 2024 |  Colombia | 21.10.2024 | 01.11.2024 | 12 | Cali | COP 16  
  
  

### 1994 COP 1

The first ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in
November and December 1994, in Nassau, Bahamas. The International Coral Reef
Initiative (ICRI) was launched at this first COP for the Convention on
Biological Diversity.

### 1995 COP 2

The second ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in
November 1995, in Jakarta, Indonesia.

### 1996 COP 3

The third ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in
November 1996, in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

### 1998 COP 4

The fourth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in May
1998, in Bratislava, Slovakia.

### 1999 EX-COP 1 (Cartagena)

The First Extraordinary Meeting of the Conference of the Parties took place in
February 1999, in Cartagena, Colombia. A series of meetings led to the
adoption of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety in January 2000, effective
from 2003.

### 2000 COP 5

The fifth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in May
2000, in Nairobi, Kenya.

### 2002 COP 6

The sixth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in
April 2002, in The Hague, Netherlands.

### 2004 COP 7

The seventh ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in
February 2004, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

### 2006 COP 8

The eighth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in
March 2006, in Curitiba, Brazil.

### 2008 COP 9

The ninth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in May
2008, in Bonn, Germany.

### 2010 COP 10 (Nagoya)

The tenth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place in
October 2010, in Nagoya, Japan. It was at this meeting that the Nagoya
Protocol was ratified.

2010 was the International Year of Biodiversity, which resulted in 110 reports
on the loss of biodiversity in different countries, but little or no progress
toward the goal of "significant reduction" in the problem. Following a
recommendation of CBD signatories, the UN declared 2011 to 2020 as the United
Nations Decade on Biodiversity.

### 2012 COP 11

Leading up to the Conference of the Parties (COP 11) meeting on biodiversity
in Hyderabad, India, 2012, preparations for a World Wide Views on Biodiversity
has begun, involving old and new partners and building on the experiences from
the World Wide Views on Global Warming.

### 2014 COP 12

Under the theme, "Biodiversity for Sustainable Development", thousands of
representatives of governments, NGOs, indigenous peoples, scientists and the
private sector gathered in Pyeongchang, Republic of Korea in October 2014 for
the 12th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity (COP 12).

From 6–17 October 2014, Parties discussed the implementation of the Strategic
Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020 and its Aichi Biodiversity Targets, which are
to be achieved by the end of this decade. The results of Global Biodiversity
Outlook 4, the flagship assessment report of the CBD informed the discussions.

The conference gave a mid-term evaluation to the UN Decade on Biodiversity
(2011–2020) initiative, which aims to promote the conservation and sustainable
use of nature. The meeting achieved a total of 35 decisions, including a
decision on "Mainstreaming gender considerations", to incorporate gender
perspective to the analysis of biodiversity.

At the end of the meeting, the meeting adopted the "Pyeongchang Road Map",
which addresses ways to achieve biodiversity through technology cooperation,
funding and strengthening the capacity of developing countries.

### 2016 COP 13

COP13 Mexico meeting

The thirteenth ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place
between 2 and 17 December 2016 in Cancún, Mexico.

### 2018 COP 14

The 14th ordinary meeting of the Parties to the Convention took place on 17–29
November 2018, in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt. The 2018 UN Biodiversity Conference
closed on 29 November 2018 with broad international agreement on reversing the
global destruction of nature and biodiversity loss threatening all forms of
life on Earth. Parties adopted the Voluntary Guidelines for the design and
effective implementation of ecosystem-based approaches to climate change
adaptation and disaster risk reduction. Governments also agreed to accelerate
action to achieve the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, agreed in 2010, until 2020.
Work to achieve these targets would take place at the global, regional,
national and subnational levels.[_citation needed_]

### 2021/2022 COP 15

COP15 Canada meeting

The 15th meeting of the Parties was originally scheduled to take place in
Kunming, China in 2020, but was postponed several times due to the COVID-19
pandemic. After the start date was delayed for a third time, the Convention
was split into two sessions. A mostly online event took place in October 2021,
where over 100 nations signed the Kunming declaration on biodiversity. The
theme of the declaration was "Ecological Civilization: Building a Shared
Future for All Life on Earth". Twenty-one action-oriented draft targets were
provisionally agreed in the October meeting, to be further discussed in the
second session: an in-person event that was originally scheduled to start in
April 2022, but was rescheduled to occur later in 2022. The second part of COP
15 ultimately took place in Montreal, Canada, from 5–17 December 2022. At the
meeting, the Parties to the Convention adopted a new action plan, the Kunming-
Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.

### 2024 COP 16

The 16th meeting of the Parties is scheduled to be held in Cali, Colombia in
2024. Originally, Turkey was going to host it but after a series of
earthquakes in February 2023 they had to withdraw.