International cross-border agreement for energy

The **Energy Charter Treaty** (**ECT**) is an international agreement which
establishes a multilateral framework for cross-border cooperation in the
energy industry, principally the fossil fuel industry. The treaty covers all
aspects of commercial energy activities including trade, transit, investments
and energy efficiency. The treaty contains dispute resolution procedures both
for States Parties to the Treaty (vis-à-vis other States) and as between
States and the investors of other States, who have made investments in the
territory of the former. Full versions of the treaty, both consolidated and
official, are readily accessible.

Initially, the Energy Charter process aimed to integrate the energy sectors of
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe at the end of the Cold War into the
broader European and world markets. Its role, however, extends beyond
east–west cooperation and, through legally binding instruments, free trade in
global energy markets and non-discrimination to stimulate foreign direct
investments and global cross-border trade.

Awards and settlements of the international arbitrations put forward by
breaking the law of the Energy Charter Treaty are sometimes in the hundreds of
millions of dollars. In 2014, the _Yukos_ cases were decided in favour of the
claimants on the basis of the treaty with a record-breaking US$50 billion
award, although appeals continue in courts in the Netherlands.

The Energy Charter Treaty has been criticized for being a significant obstacle
to enacting national policies to combat climate change, and for actively
disincentivizing national governments from compliance with recent
international climate treaties such as the Paris Agreement due to the threat
of significant financial loss.

As of 2023[update], numerous countries have either left or have announced
plans to leave the ECT. The European Union and Euratom took the final and
formal step of exiting the Energy Charter Treaty, which will take effect one
year after the depository has received the notification.

## History

### European Energy Charter

The beginnings of the Energy Charter date back to a political initiative
launched in Europe in the early 1990s. The end of the Cold War offered an
unprecedented opportunity to overcome previous economic divisions between the
nations on both sides of the Iron Curtain. The brightest prospect for mutually
co-dependent beneficial cooperation was the energy sector, given Europe's
growing energy demand and vast resource availability in post-Soviet nations.
Additionally, there was a recognised need to establish a commonly accepted
foundation for energy cooperation among the states of Eurasia. By these
considerations, the Energy Charter process was born.

The original European Energy Charter declaration was signed in The Hague on 17
December 1991. It was a political declaration of principles for international
energy cooperation in trade, transit and investment, together with the
intention to negotiate a legally binding treaty, setting the beginning of the
development of the Energy Charter Treaty. One of the final hurdles was to find
language to ensure national sovereignty over natural resources while
enshrining the principle of international cooperation to allow outside access
to those resources. Negotiators also succeeded in assuring Austria and
Switzerland that they would not bear an undue transit burden for energy
resources.

### Energy Charter Treaty

The treaty is a legally binding multilateral agreement covering investment
promotion and protection, trade, transit, energy efficiency and dispute
resolution. The treaty was signed in Lisbon in December 1994, together with a
"protocol on energy efficiency and related environmental aspects" (PEEREA).
The treaty and the protocol came into effect in April 1998. An amendment to
the trade-related provisions reflecting the change from the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade to World Trade Organization processes was also agreed at
that time.

### International Energy Charter

The International Energy Charter is a non-binding political declaration
underpinning key principles for international energy cooperation. The
declaration attempts to reflect the changes in the energy world that have
emerged since the development of the original Energy Charter Treaty in the
early 1990s. The International Energy Charter was signed on 20 May 2015, by 72
countries plus the EU, Euratom and ECOWAS at a Ministerial conference hosted
by the government of The Netherlands.

## Energy Charter Conference

Article 33 of the treaty establishes the Energy Charter Conference, which is
the governing and decision-making body of the Organisation and has United
Nations General Assembly observer status in resolution 62/75 adopted by the
General Assembly on 6 December 2007. Members consist of Countries and Regional
Economic Integration Organisations that have signed or acceded to the treaty
and are represented in the Conference and its subsidiary bodies. The
Conference meets on a regular basis to discuss issues affecting energy
cooperation among Members and to review the implementation of the treaty and
PEEREA provisions, and to consider new activities within the Energy Charter
framework. The Energy Charter Conference has the following subsidiary bodies:

  * Strategy Group
  * Implementation Group
  * Budget Committee
  * Legal Advisory Committee

Additionally, a consultative board—the Industry Advisory Panel—presents the
private sector's views on relevant issues related to energy investments,
cross-border flows and energy efficiency to the Conference and its groups.

The Legal Advisory Task Force was set up by the Energy Charter Secretariat in
2001 to assist in the drafting of balanced and legally coherent Model
Agreements for cross-border oil and gas pipelines.

## Scope

The treaty's provisions focus on four broad areas: Energy Trade, Investment,
Energy Efficiency, Dispute Settlement, Energy Transit.

### Trade

The Energy Charter Treaty's purpose in Energy Trade is to create open and non-
discriminatory energy markets throughout its member states. This framework
follows the rules of the multilateral trading system as embodied in the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which later became the World
Trade Organization (WTO). The Energy Charter Treaty extends the GATT and later
the WTO rules in the energy sector amongst its members. Additionally, the
treaty covers the trade of all energy materials (e.g. crude oil, natural gas,
wood fuel, etc.), all final energy products (e.g. petroleum, electricity,
etc.) and energy-related equipment. The rules of trade only cover trade in
goods, not trade in services, nor does it concern itself with intellectual
property rights.

### Investment

The treaty is responsible for the protection of foreign direct investment. It
is estimated that just in the European Union, the United Kingdom and
Switzerland, the treaty protects fossil investments of at least €344.6
billion. Its provisions protect investors and their investments from political
risks involved in investing in a foreign country such as discrimination,
expropriation, nationalisation, breach of contract, damages due to war, etc.
The legally binding nature of the Energy Charter Treaty makes it the world's
only multilateral framework for matters specifically related to energy.

### Dispute settlement

Whereas Article 27 sets out the provisions for dispute resolution between two
contracting states, Article 26 of the Energy Charter Treaty provides express
provisions for resolving disputes arising under the treaty between an investor
of a Contracting State and another Contracting State. This process is
generally known as Investor State Dispute Settlement or ISDS. The choices of
arbitration rules are:

  * ICSID Rules
  * ICSID Additional Facilities Rules
  * UNCITRAL _Ad hoc_ Rules
  * The Arbitration Rules of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

The most significant claims against Russia, pertaining to the Yukos decision,
arose under the provisions of Article 26.

The drafting of the treaty has raised some difficult questions in the area of
Investor-State Disputes by academics. In 2021 the treaty was struck down by
the European Court of Justice for intra-EU disputes only. Some areas of
discussion are:

  * the standards of protection granted by the treaty;
  * the international responsibility of States for breaches of the treaty;
  * the various procedures available for the vindication of rights under the treaty;
  * the conditions to be satisfied before a claimant's complaint may be considered on the merits;
  * the impact of EU law on claims under the treaty;
  * the treaty's provisions concerning taxation;
  * possible effects of the ECT on climate;
  * possible geopolitical, climate and financial impacts

and also:

  * allegedly deleterious effects on states' budgets.
  * Nathalie Bernasconi-Osterwalder, a lawyer at the International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), criticises the ECT for not having "more precise definitions of investment protection standards, [for not] set[ting] out responsibilities for investors and [for not] integrat[ing] innovations with respect to dispute settlement to ensure transparency and independence," unlike more modern approaches. Moreover, she claims it is following expansionist ambitions.
  * Tania Voon, a Professor in Law at the University of Melbourne, criticises the modernization of the ECT for not including a removal of the art. 47 survival clause, and for failing to introduce "a distinction between investments based on fossil fuels and those based on renewable energy" in order to achieve climate goals.
  * Cross-party members of the European Parliament advised the commission to withdraw if modernization is not adequate.

### Energy efficiency

The Energy Charter's involvement in matters of energy efficiency and its
relation to a cleaner environment was introduced in the 1991 European Energy
Charter. The subsequent Energy Charter Treaty, and in particular Article 19 of
the treaty, requires that each Contracting Party "... shall strive to minimise
in an economically efficient manner, harmful Environmental Impacts arising
from energy use."

Building on article 19 of the Energy Charter Treaty, the Protocol on Energy
Efficiency and Related Environmental Aspects (PEEREA) defines in more detail
the policy principles that can promote energy efficiency and provides guidance
on the development of energy efficiency programmes. PEEREA was negotiated,
opened for signature and entered into force at the same time (16 April 1998)
as the Energy Charter Treaty.

In contrast to other activities in the Charter process, the emphasis in the
work on energy efficiency is not legally binding, but rather on practical
implementation of a political commitment to improve energy efficiency. This is
promoted through policy discussions based on analysis and exchange of
experience between the member countries, invited independent experts and other
international organisations.

The implementation of PEEREA provides its member countries with a range of
best practices and a forum in which to share experiences and policy advice on
energy efficiency issues. Within this forum, particular attention is paid to
national energy efficiency strategy, taxation, pricing policy in the energy
sector, environmentally related subsidies and other mechanisms for financing
energy efficiency objectives.

### Energy transit

The Energy Charter Treaty provides a set of rules that covers the entire
energy chain, including not only investments in production and generation but
also the terms under which energy can be traded and transported across various
national jurisdictions to international markets. As such, the agreement is
intended to prevent disruption of fuel passing between countries.

#### Transit Protocol

The Energy Charter Transit Protocol is a draft protocol which negotiations are
not finalised yet. The Protocol would amplify and strengthen the treaty
provisions on energy transit issues to mitigate some specific operational
risks that continue to affect energy transit flows. Negotiations on the text
of the Transit Protocol began in early 2000 and a compromise text reflecting
an extended discussion between the European Union and Russia was tabled for
adoption at the meeting of the Energy Charter Conference on 10 December 2003.
It became clear during the meeting that a unanimous decision could not be
reached on the basis of the compromise text; a complicating factor was that
energy issues, including transit, were a subject on the bilateral agenda for
the European Union and Russia in the context of Russian negotiations for
accession to the World Trade Organization. The Protocol negotiations were then
temporarily suspended.

In December 2007, the Energy Charter Conference reaffirmed its support for the
finalisation of negotiations and adoption of the Energy Charter Protocol on
Transit to expand the existing provisions of the treaty. This work proceeded
until October 2011, when the European Union argued that, given current
developments in the international energy situation and the lack of progress in
negotiations and consultations, it appeared no longer opportune to continue
talks. A review of the issue at the end of 2015 noted the continued demand for
a multilateral legally-binding framework for energy transit, and recommended
further exploring the basis for negotiations of such an agreement, which could
address various aspects of oil, gas and electricity transportation and
transit.

The Energy Charter Treaty includes an obligation of member countries to
facilitate energy transit across their territory, in line with the principle
of freedom of transit, and to secure established transit flows. At the same
time, the treaty provisions do not oblige any country to introduce mandatory
third-party access.

### The principle of national sovereignty

The principles of the Energy Charter are based on the idea that international
flows of investments and technologies in the energy sector are mutually
beneficial. But at the same time, national sovereignty over energy resources
is a core principle of the treaty (ECT Article 18). An objective of the treaty
is to promote transparency and efficiency in the operation of energy markets,
but it is for governments to define the structure of their domestic energy
sector. Each country is free to decide whether and how its national energy
resources are developed, and the extent to which its energy sector is open to
foreign investors. The treaty does not deal with the ownership issues of the
energy companies–there is no obligation to privatise state-owned energy
companies, or to break up vertically integrated energy companies.

## Membership

Members are countries and Regional Economic Integration Organisations are a
party to the treaty through ratification or accession. Membership also
includes signatories which provisionally apply the treaty pending entry into
force. Such provisional application applies automatically after signature,
unless it is inconsistent with the domestic law of the country concerned. As
October 2022, the treaty has 51 parties, while it is provisionally applied by
two countries. All Members have ratified the treaty except for Australia,
Belarus, Norway, and the Russian Federation. Belarus has accepted provisional
application of the treaty.

### Members of the Energy Charter Conference

Source:

  * Afghanistan
  * Albania
  * Armenia
  * Austria
  * Azerbaijan
  * Belarus * (suspended on 24 June 2022). 
  * Belgium
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Bulgaria
  * Croatia
  * Cyprus
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark (withdrawal effective on 4 September 2025)
  * Estonia
  * Euratom (withdrawal effective on 28 June 2025)
  * European Union (withdrawal effective on 28 June 2025)
  * Finland
  * Georgia
  * Greece
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Japan
  * Jordan
  * Kazakhstan
  * Kyrgyzstan
  * Latvia
  * Liechtenstein
  * Lithuania (withdrawal effective on 7 August 2026)
  * Malta
  * Moldova
  * Mongolia
  * Montenegro
  * North Macedonia
  * Norway *
  * Romania
  * Slovakia
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Tajikistan
  * Turkey
  * Turkmenistan
  * Ukraine
  * Uzbekistan
  * Yemen

Russia and Australia provisionally applied the treaty, but indicated the end
of the provisional application period in 2009 and 2021 respectively. Italy was
a party to the treaty from 1998 until 2016. In October 2022, a minister from
the Netherlands announced his intention to facilitate withdrawal from the
treaty. On 21 October 2022, French President Emmanuel Macron also announced
France's withdrawal from the treaty. One month later, the German government
also expressed its intent to leave the accord. See also announced withdrawals
below.

_Note: * denotes a state that has signed the treaty and is applying it
provisionally but has not ratified it, and denotes a state that has announced
that it will withdraw from the treaty._

### Observers

Observers status is granted to countries and Regional Economic Integration
Organisations that have signed either the European Energy Charter or the
International Energy Charter. Observers have the right to attend all Charter
meetings and to receive all related documentation, reports and analysis, and
to participate in the working debates taking place within the Energy Charter.
Also, International Organisations can be granted Observer status by decision
of the Energy Charter Conference. The intention is that Observer status should
provide the chance for a country to familiarise itself with the Charter and
its functions, to facilitate its assessment of the benefits of accession to
the Energy Charter Treaty.

#### Countries

Signatories of European Energy Charter (1991)

  * Australia
  * Burundi
  * Canada
  * Chad
  * Indonesia
  * Italy
  * Mauritania
  * Morocco
  * Niger
  * Pakistan
  * Palestine
  * Serbia
  * Syria
  * Uganda
  * United States

Signatories of the International Energy Charter (2015)

  * Bangladesh
  * Benin
  * Burkina Faso
  * Cambodia
  * Chile
  * China
  * Colombia
  * East African Community
  * ECCAS
  * ECOWAS
  * Eswatini
  * G5 Sahel
  * Gambia
  * Guatemala
  * Guyana
  * Iran
  * Iraq
  * Kenya
  * Mali
  * Nigeria
  * Panama
  * Rwanda
  * Senegal
  * Sierra Leone
  * South Korea
  * Tanzania
  * United Arab Emirates
  * Vietnam

#### International organisations

  * Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN, 2003)
  * Baltic Sea Region Energy Cooperation (BASREC, 2000)
  * Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC, 1991)
  * CIS Electric Power Council (1991)
  * European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD, 1991)
  * International Energy Agency (IEA, 1991)

|

  * International Energy Forum (IEF, 2007)
  * Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD, 1991)
  * United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE, 1991)
  * World Bank (1991)
  * World Trade Organization (WTO, 1991)

  
---|---  
  
### Former members

  * Italy (signed 1991, withdrawn 2016)
  * France (signed 1991, withdrawn 2023)
  * Germany (signed 1991, withdrawn 2023)
  * Poland (signed 1991, withdrawn 2023)
  * Luxembourg (signed 1991, withdrawn 17 July 2024) 
  * Slovenia (withdrawn 14 October 2024)
  * Portugal (withdrawn 2 February 2025) 
  * Spain (withdrawn 17 April 2025)
  * United Kingdom (withdrawn 27 April 2025)
  * Netherlands (withdrawn 28 June 2025)

### Russian participation

The Russian Federation signed the treaty and applied it provisionally but did
not ratify it. It linked the ratification of the treaty to negotiations on an
Energy Charter Transit Protocol. In October 2006, German chancellor Angela
Merkel and French president Jacques Chirac proposed the creation of a
_balanced energy partnership_ between France and Germany, representing the
European Union, and Russia. Under the agreement, Russia would have to sign the
European Energy Charter, which, according to a _New York Times_ summary of a
report in Russian newspaper _Kommersant_ , Russian President Vladimir Putin
said impinges on Russia's national interests.

In December 2006, Russia indicated that the ratification of the treaty was
unlikely due to the provisions requiring third-party access to Russia's
pipelines. On 20 August 2009, it officially informed the depository of the
treaty (Government of Portugal) that it did not intend to become a contracting
party to the treaty and the related protocol terminating the provisional
application of the treaty and the PEEREA starting from 18 October 2009.

Notwithstanding the termination of provisional application of the treaty by
Russia, the provisions regarding dispute settlements and investment protection
are still in force for additional twenty years. On 30 November 2009, the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague, which had been considering this
case since 2005 under the UNCITRAL Rules, ruled that former Yukos shareholders
can move on to the merits phase of their arbitration claim against the Russian
government. GML, previously known as Menatep, the principal shareholder in
Yukos, is suing Russia for more than $100 billion in an international
arbitration case under the treaty. The hearings took place in October 2012.

In July 2014, the international arbitration panel in The Hague unanimously
ruled in favour of the shareholders, awarding $50 billion damages for the
seizure of assets and dismantling of Yukos. The Russian government has vowed
not to comply with the ruling, setting off an international legal dispute
which has resulted in France and Belgium seizing Russian assets for possible
use as restitution for the claimants. However, a French court ruled against
the seizure by the French authorities, and a Dutch court later overturned the
$50 billion ruling, arguing Russia had not ratified the Energy Charter Treaty
and so was not bound by it.

## Case law

### Renewable energy investment cases in Spain

As of 2020, Spain was the state most affected by ECT awards, having lost €825
million to investors. In a series of 20 arbitral decision, Spain was found
liable for having generated legitimate expectations of a stable framework of
renewable energy investment incentives and having afterwards abruptly reversed
these expectations.

## Secretariat

The Secretariat is located in Brussels.

The Energy Charter Treaty established the creation of a permanent Secretariat
that was originally set up to accommodate the dialogue amongst the contracting
parties during the negotiation of the treaty. The Secretariat is mandated by
the Energy Charter Conference Primarily to provide the Conference with all
necessary assistance for the performance of its duties including promotion,
organisation and legal support along with meeting space for subsidiary body
meetings hosted at the Secretariat.

Since 1 January 2022, the Secretary General is Guy Lentz and, since September
2021, the Assistant Secretary General is Atsuko Hirose.

### Organisation

One of the primary mandates given by the Energy Charter Conference to the
Secretariat is to organise and administer meetings of the Conference and its
subsidiary bodies. In addition, the Secretariat organises conferences and
energy forums related to the global ongoing energy dialogues.

### Monitor ECT and PEEREA obligations

Article 19 of the treaty, requires that each Contracting Party minimise, in an
economically efficient manner, harmful environmental impacts arising from
energy use. The Secretariat monitors the enforcement of these obligations in
the contracting parties of the treaty and creates various publicly available
reports on each of the contracting parties such as energy efficiency and the
investment climate.

### Legal support

The Energy Charter Treaty contains a comprehensive system for settling
disputes on matters covered by the treaty. The two primary forms of binding
dispute settlement are state-state arbitration on the interpretation or
application of almost all aspects of the treaty (except for competition and
environmental issues), and investor-state arbitration (Article 26) for
investment disputes. There are special provisions, based on the WTO model, for
the resolution of inter-state trade issues and the treaty also offers a
conciliation procedure for transit disputes. The Secretariat maintains legal
advice to these arbitrations as well as has responsibility for maintaining the
Travaux préparatoires used to clarify the intentions of the treaty by Article
32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

The Secretariat maintains a publicly available list of cases that have been
brought by investors to international arbitration. These cases have been
litigated under the arbitration regulations of the ICSID, Arbitration
Institute of the SCC, and UNCITRAL. The Arbitration Awards or Settlements are
sometimes in the hundred of millions of dollars. Disputes concerning
competition (Article 6) and environmental issues (Article 19) the Secretariat
provides for bilateral (in the case of competition) or multilateral (in the
case of environmental protection) non-binding consultation mechanisms.

## Criticism

The Energy Charter Treaty has come under heavy criticism for being an obstacle
to the transition to renewable energy. Transnational corporations who have
invested in fossil fuel production and nuclear power can sue national
governments for loss of profit on their investments as a consequence of the
transition to renewable energy. Critics argue that the Energy Charter Treaty
has a chilling effect on energy-related legislation. Russia and Norway refused
to ratify the treaty, and Italy left in 2016, over environmental concerns
about ECT. For example, the German energy company RWE has sued the Dutch
government for €1.4 billion in compensation for the phasing out of coal power
plants. In October 2020, the European Parliament voted to end fossil fuel
protection under the ECT.

In late‑2022, the European Commission was seeking to clarify that the ECT does
not apply within the European Union. The Commission says "the risk of legal
conflict is such as to render an international agreement incompatible with EU
law" and adds that EU [member] states should thus "confirm that the ECT does
not apply, and has never applied to intra‑EU relations".

A joint investigation by _The Guardian_ , the Transnational Institute, and
Berlin‑based Powershift, made public in mid‑November 2022, revealed opaque
proceedings, inadequate controls on conflicts of interest for key personnel,
including arbitrators, and potential bias in favor of fossil fuel interests.

## Calls and plans for withdrawal

Several countries and organisations have proposed withdrawing from the ECT.
However, the Treaty has a "sunset clause" that allows lawsuits to be filed for
20 years after the departure of a member; Italy left the ECT in 2015, but was
successfully sued in 2022.

In 2020, Julia Steinberger and Yamina Saheb (both co-authors of the IPCC Sixth
Assessment Report) initiated an open letter that calls for the withdrawal from
the ECT. They justify the call with the claim that the ECT is an obstacle to
the Paris Agreement and the European Green Deal. The letter has been signed,
for example, by Sandrine Dixson-Declève, Connie Hedegaard, James K. Galbraith,
Helga Kromp-Kolb, Rachel Kyte, Thomas Piketty, Olivier de Schutter and Jean-
Pascal van Ypersele. On 15 December 2020, the Spanish minister for ecological
transition, Teresa Ribera, supported the idea of withdrawing from it if it was
not possible to reach an agreement to make the Energy Charter Treaty
compatible with the Paris Agreement. The International Institute for
Sustainable Development describes the possibility of a withdrawal with
neutralization of the survival clause.

### Announced withdrawals

As of October 2022, Spain, the Netherlands and Poland intended to withdraw
from the ECT, and Germany, France and Belgium were "examining their options".
On 21 October 2022, France announced that it would leave the treaty, citing a
desire to accelerate nuclear and renewable energy use before fossil fuels. And
on 14 November 2022, Germany announced its intention to withdraw in order to
better tackle climate change. Slovenia had earlier stated its intention to
withdraw. Denmark announced in April 2023 that it intends to withdraw.

In July 2023 the European Commission formally proposed legislation for both
the union and its member states to make a "coordinated and orderly"
simultaneous withdrawal from the ECT.

The UK government announced in September 2023 that it would consider leaving
the "outdated" treaty if modernisation was not agreed by that November. In
February 2024, the United Kingdom announced its plans to withdraw from the
treaty due to a failure in negotiations to modernise the treaty. In March
2024, the European Union countries jointly agreed to leave the ECT. However,
before this will take effect the European Parliament has to agree.

### Withdrawals

Italy withdrew in 2016; France, Germany and Poland in 2023, Luxembourg and
Slovenia in 2024 and Portugal, Spain and the UK in 2025