Eastern European development bank

The **Eurasian Development Bank** (**EDB**) is an international development
finance institution investing in the development of the economies, trade and
other economic ties, and integration in Eurasian countries. The EDB was
founded in 2006 and is headquartered in Almaty, Kazakhstan. The Bank has a
branch in St. Petersburg and representative offices in Astana, Bishkek,
Dushanbe, Yerevan, Minsk, and Moscow.

## History of the EDB

The founding of the Eurasian Development Bank on 12 January 2006 was initiated
by the Presidents of Russia and Kazakhstan. It began operating in June 2006.

Armenia and Tajikistan joined the EDB in 2009, Belarus in 2010, and the Kyrgyz
Republic in 2011. In January 2013, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development recognised the EDB as a multilateral financial institution.

In March 2022, the bank's eurobonds were downgraded by Fitch due to the
sanctions prompted by the Russian invasion of Ukraine which prompted the bank
to offer buybacks of the 2022 eurobonds up to the amount of $200 USD million.

## Membership

The present membership of the Bank consists of 6 countries. Other states and
international organisations can become members by acceding to the Agreement
Establishing the Bank.

Ranked on the basis of paid-up capital (as of January 2023) major shareholders
include:

  1. Russia (44.78 %)
  2. Kazakhstan (37.28%)
  3. Belarus (5.21 %)
  4. Tajikistan (4.25%)
  5. Kyrgyzstan (4.22%)
  6. Armenia (4.22%)

The president of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev has signed a law on
Uzbekistan's accession to the Agreement Establishing the Eurasian Development
Bank. Uzbekistan will become the seventh member of the bank and the third
largest shareholder with a 10% equity stake.

### Potential members

  * During an interview, Dmitry Pankin, chairman of the EDB's management board, stated that there were 12 countries expressing to join, including Azerbaijan, Egypt, Israel, India, Indonesia, Iran, Japan, Mongolia, Singapore, Thailand, the Republic of Korea and Vietnam.
  * Moldova: In November 2019, Moldova confirmed its intention to join the Eurasian Development Bank during a meeting in Moscow.
  * Hungary: Hungary expressed its interest to join the Eurasian Development Bank. Hungarian finance minister Mihály Varga stated that the Hungarian government is aiming for full membership by 2020. As a former member of Comecon, Hungary will be the first former Warsaw Pact state to join the EDB.

## Mission and strategy

The EDB's mission is to promote market economies and economic growth in its
member states and help expand trade and other economic ties between them by
means of investment.

The EDB's Strategy for 2022–2026 sets out the following development
objectives:

  * Strengthening the Bank's unique integration role in the EAEU+. The Bank's total investment will amount to US$10.9 billion;
  * Implementing integration mega-projects in transport infrastructure and logistics, food security, water and energy: the Eurasian Transport Corridor, the Eurasian Commodity Distribution System, and the Central Asian Water and Energy Complex;
  * Developing the EDB's digital projects by focusing on support for the digital agendas of the Bank's member countries to promote their digital transformation;
  * Promoting the UN Sustainable Development Goals and ESG approaches in the Bank's corporate governance, and increasing financing for the Bank's green and social projects;
  * Enhancing operations in the countries of the EDB's minority shareholders. Five-year strategies have been developed for each of the Bank's member states, tailored to their economic and investment profiles. The Bank's investment in Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan is expected to reach US$500 million by 2026.

## International cooperation

The EDB cooperates with other international organisations, national and
international development institutions, academic and civil society
organisations, associations and unions to support the Bank's activities in the
member states and beyond.

The EDB has held observer statuses at:

  * the United Nations General Assembly (since 2007);
  * the Eurasian Group on Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism (EAG) (since 2008);
  * the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board;
  * the International Investment Bank (since 2014).

The EDB:

  * is a member of the Kazakhstan Stock Exchange (KASE), the International Capital Market Association (ICMA), and the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA);
  * participates in the Multilateral Financial Institutions’ Working Group on Environmental and Social Standards (since 2012);
  * cooperates with the World Economic Forum (WEF; since 2014).

## Activities

The Eurasian Development Bank's activities in Eurasia include financing
investment projects that help improve living standards and develop the
business and financial environment in the countries by lending to state or
private enterprises, public-private partnerships (PPPs), equity participation,
issuing guarantees, financing private investment funds, and providing loans to
commercial banks for corporate on-lending. The Bank also implements digital
transformation projects in the EAEU+ and provides financing to banks,
companies, and enterprises by investing in new and ongoing projects and
supporting investment projects in the pipeline. The EDB's portfolio mainly
consists of projects in transport infrastructure, digital systems, green
energy, agriculture, manufacturing, and mechanical engineering. The projects
that have been implemented with the EDB's participation and financing include
the following:

  * Reconstruction of the Almaty Airport terminal (Kazakhstan);
  * Construction of the Big Almaty Ring Road (Kazakhstan);
  * Construction of the Turkistan Airport terminal (Kazakhstan);
  * Construction of the Saryarka gas pipeline (Kazakhstan);
  * Smart lighting system in Atyrau (Kazakhstan) – Impact Awards 2021 Winner;
  * Construction of the Central Ring Road in Moscow;
  * Construction of the Azov Wind Farm (Russia);
  * Construction of the Western High-Speed Diameter in St. Petersburg;
  * Complete replacement of passenger railcars Armenia's national railway carrier;
  * Financing the Russian-Kyrgyz Development Fund's targeted programmes;
  * Construction of the Polotsk Hydropower Plant on the Western Dvina River (Belarus).

### Fund for Digital Initiatives

The Eurasian Development Bank's Fund for Digital Initiatives was established
on 30 June 2020. The aim of the fund is to support digital transformation in
the EDB member states. The fund provides project financing and grants and
supports digital projects in healthcare, trade, public governance, culture,
tourism, sports, education, environmental protection, energy, data protection,
transport, logistics, manufacturing, agriculture, the labour market and
migration, as well as financial technology and smart cities.

The first project implemented by the Fund for Digital Initiatives was the
COVID-19-Free Travel mobile app aimed at allowing the free and safe movement
of people among countries during the coronavirus pandemic. The app makes it
possible to retrieve, store and display PCR test results and vaccination
records.

### Technical assistance

The Technical Assistance Fund is the EDB's vehicle for providing expertise and
support for projects in the pipeline to relieve potential borrowers from some
of the additional burdens and speed up the drafting of project documents. The
fund has three strands: technical assistance in preparing investment projects;
technical assistance in expanding the Bank's investment activities; and
subsidising interest rates in investment projects.

### Research

The Bank's own research activities have made it a reputable think tank. The
EDB is involved in major research and applied projects; prepares reports and
recommendations on regional economic integration for member governments;
regularly hosts conferences and round table discussions; and publishes sector-
and theme-specific reviews, macroeconomic papers analysing economic
developments in and forecasts for the region, as well as information on
regional integration, development bank activities, and investment project
financing in the EAEU+. In 2021, the EDB research team published the following
studies: The International North–South Transport Corridor: Promoting Eurasia's
Intra- and Transcontinental Connectivity; EDB Monitoring of Mutual Investments
for the twelve CIS countries and Georgia; Investment in the Water and Energy
Complex of Central Asia; and Uzbekistan and the EAEU: Prospects and Potential
Impact of Economic Integration.

### Mobilising finance

The EDB works actively with financial institutions to mobilise long-term
resources in the capital markets, which are the main source of funding for the
Bank's investment activities.

The sources of market financing include:

  * Eurobonds issued under the EMTN programme;
  * bonds issued in local markets;
  * securities issued under the ECP programme;
  * bilateral bank loans.

## Financial performance

The Bank's charter capital totals US$7 billion, including US$1.5 billion of
paid-in capital and US$5.5 billion of callable capital. The current investment
portfolio as of 1 March 2022 totalled US$3.902 billion and the cumulative
investment portfolio (including completed projects) US $10.448 billion. A
total of 84 projects are being financed.

## Environmental and social responsibility

In 2012, the Bank's management board approved an Environmental and Social
Responsibility Framework aimed at reducing the negative environmental impacts
of EDB-funded projects. The Bank's investment projects include those focusing
on environmental protection, socio-economic development, and the efficient use
of natural resources. Also in 2012, the Bank joined the Multilateral Financial
Institutions’ Working Group on Environment.

In 2019, the EDB's management stated that the Bank would focus on
environmental projects, primarily in the electricity and renewable energy
sectors.

In 2020, the Bank became a shareholder of the AIFC Green Finance Centre
established to develop and promote green finance in Kazakhstan and Central
Asia. The Centre assists potential issuers, investors and market players in
preparing for the issuance of green bonds on the AIFC Exchange.

Between 2017 and 2020, the EDB financed renewable energy projects with a total
installed capacity of about 500 MW to the tune of more than US$540 million. In
2020, the Bank approved a Renewable Energy Programme for 2020–2024, which will
finance projects with an installed capacity of 500 MW for a total of up to
US$600 million. By 2024, the EDB plans to extend up to US$1 billion to
renewable energy projects.

In 2021, the EDB financed the construction of the Azov wind farm, the first
one in the Unified Energy System of Russia to remotely control the flows of
both active and reactive power generated by the facility.

In 2021, the EDB published its Green and Social Debt Instruments Framework.

In September 2021, the Bank issued green bonds on the Kazakhstan Stock
Exchange (KASE). ACRA, as an accredited verifier, confirmed the issue's
compliance with the ICMA green bond principles and included it in its
register. This was followed by the issuance in November of social bonds for
projects implemented in Kazakhstan.

In December 2021, the EDB and the Global Energy Association published a report
entitled Green Technologies for Eurasia's Sustainable Future aimed at helping
to reduce the carbon footprint in Eurasia.

The Bank is also involved in the development of transport corridors across
Eurasia. The relevant projects are expected to halve transport-related CO2
emissions on the China–EAEU–EU axis. The EDB is also working on a development
scheme for Central Asia's water and energy complex. Realising the region's
hydro potential will reduce CO2 emissions by 5 million tonnes per year while
improvements in irrigation will help to minimise climate-related risks for
Central Asia. The Bank's strategy for 2022–2026 prioritises environmental and
resource efficiency. Each project is internally reviewed for its carbon
footprint.

## Management

The Bank’s management structure is made up of the Bank’s Council, the
Management Board, and the Chairman of the Management Board.

The Bank’s Council is its supreme management body in charge of the general
management of its operations. Each member state of the Bank appoints to the
Council an authorised representative and his or her deputy who become Council
members.

The Bank’s Management Board is a permanent collective executive body governed
by the Bank’s Council.

The Chairman of the EDB Management Board is Nikolai Podguzov.