| This article **containspromotional content**. Please help improve it by
removing promotional language and inappropriate external links, and by adding
encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view. _( February
2024)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
ESF headquarters in Strasbourg.

The **European Science Foundation** (**ESF**) is an association of 11 member
organizations devoted to scientific research in 8 European
countries.[_citation needed_] ESF is an independent, non-governmental, non-
profit organization that promotes science in Europe. It was established in
1974 and its offices are located in Strasbourg, France (headquarters).

ESF Member Organizations are research-performing and research-funding
organizations, academies and learned societies across Europe.

After four decades of stimulating European research through its networking,
ESF undertook a re-alignment and re-calibration of its strategic vision and
focus. The launch of its Expert division "Science Connect" beginning of 2017
marks the next phase of its evolution and has been born out of an
understanding of the science landscape, funding context and the needs of the
research community.

## Past activities

Up to 2015 ESF provided a platform for research scoping, planning and
networking on a European and global scale for ESF member organizations. ESF
activities were organized around three operational bases: strategy, synergy
and management. In line with its then mission and strategic plan, the European
Science Foundation ran programmes in science; programmes to enhance science
synergy such as research networking programmes and collaborative research
projects for European scientists; along with activities dedicated to science
management, such as providing administrative services to independent
scientific committees and other organizations.

### ESF-EUROHORCs – Funding gap

In June 2008, ESF in collaboration with EUROHORCs (European Heads of Research
Councils) published a policy briefing 'The EUROHORCs and ESF Vision on a
Globally Competitive ERA and their Road Map for Actions to Help Build it',
detailing essential requirements to build a globally competitive European
Research Area within the next five to ten years. At the time, EUROHORCs used
the European Science Foundation as an implementation agency. In 2014, this
instrument disappeared from the European landscape and has not been replaced
by any other funding mechanism.

## Change of focus

ESF has recently changed its scope of work. ESF has closed its traditional
research support activities (European Collaborative Research Projects,
Exploratory Workshops, Research Networking Programmes, etc.) and is focused
now on supporting the scientific community through scientific-support services
delivered by its Expert division (Science Connect).

## Structure

ESF is structured as follows:

  * Governing bodies
  * Science Connect Division
  * Community of Experts
  * Expert boards

### Governing bodies

The annual _assembly_ is the highest level decision making body of the ESF. It
elects the ESF president, the Executive Board, ratifies the budget and
accounts and admits new members. The assembly delegates are appointed by ESF
member organizations.

The _Executive Board_ sets and direct the overall strategy of the ESF and
coordinates the relations with EU and other institutions. The Executive Board
consists of the ESF president and 3 to 8 member organizations. The Executive
Board meets twice a year.

The _President_ officially represents the ESF to the public and in relations
with other national or international organizations.

The _Chief Executive_ is responsible for the implementation of the strategy
and policy set by the Executive Board, for administration of the ESF office
and its finance and for ensuring the execution of the decision of the assembly
and the Governing Council.

### Science Connect Division

Science Connect is ESF's Expert services division dedicated to support
scientific decision-making through a range of science-support services, such
as Grant Evaluation, Career Tracking, coordination of EU-funded Projects and
the hosting of scientific platforms and Expert Boards.

### Community of Experts

According to the ESF website, the Community of Experts is a network of
international recognized experts that covers the full spectrum of the
scientific landscape (Humanities, Economics and Social Sciences, Physics,
Chemistry, Mathematics and Engineering Sciences, Earth and Environmental
Sciences, Life and Biomedical Sciences). Its role is to sustain scientific
collaboration and support excellence in research grant peer-review and
proposal evaluation across all scientific disciplines.

ESF's Community of Experts comprises two colleges:

  * The College of Review Panel Members. Review Panel Members have a broad expertise in several scientific disciplines and their mission is to build consensus during the evaluation of research proposals.
  * The College of Expert Reviewers. Expert Reviewers are scientists specialized in a specific scientific domain and are in charge of assessing and evaluating several types of proposals such as fellowship applications and research projects.

### Expert boards

Since 1974 ESF has set up and hosted expert boards and committees in several
scientific domains. These include space sciences; radio-astronomy frequencies;
nuclear physics; marine and polar sciences; and materials science. At present
ESF hosts the following Expert Boards:

#### European Space Sciences Committee (ESSC)

Established in 1974, the ESSC provides unbiased, expert advice to the space
scientific community including the European Space Agency, the European
Commission, EU national space agencies. Over the years, the ESSC has become
the reference body in Europe for independent scientific advice on space
matters and a key partner for international research collaboration.

#### Nuclear Physics European Collaboration Committee (NuPECC)

NuPECC's aim is to strengthen European collaboration in nuclear physics
through the definition of a network of complementary facilities within Europe.
NuPECC issues recommendations on the development, organization and support of
European nuclear physics and particular projects.

#### Committee on Radio Astronomy Frequencies (CRAF)

Established in 1988, CRAF represents all the major radio astronomical
observatories in Europe. CRAF initiates and encourages scientific studies
aimed at reducing radio astronomy interference at source and the effects of
interference. Throughout the years CRAF has become an active voice in Europe
and engages with other groups of radio astronomers in discussions with
international organizations that decide on the use of radio spectrum.

## Member organizations

European Science Foundation Map

**Belgium**

  * Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique – FNRS (F.R.S.–FNRS) (Fund for Scientific Research – FNRS (F.R.S.–FNRS))

**Bulgaria**

  * Българска академия на науките (BAS) (Bulgarian Academy of Sciences)
  * Научни изследвания (National Science Fund of Bulgaria)

**France**

  * Institut Français de Recherche pour l'Exploitation de la Mer (IFREMER)(French Research Institute for Exploitation of the Sea)
  * EuroScience (EuroScience)
  * Core Technologies for Life Sciences (CTLS)

**Hungary**

  * Magyar Tudományos Akadémia (MTA) (Hungarian Academy of Sciences)

**Luxembourg**

  * Fonds National de la Recherche (FNR)

**Romania**

  * Consiliul Național al Cercetării Științifice (National Council for Scientific Research -CNCS)

**Serbia**

  * Српска академија наука и уметности (САНУ) (Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts)

**Turkey**

  * Türkiye Bilimsel ve Teknolojik Araştırma Kurumu (TÜBITAK) (Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey)

## Presidents

  * 1974–1979 Brian Flowers
  * 1980–1984 Hubert Curien
  * 1985–1990 Eugen Seibold
  * 1991–1993 Umberto Colombo
  * 1994–1999 Sir Dai Rees
  * 2000–2005 Reinders van Duinen
  * 2006–2011 Ian Halliday
  * 2012–2015 Pär Omling
  * 2016 – April 2020: Martin Hynes
  * April 2020 to date: Véronique Halloin

## Secretaries General and Chief Executives

  * 1974–1979 Friedrich Schneider
  * 1980–1986 John Goormaghtigh
  * 1986–1993 Michael Posner
  * 1991–1993 Umberto Colombo
  * 1993–1998 Peter Fricker
  * 1998–2003 Enric Banda
  * 2004–2007 Bertil Anderson
  * 2007 John Marks
  * 2008–2011 Marja Makarow
  * 2012–2015 Martin Hynes
  * 2016 – June 2019: Jean-Claude Worms 
  * July 2019 to date: Nicolas Walter