International diplomatic meeting

The **European Political Community** (**EPC**) is an intergovernmental forum
for political and strategic discussions about the future of Europe,
established in 2022 after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The group first met
in October 2022 in Prague, with participants from 44 European countries, as
well as the Presidents of the European Council and the European Commission. It
is distinct from both the European Union (which is a participant) and the
Council of Europe (represented by its Secretary General).

## History

The European Political Community was proposed by the French president Emmanuel
Macron at the Conference on the Future of Europe on 9 May 2022 after the
Russian invasion of Ukraine, in his role as the president of the Council of
the European Union (EU). The President of the European Council, Charles
Michel, also put forward a similar proposal for the establishment of a
"European geopolitical community". On 23–24 June 2022, formation of the
community was agreed to at a meeting of the European Council. On 29 September
2022, the United Kingdom announced that it would participate in the community.
The group convened for the first time on 6 October 2022 with leaders from 44
states in attendance. Russia and Belarus were deliberately excluded from
participation. In January 2023, it was confirmed that San Marino had joined
the community becoming its 45th participating state. The heads of government
of Andorra and Monaco were also invited to the second summit bringing the
number of participants up to 47.

## Aim

In his address to the European Parliament on 9 May 2022, French President
Emmanuel Macron proposed the European Political Community as "a new European
organization" that would allow countries "that subscribe to our shared core
values to find a new space for cooperation" on politics, security, energy,
infrastructure, investment, and migration.

The aim of the European Political Community is to provide a policy
coordination platform for European countries across the continent and to
foster political dialogue and cooperation to address issues of common
interest, so as to strengthen the security, stability and prosperity of the
European continent, in particular in regard to the European energy crisis.

The European Political Community aims at:

  * strengthening the links between EU member states and non-EU member states who share the same European values,
  * increasing cooperation between the member countries on a large scale of topics such as peace, security, energy, climate, migration and the current economic situation,
  * allowing candidate states to start taking part in some European projects, such as student and university exchanges.

Following a bilateral summit meeting between the leaders of the United Kingdom
and France on 10 March 2023, it was stated in the joint declaration that the
EPC should focus on energy, infrastructures, connectivity, cybersecurity,
countering disinformation and migration.

## Structure

The European Political Community is envisaged as an intergovernmental forum
for heads of states and governments similar to the G7 or G20 and upon
establishment did not have its own secretariat, budget or staff. Each summit
is primarily organised by the hosting country. Initially, the incoming host,
outgoing host and future host constituted a hosting trio to coordinate
organising summits and the setting agendas. This was expanded to a quartet
following the fourth summit in July 2024.

In January 2023, the Government of France began recruiting a small task force,
led by a project manager, to support the work of the EPC. The task force will
help coordinate the preparation and organisation of EPC Summits, support the
institutional development of the EPC, facilitate the insertion of the EPC in
the space European diplomacy (EU, Council of Europe) and contribute to
mobilising various other actors (such as development banks) in support of the
work of the EPC.

The invitation letter for the first summit was signed by European Council
President Charles Michel. For the second summit, invitation letters were
jointly signed by Charles Michel and Maia Sandu, the president of the hosting
country.

As the community has not launched an official website, the agendas, press
releases and multimedia resources for the summits are published on the website
of the European Council.

## Symbols

European Political Community wordmark

A wordmark consisting of the English language name of the community in blue
capital letters has been used since the first summit in October 2022. A logo
consisting of the abbreviation "EPC" in blue on a white background was
introduced in the lead up to the second summit.

As a condition for the United Kingdom's participation, Liz Truss during her
brief tenure as prime minister insisted that the European Political Community
should not use symbols associated with the European Union such as the European
Flag or the European Anthem.

## Summits

European leaders at the 1st EPC Summit in the Czech Republic European leaders
at the 2nd EPC Summit in Moldova

Two summits are held every year with the spring summit being hosted by a non-
EU member state and the autumn summit hosted by an EU member state. The autumn
summit is held in the country assuming the presidency of the Council of the
European Union during that semester.

The first summit took place in Prague on 6 October 2022. The event was covered
live by the Eurovision network.

Following the first summit, it was decided that Moldova will hold the
following meeting, and topics on which leaders agreed to work on include
protecting "key facilities" such as pipelines, undersea cables, and
satellites. It was also agreed that the next two summits would take place in
Spain and in the United Kingdom.

In May 2023, Switzerland expressed an interest in hosting an EPC summit in
spring 2025. Serbia has also expressed an interest in hosting a future summit.
During the closing press conference of the 4th summit, the British prime
minister, Keir Starmer, confirmed that the next summit will take place in
Hungary followed by summits in Albania and Denmark in 2025. In May 2025, it
was announced that the EPC spring summits would be hosted by Armenia in 2026,
Switzerland in 2027, and Azerbaijan in 2028, and that the autumn summits would
be hosted by the Republic of Ireland in 2026, Greece in 2027 and Latvia in
2028.

Overview of European Political Community summits  Number  | Date  | Logo  | Host country  | Host city  | Chair  | Countries attending   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1 | 6 October 2022 |  |  Czech Republic | Prague Castle, Prague | Petr Fiala | 44   
2 | 1 June 2023 |  |  Moldova | Mimi Castle, Bulboaca | Maia Sandu | 45   
3 | 5 October 2023 |  |  Spain | Alhambra, Granada | Pedro Sánchez | 45   
4 | 18 July 2024 |  |  United Kingdom | Blenheim Palace, Woodstock | Keir Starmer | 42   
5 | 7 November 2024 |  |  Hungary | Puskás Aréna, Budapest | Viktor Orbán | 42   
6 | 16 May 2025 |  |  Albania | Skanderbeg Square, Tirana | Edi Rama | 45   
7 | 2 October 2025 |  |  Denmark | Bella Center, Copenhagen |  | _TBA_  
8 | Spring 2026 |  |  Armenia | _TBA_ |  | _TBA_  
9 | Autumn 2026 |  |  Ireland | _TBA_ |  | _TBA_  
10 | Spring 2027 |  |  Switzerland | _TBA_ |  | _TBA_  
11 | Autumn 2027 |  |  Greece | _TBA_ |  | _TBA_  
12 | Spring 2028 |  |  Azerbaijan | _TBA_ |  | _TBA_  
13 | Autumn 2028 |  |  Latvia | _TBA_ |  | _TBA_  
  
## Participants

The countries and international organisations participating in the European
Political Community are as follows:

Countries participating

  * Albania
  * Andorra
  * Armenia
  * Austria
  * Azerbaijan
  * Belgium
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Bulgaria
  * Croatia
  * Cyprus
  * Czech Republic
  * Denmark
  * Estonia
  * Finland
  * France
  * Georgia
  * Germany
  * Greece
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * Ireland
  * Italy
  * Kosovo
  * Latvia
  * Liechtenstein
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * Malta
  * Moldova
  * Monaco
  * Montenegro
  * Netherlands
  * North Macedonia
  * Norway
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * Romania
  * San Marino
  * Serbia
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * Spain
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Turkey
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom

Organisations participating

  * Council of Europe
  * European Union  
**∟** European Council  
**∟** European Commission  
**∟** European Parliament

  * NATO
  * OSCE

European countries not participating

  * Vatican City

European countries not invited

  * Belarus
  * Russia

## Achievements

During the first summit, it was agreed that a European Union-led mission would
be deployed on the Armenian side of the border with Azerbaijan for a period of
two months of monitoring following the Armenia–Azerbaijan border crisis. This
mission ultimately led to the deployment of a longer term European Union
Mission in Armenia.

The first summit also led to a rapprochement between the United Kingdom and
European institutions. At the summit, the UK agreed to re-engage with the
North Seas Energy Cooperation (NSEC) and committed to joining the Permanent
Structured Cooperation (PESCO) and its Military Mobility programme.

The second summit hosted by Moldova coincided with an €87m contribution to
non-military logistical aid from the European Peace Facility, as well as the
establishment of a civilian mission in Chișinău.

## Reception

### Positive

German Chancellor, Olaf Scholz said that community could mediate "regular
exchanges at the political level" once or twice a year to discuss issues
affecting the continent. Prime Minister of Albania, Edi Rama, and Prime
Minister of the Netherlands, Mark Rutte, supported Macron's proposal in an
opinion piece published by Politico on 5 October 2022. They argued that Europe
needed a platform that did not overlap with existing regional organisations or
displace processes of European Union membership. In a command paper presented
to parliament in March 2023, the UK government stated that it supports the
aims of the EPC and sees it as a "notable and welcome new forum for continent-
wide cooperation". The Consultative Committee of the European Economic Area
welcomed the formation of the EPC and considers it to be a good arena for the
discussion of talks and discussions related to maintaining peace and stability
across the continent.

### Negative

According to the Associated Press, critics claimed the EPC was an attempt to
put the brakes on the potential enlargement of the European Union, speculating
that "it may become a talking shop, perhaps convening once or twice a year but
devoid of any real clout or content". Additionally, the first summit did not
include a formal declaration, nor was any offer of EU money or programs
proposed at the time. A spokesperson for the Council of Europe, in response to
the summit, stated, "In the field of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law, such a pan-European community already exists: it is the Council of
Europe." However, in July 2024, the Secretary General of the Council of
Europe, Marija Pejčinović Burić, did attend the 4th European Political
Community Summit in the United Kingdom. Russia criticised the EPC as "yet
another attempt by Brussels to build an anti-Russian coalition and prevail
upon other countries to join the campaign of sanctions against Russia."