| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article's **tone or style may not reflect theencyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia**. See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. _( August 2023)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "European Cooperation in Science and Technology" – news **·**
newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( August 2023)__(Learn how
and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
COST logo Grant proposal for DNAqua-Net, a COST-funded project

The **European Cooperation in Science and Technology** (**COST Association**)
is running an EU-funded programme which enables researchers and innovators to
set-up their own research networks in a wide range of scientific topics,
called COST Actions. While COST does not fund research activities as such, it
provides funding for scientific collaboration in the form of conferences,
meetings, training schools and scientific exchanges.

To date, COST has 41 Full Members, 1 Cooperating Member and 1 Partner Member.
Salvatore Grimaldi has been appointed as President of the COST Association in
July 2023 and will serve as President until 21 June 2025.

## History

In the 1960s, European countries felt the need to begin framing science
policies in order to bridge the gap in science and technology between Europe
and the USA. As a result, COST was founded in 1971 to connect the research
systems of individual European countries. The Ministerial Conference of 22 and
23 November 1971 is generally presented as the official entry into force of
COST and at which the first intergovernmental agreements were signed.

## Objectives

The COST governing board, the Committee of Senior Officials, approved the
mission that will drive COST throughout the end of Horizon Europe:

> “COST provides networking opportunities for researchers and innovators in
> order to strengthen Europe’s capacity to address scientific, technological
> and societal challenges.”

The organisation engages about 45,000 researchers and innovators. In all,
nearly half a million researchers have participated in COST over the years.

## Members

COST members as of 2022

The 41 COST Members are: Albania, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, The Netherlands,
The Republic of North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom,
Ukraine.

These countries govern COST via their representatives in the COST Committee of
Senior Officials (CSO) – the General Assembly of the COST Association.

Israel is a Cooperating Member and South Africa a Partner Member.

COST Near Neighbour Countries include Algeria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Egypt, the
Faroe Islands, Jordan, Kosovo, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Palestine, Russia,
Syria, and Tunisia. Once their participation is approved, researchers from
Near Neighbour Countries’ institutions are eligible to participate in the COST
Action on the same basis as the COST Members that have signed the Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) – with the exception of the right to vote in the
Management Committees or Working Groups of the Action.

International Partner Countries are non-COST Members who are not a Near-
Neighbour Country i.e. any country (worldwide) that is not included in the
previous lists. Once their participation is approved, researchers from
International Partner Countries can participate in the Management Committee
meetings as Observers, with no voting rights. Researchers connected to
institutions from International Partner Countries whose participation in a
COST Action has been approved are not eligible for reimbursement. Currently,
South Africa is a COST Partner Country.

## COST Actions

Since its inception, COST has operated according to one main instrument, the
COST Action.

A COST Action is a network open to researchers and innovators, collaborating
in all fields of science and technology of common interest to at least seven
COST Members/Cooperating Members. A huge variety of topics can be covered in
COST Actions, including established research areas like history, biology,
ecology, astronomy, criminal justice, but also newly emerging areas like
systems biology, renewable energy, sustainable architecture or behavioural
economics. Actions can adapt as science advances.

### Funding COST Actions

COST provides international funding for networking, enabling researchers to
set up their interdisciplinary research networks in Europe and beyond. Since
1971, COST has been receiving EU funding under the various research and
innovation framework programmes, such as Horizon 2020 and Horizon Europe.

COST provides funding for a period of four years which is used for organising
meetings, workshops, conferences, training schools, short-term scientific
missions as well as communication and dissemination activities. This way it
promotes global networking of nationally funded research.

The average COST Action support is EUR 140,000 per annum (dependent on budget
availability) for participation by typically 30 COST Member Countries. The sum
covers travel and meeting support.

## Governance

The COST Association, an international not-for-profit association under
Belgian law, is located in Brussels and carries out all activities related to
the Open Call. It integrates governance, management, and implementation
functions into a single structure.

The decision-making body of the COST Association is the general assembly of
Members, the Committee of Senior Officials (CSO). The CSO is chaired by the
President of the COST Association, Salvatore Grimaldi.

Another legal body is the Executive Board (EB) which prepares all decisions to
be taken by the general assembly and oversees the activities of the COST
Administration - the Executive Board is chaired by the COST Vice-President.
The COST Administration, based in Brussels, is currently headed by Dr Ronald
de Bruin.