The **European Telecommunications Satellite Organization** (**Eutelsat IGO**)
is an intergovernmental organisation consisting of 49 member states. It is
headquartered in Paris, France. The mission of Eutelsat IGO is to maintain the
rights to use radio frequencies and orbital locations which were assigned
collectively to the Member States by the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) and to oversee the operations of Eutelsat S.A. so as to ensure that the
company complies with the international Eutelsat Convention. Eutelsat IGO
plays an active role within the global telecommunications community and is a
key actor in the satellite business sector.

## History

The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization was created in 1977 on
an interim basis by 17 European countries, members of the European Conference
of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT). Its purpose was to
provide Europe with a satellite infrastructure for a wide range of
telecommunications services. The Convention establishing the European
Telecommunications Satellite Organization Eutelsat was opened for signature in
July 1982 and entered into force on 1 September 1985.

The main mission of Eutelsat was the design, development, construction,
operation and maintenance of the space segment for international public
telecommunications services in Europe. Eutelsat started by providing space
segment capacity for basic telecommunications and audio-visual services and
rapidly expanded its activities to the provision of services for analogue and
digital television, radio broadcasting, business telecommunications,
multimedia communications, messaging and positioning in Europe, the Middle
East, Africa, Asia and the American continent.

Following the liberalisation of the telecommunications sector in Europe, the
Eutelsat Member States decided in May 1999 to restructure the organisation. On
2 July 2001, all assets, liabilities and operational activities of the
intergovernmental organisation were transferred to Eutelsat S.A., a private
company established in Paris for this purpose. The original Eutelsat
Convention was amended with the agreement of the Member States and the
amendments entered into force on a definitive basis on 28 November 2002.

There is an agreement between Eutelsat IGO and Eutelsat S.A. for the use of
the name Eutelsat. When written in capital letters and followed by IGO it
refers to the international organisation while the companies of the Eutelsat
Group write Eutelsat in small letters in order to avoid potential confusion.

## Purposes

Since its restructuring in 2001, the structure, role, mission and activities
of Eutelsat IGO have evolved to reflect developments in the fields of
regulation, technology and markets for Fixed Satellite Services.

The primary purpose of Eutelsat IGO is to ensure that Eutelsat S.A. observes
the Basic Principles set forth in Article III a) of the Amended Convention
referring to public service/universal service obligations, pan European
coverage by the satellite system, non-discrimination and fair competition.
This supervisory task is executed primarily through the participation of the
Executive Secretary on the boards of directors of Eutelsat S.A. and its parent
company Eutelsat Communications (Paris Stock Exchange symbol: ETL) as an
observer _(censeur)_. This gives him the right to obtain information and voice
opinions without having the right to vote.

Eutelsat IGO also ensures continuity of the rights to use radio frequencies of
the ITU Radio regulations for the space segment which was transferred to
Eutelsat S.A.

Other key activities of Eutelsat IGO include ongoing monitoring of the
regulatory environment in European countries and continued collaboration with
other international organisations. Eutelsat IGO has the status of an
International Organization Operating Satellite Systems (IOOSS) in all three
sectors of the ITU and the Executive Secretary and Secretariat participate
regularly in International Telecommunication Union (ITU) activities and events
of relevance to the Organisation. Since June 2008, Eutelsat IGO has also held
permanent Observer status with the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS). The current Executive Secretary of Eutelsat IGO
is a Commissioner of the United Nations Broadband Commission for Digital
Development and the Organisation is actively advocating for the work
undertaken by the commission. The 2018 Report on the State of the Broadband
issued in September 2018 featured a contribution from the satellite industry.

Annual tripartite meetings are organised between the Heads of Eutelsat IGO,
International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO) and
International Mobile Services Organization (IMSO) with a view to discuss
matters of mutual interest and give further consideration for joint
initiatives. On 15 May 2019, Eutelsat IGO signed an Agreement on Cooperation
with Intersputnik giving the two organisations a mutual observer status. In
addition, Eutelsat IGO holds Observer status in Regional Commonwealth (RCC) in
the field of communications, an association of several former Soviet
republics, which are now independent states.

## Structure

Eutelsat IGO consists of the Assembly of Parties to the Eutelsat Convention
which meets ordinarily every two years and the Secretariat which is the
permanent body of the Organisation. The Secretariat is headed by the Executive
Secretary who is appointed for a four-year mandate by and is responsible to
the Eutelsat IGO Assembly of Parties. The Executive Secretary is the legal
representative of Eutelsat IGO and an observer (censeur) on the Board of
Directors of Eutelsat S.A.

Piotr Dmochowski-Lipski of Poland was reelected to the post of Executive
Secretary for a third term by the Assembly of Parties in March 2025.

He succeeded Christian Roisse of France, Executive Secretary from 2005 to
2017, and Birgitta NÃ¤slund of Sweden, Executive Secretary from 2001 to 2005.