Intergovernmental organization and observatory in Chile

Trailer of the European Southern Observatory

The **European Organisation for Astronomical Research in the Southern
Hemisphere** , commonly referred to as the **European Southern Observatory**
(**ESO**), is an intergovernmental research organisation made up of 16 member
states for ground-based astronomy. Created in 1962, ESO has provided
astronomers with state-of-the-art research facilities and access to the
southern sky. The organisation employs over 750 staff members and receives
annual member state contributions of approximately €162 million. Its
observatories are located in northern Chile.

ESO has built and operated some of the largest and most technologically
advanced telescopes. These include the 3.6 m New Technology Telescope, an
early pioneer in the use of active optics, and the Very Large Telescope (VLT),
which consists of four individual 8.2 m telescopes and four smaller auxiliary
telescopes which can all work together or separately. The Atacama Large
Millimeter Array observes the universe in the millimetre and submillimetre
wavelength ranges, and is the world's largest ground-based astronomy project
to date. It was completed in March 2013 in an international collaboration by
Europe (represented by ESO), North America, East Asia and Chile.

Currently under construction is the Extremely Large Telescope. It will use a
39.3-metre-diameter segmented mirror, and become the world's largest optical
reflecting telescope when operational towards the end of this decade. Its
light-gathering power will allow detailed studies of planets around other
stars, the first objects in the universe, supermassive black holes, and the
nature and distribution of the dark matter and dark energy which dominate the
universe.

ESO's observing facilities have made astronomical discoveries and produced
several astronomical catalogues. Its findings include the discovery of the
most distant gamma-ray burst and evidence for a black hole at the centre of
the Milky Way. In 2004, the VLT allowed astronomers to obtain the first
picture of an extrasolar planet (2M1207b) orbiting a brown dwarf 173 light-
years away. The High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher (HARPS)
instrument installed on the older ESO 3.6 m telescope led to the discovery of
extrasolar planets, including Gliese 581c—one of the smallest planets seen
outside the Solar System.

## History

The idea that European astronomers should establish a common large observatory
was broached by Walter Baade and Jan Oort at the Leiden Observatory in the
Netherlands in spring 1953. It was pursued by Oort, who gathered a group of
astronomers in Leiden to consider it on 21 June that year. Immediately
thereafter, the subject was further discussed at the Groningen conference in
the Netherlands. On 26 January 1954, an ESO declaration was signed by
astronomers from six European countries expressing the wish that a joint
European observatory be established in the southern hemisphere.

At the time, all reflector telescopes with an aperture of 2 metres or more
were located in the northern hemisphere. The decision to build the observatory
in the southern hemisphere resulted from the necessity of observing the
southern sky; some research subjects (such as the central parts of the Milky
Way and the Magellanic Clouds) were accessible only from the southern
hemisphere.

Director General | In office   
---|---  
Otto Heckmann | 1962–1969   
Adriaan Blaauw | 1970–1974   
Lodewijk Woltjer | 1975–1987   
Harry van der Laan  | 1988–1992   
Riccardo Giacconi | 1993–1999   
Catherine Cesarsky | 1999–2007   
Tim de Zeeuw | 2007–2017   
Xavier Barcons | 2017–present   
Source: _www.eso.org, about ESO_  
  
It was initially planned to set up telescopes in South Africa where several
European observatories were located (Boyden Observatory), but tests from 1955
to 1962 demonstrated that a site in the Andes was preferable: When Jürgen
Stock enthusiastically reported his observations from Chile, Otto Heckmann
decided to leave the South African project on hold. ESO—at that time about to
sign the contracts with South Africa—decided to establish their observatory in
Chile. The ESO Convention was signed 5 October 1962 by Belgium, Germany,
France, the Netherlands and Sweden. Otto Heckmann was nominated as the
organisation's first director general on 1 November 1962. On 15 November 1963
Chile was chosen as the site for ESO's observatory.

Directors general of ESO (from left to right): Lodewijk Woltjer, Harry van der
Laan, Catherine Cesarsky, Tim de Zeeuw and Xavier Barcons

A preliminary proposal for a convention of astronomy organisations in these
five countries was drafted in 1954. Although some amendments were made in the
initial document, the convention proceeded slowly until 1960 when it was
discussed during that year's committee meeting. The new draft was examined in
detail, and a council member of CERN (the European Organization for Nuclear
Research) highlighted the need for a convention between governments (in
addition to organisations). The convention and government involvement became
pressing due to rapidly rising costs of site-testing expeditions. The final
1962 version was largely adopted from the CERN convention, due to similarities
between the organisations and the dual membership of some members.

In 1966, the first ESO telescope at the La Silla site in Chile began
operating. Because CERN (like ESO) had sophisticated instrumentation, the
astronomy organisation frequently turned to the nuclear-research body for
advice and a collaborative agreement between ESO and CERN was signed in 1970.
Several months later, ESO's telescope division moved into a CERN building in
Geneva and ESO's Sky Atlas Laboratory was established on CERN property. ESO's
European departments moved into the new ESO headquarters in Garching (near
Munich), Germany, in 1980.

In 2015, Guillem Anglada-Escudé confirmed the existence of Proxima Centauri b
at the Southern Observatory.

### Member states

Country  | Accession   
---|---  
Belgium | 1962  
Germany | 1962  
France | 1962  
Netherlands | 1964  
Sweden | 1964  
Denmark | 1967  
Switzerland | 1982  
Italy | 1982  
Portugal | 1 January 2001  
United Kingdom | 8 July 2002  
Finland | 1 July 2004  
Spain | 1 July 2006  
Czech Republic | 1 January 2007  
Austria | 1 July 2008  
Poland | 28 October 2014  
Ireland | 28 September 2018  
  
## Chilean observation sites

Although ESO is headquartered in Germany, its telescopes and observatories are
in northern Chile, where the organisation operates advanced ground-based
astronomical facilities:

  * La Silla, which hosts the New Technology Telescope (NTT)
  * Paranal, where the Very Large Telescope (VLT) is located
  * Llano de Chajnantor, where ALMA, the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array, is located

These are among the best locations for astronomical observations in the
southern hemisphere. An ESO project is the Extremely Large Telescope (ELT), a
40-metre-class telescope based on a five-mirror design and the formerly
planned Overwhelmingly Large Telescope. The ELT will be the largest visible
and near-infrared telescope in the world. ESO began its design in early 2006,
and aimed to begin construction in 2012. Construction work at the ELT site
started in June 2014. As decided by the ESO council on 26 April 2010, a fourth
site (Cerro Armazones) is to be home to ELT.

Each year about 2,000 requests are made for the use of ESO telescopes, for
four to six times more nights than are available. Observations made with these
instruments appear in a number of peer-reviewed publications annually; in
2017, more than 1,000 reviewed papers based on ESO data were published.

ESO telescopes generate large amounts of data at a high rate, which are stored
in a permanent archive facility at ESO headquarters. The archive contains more
than 1.5 million images (or spectra) with a total volume of about 65 terabytes
(65,000,000,000,000 bytes) of data.

ESO telescopes  Name | Short | Size | Type | Location | Year   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
ESO 3.6 m telescope – _hostingHARPS_ | ESO 3.6m | 3.57 m | optical and infrared | La Silla | 1977   
MPG/ESO 2.2 m telescope | MPG | 2.20 m | optical and infrared | La Silla | 1984   
New Technology Telescope | NTT | 3.58 m | optical and infrared | La Silla | 1989   
Very Large Telescope | VLT | 4 × 8.2 m  
4 × 1.8 m | optical to mid-infrared, array | Paranal | 1998   
Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy | VISTA | 4.1 m | near-infrared, survey | Paranal | 2009   
VLT Survey Telescope | VST | 2.6 m | optical, survey | Paranal | 2011   
Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array[A] | ALMA | 50 × 12 m  
12 × 7 m  
4 × 12 m | millimetre-/submillimetre-wavelength  
interferometer array | Chajnantor | 2011   
Extremely Large Telescope | ELT | 39.3 m | optical to mid-infrared | Cerro Armazones | _End of this decade_  
**A** ALMA is a partnership among Europe, the United States, Canada, East Asia
and the Republic of Chile.  
**·** Additional ESO research facilities are located in Santiago, Chile and
include a library, computing resources and programmes for visiting scientists.  
**·** ESO also maintains close ties with other observatories and universities
throughout the country.  
**·** Source: _ESO – Telescopes and Instrumentation_  
  
### La Silla

La Silla cluster of telescopes

La Silla, located in the southern Atacama Desert 600 kilometres (370 mi) north
of Santiago de Chile at an altitude of 2,400 metres (7,900 ft), is the home of
ESO's original observation site. Like other observatories in the area, La
Silla is far from sources of light pollution and has one of the darkest night
skies on Earth. In La Silla, ESO operates three telescopes: a 3.6-metre
telescope, the New Technology Telescope (NTT) and the 2.2-metre Max-Planck-ESO
Telescope.

The observatory hosts visitor instruments, attached to a telescope for the
duration of an observational run and then removed. La Silla also hosts
national telescopes, such as the 1.2-metre Swiss and the 1.5-metre Danish
telescopes.

About 300 reviewed publications annually are attributable to the work of the
observatory. Discoveries made with La Silla telescopes include the HARPS-
spectrograph detection of the planets orbiting within the Gliese 581 planetary
system, which contains the first known rocky planet in a habitable zone
outside the solar system. Several telescopes at La Silla played a role in
linking gamma-ray bursts, the most energetic explosions in the universe since
the Big Bang, with the explosions of massive stars. The ESO La Silla
Observatory also played a role in the study of supernova SN 1987A.

#### ESO 3.6-metre telescope

The ESO 3.6 m Telescope

The ESO 3.6-metre telescope began operations in 1977. It has been upgraded,
including the installation of a new secondary mirror. The conventionally
designed horseshoe-mount telescope was primarily used for infrared
spectroscopy; it now hosts the HARPS spectrograph, used in search of extra-
solar planets and for asteroseismology. The telescope was designed for very
high long-term radial velocity accuracy (on the order of 1 m/s).

#### New Technology Telescope

The New Technology Telescope

The New Technology Telescope (NTT) is an altazimuth, 3.58-metre
Ritchey–Chrétien telescope, inaugurated in 1989 and the first in the world
with a computer-controlled main mirror. The flexible mirror's shape is
adjusted during observation to preserve optimal image quality. The secondary
mirror position is also adjustable in three directions. This technology
(developed by ESO and known as active optics) is now applied to all major
telescopes, including the VLT and the future ELT.

The design of the octagonal enclosure housing the NTT is innovative. The
telescope dome is relatively small and ventilated by a system of flaps
directing airflow smoothly across the mirror, reducing turbulence and
resulting in sharper images.

#### MPG/ESO 2.2-metre telescope

The 2.2-metre telescope has been in operation at La Silla since early 1984,
and is on indefinite loan to ESO from the Max Planck Society (_Max-Planck-
Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Wissenschaften_ , or MPG, in German). Telescope
time is shared between MPG and ESO observing programmes, while operation and
maintenance of the telescope are ESO's responsibility.

Its instrumentation includes a 67-million-pixel wide-field imager (WFI) with a
field of view as large as the full moon, which has taken many images of
celestial objects. Other instruments used are GROND (Gamma-Ray Burst Optical
Near-Infrared Detector), which seeks the afterglow of gamma-ray bursts—the
most powerful explosions in the universe, and the high-resolution spectrograph
FEROS (Fiber-fed Extended Range Optical Spectrograph), used to make detailed
studies of stars.

#### Other telescopes

La Silla also hosts several national and project telescopes not operated by
ESO. Among them are the Swiss Euler Telescope, the Danish National Telescope
and the REM, TRAPPIST and TAROT telescopes.

  * The Euler Telescope is a 1.2-metre telescope built and operated by the Geneva Observatory in Switzerland. It is used to conduct high-precision radial velocity measurements primarily used in the search for large extrasolar planets in the southern celestial hemisphere. Its first discovery was a planet orbiting Gliese 86. Other observing programmes focus on variable stars, asteroseismology, gamma-ray bursts, monitoring active galactic nuclei (AGN) and gravitational lenses.
  * The 1.54-metre _Danish National Telescope_ was built by Grubb-Parsons and has been in use at La Silla since 1979. The telescope has an off-axis mount, and the optics are a Ritchey-Chrétien design. Because of the telescope's mount and limited space inside the dome, it has significant pointing restrictions.

Dome of the Danish 1.54-metre telescope that has been in operation at La Silla
Observatory since 1979

  * The Rapid Eye Mount telescope is a small rapid-reaction automatic telescope with a primary 60-centimetre (24 in) mirror. The telescope, in an altazimuth mount, began operation in October 2002. The primary purpose of the telescope is to follow the afterglow of the GRBs detected by the Swift Gamma-Ray Burst Mission satellite.
  * The Belgian TRAPPIST is a joint venture between the University of Liège and Geneva Observatory. The 0.60-metre telescope is specialised in comets, exoplanets, and was one of the few telescopes that observed a stellar occultation of the dwarf planet Eris, revealing that it may be smaller than Pluto.
  * The _Quick-action telescope for transient objects_ , TAROT, is a very fast-moving optical robotic telescope able to observe a gamma-ray burst from its beginning. Satellites detecting GRBs send signals to TAROT, which can provide a sub-arc second position to the astronomical community. Data from the TAROT telescope is also useful in studying the evolution of GRBs, the physics of a fireball and its surrounding material. It is operated from the Haute-Provence Observatory in France.

### Paranal

The Paranal Observatory is located atop Cerro Paranal in the Atacama Desert in
northern Chile. Cerro Paranal is a 2,635-metre-high (8,645 ft) mountain about
120 kilometres (75 mi) south of Antofagasta and 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) from
the Pacific coast.

The observatory has seven major telescopes operating in visible and infrared
light: the four 8.2-metre (27 ft) telescopes of the Very Large Telescope, the
2.6-metre (8 ft 6 in) VLT Survey Telescope (VST) and the 4.1-metre (13 ft)
Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy. In addition, there are
four 1.8-metre (5 ft 11 in) auxiliary telescopes forming an array used for
interferometric observations. In March 2008, Paranal was the location for
several scenes of the 22nd James Bond film, _Quantum of Solace_.

#### Very Large Telescope

The main facility at Paranal is the VLT, which consists of four nearly
identical 8.2-metre (27 ft) unit telescopes (UTs), each hosting two or three
instruments. These large telescopes can also work together in groups of two or
three as a giant interferometer. The ESO Very Large Telescope Interferometer
(VLTI) allows astronomers to see details up to 25 times finer than those seen
with the individual telescopes. The light beams are combined in the VLTI with
a complex system of mirrors in tunnels, where the light paths must diverge
less than 1/1000 mm over 100 metres. The VLTI can achieve an angular
resolution of milliarcseconds, equivalent to the ability to see the headlights
of a car on the Moon.

The first of the UTs had its first light in May 1998, and was offered to the
astronomical community on 1 April 1999. The other telescopes followed suit in
1999 and 2000, making the VLT fully operational. Four 1.8-metre auxiliary
telescopes (ATs), installed between 2004 and 2007, have been added to the VLTI
for accessibility when the UTs are used for other projects.

Data from the VLT have led to the publication of an average of more than one
peer-reviewed scientific paper per day; in 2017, over 600 reviewed scientific
papers were published based on VLT data. The VLT's scientific discoveries
include imaging an extrasolar planet, tracking individual stars moving around
the supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way and observing the
afterglow of the furthest known gamma-ray burst.

At the Paranal inauguration in March 1999, names of celestial objects in the
Mapuche language were chosen to replace the technical designations of the four
VLT Unit Telescopes (UT1–UT4). An essay contest was prior arranged for
schoolchildren in the region concerning the meaning of these names which
attracted many entries dealing with the cultural heritage of ESO's host
country. A 17-year-old adolescent from Chuquicamata, near Calama, submitted
the winning essay and was awarded an amateur telescope during the
inauguration. The four unit telescopes, UT1, UT2, UT3 and UT4, are since known
as _Antu_ (sun), _Kueyen_ (moon), _Melipal_ (Southern Cross), and _Yepun_
(Evening Star), with the latter having been originally mistranslated as
"Sirius", instead of "Venus".

#### Survey telescopes

Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy (VISTA) is housed on the
peak adjacent to the one hosting the VLT, sharing observational conditions.
VISTA's main mirror is 4.1 metres (13 ft) across, a highly curved mirror for
its size and quality. Its deviations from a perfect surface are less than a
few thousandths the thickness of a human hair, and its construction and
polishing presented a challenge.

VISTA was conceived and developed by a consortium of 18 universities in the
United Kingdom led by Queen Mary, University of London, and it became an in-
kind contribution to ESO as part of the UK's ratification agreement. The
telescope's design and construction were managed by the Science and Technology
Facilities Council's UK Astronomy Technology Centre (STFC, UK ATC).
Provisional acceptance of VISTA was formally granted by ESO at the December
2009 ceremony at ESO headquarters in Garching, which was attended by
representatives of Queen Mary, University of London and STFC. Since then the
telescope has been operated by ESO, capturing quality images since it began
operation.

The VLT Survey Telescope (VST) is a state-of-the-art, 2.6-metre (8 ft 6 in)
telescope equipped with OmegaCAM, a 268-megapixel CCD camera with a field of
view four times the area of the full moon. It complements VISTA by surveying
the sky in visible light. The VST (which became operational in 2011) is the
result of a joint venture between ESO and the Astronomical Observatory of
Capodimonte (Naples), a research centre at the Italian National Institute for
Astrophysics INAF.

The scientific goals of both surveys range from the nature of dark energy to
assessing near-Earth objects. Teams of European astronomers will conduct the
surveys; some will cover most of the southern sky, while others will focus on
smaller areas. VISTA and the VST are expected to produce large amounts of
data; a single picture taken by VISTA has 67 megapixels, and images from
OmegaCam (on the VST) will have 268 megapixels. The two survey telescopes
collect more data every night than all the other instruments on the VLT
combined. The VST and VISTA produce more than 100 terabytes of data per year.

### Llano de Chajnantor

The Llano de Chajnantor is a 5,100-metre-high (16,700 ft) plateau in the
Atacama Desert, about 50 kilometres (31 mi) east of San Pedro de Atacama. The
site is 750 metres (2,460 ft) higher than the Mauna Kea Observatory and 2,400
metres (7,900 ft) higher than the Very Large Telescope on Cerro Paranal. It is
dry and inhospitable to humans, but a good site for submillimetre astronomy;
because water vapour molecules in Earth's atmosphere absorb and attenuate
submillimetre radiation, a dry site is required for this type of radio
astronomy. The telescopes are:

  * Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT; not operated by ESO)
  * Atacama Pathfinder Experiment (Operated on behalf of the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy (MPIfR))
  * Atacama Large Millimeter Array
  * Q/U Imaging Experiment (QUIET; not operated by ESO)
  * POLARBEAR (on the Huan Tran Telescope; not operated by ESO)

ALMA is a telescope designed for millimetre and submillimetre astronomy. This
type of astronomy is a relatively unexplored frontier, revealing a universe
which cannot be seen in more-familiar visible or infrared light and ideal for
studying the "cold universe"; light at these wavelengths shines from vast cold
clouds in interstellar space at temperatures only a few tens of degrees above
absolute zero. Astronomers use this light to study the chemical and physical
conditions in these molecular clouds, the dense regions of gas and cosmic dust
where new stars are being born. Seen in visible light, these regions of the
universe are often dark and obscure due to dust; however, they shine brightly
in the millimetre and submillimetre portions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
This wavelength range is also ideal for studying some of the earliest (and
most distant) galaxies in the universe, whose light has been redshifted into
longer wavelengths from the expansion of the universe.

#### Atacama Pathfinder Experiment

ESO hosts the Atacama Pathfinder Experiment, APEX, and operates it on behalf
of the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy (MPIfR). APEX is a 12-metre
(39 ft) diameter telescope, operating at millimetre and submillimetre
wavelengths—between infrared light and radio waves.

#### Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array

ALMA is an astronomical interferometer initially composed of 66 high-precision
antennas and operating at wavelengths of 0.3 to 3.6 mm. Its main array will
have 50 12-metre (39 ft) antennas acting as a single interferometer. An
additional compact array of four 12-metre and twelve 7-metre (23 ft) antennas,
known as the Morita array is also available. The antennas can be arranged
across the desert plateau over distances from 150 metres to 16 kilometres (9.9
mi), which will give ALMA a variable "zoom". The array will be able to probe
the universe at millimetre and submillimeter wavelengths with unprecedented
sensitivity and resolution, with vision up to ten times sharper than the
Hubble Space Telescope. These images will complement those made with the VLT
Interferometer. ALMA is a collaboration between East Asia (Japan and Taiwan),
Europe (ESO), North America (US and Canada) and Chile.

The scientific goals of ALMA include studying the origin and formation of
stars, galaxies, and planets with observations of molecular gas and dust,
studying distant galaxies towards the edge of the observable universe and
studying relic radiation from the Big Bang. A call for ALMA science proposals
was issued on 31 March 2011, and early observations began on 3 October.

## Outreach

Artist's impression of ESO Supernova Planetarium & Visitor Centre

Outreach activities are carried out by the ESO education and Public Outreach
Department (ePOD).

ePOD also manages the ESO Supernova Planetarium & Visitor Centre, an astronomy
centre located at the site of the ESO Headquarters in Garching bei München,
which was inaugurated 26 April 2018.

## Video gallery

  * ESO's 50th-anniversary event (_Munich Residenz in Germany, 11 October 2012_)

  * ESO's first 50 years of exploring the southern sky

  * José Manuel Barroso visits the ESO in January 2013.

  * Tim de Zeeuw talks on ESO and its 50th anniversary.

  * The temporary office buildings at the ESO headquarters in Garching being dismantled

  * Timelapses of ESO's VLT, ALMA and La Silla site