Intergovernmental organization to combat money laundering and terrorism
financing

The **Financial Action Task Force** (**FATF**), also known by its French name,
**Groupe d'action financière** (**GAFI**), is an intergovernmental
organisation founded in 1989 on the initiative of the G7 to develop policies
to combat money laundering and to maintain certain interest. In 2001, its
mandate was expanded to include terrorism financing. The FATF Secretariat is
administratively hosted at the OECD in Paris, but the two organisations are
separate.

The objectives of FATF are to set standards and promote effective
implementation of legal, regulatory and operational measures for combating
money laundering, terrorist financing and other related threats to the
integrity of the international financial system. FATF is a "policy-making
body" that works to generate the necessary political will to bring about
national legislative and regulatory reforms in these areas. FATF monitors
progress in implementing its Recommendations through "peer reviews" ("mutual
evaluations") of member countries.

Since 2000, FATF has maintained the FATF blacklist (formally called the "Call
for action") and the FATF greylist (formally called the "Other monitored
jurisdictions"). The blacklist has led financial institutions to shift
resources and services away from the listed. This in turn has motivated
domestic economic and political actors in the listed countries to pressure
their governments to introduce regulations compliant with the FATF.

## History

FATF was formed at the 1989 G7 Summit in Paris to combat the growing problem
of money laundering. The task force was charged with studying money laundering
trends, monitoring legislative, financial and law enforcement activities taken
at the national and international level, reporting on compliance, and issuing
recommendations and standards to combat money laundering. At the time of its
formation, FATF had 16 members, which by 2023 had grown to 40. In its first
year, FATF issued a report containing forty recommendations to more
effectively fight money laundering. These standards were revised in 2003 to
reflect evolving patterns and techniques in money laundering.

The mandate of the organisation was expanded in 2001 to include terrorist
financing following the September 11 terror attacks.

## FATF Recommendations

### Creation and ongoing maintenance

Together, the Forty Recommendations on Money Laundering and eight (now nine)
Special Recommendations on Terrorism Financing set the international standard
for anti-money laundering measures and combating the financing of terrorism
and terrorist acts. They set out the principles for action and allow countries
a measure of flexibility in implementing these principles according to their
particular circumstances and constitutional frameworks. Both sets of FATF
Recommendations are intended to be implemented at the national level through
legislation and other legally binding measures. There are multiple groups to
organise the Recommendations; AML/CFT Policies and Coordination, Money
Laundering and Confiscation, Terrorist Financing and Financial Proliferation,
Preventive Measures, Transparency and Beneficial Ownership of Legal Persons
and Arrangements, Powers and Responsibilities of Competent Authorities and
other Institutional Measures, and International Cooperation.

In February 2012, the FATF codified its recommendations and Interpretive Notes
into one document that maintains SR VIII (renamed Recommendation 8), and also
includes new rules on weapons of mass destruction, corruption and wire
transfers (Recommendation 16, commonly known as the “travel rule”).

In October 2018, the FATF updated Recommendation No. 15, expanding its reach
to include operations related to virtual assets. It urged its member countries
to ensure that providers of virtual asset services are regulated for AML/CFT
objectives and licensed or registered. Additionally, they should be under
robust systems for supervision assurance and compliant with the FATF
recommendations.

In June 2019, the FATF released its first guidance on the risk-based approach
for virtual assets and virtual asset service providers. This guidance offers
recommendations on how member jurisdictions should regulate cryptocurrency
businesses, placing anti-money laundering and countering the financing of
terrorism (AML/CFT) obligations on VAs and VASPs. It also extended
Recommendation 16 to VASPs.

This guidance was updated on March 19 and October 2021.

#### Forty recommendations on money laundering

The FATF's Forty Recommendations on Money Laundering of 1990 are the primary
policies issued by FATF and the Nine Special Recommendations (SR) on Terrorism
Financing (TF). The Recommendations are seen globally as the world standard in
anti-money laundering as well many countries have committed to putting the
Forty Recommendations in place. The Recommendations cover the criminal justice
system and law enforcement, international cooperation, and the financial
system and its regulation. The FATF completely revised the Forty
Recommendations in 1996 and 2003. By 1996 the Recommendations had to be
updated to include more than just drug-money laundering, as well as to keep up
with changing techniques. The 2003 Forty Recommendations require states, among
other things, to:

  * Implement relevant international conventions
  * Criminalise money laundering and enable authorities to confiscate the proceeds of money laundering
  * Implement customer due diligence (e.g., identity verification), record keeping and suspicious transaction reporting requirements for financial institutions and designated non-financial businesses and professions
  * Establish a financial intelligence unit to receive and disseminate suspicious transaction reports, and
  * Cooperate internationally in investigating and prosecuting money laundering

#### Nine Special Recommendations on Terrorism Financing

The FATF has issued Special Recommendations on Terrorist Financing. In October
2001 the FATF issued the original eight Special Recommendations on Terrorism
Financing, following the September 11 attacks in the United States. Among the
measures, Special Recommendation VIII (SR VIII) specifically targeted non-
profit organisations. This was followed by the International Best Practices
Combating the Abuse of Non-Profit Organisations in 2002, released one month
before the U.S. Department of Treasury's Anti-Terrorist Financing Guidelines,
and the Interpretive Note for SR VIII in 2006. A ninth Special Recommendation
was added later. In 2003 the Recommendations, as well as the 9 Special
Recommendations were adjusted for the second time.

### Compliance mechanism

In February 2004 (Updated as of February 2009) the FATF published a reference
document Methodology for Assessing Compliance with the FATF 40 Recommendations
and the FATF 9 Special Recommendations. The 2009 Handbook for Countries and
Assessors outlines criteria for evaluating whether FATF standards are achieved
in participating countries. FATF evaluates a country's performance based on
its assessment methodology that covers: 1. technical compliance, which is
about the legal and institutional framework and the powers and procedures of
the competent authorities, and 2. effectiveness assessment, which is about the
extent to which the legal and institutional framework is producing the
expected results.

There are many differences between countries dealing with their legal and
financial system, which is taken into consideration by the FATF. There is a
set minimum of actions that meet a standard, that all countries can use
regarding their own situation. This standard covers all actions that a nation
should take within its regulatory systems and its criminal justice systems as
well as the preventive measures that should be taken by specified businesses,
professions, and institutions.

For non-profit organisations (NPOs) there has been a command for more
financial transparency, to make sure that they do not become easier for
terrorist organisations to launder money through the organisations. This
hypothesis was thought of by intergovernmental organisations. These
intergovernmental organisations include the World Bank, the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development and the International Monetary Fund.
NPOs are put under surveillance, especially when they are associated with
"suspect communities" or if they are based or working in zones of conflict.

FATF data is a key indicator of the quality of AML/CFT systems in the Basel
AML Index, a money laundering and terrorist financing risk assessment tool
developed by the Basel Institute on Governance.

There are still compliance issues in areas that might afford exploitative
opportunities for transnational crime and terrorist networks. This can have
detrimental effects on a country's national security through increasing risks
of money laundering and financing of terrorism as well as wastage due to the
implementation of inappropriate regulatory measures. The objective is to
increase mitigation strategies that would enable scarce resources in fighting
money laundering and terrorism financing threats.

The FATF follows strict criteria to identify potential threats.

### Black or greylisting of non-compliant nations

In addition to FATF's "Forty plus Nine" Recommendations, in 2000 FATF issued a
list of "Non-Cooperative Countries or Territories" (NCCTs), commonly called
the FATF Blacklist. This was a list of 15 jurisdictions that, for one reason
or another, FATF members believed were uncooperative with other jurisdictions
in international efforts against money laundering (and, later, terrorism
financing). Typically, this lack of cooperation manifested itself as an
unwillingness or inability (frequently, a legal inability) to provide foreign
law enforcement officials with information relating to bank account and
brokerage records, and customer identification and beneficial owner
information relating to such bank and brokerage accounts, shell corporations,
and other financial vehicles commonly used in money laundering. All remaining
Non-Cooperative Countries and Territories in the NCCT initiative were delisted
in October 2006, however, FATF continues to maintain a "blacklist" of "High
Risk" jurisdictions and a "greylist" of "Jurisdictions Under Increased
Monitoring", and issues updates as countries on High-risk and non-cooperative
jurisdictions list have made significant improvements in standards and
cooperation. The FATF also issues updates to identify additional jurisdictions
that pose Money Laundering/Terrorist Financing risks.

The FATF surveyed 26 jurisdictions to check their ability and willingness to
cooperate with other countries in the international fight against money
laundering. The review contained the summaries of these surveys. Fifteen
jurisdictions were branded "non-cooperative countries or territories", because
of the high number of harmful practices identified in these jurisdictions.

As of February 2025[update], countries in the blacklist are Iran, Myanmar and
North Korea. Countries and territories in the grey list are Algeria, Angola,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Haiti, Kenya, Laos, Lebanon, Mali, Monaco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nigeria, South Africa, South Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Venezuela,
Vietnam, and Yemen.

## Members and affiliate organisations

As of October 2023[update], FATF has 38 countries as full members. However,
through several associated regional bodies, the FATF network comprised 187
countries in total, as of 2012[update]. The FATF also works in close
cooperation with several international and regional organisations. Countries
are subjected to evaluation by FATF to see that they are upholding laws and
regulations enforced by FATF.

### Full members

As of 2023[update] The FATF currently comprises 38 member jurisdictions and
two regional organisations, representing most major financial centres in all
parts of the globe:

Financial Action Task Force Membership Map

Regional organisations

  1. European Commission
  2. Gulf Cooperation Council

Countries and other jurisdictions

  1. Argentina
  2. Australia
  3. Austria
  4. Belgium
  5. Brazil
  6. Canada
  7. China
  8. Denmark
  9. Finland
  10. France
  11. Germany
  12. Greece
  13. Hong Kong, China (originally joined under the designation  British Hong Kong in 1991)
  14. Iceland
  15. India
  16. Indonesia
  17. Ireland
  18. Israel
  19. Italy
  20. Japan
  21. Luxembourg
  22. Malaysia
  23. Mexico
  24. Netherlands (comprises  the Netherlands,  Aruba,  Curacao and  Sint Maarten)
  25. New Zealand
  26. Norway
  27. Portugal
  28. Russia (suspended)
  29. Saudi Arabia
  30. Singapore
  31. South Africa
  32. South Korea
  33. Spain
  34. Sweden
  35. Switzerland
  36. Turkey
  37. United Kingdom
  38. United States

### FATF-style regional bodies

As of 2023[update], there are 9 "FATF-style regional bodies" that are
associate members of the FATF:

  * Asia/Pacific Group on Money Laundering (APG)
  * Caribbean Financial Action Task Force (CFATF)
  * Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group (ESAAMLG)
  * Eurasian Group (EAG)
  * Council of Europe Select Committee of Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money Laundering Measures (Moneyval, formerly PC-R-EV)
  * Financial Action Task Force of Latin America (GAFILAT), formerly The Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering in South America (GAFISUD)
  * Inter-Governmental Action Group against Money Laundering in West Africa (GIABA)
  * Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task Force (MENAFATF)
  * Task Force on Money Laundering in Central Africa (GABAC)

Countries that are not full FATF members but are members of the FATF-style
regional bodies are entitled to attend FATF meetings as individual member
delegates of the regional bodies and to intervene on policy and operational
issues.

### Observer members

There are 28 international organisations with the "FATF Observer" status.
These include the International Monetary Fund, the UN with six expert groups
and the World Bank and the OECD. All the observer organisations have anti-
money laundering as one of their tasks. The observer organisations include:

  * African Development Bank
  * Anti-Money Laundering Liaison Committee of the Franc Zone (CLAB) [French]
  * Asian Development Bank
  * Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS)
  * Camden Asset Recovery Inter-agency Network (CARIN)
  * Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units
  * European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
  * Group of International Finance Centre Supervisors
  * United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
  * United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (UNCTED)

## Effects of FATF

The FATF has been characterized as effective in shifting laws and regulations
to combat illicit financial flows. FATF incentivizes stricter regulations
through its public noncomplier list, which leads financial institutions to
shift resources and services away from the countries on the blacklist. This in
turn motivates domestic economic and political actors in the listed countries
to pressure their governments to introduce regulations that are compliant with
the FATF.

As of 2012, the effect of the FATF Blacklist has been significant, and
arguably has proven more important in international efforts against money
laundering than the FATF Recommendations. While, under international law, the
FATF Blacklist carries with it no formal sanction, in reality, jurisdictions
placed on the FATF Blacklist often face intense financial pressure.

FATF has made it difficult for non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in many
countries to access funds to aid in relief situations and conduct other
important civil society functions due to the misinterpretation of FATF
criteria by governments. The unintended consequences of the misinterpretation
of FATF Recommendation 8 on non-profit organisations have impacted NGOs,
particularly those in the Global South extending well beyond civil society
located in Middle Eastern and terror-ridden countries. In 2023, FATF released
new guidance on interpretation of Recommendation 8 relating to non-profits, to
better prevent misuse of its standards to restrict legitimate civil society
operations.

In a 2020 paper, Ronald Pol stated that while the FATF has been very
successful in getting its policies adopted worldwide, the actual impact of
those policies has been rather small: according to his estimates, less than 1%
of illegal profits are seized, with the costs of implementing the policies
being at least one hundred times larger. Pol contends that industry and
policymakers consistently ignore this, instead evaluating the policies based
on largely irrelevant success metrics.