Specialised agency of the United Nations

The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Food Price Index 1961–2021. Years
2014–2016 is 100.

Real

Nominal

Food Price Index

Oils

Cereals

Dairy

Meat

sugar

The **Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations** (**FAO**) is a
specialized agency of the United Nations that leads international efforts to
defeat hunger and improve nutrition and food security. Its Latin motto, _fiat
panis_ , translates to "let there be bread". It was founded on 16 October
1945.

The FAO comprises 195 members, including 194 countries and the European Union
(EU). Its headquarters is in Rome, Italy, and it maintains regional and field
offices worldwide, operating in over 130 countries. It helps governments and
development agencies coordinate their activities to improve and develop
agriculture, forestry, fisheries, and land and water resources. It also
conducts research, provides technical assistance to projects, operates
educational and training programs, and collects agricultural output,
production, and development data.

The FAO is governed by a biennial conference representing each member country
and the EU, which elects a 49-member executive council. The director-general,
as of 2019 Qu Dongyu of China, serves as the chief administrative officer.
Various committees govern matters such as finance, programs, agriculture, and
fisheries.

100 lire (FAO's celebration.)  
---  
**Obverse** : Young woman with braid facing left. Surrounded by Repubblica Italiana [Italian Republic].  | **Reverse** : Cow nursing calf, face value & date. FAO at bottom and _Nutrire il Mondo_ [_Feed the world_] at top.   
Coin minted by Italy in the 1970s to celebrate and promote the _Food and
Agriculture Organization_.  
  
## History

The idea of an international organization for food and agriculture emerged in
the late 19th and early 20th century, advanced primarily by Polish-born
American agriculturalist and activist David Lubin. In May–June 1905, an
international conference was held in Rome, Italy, which led to the creation of
the International Institute of Agriculture (IIA) by the King of Italy, Victor
Emmanuel III.

The IIA was the first intergovernmental organization to deal with the problems
and challenges of agriculture on a global scale. It worked primarily to
collect, compile, and publish data on agriculture, ranging from output
statistics to a catalog of crop diseases. Among its achievements was the
publication of the first agricultural census in 1930.

World War II effectively ended the IIA. During the war, in 1943, United States
President Franklin D. Roosevelt called a League of Nations Conference on Food
and Agriculture, which brought representatives from forty-four governments to
The Omni Homestead Resort in Hot Springs, Virginia, from 18 May to 3 June to
attend the Hot Springs Conference. The main impetus for the conference was the
British-born Australian economist Frank L. McDougall, who since 1935 had
advocated for an international forum to address hunger and malnutrition.

The Conference ended with a commitment to establish a permanent organization
for food and agriculture, which was achieved on 16 October 1945 in Quebec
City, Canada, following the Constitution of the Food and Agriculture
Organization. The first session of the FAO Conference began the same day in
the Château Frontenac in Quebec City and ended on 1 November 1945. This was
led by Sir John Boyd Orr where his work on ending world hunger and creation of
FAO resulted in him winning the Nobel Peace Prize in 1949.

After the war, the IIA was officially dissolved by resolution of its Permanent
Committee on 27 February 1948. Its functions, facilities, and mandate were
then transferred to the newly established FAO, which maintained its
headquarters in Rome.

The FAO's initial functions supported agricultural and nutrition research and
provided technical assistance to member countries to boost production in
agriculture, fishery, and forestry. Beginning in the 1960s, it focused on
efforts to develop high-yield strains of grain, eliminate protein deficiency,
promote rural employment, and increase agricultural exports. The FAO
recognized the decrease of these resources as an urgent problem in 1961 and
created a joint collaboration with the International Biological Program (IBP)
in 1967. To that end, it joined the UN General Assembly in creating the UN
World Food Programme, the largest humanitarian organization addressing hunger
and promoting food security.

FAO Commemorative 1998 30th Anniv MM Programme Bronze Obverse

The FAO launched what would become the FAO Money and Medals Programme (MMP) in
1968. FAO issued collector art medals in various series to bring attention to
FAO's goals and missions. This program was responsible for over a hundred
medal designs issued to the collecting public. A thirtieth anniversary medal
of the MMP was issued in 1998.

In 1974, in response to famine in Africa, the FAO convened the first World
Food Summit to address widespread hunger, malnutrition, and food insecurity.
The meeting resulted in a proclamation that "every man, woman, and child has
the inalienable right to be free from hunger and malnutrition to develop their
physical and mental faculties" and a global commitment to eradicate these
issues within a decade. A subsequent summit in 1996 addressed the shortcomings
in achieving this goal while establishing a strategic plan for eliminating
hunger and malnutrition into the 21st century.

Every year, FAO publishes a number of major 'State of the World' reports
related to food, agriculture, forestry, fisheries and natural resources.

## Structure and finance

| This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Food and Agriculture Organization" – news **·** newspapers
**·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( October 2017)__(Learn how and when to
remove this message)_  
---|---  
Lester Bowles Pearson presiding at a plenary session of the founding
conference of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. October
1945.

In 1951, the FAO's headquarters were moved from Washington, D.C., United
States, to Rome, Italy. The agency is directed by the Conference of Member
Nations, which meets every two years to review the work carried out by the
organization and to Work and Budget for the next two-year period. The
conference elects a council of 49 member states (serve three-year rotating
terms) that acts as an interim governing body, and the director-general, who
heads the agency.

The FAO is composed of eight departments: Agriculture and Consumer Protection,
Climate, Biodiversity, Land and Water Department, Economic and Social
Development, Fisheries and Aquaculture, Forestry, Corporate Services and
Technical Cooperation and Programme Management.

Beginning in 1994, the FAO underwent the most significant restructuring since
its founding, to decentralize operations, streamline procedures and reduce
costs. As a result, savings of about US$50 million, €43 million a year were
realized.

### Budget

The FAO's Regular Programme budget is funded by its members, through
contributions set at the FAO Conference. This budget covers core technical
work, cooperation and partnerships including the Technical Cooperation
Programme, knowledge exchange, policy and advocacy, direction and
administration, governance and security.

The total FAO Budget planned for 2018–2019 is US$1,005.6 million. The
voluntary contributions provided by members and other partners support
mechanical and emergency (including rehabilitation) assistance to governments
for clearly defined purposes linked to the results framework, as well as
direct support to FAO's core work. The voluntary contributions are expected to
reach approximately US$1.6 billion in 2016–2017.

This overall budget covers core technical work, cooperation and partnerships,
leading to Food and Agriculture Outcomes at 71 percent; Core Functions at 11
percent; the Country Office Network – 5 percent; Capital and Security
Expenditure – 2 percent; Administration – 6 percent; and Technical and
Cooperation Program – 5 percent.

### Directors-General

  * John Boyd Orr, October 1945 – April 1948
  * Norris E. Dodd, April 1948 – December 1953
  * Philip V. Cardon, January 1954 – April 1956
  * Herbert Broadley, (acting) April 1956 – November 1956
  * Binay Ranjan Sen, November 1956 – December 1967
  * Addeke Hendrik Boerma, January 1968 – December 1975
  * Edouard Saouma, January 1976 – December 1993
  * Jacques Diouf, January 1994 – December 2011
  * José Graziano da Silva, January 2012 – July 2019
  * Qu Dongyu, August 2019 – present

### Deputy Directors-General

  * William Nobel Clark: 1948
  * Sir Herbert Broadley: 1948–1958
  * Friedrich Traugott Wahlen: 1958–1959
  * Norman C. Wright: 1959–1963
  * Oris V. Wells: 1963–1971
  * Roy I. Jackson: 1971–1978
  * Ralph W. Phillips: 1978–1981
  * Edward M. West: 1981–1985
  * Declan J. Walton: 1986–1987
  * Howard Hjort: 1992–1997
  * Vikram J. Shah (ad personam): 1992–1995
  * David A. Harcharik: 1998–2007
  * James G. Butler: 2008–2010
  * He Changchui (Operations): 2009–2011
  * Ann Tutwiler (Knowledge): 2011–2012
  * Manoj Juneja (Operations): 2011–2012
  * Dan Gustafson (Programmes): 2012–2020
  * Maria Helena Semedo: 2013–2017
  * Laurent Thomas: 2017–2023
  * Beth Bechdol: 2020–2023
  * Maurizio Martina: 2023–2025

## Offices

### FAO Headquarters

FAO Headquarters in Rome

The world headquarters is located in Rome, in the former seat of the
Department of Italian East Africa. One of the most notable features of the
building was the Axum Obelisk which stood in front of the agency seat,
although just outside the territory allocated to the FAO by the Italian
Government. It was taken from Ethiopia by Benito Mussolini's troops in 1937 as
war booty and returned on 18 April 2005.

### Regional Offices

  * Regional Office for Africa, in Accra, Ghana
  * Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, in Bangkok, Thailand
  * Regional Office for Europe and Central Asia, in Budapest, Hungary
  * Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, in Santiago de Chile, Chile
  * Regional Office for the Near East, in Cairo, Egypt

### Sub-regional Offices

  * Sub-regional Office for Central Africa (SFC), in Libreville, Gabon
  * Sub-regional Office for Central Asia, in Ankara, Turkey
  * Sub-regional Office for Eastern Africa (SFE), in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
  * Sub-regional Office for Mesoamerica (SLM), in Panama City, Panama
  * Sub-regional Office for North Africa, in Tunis, Tunisia
  * Sub-regional Office for Southern Africa and East Africa, in Harare, Zimbabwe
  * Sub-regional Office for the Caribbean, in Bridgetown, Barbados
  * Sub-regional Office for the Gulf Cooperation Council States and Yemen, in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
  * Sub-regional Office for the Pacific Islands, in Apia, Samoa

### Liaison Offices

Liaison Office for North America in Washington, D.C.

  * Liaison Office for North America, in Washington, D.C., United States
  * Liaison Office with Japan, in Yokohama
  * Liaison Office with the European Union and Belgium, in Brussels
  * Liaison Office with the Russian Federation, in Moscow
  * Liaison Office with the United Nations, in Geneva, Switzerland
  * Liaison Office with the United Nations, in New York City, United States

### Partnership and Liaison Offices

Partnership and Liaison Offices provide for stronger country participation in
the FAO's work and programmes at national, sub-regional, regional, and inter-
regional levels, and enhanced cooperation through unilateral trust fund
projects and South–South cooperation.

  * Azerbaijan
  * Cameroon
  * Côte d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast)
  * Equatorial Guinea
  * Kazakhstan
  * Mexico
  * Republic of Korea (South Korea)

## Priority work areas

FAO has outlined the following priorities in its fight against hunger.

  * Help eliminate hunger, food insecurity, and malnutrition – contribute to eradicating hunger by facilitating policies and political commitments to support food security and make sure that up-to-date information about hunger and nutrition challenges and solutions is available and accessible.
  * Make agriculture, forestry, and fisheries more productive and sustainable – promote evidence-based policies and practices to support highly productive agricultural sectors (crops, livestock, forestry, and fisheries) while ensuring that the natural resource base does not suffer in the process.
  * Reduce rural poverty by helping the rural poor gain access to the resources and services they need, including rural employment and social protection.
  * Enable inclusive and efficient agricultural and food systems – helping to build safe and efficient food systems that support smallholder agriculture and reduce poverty and hunger in rural areas.
  * Increase the resilience of livelihoods to threats and crises – helping countries to prepare for natural and human-caused disasters by reducing their risk and enhancing the resilience of their food and agricultural systems.

Two fundamental areas of work – gender and governance – are fully integrated
in the above strategic objective action plans.

## Programmes and achievements

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This section **may containexcessive or irrelevant examples**. Please help improve it by removing less pertinent examples and elaborating on existing ones. _( February 2022)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This section **containspromotional content**. Please help improve it by
removing promotional language and inappropriate external links, and by adding
encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view. _( February
2022)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Food and Agriculture Organization" – news **·** newspapers
**·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( April 2022)__(Learn how and when to
remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
### Food

### _Codex Alimentarius_

FAO and the World Health Organization created the Codex Alimentarius
Commission in 1961 to develop food standards, guidelines, and texts such as
codes of practice under the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. The
programme's main aims are protecting consumer health, ensuring fair trade, and
promoting co-ordination of all food standards work undertaken by
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations.

#### World Food Summit

In 1996, FAO organized the World Food Summit, attended by 112 Heads or Deputy
Heads of State and Government. The Summit concluded with the signing of the
Rome Declaration, which established the goal of halving the number of people
who suffer from hunger by 2015. At the same time, 1,200 civil society
organizations (CSOs) from 80 countries participated in an NGO forum. The forum
was critical of the growing industrialization of agriculture and called upon
governments – and FAO – to do more to protect the 'Right to Food' for the
poor.

#### TeleFood

In 1997, FAO launched TeleFood, a campaign of concerts, sporting events, and
other activities to harness the power of media, celebrities, and concerned
citizens to help fight hunger. Since its start, the campaign has generated
close to US$28 million, €15 million in donations. Money raised through
TeleFood pays for small, sustainable projects that help small-scale farmers
produce more food for their families and communities.

The projects provide tangible resources, such as fishing equipment, seeds, and
agricultural implements. They vary enormously, from helping families raise
pigs in Venezuela through creating school gardens in Cape Verde and Mauritania
or providing school lunches in Uganda and teaching children to grow food to
raising fish in a leper community in India.

#### FAO Goodwill Ambassadors

The FAO Goodwill Ambassadors Programme was initiated in 1999. It was created
to increase public awareness and disseminate information about issues related
to food security and hunger in the world.

#### Right to Food Guidelines

In 2004 the Right to Food Guidelines were adopted which offer guidance to
states on how to implement their obligations on the right to food.

#### Response to food crisis

In December 2007, FAO launched its Initiative on soaring food prices to help
small producers raise their output and earn more. Under the initiative, FAO
contributed to the work of the UN High-Level Task Force on the Global Food
Crisis, which produced the Comprehensive Framework for Action. FAO has carried
out projects in over 25 countries and inter-agency missions in nearly 60,
scaled up its monitoring through the Global Information and Early Warning
System on Food and Agriculture, provided policy advice to governments while
supporting their efforts to increase food production, and advocated for more
investment in agriculture as well as provided funding to distribute and
multiply quality seeds in Haiti, which has significantly increased food
production, thereby providing cheaper food.

#### FAO–EU partnership

In May 2009, FAO and the European Union signed an initial aid package worth
€125 million to support small farmers in countries hit hard by rising food
prices. The aid package falls under the EU's €1 billion Food Facility, set up
with the UN Secretary-General's High-Level Task Force on the Global Food
Crisis and FAO to focus on programmes that will have a quick but lasting
impact on food security. FAO is receiving around €200 million for work in 25
countries, of which €15.4 million goes to Zimbabwe.

#### Food security programmes

The Special Programme for Food Security is FAO's flagship initiative for
reaching the goal of halving the number of hungry in the world by 2015
(currently estimated at close to 1 billion people) as part of its commitment
to the Millennium Development Goals. Through projects in over 100 countries
worldwide, the programme promotes effective, tangible solutions to eliminating
hunger, undernourishment, and poverty. Currently, 102 countries are engaged in
the programme, and of these, approximately 30 have begun shifting from pilot
to national programmes. To maximize the impact of its work, FAO strongly
promotes national ownership and local empowerment in the countries in which it
operates.

#### Online campaign against hunger

The 1billionhungry project became the EndingHunger campaign in April 2011.
Spearheaded by FAO in partnership with other UN agencies and private nonprofit
groups, the EndingHunger movement pushes the boundaries of conventional public
advocacy. It builds on the success in 2010 of The 1billonhungry project and
the subsequent chain of public events that led to the collection of over three
million signatures on a global petition to end hunger (www.EndingHunger.org).
The petition was originally presented to representatives of world governments
at a ceremony in Rome on 30 November 2010.

The web and partnerships are two pivotal and dynamic aspects of EndingHunger.
The campaign relies on the assistance of organizations and institutions that
can facilitate the project's diffusion, by placing banners on their own
websites or organizing events aimed to raise awareness of the project. In its
2011 season, the campaign expanded its multimedia content, pursued mutual
visibility arrangements with partner organizations, and sharpened its focus on
14- to 25-year-olds, who were encouraged to understand their potential as a
social movement to push for the end of hunger.

Moreover, the EndingHunger project is a viral communication campaign, renewing
and expanding its efforts to build the movement through Facebook, Twitter and
other social networks. Those who sign the petition can spread the link of the
EndingHunger website to their friends, via social media or mail, in order to
gain awareness and signatures for the petition. The next interim objective is
to grow the EndingHunger movement's Facebook community to 1 million members.
As with the petition, the more people who get involved, the more powerful the
message to governments: "We are no longer willing to accept the fact that
hundreds of millions live in chronic hunger." Groups and individuals can also
decide on their own to organize an event about the project, simply by
gathering friends, whistles, T-shirts and banners (whistles and T-shirts can
be ordered, and petition sign sheets downloaded, on the endinghunger.org
website) and thereby alert people about chronic hunger by using the yellow
whistle.

The original 1billionhungry campaign borrowed as its slogan the line "I'm as
mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!", used by Peter Finch in
the 1976 film, _Network_. Meanwhile, the yellow whistle has been the campaign
symbol from the start, from 1billionhungry to Ending Hunger. (The creative
concept was provided by the McCann Erickson Italy Communication Agency.) It
symbolizes the fact that we are "blowing the whistle" on the silent disaster
of hunger. It is both a symbol and – at many live events taking place around
the world – a physical means of expressing frustration and making some noise
about the hunger situation.

Both The 1billionhungry and the EndingHunger campaigns have continued to
attract UN Goodwill Ambassadors from the worlds of music and cinema,
literature, sport, activism and government. Some of the well known individuals
who have become involved include former Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula
da Silva, former presidents of Chile Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet,
actress Susan Sarandon, actors Jeremy Irons and Raul Bova, singers Céline Dion
and Anggun, authors Isabelle Allende and Andrea Camilleri, musician Chucho
Valdés and Olympic track-and-field legend Carl Lewis.

### Agriculture

#### International Plant Protection Convention

FAO created the International Plant Protection Convention or IPPC in 1952.
This international treaty organization works to prevent the international
spread of pests and plant diseases in both cultivated and wild plants. Among
its functions are the maintenance of lists of plant pests, tracking of pest
outbreaks, and coordination of technical assistance between member nations. As
of July 2018, 183 contracting parties have ratified the treaty.

#### Plant Treaty (ITPGRFA)

FAO is depositary of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for
Food and Agriculture, also called _Plant Treaty_ , _Seed Treaty_ or _ITPGRFA_
, entered into force on 29 June 2004.

#### Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition

The Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition (AAHM) aims to address how
countries and organizations can be more effective in advocating and carrying
out actions to address hunger and malnutrition. As a global partnership, AAHM
creates global connections between local, regional, national and international
institutions that share the goals of fighting hunger and malnutrition. The
organization works to address food security by enhancing resources and
knowledge sharing and strengthening hunger activities within countries and
across state lines at the regional and international levels.

Following the World Food Summit, the Alliance was initially created in 2002 as
the 'International Alliance Against Hunger (IAAH)' to strengthen and
coordinate national efforts in the fight against hunger and malnutrition. The
mission of the Alliance originates from the first and eighth UN Millennium
Development Goals; reducing the number of people that suffer from hunger in
half by 2015 (preceded by the "Rome Declaration" in 1996) and developing a
global partnership for development. The Alliance was founded by the Rome-based
food agencies – the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), UN World Food Programme (WFP), International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD), – and Bioversity International.

AAHM connects top-down and bottom-up anti-hunger development initiatives,
linking governments, UN organizations, and NGOs together in order to increase
effectiveness through unity.

#### Integrated pest management

During the 1990s, FAO took a leading role in the promotion of integrated pest
management for rice production in Asia. Hundreds of thousands of farmers were
trained using an approach known as the Farmer Field School (FFS). Like many of
the programmes managed by FAO, the funds for Farmer Field Schools came from
bilateral Trust Funds, with Australia, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland
acting as the leading donors. FAO's efforts in this area have drawn praise
from NGOs that have otherwise criticized much of the work of the organization.

#### Trans-boundary pests and diseases

FAO established an _Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and
Plant Pests and Diseases_ in 1994, focusing on the control of diseases like
rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease and avian flu by helping governments
coordinate their responses. One key element is the _Global Rinderpest
Eradication Programme_ , which has advanced to a stage where large tracts of
Asia and Africa have now been free of the cattle disease rinderpest for an
extended period of time. Meanwhile, the _ Desert Locust Information Service_
monitors the worldwide locust situation and keeps affected countries and
donors informed of expected developments.

#### Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building

The Food Price Index (FAO) (1990–2012)

The Global Partnership Initiative for Plant Breeding Capacity Building (GIPB)
is a global partnership dedicated to increasing plant breeding capacity
building. The mission of GIPB is to enhance the capacity of developing
countries to improve crops for food security and sustainable development
through better plant breeding and delivery systems. The ultimate goal is to
ensure that a critical mass of plant breeders, leaders, managers and
technicians, donors and partners are linked together through an effective
global network.

Increasing capacity building for plant breeding in developing countries is
critical for the achievement of meaningful results in poverty and hunger
reduction and to reverse the current worrisome trends. Plant breeding is a
well recognized science capable of widening the genetic and adaptability base
of cropping systems, by combining conventional selection techniques and modern
technologies. It is essential to face and prevent the recurrence of crises
such as that of the soaring food prices and to respond to the increasing
demands for crop based sources of energy.

#### Investment in agriculture

FAO's technical cooperation department hosts an Investment Centre that
promotes greater investment in agriculture and rural development by helping
developing countries identify and formulate sustainable agricultural policies,
programmes and projects. It mobilizes funding from multilateral institutions
such as the World Bank, regional development banks and international funds as
well as FAO resources.

#### Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS)

The Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS) Partnership
Initiative was conceptualized and presented by Parviz Koohafkan the Task
Manager of Chapter 10 of Agenda 21 in Food and Agricultural Organization of
United Nations, FAO in 2002 during World Summit on Sustainable Development in
Johannesburg, South Africa. This UN Partnership Initiative aims to identify,
support and safeguard Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems and
their livelihoods, agricultural and associated biodiversity, landscapes,
knowledge systems and cultures around the world. The GIAHS Partnership
recognizes the crucial importance of the well-being of family farming
communities in an integrated approach while directing activities towards
sustainable agriculture and rural development.

#### Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA)

The Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, established in
1983, provides an intergovernmental forum that specifically addresses
biological diversity for food and agriculture. Its main objective is to ensure
the sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity for food and agriculture
and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits derived from its use, for
present and future generations.

#### Animal Genetic Resources

FAO has a unit focused on Animal Genetic Resources, which are defined as
"those animal species that are used, or may be used, for the production of
food and agriculture, and the populations within each of them. These
populations within each species can be classified as wild and feral
populations, land-races and primary populations, standardized breeds, selected
lines, varieties, strains and any conserved genetic material; all of which are
currently categorized as Breeds." FAO assists countries in implementation of
the Global Plan of Action for Animal Genetic Resources. FAO supports a variety
of _ex situ_ and _in situ_ conservation strategies including cryoconservation
of animal genetic resources.

### Forestry

One of FAO's strategic goals is the sustainable management of the world's
forests. The _Forestry Division_ works to balance social and environmental
considerations with the economic needs of rural populations living in forest
areas. FAO serves as a neutral forum for policy dialogue, as a reliable source
of information on forests and trees and as a provider of expert technical
assistance and advice to help countries develop and implement effective
national forest programmes.

FAO is both a global clearinghouse for information on forests and forest
resources and a facilitator that helps building countries' local capacity to
provide their own national forest data. In collaboration with member
countries, FAO carries out periodic global assessments of forest resources,
which are made available through reports, publications and the FAO's Web site.
The _Global Forest Resources Assessment_ provides comprehensive reporting on
forests worldwide every five years. FRA 2020 is the most recent global
assessment. The results, data and analyses are available online in different
formats, including key findings, main report and country reports.

Every two years, FAO publishes the _State of the World's Forests_ , a major
report covering current and emerging issues facing the forestry sector.

Since 1947, FAO has published the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products, a
compilation of statistical data on basic forest products from over 100
countries and territories of the world. It contains data on the volume of
production; and the volume, value and direction of trade in forest products.

_Unasylva_ , FAO's peer-reviewed journal on forestry, has been published in
English, French and Spanish on a regular basis since 1947, the longest-running
multilingual forestry journal in the world.

The FAO is an official sponsor of International Day of Forests, on 21 March
each year, as proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly on 28 November
2012.

Every six years since 1926, FAO and a host member state hold the World
Forestry Congress. It is a forum for the sharing of knowledge and experience
regarding the conservation, management and use of the world's forests, and
covers such issues as international dialogue, socio-economic and institutional
aspects, and forest policies.

The Forestry Department is also organized geographically in several groups
covering the whole world's forest ecosystems. One of them is the Silva
Mediterranean work-group, covering the pan-Mediterranean region.

#### Tree Cities of the World

At the World Forum on Urban Forests in October 2018, the FAO and the Arbor Day
Foundation jointly launched the Tree Cities of the World programme. The aim of
this programme is to celebrate and recognize cities and towns of all sizes
throughout the world which have shown a commitment to maintaining their urban
forests. From the end of 2019, any municipality which has responsibility for
its trees was able to apply to join Tree Cities of the World. On 4 February
2020, 59 cities were announced as having achieved the designation of Tree City
of the World. There were 27 in the United States, with the rest scattered
across the world.

### Fisheries

FAO fisheries expert, Ceylon, 1950s

The FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department is defined through its vision and
mission statements:

  * _Vision_ : A world in which responsible and sustainable use of fisheries and aquaculture resources makes an appreciable contribution to human well-being, food security and poverty alleviation.
  * _Mission_ : To strengthen global governance and the managerial and technical capacities of members and to lead consensus-building towards improved conservation and utilization of aquatic resources.

The work of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Department centers on the
"Sustainable management and use of fisheries and aquaculture resource",
embracing normative as well as operational activities, whether implemented
from headquarters or from the field.

The FAO _Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries_ was adopted in 1995.

### Statistics

**ESSG** is an acronym for the **Global Statistics Service** , the major
"section" of the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization -
Statistics Division. It is responsible for updating and disseminating the
FAOSTAT report. This offers free and easy access to data for 245 countries and
35 regional areas from 1961 through the most recent year available. Enhanced
features include browsing and analysis of data, an advanced interactive data
download, and enhanced data exchange through web services.

The Land and Water Division maintains a database of global water statistics,
Aquastat. The Fisheries and Aquaculture Division maintains a database of
global Fisheries and Aquaculture statistics, FishStat.

## Membership

As of 1 May 2020, the Organization has 194 Member Nations, one Member
Organization, and two Associate Members.

  1. Afghanistan
  2. Albania
  3. Algeria
  4. Andorra
  5. Angola
  6. Antigua and Barbuda
  7. Argentina
  8. Armenia
  9. Australia
  10. Austria
  11. Azerbaijan
  12. Bahamas, The
  13. Bahrain
  14. Bangladesh
  15. Barbados
  16. Belarus
  17. Belgium
  18. Belize
  19. Benin
  20. Bhutan
  21. Bolivia
  22. Bosnia and Herzegovina
  23. Botswana
  24. Brazil
  25. Brunei
  26. Bulgaria
  27. Burkina Faso
  28. Burundi
  29. Cambodia
  30. Cameroon
  31. Canada
  32. Cape Verde
  33. Central African Republic
  34. Chad
  35. Chile
  36. China
  37. Colombia
  38. Comoros
  39. Congo, Democratic Republic of the
  40. Congo, Republic of the
  41. Cook Islands
  42. Costa Rica
  43. Côte d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast)
  44. Croatia
  45. Cuba
  46. Cyprus
  47. Czech Republic (Czechia)
  48. Denmark
  49. Djibouti
  50. Dominica
  51. Dominican Republic
  52. Ecuador
  53. Egypt
  54. El Salvador
  55. Equatorial Guinea
  56. Eritrea
  57. Estonia
  58. Eswatini (Swaziland)
  59. Ethiopia
  60. European Union
  61. Faroe Islands
  62. Fiji
  63. Finland
  64. France (French Republic)
  65. Gabon
  66. Gambia, The
  67. Georgia
  68. Germany
  69. Ghana
  70. Greece
  71. Grenada
  72. Guatemala
  73. Guinea
  74. Guinea-Bissau
  75. Guyana
  76. Haiti
  77. Honduras
  78. Hungary
  79. Iceland
  80. India
  81. Indonesia
  82. Iran
  83. Iraq
  84. Ireland
  85. Israel
  86. Italy
  87. Jamaica
  88. Japan
  89. Jordan
  90. Kazakhstan
  91. Kenya
  92. Kiribati
  93. Korea, Democratic People's Republic of
  94. Korea, Republic of
  95. Kuwait
  96. Kyrgyzstan
  97. Laos
  98. Latvia
  99. Lebanon
  100. Lesotho
  101. Liberia
  102. Libya
  103. Lithuania
  104. Luxembourg
  105. Madagascar
  106. Malawi
  107. Malaysia
  108. Maldives
  109. Mali
  110. Malta
  111. Marshall Islands
  112. Mauritania
  113. Mauritius
  114. Mexico
  115. Micronesia, Federated States of
  116. Moldova
  117. Monaco
  118. Mongolia
  119. Montenegro
  120. Morocco
  121. Mozambique
  122. Myanmar (Burma)
  123. Namibia
  124. Nauru
  125. Nepal
  126. Netherlands
  127. New Zealand
  128. Nicaragua
  129. Niger
  130. Nigeria
  131. Niue
  132. North Macedonia
  133. Norway
  134. Oman
  135. Pakistan
  136. Palau
  137. Panama
  138. Papua New Guinea
  139. Paraguay
  140. Peru
  141. Philippines
  142. Poland
  143. Portugal
  144. Qatar
  145. Romania
  146. Russian Federation
  147. Rwanda
  148. Saint Kitts and Nevis
  149. Saint Lucia
  150. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
  151. Samoa
  152. San Marino
  153. São Tomé and Príncipe
  154. Saudi Arabia
  155. Senegal
  156. Serbia
  157. Seychelles
  158. Sierra Leone
  159. Singapore
  160. Slovakia
  161. Slovenia
  162. Solomon Islands
  163. Somalia
  164. South Africa
  165. South Sudan
  166. Spain
  167. Sri Lanka
  168. Sudan
  169. Suriname
  170. Sweden
  171. Switzerland
  172. Syria
  173. Tajikistan
  174. Tanzania
  175. Thailand
  176. Timor-Leste (East Timor)
  177. Togo
  178. Tokelau
  179. Tonga
  180. Trinidad and Tobago
  181. Tunisia
  182. Turkey
  183. Turkmenistan
  184. Tuvalu
  185. Uganda
  186. Ukraine
  187. United Arab Emirates
  188. United Kingdom
  189. United States
  190. Uruguay
  191. Uzbekistan
  192. Vanuatu
  193. Venezuela
  194. Vietnam
  195. Yemen
  196. Zambia
  197. Zimbabwe

FAO member states

FAO associates

  1. **^** The Republic of China was originally a member of FAO from 16 October 1945, despite its territory being reduced to Taiwan and some offshore islands following the Chinese Civil War in 1949. In 1951 the ROC withdrew from the FAO. In 1973, the People's Republic of China assumed its seat at the FAO. For more on its complex detail, see the political status of Taiwan.
  2. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ _**c**_ _**d**_ a part of the Realm of New Zealand
  3. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ a part of the Danish Realm
  4. **^** member organization
  5. ^ _**a**_ _**b**_ associate member

Taiwan (at the time representing China), withdrew from the FAO in 1951. in
1971, the People's Republic of China was recognized as the representative of
China by the FAO and the withdrawal from part of Taiwan was not taken into
account.

The only UN member state that is a non-member of the FAO is Liechtenstein.

Both UN observer states are also non-members of the FAO: the Holy See (Vatican
City) and Palestine.

Some countries may denote specific representatives to the FAO, for instance
the United States Ambassador to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, who has ambassador rank and is also a part of the United
States Mission to the UN Agencies in Rome.

## Criticism

| The **neutrality of this section is disputed**. Relevant discussion may be
found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to
do so are met. _( May 2021)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
### 1970s, 80s, 90s

There has been public criticism of FAO for at least 30 years. Dissatisfaction
with the organization's performance was among the reasons for the creation of
two new organizations after the World Food Conference in 1974, namely the
World Food Council and the International Fund for Agricultural Development; by
the early eighties there was intense rivalry among these organizations. At the
same time, the World Food Programme, which started as an experimental three-
year programme under FAO, was growing in size and independence, with the
Directors of FAO and WFP struggling for power.

Early in 1989, the organization came under attack from Heritage Foundation, an
American conservative think tank, which described the FAO as becoming
"essentially irrelevant in combating hunger" due to a "bloated bureaucracy
known for the mediocrity of its work and the inefficiency of its staff", which
had become politicized. In September of the same year, the journal _Society_
published a series of articles about FAO that included a contribution from the
Heritage Foundation and a response by FAO staff member, Richard Lydiker, who
was later described by the Danish Minister for Agriculture (who had herself
resigned from the organization) as "FAO's chief spokesman for non-
transparency".

In 1990, the U.S. State Department expressed the view that "The Food and
Agriculture Organization has lagged behind other UN organizations in
responding to US desires for improvements in program and budget processes to
enhance value for money spent".

A year later, in 1991, _The Ecologist_ magazine produced a special issue under
the heading "The UN Food and Agriculture Organization: Promoting World
Hunger". The magazine included articles that questioned FAO's policies and
practices in forestry, fisheries, aquaculture, and pest control. The articles
were written by experts such as Helena Norberg-Hodge, Vandana Shiva, Edward
Goldsmith, Miguel A. Altieri and Barbara Dinham.

### 2000s

The 2002 Food Summit organized by FAO was considered to have been ineffectual
and unproductive by the official participants. Social movements, farmers,
fisherfolk, pastoralists, indigenous peoples, environmentalists, women's
organizations, trade unions and NGOs expressed their "collective
disappointment in, and rejection of the official Declaration of the ...
Summit".

In 2004, FAO produced a controversial report called "Agricultural
Biotechnology: meeting the needs of the poor?", which claimed that
"agricultural biotechnology has real potential as a new tool in the war on
hunger". In response to the report, more than 650 organizations from around
the world signed an open letter in which they said "FAO has broken its
commitment to civil society and peasants' organisations". The letter
complained that organizations representing the interests of farmers had not
been consulted, that FAO was siding with the biotechnology industry and,
consequently, that the report "raises serious questions about the independence
and intellectual integrity of an important United Nations agency". Jacques
Diouf, the Director General of FAO at that time, responded immediately,
stating that decisions on biotechnology must "be taken at the international
level by competent bodies" (in other words, not by non-governmental
organizations). He acknowledged, however, that "biotechnology research is
essentially driven by the world's top ten transnational corporations" and "the
private sector protects its results with patents in order to earn from its
investment and it concentrates on products that have no relevance to food in
developing countries".

In May 2006, a British newspaper published the resignation letter of Louise
Fresco, one of eight Assistant Directors-General of FAO. In her letter, Fresco
stated that "the Organization has been unable to adapt to a new era", that its
"contribution and reputation have declined steadily" and "its leadership has
not proposed bold options to overcome this crisis".

The 32nd Session of FAO's Committee on World Food Security in 2006, attended
by 120 countries, was widely criticized by non-governmental organizations, but
largely ignored by the mainstream media. Oxfam called for an end to the talk-
fests while Via Campesina issued a statement that criticised FAO's policy of
Food Security.

On 18 October 2007, the final report of an Independent External Evaluation of
FAO was published. More than 400 pages in length, the evaluation was the first
of its kind in the history of the Organization. It had been commissioned by
decision of the 33rd Session of the FAO Conference in November 2005. The
report concluded that "The Organization is today in a financial and programme
crisis" but "the problems affecting the Organization today can all be solved".
Among the problems noted by the IEE were: "The Organization has been
conservative and slow to adapt"; "FAO currently has a heavy and costly
bureaucracy", and "The capacity of the Organization is declining and many of
its core competencies are now imperilled". Among the solutions offered were:
"A new Strategic Framework", "institutional culture change and reform of
administrative and management systems". In conclusion the IEE stated that, "If
FAO did not exist it would need to be invented".

The official response from FAO came on 29 October 2007. It indicated that
management supported the principal conclusion in the report of the IEE on the
need for "reform with growth" so as to have an FAO "fit for this century".
Meanwhile, hundreds of FAO staff signed a petition in support of the IEE
recommendations, calling for "a radical shift in management culture and
spirit, depoliticization of appointments, restoration of trust between staff
and management, [and] setting strategic priorities of the organization".

In May 2008, while talking about the ongoing world food crisis, President
Abdoulaye Wade of Senegal expressed the opinion that FAO was "a waste of
money" and that "we must scrap it". Wade said that FAO was itself largely to
blame for the price rises, and that the organization's work was duplicated by
other bodies that operated more efficiently, like the UN's International Fund
for Agricultural Development. However, this criticism may have had more to do
with personal animosity between the President and the Director-General,
himself a Senegalese, particularly in light of the significant differences in
the work carried out by the two organizations.

In June 2008, the FAO sponsored the High-Level Conference on World Food
Security. The summit was notable for the lack of agreement over the issue of
biofuels. The response to the summit among non-governmental organizations was
mixed, with Oxfam stating that "the summit in Rome was an important first step
in tackling the food crisis but greater action is now needed", while Maryam
Rahmanian of Iran's Centre for Sustainable Development said "We are dismayed
and disgusted to see the food crisis used to further the policies that have
led us to the food crisis in the first place". As with previous food summits,
civil society organizations held a parallel meeting and issued their own
declaration to "reject the corporate industrial and energy-intensive model of
production and consumption that is the basis of continuing crises."

In November 2008, a Special Conference of FAO member countries agreed a
US$42.6 million (€38.6 million), three-year Immediate Plan of Action for
"reform with growth", as recommended by the IEE. Under the plan US$21.8
million would be spent on overhauling the financial procedures, hierarchies
and human resources management.

### 2010s

From 2013, an English-language newspaper based in Rome, _The Italian Insider_
, made several allegations of nepotism and corruption within FAO and reported
on poor management-staff relations. In June 2018, FAO and four of its
officials took the paper and its editor, John Philips, to court alleging
defamation, using a law dating back to the fascist era in Italy. Reporters
Without Borders condemned "the disproportionate nature of the defamation
proceedings", for which the newspaper was liable for a fine of up to Euros
100,000 and the editor at least three years in prison. The case was adjourned
until January 2019, when it was further adjourned until May 2019. The January
hearing was considered by the British satirical magazine _Private Eye_ to have
been "one of the more surreal courtroom scenes in modern times", involving
dispute as to the meaning of an English slang word used by the _Insider_.

In 2016/17 FAO was heavily criticized for recruiting Nadine Heredia Alarcón de
Humala, wife of the former president of Peru, Ollanta Humala, to a senior
position, at a time when she was being investigated by Peru following
corruption allegations. Critics included Transparency International.

At the end of April 2017, FAO staff unions addressed the organization's
Governing Council to complain about the practice of issuing short-term
contracts that "exploit employees without providing job security, social
security and paid leave". Other complaints included the increasing
centralization of management processes, despite claims that FAO was being
decentralized, and the failure to follow United Nations recommendations
regarding increasing the retirement age. The staff representative also
complained about the high percentage of unfilled positions, increasing the
workload for others who were under pressure to deliver more with less. She
also noted that contacts between Management and the staff bodies were becoming
less and less frequent.

### 2020s

An investigation by the German public broadcaster ARD shows that the Chinese
leadership of the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation FAO has tailored it to
Chinese interests since Qu Dongyu took office in 2019. According to the
report, the acting director-general has instrumentalized the FAO in Beijing's
interests: It is about deliveries of pesticides banned in Europe, the majority
of which come from the Chinese agrochemical company Syngenta, UN projects in
line with China's "Belt and Road Initiative" as well as questionable
investment projects.

## FAO renewal

The FAO Conference in November 2007 unanimously welcomed the IEE report and
established a Conference Committee for the Follow-up to the Independent
External Evaluation of FAO (CoC-IEE) to be chaired by the Independent
Chairperson of Council, and open to full participation by all Members. The
CoC-IEE was charged to review the IEE report and its recommendations and
develop an Immediate Plan of Action (IPA) for their implementation.

A comprehensive programme of organizational reform and culture change began in
2008 after the release of an Independent External Evaluation. Headquarters
restructuring and delegation of decision making created a flatter more
responsive structure and reduced costs. Modernizing and streamlining of
administrative and operational processes took place. Improved internal
teamwork and closer external partnerships coupled with upgrading of IT
infrastructure and greater autonomy of FAO's decentralized offices now allows
the Organization to respond quickly where needs are greatest. As FAO is
primarily a knowledge based organization, investing in human resources is a
top priority. Capacity building including a leadership programme, employee
rotation and a new junior professional programme were established. Individual
performance management, an ethics and ombudsman officer and an independent
office of evaluation were designed to improve performance through learning and
strengthened oversight.

In January 2012, the Director-General José Graziano da Silva acted upon the
commitment made during his campaign to bring the FAO reform to a successful
and anticipated completion. In addition, the new Director-General shifted the
focus of the reform process to realization of its benefits and mainstreaming
the reform into the work of the Organization.

In July 2020, the FAO Council approved a series of measures proposed by its
Director-General Qu Dongyu to modernize the organization and make it more
efficient and effective. An important element within the approved measures is
the adoption "of a more flexible organizational structure, aimed at ensuring
agility, optimal cross-sectoral collaboration and better responses to emerging
needs and priorities".