Intergovernmental forum

The **G20** or **Group of 20** is an intergovernmental forum comprising 19
sovereign countries, the European Union (EU), and the African Union (AU). It
works to address major issues related to the global economy, such as
international financial stability, climate change mitigation and sustainable
development, through annual meetings of Heads of State and Heads of
Government.

The sovereign states of the G20 (without its international members, like the
EU or AU) account for around 85% of gross world product (GWP), 75% of
international trade, 56% of the global population, and 60% of the world's land
area. Including the EU and AU, the G20 comprises 78.9% of global population
and 83.9% of global CO2 emissions from fossil energy.

The G20 was founded in 1999 in response to several world economic crises.
Since 2008, it has convened at least once a year, with summits involving each
member's head of government or state, finance minister, or foreign minister,
and other high-ranking officials; the EU is represented by the European
Commission and the European Central Bank. Other countries, international
organizations, and nongovernmental organizations are invited to attend the
summits, some permanently. The African Union joined as the 21st member at the
2023 summit in India and was officially represented at the 2024 summit in
Brazil.

In its 2009 summit, the G20 declared itself the primary venue for
international economic and financial cooperation. The group's stature has
risen during the subsequent decade, and it is recognised by analysts as
exercising considerable global influence; it is also criticised for its
limited membership, lack of enforcement powers, and for the alleged
undermining of existing international institutions. Summits are often met with
protests, particularly by anti-globalization groups.

## History

The G20 is the latest in a series of post–World War II initiatives aimed at
international coordination of economic policy, which include institutions such
as the "Bretton Woods twins", the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank, and what is now the World Trade Organization.

The G20 was foreshadowed at the Cologne summit of the G7 in June 1999, and
formally established at the G7 Finance Ministers' meeting on 26 September 1999
with an inaugural meeting on 15–16 December 1999 in Berlin. Canadian finance
minister Paul Martin was chosen as the first chairman and German finance
minister Hans Eichel hosted the meeting.

A 2004 report by Colin I. Bradford and Johannes F. Linn of the Brookings
Institution asserted the group was founded primarily at the initiative of
Eichel, the concurrent chair of the G7. However, Bradford later described
then-Finance Minister of Canada (and future Prime Minister of Canada) Paul
Martin as "the crucial architect of the formation of the G20 at finance
minister level", and as the one who later "proposed that the G20 countries
move to leaders level summits". Canadian academic and journalistic sources
have also identified the G20 as a project initiated by Martin and his American
counterpart then-Treasury Secretary Larry Summers. All acknowledge, however,
that Germany and the United States played a key role in bringing their vision
into reality.[_citation needed_]

Martin and Summers conceived of the G20 in response to the series of massive
debt crises that had spread across emerging markets in the late 1990s,
beginning with the Mexican peso crisis and followed by the 1997 Asian
financial crisis, the 1998 Russian financial crisis, and eventually impacting
the United States, most prominently in the form of the collapse of the
prominent hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management in the autumn of 1998. It
illustrated to them that in a rapidly globalizing world, the G7, G8, and the
Bretton Woods system would be unable to provide financial stability, and they
conceived of a new, broader permanent group of major world economies that
would give a voice and new responsibilities in providing it.

The G20 membership was decided by Eichel's deputy Caio Koch-Weser and
Summers's deputy Timothy Geithner. According to the political economist Robert
Wade:

> "Geithner and Koch-Weser went down the list of countries saying, Canada in,
> Portugal out, South Africa in, Nigeria and Egypt out, and so on; they sent
> their list to the other G7 finance ministries; and the invitations to the
> first meeting went out."

### Early topics

The G20's primary focus has been governance of the global economy. Summit
themes have varied from year to year. The theme of the 2006 G20 ministerial
meeting was "Building and Sustaining Prosperity". The issues discussed
included domestic reforms to achieve "sustained growth", global energy and
resource commodity markets, reform of the World Bank and IMF, and the impact
of demographic changes.

In 2007, South Africa hosted the secretariat with Trevor A. Manuel, South
African Minister of Finance as chairperson of the G20.

In 2008, Guido Mantega, Brazil's Minister of Finance, was the G20 chairman and
proposed dialogue on competition in financial markets, clean energy, economic
development and fiscal elements of growth and development.

On 11 October 2008 after a meeting of G8 finance ministers, US President
George W. Bush stated that the next meeting of the G20 would be important in
finding solutions to the burgeoning economic crisis of 2008.

## Summits

The Summit of G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, who prepare
the leaders' summit and implement their decisions, was created as a response
both to the 2008 financial crisis and to a growing recognition that key
emerging powers were not adequately included in the core of global economic
discussion and governance. Additionally, G20 summits of heads of state or
government were held.

After the 2008 debut summit in Washington, DC, G20 leaders met twice a year:
in London and Pittsburgh in 2009, and in Toronto and Seoul in 2010.

Since 2011, when France chaired and hosted the G20, the summits have been held
only once a year. The 2016 summit was held in Hangzhou, China, the 2017 summit
was held in Hamburg, Germany, the 2018 summit was held in Buenos Aires,
Argentina, the 2019 summit was held in Osaka, Japan, the 2020 summit was
scheduled in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia but it was held virtually due to COVID-19,
the 2021 summit was held in Rome, Italy, the 2022 summit was held in Bali,
Indonesia and the 2023 summit was held in New Delhi, India. The 2024 Group of
20 (G20) Summit will take place from 18-19 November in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Several other ministerial-level G20 meetings have been held since 2010.
Agriculture ministerial meetings were conducted in 2011 and 2012; meetings of
foreign ministers were held in 2012 and 2013; trade ministers met in 2012 and
2014, and employment ministerial meetings have taken place annually since
2010.

In 2012, the G20 Ministers of Tourism and Heads of Delegation of G20 member
countries and other invited States, as well as representatives from the World
Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC), World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) and
other organisations in the Travel & Tourism sector met in Mérida, Mexico, on
May 16 at the 4th G20 meeting and focused on 'Tourism as a means to Job
Creation'. As a result of this meeting and The World Travel & Tourism
Council's Visa Impact Research, later on the Leaders of the G20, convened in
Los Cabos on 18–19 June, would recognise the impact of Travel & Tourism for
the first time. That year, the G20 Leaders Declaration added the following
statement: "We recognise the role of travel and tourism as a vehicle for job
creation, economic growth and development, and, while recognizing the
sovereign right of States to control the entry of foreign nationals, we will
work towards developing travel facilitation initiatives in support of job
creation, quality work, poverty reduction and global growth."

In March 2014, the former Australian foreign minister Julie Bishop, when
Australia was hosting the 2014 G20 summit in Brisbane, proposed to ban Russia
from the summit over its annexation of Ukrainian Crimea. The BRICS foreign
ministers subsequently reminded Bishop that "the custodianship of the G20
belongs to all Member States equally and no one Member State can unilaterally
determine its nature and character."

The 2015 G20 Summit in Antalya, Turkey, focused on "Inclusiveness, Investment,
and Implementation," gathering leaders to address global economic challenges,
development, climate change, and urgent issues like terrorism and refugees.
Key outcomes included the Antalya Action Plan and commitments to financial
stability, tax regulation, and energy policy.

In 2016, the G20 framed its commitment to the 2030 Agenda, Sustainable
Development Goals in three key themes; the promotion of strong sustainable and
balanced growth; protection of the planet from degradation; and furthering co-
operation with low-income and developing countries. At the G20 Summit in
Hangzhou, members agreed on an action plan and issued a high level principles
document to member countries to help facilitate the agenda's implementation.

Japan hosted the 2019 summit. The 2020 summit was to be held in Saudi Arabia,
but was instead held virtually on 21–22 November 2020 due to the COVID-19
pandemic under the presidency of Saudi Arabia. 2021 G20 Rome summit which was
held in Rome, the capital city of Italy, on 30–31 October 2021.

Indonesia held the 2022 summit in November 2022. During its presidency,
Indonesia focused on the global COVID-19 pandemic and how to collectively
overcome the challenges related to it. The three priorities of Indonesia's G20
presidency were global health architecture, digital transformations, and
sustainable energy transitions. The G20 Presidency of Indonesia, in
partnership with the Pandemic Fund secretariat, also officially launched the
Pandemic Fund at a high-level event. The Pandemic Fund expected to be as a key
part of the solution for reducing risks from epidemics and pandemics in the
most vulnerable parts of the world and contributing to a healthier and safer
world . Indonesia’s 2022 G20 presidency highlighted its leadership in
promoting international cooperation, sustainable development, and Islamic
messages of peace, including hosting the R20 forum to foster interfaith
dialogue.

Azali Assoumani, President of the African Union, is greeted by Narendra Modi,
G20 Chairman, at the G20 summit in 2023.

India held the 2023 summit in September 2023. The presidency's theme was
_Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam_ (Sanskrit: वसुधैव कुटुम्बकम्; English:"One Earth, One
Family, One Future"). In an interview on 26 August 2023, Prime Minister
Narendra Modi expressed optimism about the G20 countries' evolving agenda
under India's presidency, shifting toward a human-centric development approach
that aligns with the concerns of the Global South, including addressing
climate change, debt restructuring through the G20's Common Framework for
debt, and a strategy for regulation of global cryptocurrencies. G20 expanded
by the inclusion of African Union, it is also the first inclusion since 1999.

The Brazilian presidency launched the G20 Social, a place where for the first
time the organization will bring the civil society into the debate where it
can participate and contribute to discussions and policy formulations
regarding to the summit.

### Chair rotation

To decide which member nation should hold to chair the G20 leaders' meeting
for a given year, all country members are assigned to one of five groupings,
with all but one group having four members, the other having three. States
from the same region are placed in the same group, except Group 1 and Group 2.
All countries within a group are eligible to take over the G20 Presidency when
it is their group's turn. Therefore, the states within the relevant group need
to negotiate among themselves to select the next G20 President. Each year, a
different G20 member country assumes the presidency starting from 1 December
until 30 November. This system has been in place since 2010, when South Korea,
which is in Group 5, held the G20 chair. The table below lists the nations'
groupings:

Group 1 | Group 2 | Group 3 (Latin America) | Group 4 (Western Europe) | Group 5 (East/Southeast Asia)   
---|---|---|---|---  
  
  * Australia (2014)
  * Canada (2010-1)
  * Saudi Arabia (2020)
  * United States (2008, 2009-2)

|

  * India (2023)
  * Russia (2013)
  * South Africa (2025)
  * Turkey (2015)

|

  * Argentina (2018)
  * Brazil (2024)
  * Mexico (2012)

|

  * France (2011)
  * Germany (2017)
  * Italy (2021)
  * United Kingdom (2009-1)

|

  * China (2016)
  * Indonesia (2022)
  * Japan (2019)
  * South Korea (2010-2)

  
  
To ensure continuity, the presidency is supported by a "troika" made up of the
current, immediate past and next host countries.

## Organization

The G20 operates without a permanent secretariat or staff. The group's chair
(the presidency) rotates annually among the members and is selected from a
different regional grouping of countries. The incumbent chair establishes a
temporary secretariat for the duration of its term, which coordinates the
group's work and organizes its meetings. Together with the previous and
following presidency a so-called _troika_ is formed, to provide a smooth
transition of secretariat functions.

The 2022 summit was held in Bali, Indonesia. India was the chair in 2023 and
hosted the 2023 summit. South Africa is the current chair and will host the
2025 Johannesburg Summit.

Additionally because of the lacking of a permanent secretariat the G20 has
been relying on the OECD for more institutional competences substituting
permanent secretariat functions.

### Proposed permanent secretariat

In 2010, President of France Nicolas Sarkozy proposed the establishment of a
permanent G20 secretariat, similar to the United Nations. Seoul and Paris were
suggested as possible locations for its headquarters. Brazil and China
supported the establishment of a secretariat, while Italy and Japan expressed
opposition to the proposal. South Korea proposed a "cyber secretariat" as an
alternative.

## Members

As of 2023[update], there are 21 members in the group: Argentina, Australia,
Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South Korea, Turkey, the United
Kingdom, the United States, the European Union and the African Union. Guest
invitees include, among others, Spain, the United Nations, the World Bank and
ASEAN.

Representatives include, at the leaders' summits, the leaders of nineteen
countries, the African Union and of the European Union, and, at the
ministerial-level meetings, the finance ministers and central bank governors
of nineteen countries, the African Union and of the European Union.

In addition, each year, the G20's guests include Spain; the Chair of ASEAN; a
representative of the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and a
country (sometimes more than one) invited by the presidency, usually from its
own region.

The first of the tables below lists the member entities and their leaders,
finance ministers and central bank governors. The second table lists relevant
statistics such as population and GDP figures for each member, as well as
detailing memberships of other international organizations, such as the G7,
BRICS and MIKTA. Total GDP figures are given in millions of US dollars.

In September 2023, at the 18th G20 Summit, Indian PM Narendra Modi announced
that the African Union has been included as a member of the G20, making it the
21st member.

### Member of Head Of state and Head of goverment

Member  | Leader  | Finance portfolio  | Portfolio minister  | Central bank  | Central bank governor   
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Argentina | Javier Milei | Minister of Economy | Luis Caputo | Central Bank of the Argentine Republic | Santiago Bausili [es]  
Australia | Anthony Albanese | Treasurer | Jim Chalmers | Reserve Bank of Australia | Michele Bullock  
Brazil | Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva | Minister of Finance | Fernando Haddad | Central Bank of Brazil | Gabriel Galípolo  
Canada | Mark Carney | Minister of Finance | François-Philippe Champagne | Bank of Canada | Tiff Macklem  
China | Xi Jinping | Minister of Finance | Lan Fo'an | People's Bank of China | Pan Gongsheng  
France | Emmanuel Macron | Minister of Economics and Finance | Éric Lombard | Bank of France | François Villeroy de Galhau  
Germany | Friedrich Merz | Minister of Finance | Lars Klingbeil | Deutsche Bundesbank | Joachim Nagel  
India | Narendra Modi | Minister of Finance | Nirmala Sitharaman | Reserve Bank of India | Sanjay Malhotra  
Indonesia | Prabowo Subianto | Minister of Finance | Sri Mulyani | Bank Indonesia | Perry Warjiyo  
Italy | Giorgia Meloni | Minister of Economy and Finance | Giancarlo Giorgetti | Bank of Italy | Fabio Panetta  
Japan | Shigeru Ishiba | Minister of Finance | Katsunobu Katō | Bank of Japan | Kazuo Ueda  
Mexico | Claudia Sheinbaum | Secretary of Finance and Public Credit | Edgar Amador Zamora | Bank of Mexico | Victoria Rodríguez Ceja  
Russia | Vladimir Putin | Minister of Finance | Anton Siluanov | Bank of Russia | Elvira Nabiullina  
Saudi Arabia | Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud | Minister of Finance | Mohammed Al-Jadaan | Saudi Central Bank | Fahad Almubarak  
South Africa | Cyril Ramaphosa | Minister of Finance | Enoch Godongwana | South African Reserve Bank | Lesetja Kganyago  
South Korea | Lee Jae Myung | Minister of Economy and Finance | Koo Yun-cheol | Bank of Korea | Rhee Chang-yong  
Turkey | Recep Tayyip Erdoğan | Minister of Treasury and Finance | Mehmet Şimşek | Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey | Fatih Karahan  
United Kingdom | Keir Starmer | Chancellor of the Exchequer | Rachel Reeves | Bank of England | Andrew Bailey  
United States | Donald Trump | Secretary of the Treasury | Scott Bessent | Federal Reserve | Jerome Powell  
European Union | António Costa | Commissioner for Economy | Valdis Dombrovskis | European Central Bank | Christine Lagarde  
Ursula von der Leyen  
African Union | João Lourenço | Commissioner for Economic Affairs  | Victor Harison | African Central Bank (yet to be established)  | TBA   
Mahamoud Ali Youssouf  
  
### Member country data

Member  | Trade  
bil. USD (2022)  | Nom. GDP  
mil. USD (2025)  | PPP GDP  
mil. USD (2025)  | Nom. GDP per capita  
USD (2025)  | PPP GDP per capita  
USD (2025)  | HDI  
(2023)  | Population  
(2022)  | Area  
km2 | P5 | G4 | G7 | BRICS | MIKTA | CPTPP | RCEP | APEC | OECD | DAC | C'wth | SCO | IMF economy classification   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Argentina | 170.1  | 683,533  | 1,493,423  | 14,362  | 31,379  | 0.865  | 46,300,000  | 2,780,400  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | negotiating | No  | No  | No  | Emerging   
Australia | 721.4  | 1,771,681  | 1,980,022  | 64,547  | 72,138  | 0.958  | 26,141,369  | 7,692,024  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | Advanced   
Brazil | 626.4  | 2,125,958  | 4,958,122  | 9,964  | 23,238  | 0.786  | 217,240,060  | 8,515,767  | No  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | negotiating | No  | No  | No  | Emerging   
Canada | 1,179.1  | 2,225,341  | 2,730,110  | 53,558  | 65,707  | 0.939  | 38,743,000  | 9,984,670  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | Advanced   
China | 6,309.6  | 19,231,705  | 40,716,448  | 13,687  | 28,978  | 0.797  | 1,411,750,000  | 9,596,960  | Yes  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | applicant | Yes  | Yes  | participant | No  | No  | Yes  | Emerging   
France | 1,435.8  | 3,211,292  | 4,503,783  | 46,792  | 65,626  | 0.920  | 68,305,148  | 640,679  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | Advanced   
Germany | 3,226.9  | 4,744,804  | 6,161,002  | 55,911  | 72,599  | 0.959  | 84,316,622  | 357,114  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | Advanced   
India | 1,176.8  | 4,187,017  | 17,647,050  | 2,878  | 12,132  | 0.685  | 1,406,632,000  | 3,287,263  | No  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | participant | No  | Yes  | Yes  | Emerging   
Indonesia | 529.4  | 1,429,743  | 5,009,483  | 5,027  | 17,612  | 0.728  | 279,088,893  | 1,904,569  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | applicant | Yes  | Yes  | negotiating | No  | No  | No  | Emerging   
Italy | 1,346.4  | 2,422,855  | 3,719,110  | 41,091  | 63,076  | 0.915  | 61,095,551  | 301,336  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | Advanced   
Japan | 1,644.2  | 4,186,431  | 6,741,192  | 33,956  | 54,677  | 0.925  | 125,592,404  | 377,930  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | Advanced   
Mexico | 1,204.5  | 1,692,640  | 3,395,916  | 12,692  | 25,463  | 0.789  | 131,541,424  | 1,964,375  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | Emerging   
South Korea | 1,415.0  | 1,790,322  | 3,365,052  | 34,642  | 65,112  | 0.937  | 51,844,834  | 100,210  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | Advanced   
Russia | 772.3  | 2,076,396  | 7,191,718  | 14,258  | 49,383  | 0.832  | 145,807,429  | 17,098,242  | Yes  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Emerging   
Saudi Arabia | 598.8  | 1,083,749  | 2,229,611  | 30,099  | 61,923  | 0.900  | 36,168,000  | 2,149,690  | No  | No  | No  | invited | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | participant  | No  | Dialogue partner | Emerging   
South Africa | 259.1  | 410,338  | 1,025,615  | 6,397  | 15,989  | 0.741  | 61,060,000  | 1,221,037  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | participant | No  | Yes  | No  | Emerging   
Turkey | 617.9  | 1,437,406  | 3,651,873  | 16,709  | 42,451  | 0.853  | 85,551,932  | 783,562  | No  | No  | No  | partner (unconfirmed) | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | Dialogue partner | Emerging   
United Kingdom | 1,353.3  | 3,839,180  | 4,447,841  | 54,949  | 63,661  | 0.946  | 68,492,933  | 242,495  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | Advanced   
United States | 5,441.0  | 30,507,217  | 30,507,217  | 89,105  | 89,105  | 0.938  | 337,341,954  | 9,833,517  | Yes  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Yes  | Yes  | Yes  | No  | No  | Advanced   
_European Union_ | 5,858.4  | 19,991,160  | 29,176,749  | 44,225  | 64,545  | 0.900  | 446,828,803  | 4,233,262  | No  | No  | Yes  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | participant | Yes  | No  | No  | Advanced (majority)  
_African Union_ | 1,379.0  | 2,834,002  | 10,826,442  | 1,930  | 7,373  | 0.577  | 1,393,676,444  | 29,922,059  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | No  | Emerging   
  
In addition to these 21 members, the chief executive officers of several other
international forums and institutions participate in meetings of the G20.
These include the managing director and Chairman of the International Monetary
Fund, the President of the World Bank, the International Monetary and
Financial Committee and the Chairman of the Development Assistance Committee.

The G20's membership does not reflect exactly the 21 largest economies of the
world in any given year; as the organization states:

> In a forum such as the G20, it is particularly important for the number of
> countries involved to be restricted and fixed to ensure the effectiveness
> and continuity of its activity. There are no formal criteria for G20
> membership and the composition of the group has remained unchanged since it
> was established. Because of the objectives of the G20, it was considered
> important that countries and regions of systemic significance for the
> international financial system be included. Aspects such as geographical
> balance and population representation also played a major part.

### Role of Asian countries

A 2011 report released by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) predicted that
large Asian economies such as China and India would play a more important role
in global economic governance in the future. The report claimed that the rise
of emerging market economies heralded a new world order, in which the G20
would become the global economic steering committee. The ADB furthermore noted
that Asian countries had led the global recovery following the late-2000s
recession. It predicted that the region would have a greater presence on the
global stage, shaping the G20's agenda for balanced and sustainable growth
through strengthening intraregional trade and stimulating domestic demand.

## Invitees

G20 members (dark blue), countries represented through the European Union and
African Union (light blue) and previously invited states (pink) as of 2024.

Typically, several participants that are not full members of the G20 are
extended invitations to participate in the summits. Permanent guest invitees
are: the government of Spain; the Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and a representative of the New Partnership for Africa's Development
are invited in their capacities as leaders of their organisations and as heads
of government of their home states. In addition, the leaders of the Financial
Stability Board, the International Labour Organization, the International
Monetary Fund, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the
United Nations, the World Bank Group and the World Trade Organization are
invited and participate in pre-summit planning within the policy purview of
their respective organisation.

Other invitees are chosen by the host country, usually one or two countries
from its region. For example, South Korea invited Singapore. International
organisations which have been invited in the past include the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC), the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(BCBS), the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the Eurasian Economic
Community (EAEC), the European Central Bank (ECB), the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), the Global Governance Group (3G) and the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC). Previously, the Netherlands had a similar status to Spain while
the rotating presidency of the Council of the European Union would also
receive an invitation, but only in that capacity and not as their own state's
leader (such as the Czech premiers Mirek Topolánek and Jan Fischer during the
2009 summits).

## Permanent guest invitees

Invitee  | Officeholder  | State  | Official title   
---|---|---|---  
International Labour Organization (ILO)  | Gilbert Houngbo | —  | Director General   
International Monetary Fund (IMF)  | Kristalina Georgieva | —  | Managing Director  
Spain | Pedro Sánchez |  Spain | Prime Minister  
New Partnership for Africa's Development (AUDA-NEPAD)  | Abdel Fattah El-Sisi |  Egypt | President (chair)   
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)  | Mathias Cormann | —  | Secretary-General   
United Nations (UN)  | António Guterres | —  | Secretary-General  
World Bank Group (WBG)  | Ajay Banga | —  | President   
World Health Organization (WHO)  | Tedros Adhanom | —  | Director General  
World Trade Organization (WTO)  | Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala | —  | Director General  
  
## Agenda

### Financial focus

The initial G20 agenda, as conceived by US, Canadian and German policymakers,
was very much focused on the sustainability of sovereign debt and global
financial stability, in an inclusive format that would bring in the largest
developing economies as equal partners. During a summit in November 2008, the
leaders of the group pledged to contribute trillions to international
financial organizations, including the World Bank and IMF, mainly for re-
establishing the global financial system.

Since inception, the recurring themes covered by G20 summit participants have
related in priority to global economic growth, international trade and
financial market regulation.

The G20 has led the Debt Service Suspension Initiative, through which official
bilateral creditors suspended debt repayments of 73 of the poorest debtor
countries.

### Growth and sustainability

The G20 countries account for almost 75% of global carbon emissions. After the
adoption of the UN Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Climate
Agreement in 2015, more "issues of global significance" were added to the G20
agenda: migration, digitisation, employment, healthcare, the economic
empowerment of women, development aid and stopping climate change.

The G20 countries account for almost 75% of the global carbon emissions and
promised in 2009 to phase out 'inefficient subsidies'. Despite these promises
G20 members have subsidised fossil fuel companies over $3.3 trillion between
2015 and 2021, with several states increasing subsidies; Australia (+48.2%),
the US (+36.7%), Indonesia (+26.6%), France (+23.8%), China (+4.1%), Brazil
(+3.0%), Mexico (+2.6%). China alone generates over half of the coal-generated
electricity in the world.

### Interrelated themes

Wolfgang Schäuble, German Federal Minister of Finance, had insisted on the
interconnected nature of the issues facing G20 countries, be they purely
financial or developmental, and the need to reach effective, cross-cutting
policy measures: "Globalization has lifted hundreds of millions out of
poverty, but there is also a growing rise in frustration in some quarters […]
development, [national] security and migration are all interlinked".

## G20 engagement groups

The G20 engagement groups and pre-conferences are independent collectives that
are led by organisations of the host country. They represent a diverse group
of stakeholders and work collectively to develop non-binding policy
recommendations formally submitted to the G20 leaders for consideration.

For the 2022 G20 hosted by Indonesia, there are 10 engagement groups formed to
facilitate independent stakeholders in developing proposals and policy
recommendations for G20 leaders.

Startup20 and other few engagement groups initiated under the G20 India
Presidency of 2023.

## Influence and accountability

The G20's prominent membership gives it a strong input on global policy
despite lacking any formal ability to enforce rules. There are disputes over
the legitimacy of the G20, and criticisms of its organisation and the efficacy
of its declarations.

The G20's transparency and accountability have been questioned by critics, who
call attention to the absence of a formal charter and the fact that the most
important G20 meetings are closed-door. In 2001, the economist Frances Stewart
proposed an Economic Security Council within the United Nations as an
alternative to the G20. In such a council, members would be elected by the
General Assembly based on their importance to the world economy, and the
contribution they are willing to provide to world economic development.

The cost and extent of summit-related security is often a contentious issue in
the hosting country, and G20 summits have attracted protesters from a variety
of backgrounds, including information activists, opponents of fractional-
reserve banking and anti-capitalists. In 2010, the Toronto G20 summit sparked
mass protests and rioting, leading to the largest mass arrest in Canada's
history.

## Views on the G20's exclusivity of membership

Although the G20 has stated that the group's "economic weight and broad
membership gives it a high degree of legitimacy and influence over the
management of the global economy and financial system", its legitimacy has
been challenged. A 2011 report for the Danish Institute for International
Studies criticised the G20's exclusivity, particularly highlighting its
underrepresentation of African countries and its practice of inviting
observers from non-member states as a mere "concession at the margins", which
does not grant the organisation representational legitimacy. Concerning the
membership issue, US President Barack Obama noted the difficulty of pleasing
everyone: "Everybody wants the smallest possible group that includes them. So,
if they're the 21st largest nation in the world, they want the G-21, and think
it's highly unfair if they have been cut out." Others stated in 2011 that the
exclusivity is not an insurmountable problem and proposed mechanisms by which
it could become more inclusive.

### Norwegian perspective

In line with Norway's emphasis on inclusive international processes, the
United Nations, and the UN system, in a 2010 interview with _Der Spiegel_ ,
the current prime minister of Norway Jonas Gahr Støre called the G20 "one of
the greatest setbacks since World War II" as 173 states who are all members of
the UN are not among the G20. This includes Norway, a major developed economy
and the seventh-largest contributor to UN international development programs,
which is not a member state of the EU, and thus is not represented in the G20
even indirectly. Norway, like other such states, has little or no voice within
the group. Støre argued that the G20 undermines the legitimacy of
international organizations set up in the aftermath of World War II, such as
the IMF, World Bank and United Nations:

> The G20 is a self-appointed group. Its composition is determined by the
> major countries and powers. It may be more representative than the G7 or the
> G8, in which only the richest countries are represented, but it is still
> arbitrary. We no longer live in the 19th century, a time when the major
> powers met and redrew the map of the world. No one needs a new Congress of
> Vienna.

However, Norway, has moderated this position in practice, and has contributed
to a number of G20-work streams for years, in particular on health, energy and
climate. Under the government of Erna Solberg, Norway attended the 2017 G20
summit in Hamburg, Germany.

### Spanish position on membership

Spain is the world's twelfth largest economy by nominal GDP (the fifteenth
largest by purchasing power parity), the fourth in the European Union, and the
second among Spanish-speaking countries. In addition, since the 1990s several
Spanish companies have gained multinational status, and Spain is an important
foreign investor worldwide. Its numbers[_clarification needed_] exceed the
numbers of several current members of the G20 such as Argentina or South
Africa. This has led to what Henley _et al_ consider to be a de facto position
as a member of the G20. However, Spain, a permanent guest, does not plan to
request official membership.

### Polish aspirations

In contrast with the Spanish position, the Polish government has repeatedly
asked to join the G20.

Before the 2009 G20 London summit, the Polish government expressed an interest
in joining with Spain and the Netherlands and condemned an "organisational
mess" in which a few European leaders spoke in the name of the collective EU
without legitimate authorisation in cases which belong to the European
Commission.[_citation needed_]

During a 2010 meeting with foreign diplomats, Polish president Lech Kaczyński
said:

> The Polish economy is according to our data the 18th world economy. The
> place of my country is among the members of the G20. This is a very simple
> postulate: firstly – it results from the size of the Polish economy,
> secondly – it results from the fact that Poland is the biggest country in
> its region and the biggest country that has experienced a certain story.
> That story is a political and economic transformation.

In 2012, Tim Ferguson wrote in _Forbes_ that swapping Argentina for Poland
should be considered, claiming that the Polish economy was headed toward a
leadership role in Europe and its membership would be more legitimate. A
similar opinion was expressed by Marcin Sobczyk in the _Wall Street Journal_.
Mamta Murthi from the World Bank said: "To be in 'a club', what Poland can do
is to continue working as if it already is in the club it wants to join."

In 2014, consulting company Ernst & Young published its report about optimal
members for G20. After analyzing trade, institutional and investment links
Poland was included as one of the optimal members.

G20 membership has been part of the look program of Poland's Law and Justice
party and President Andrzej Duda. In March 2017, Deputy Prime Minister of
Poland Mateusz Morawiecki took part in a meeting of G20 financial ministers in
Baden-Baden as the first Polish representative.

### Global Governance Group (3G) response

In June 2010, Singapore's representative to the United Nations warned the G20
that its decisions would affect "all countries, big and small", and asserted
that prominent non-G20 members should be included in financial reform
discussions. Singapore thereafter took a leading role in organizing the Global
Governance Group (3G), an informal grouping of 30 non-G20 countries (including
several microstates and many Third World countries) to collectively channel
their views into the G20 process more effectively. Singapore's chairing of the
3G was cited as a rationale for inviting Singapore to the November 2010 G20
summit in South Korea, as well as 2011, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017
summits.[_citation needed_]

### _Foreign Policy_ critiques

The American magazine _Foreign Policy_ has published articles condemning the
G20, in terms of its principal function as an alternative to the supposedly
exclusive G8. It questions the actions of some of the G20 members and advances
the notion that some states should not have membership in the first place.
Furthermore, with the effects of the Great Recession still ongoing, the
magazine has criticized the G20's efforts to implement reforms of the world's
financial institutions, branding such efforts as failures.

### Calls for removal of Russia

In March 2022, following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, U.S. President Joe
Biden called for the removal of Russia from the group. Alternatively, he
suggested that Ukraine be allowed to attend the G20 2022 summit, despite its
lack of membership. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau also said the group
should "re-evaluate" Russia's participation. Russia claims it would not be a
significant issue, as most G20 members are already fighting Russia
economically due to the war. China suggested that expelling Russia would be
counterproductive. In November 2022, Indonesia and Russia stated that Vladimir
Putin would not attend the G20 summit in person, but may attend virtually.
During the 2022 summit, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy appeared in a
video statement and repeatedly addressed the assembly as the 'G19' as a means
of indicating his viewpoint that Russia should be removed from the group.
Despite the group refusing criticism on Russia directly in 2023 for the war,
Putin was not present at the G20 summit due to the arrest warrant issued by
the ICC in 2024.