Developed countries that back the IMF

The **Group of Ten** (**G-10** or **G10**) refers to the group of countries
that agreed to participate in the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB), an
agreement to provide the International Monetary Fund (IMF) with additional
funds to increase its lending ability.

## History

The GAB was established in 1962, when the governments of eight International
Monetary Fund (IMF) members—Belgium, Canada, France, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States—and the central banks
of two others, Germany and Sweden, agreed to make resources available to the
IMF with an additional $6 billion of their resources. The additional money was
intended to allow the IMF to have increased lending resources.

In 1964, the funds were used by the IMF to rescue the pound sterling. The G-10
grew in 1964 by the association of the eleventh member, Switzerland, then not
a member of the IMF, but the name of the group remained the same.

## Activities

The GAB enables the IMF to borrow specified amounts of currencies from these
eleven industrial countries (or their central banks), under certain
circumstances. Specifically, a proposal for calls under the GAB may only be
made when a proposal for the establishment of an activation period under the
New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) is not accepted by NAB participants, who
number 38 countries, amongst which are the BRICS nations and Middle Eastern
powers.[_citation needed_]

The potential amount of credit available to the IMF under the GAB totals SDR
17bn (about $26bn), with an additional SDR 1.5bn available under an associated
arrangement[_clarify_] with Saudi Arabia. The GAB was established in 1962 and
expanded in 1983 to SDR 17bn, from about SDR 6bn. It has been activated ten
times, the last time in 1998. The GAB and the associated credit arrangement
with Saudi Arabia have been renewed, without modifications, for a period of
five years from December 26, 2013.

The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) hosts a publications e-library
page for the G-10.

### Observers

The following international organizations are official observers of the
activities of the G10: the BIS, European Commission, International Monetary
Fund, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Luxembourg
is an associate member.