Regional organization of four post-Soviet states: Georgia, Ukraine,
Azerbaijan, and Moldova

The **GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development** is a regional
organization of four post-Soviet states: Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and
Moldova.

Conceived in 1997 to harmonize and integrate commercial, diplomatic and
democratic relations among its member states, the GUAM treaty charter was
signed in 2001 and today covers a population of over 49.8 million people.
Uzbekistan was also a member of GUAM in the 1999–2005 period. In 2003, GUAM
became an observer in the UN General Assembly. In 2007, GUAM also established
a military peacekeeping force and organized joint military exercises. Such
increasingly deepened integration and relationships led to GUAM playing an
important role in the region's diplomatic and commercial affairs.

The agreement on a Free Trade Area was signed in 2002. In 2017, additional
agreements on a free-trade area were announced, but as of 2022 reportedly the
FTA has not been ratified and has not entered into force. The WTO was notified
only in 2017 and the Agreement is designated as "Plurilateral" and "In Force".
According to the WTO database, the GUAM FTA agreement was signed in 2002 and
entered into force in 2003. International Trade Centre says there is no free
trade area in operation with distinct rules from an Agreement on Creation of
CIS Free Trade Area, was signed on 15 April 1994 by 12 CIS countries.

The database of agreements of the International Trade Centre does not indicate
that a GUAM FTA agreement has been concluded, but it does indicate that the
1994 Agreement on CIS FTA is in force for Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and
Moldova. and the 1999 Agreement on CIS FTA version is listed as the current
text of the FTA agreement.

The official negotiating language of GUAM was Russian, but it was scrapped in
favor of English in 2014.

Election monitoring by GUAM has been described as "low-quality", as observers
from the group validate flawed elections.

## History

### Origins and foundation, Uzbek membership (1997–2005)

70-kopeck Ukrainian postage stamp commemorating the GUAM Summit held in Kyiv,
22–23 May 2006.

Cooperation between Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova started with the
"GUAM consultative forum", established on 10 October 1997, in Strasbourg and
named after the initial letters of each of those countries. In 1999, the
organisation adopted the name **GUUAM** due to the membership of Uzbekistan. A
summit in Yalta on 6 and 7 June 2001 was accompanied by the signing of GUUAM's
charter, which formalized the organization. According to the former Ukrainian
President Viktor Yushchenko, the charter set objectives for cooperation, such
as promoting democratic values, ensuring stable development, enhancing
international and regional security, and stepping up European integration.

In 2002, Uzbekistan announced that it planned to withdraw from the
organization and following this announcement started to ignore GUUAM summits
and meetings. In May 2005, shortly after the Andijan massacre, Uzbekistan
finally gave official notice of withdrawal from the organization to the
Moldovan presidency, thus changing the group's name back to GUAM.

A summit of GUUAM took place in Chișinău, Moldova, on 22 April 2005. The US
Department of State special representative for Eurasian conflicts, Steven
Mann, and the OSCE Secretary General, Ján Kubiš, participated in the summit.
The Russian ambassador in Chișinău criticized the fact that Russia was not
invited to attend. Ilham Aliyev, the president of Azerbaijan, said after the
summit: "Our organization is emerging as a powerful force, participating in
resolving problems in the Caspian—Black Sea region" while the president of
Ukraine, Viktor Yushchenko, said that a new page had been written in the
history of the organization.

### Deepening of relations and integration (2006–2013)

Given the growth of its influence in the region, and the existence of the
Russian—led Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), GUAM was seen in Russia
as a way of countering the Russian influence in the area and as part of a
strategy backed by the United States. However, GUAM leaders repeatedly and
officially dismiss such claims and declare their strong willingness to develop
close friendly relations with Russia.[_citation needed_] Moreover, Azerbaijan,
the group's main energy power, has managed to avoid any conflicts with Russia
in recent years.

In April 2006, three GUAM nations supported Ukraine's proposal to condemn the
Holodomor, the 1930s famine in Ukraine which killed millions of people, as a
genocide.

In May 2006, Ukraine and Azerbaijan announced plans to further increase the
GUAM member relations by renaming the organization _GUAM Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development_ and establishing its headquarters in the
Ukrainian capital. The other members said this was a remarkable step and
development. The summit participants were also expected to adopt GUAM by—laws,
a declaration and a communique. Also in May 2006 the Ukrainian Defense
Ministry announced plans to establish GUAM peacekeeping forces. The following
year, GUAM nations agreed to form a 500-personnel joint peacekeeping force to
battle separatism.

In June 2007, presidents of Lithuania, Poland and Romania joined the leaders
of GUAM member states at the GUAM summit in Baku, Azerbaijan. Also
participating at the summit were the Vice-President of Bulgaria, the Vice-
Speaker of the Estonian parliament, the Minister of Economy of Latvia, and the
high—level representatives of the United States, Japan, the Organization for
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE), the Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation (BSEC), UNESCO, and heads of diplomatic missions
accredited in Azerbaijan.

### After Russian invasion and annexation of Crimea (2014–present)

In December 2014, then-Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin proposed that
GUAM should use English during meetings, instead of Russian, which was also
the main language used in official gatherings in the Soviet Union. GUAM
representatives agreed.

In March 2017, GUAM officially established agreements on a free-trade area and
harmonization of customs procedures among its member states.[_needs update_]

In May 2021, three of the four members, Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia, joined
the Association Trio in order to jointly facilitate further European
integration.

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships among various
supranational organisations in the territory of the former Soviet Union

  * v
  * t
  * e

## Free trade area negotiations

An Agreement on Establishment of Free Trade Area between the GUUAM
Participating States was signed on 20 July 2002.

In 2017 Ukraine announced agreements on a free-trade area and harmonization of
customs procedures among its member states.

At the 77th Session of the United Nations (UN) General Assembly held in New
York on 20 September 2022, the Foreign Ministers of the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development (GUAM) members came together on the
sidelines and held the 39th Cabinet meeting of GUAM. After the meeting, the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova
signed a protocol on the determination of the country of origin of the goods.
In addition, it was announced by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine
that a free trade zone was established between the GUAM countries.

The Free Trade Area has not been ratified and has not entered into force. It
is too soon to be sure whether GUAM member states will ratify the free trade
area soon, or if the project will be placed on hiatus. There is also the
question about to what extent an FTA could help financially GUAM countries
compared to other projects, such as European Union membership or the Middle
Corridor. GUAM is a regional bloc that has not demonstrated its usefulness to
its member states compared to other organizations or projects that GUAM member
states are part of.

## Members

Current

  * Georgia (1997)
  * Ukraine (1997)
  * Azerbaijan (1997)
  * Moldova (1997)

Former

  * Uzbekistan (1999–2002)