Intergovernmental organization regulating tuna fisheries in the Indian Ocean

| This article includes a list of general references, but **it lacks
sufficient correspondinginline citations**. Please help to improve this
article by introducing more precise citations. _( January 2024)__(Learn how
and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **Indian Ocean Tuna Commission** (**IOTC** ; French: _CTOI_) is an
intergovernmental organization that co-ordinates the regulation and management
of tuna in the Indian Ocean. Conceived in 1993, it entered into existence in
1996.

A multilateral treaty, the **Agreement for the Establishment of the Indian
Ocean Tuna Commission** was approved by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 1993. The agreement
entered into force on 27 March 1996 after it had been accepted by a tenth
party. The Agreement is open to any state that has coasts within the Indian
Ocean region (or adjacent seas) as well as any state that fishes for tuna in
the Indian Ocean region. The agreement is also open to regional economic
organizations.

IOTC headquarters are located in Victoria, Seychelles.

The IOTC is the successor to the Indo-Pacific Tuna Development and Management
Programme, which was established in 1982.

As of July 2024, there are 29 members of IOTC:

  * Australia
  * Bangladesh
  * China
  * Comoros
  * European Union
  * France
  * India
  * Indonesia
  * Iran
  * Japan
  * Kenya
  * South Korea
  * Madagascar
  * Malaysia
  * Maldives
  * Mauritius
  * Mozambique
  * Oman
  * Pakistan
  * Philippines
  * Seychelles
  * Somalia
  * South Africa
  * Sri Lanka
  * Sudan
  * Tanzania
  * Thailand
  * United Kingdom
  * Yemen

Vanuatu was a member of the IOTC between 2012 and 2015. Eritrea was a member
until 2023. They chose to withdraw from the organization. Liberia is a
cooperating non-contracting party.

## UK's Status in the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission

In May 2022, the Food and Agriculture Organization issued a legal opinion
asserting that the United Kingdom should no longer be recognized as a "coastal
state" in the Indian Ocean, due to the disputed status of the Chagos
Archipelago. This position follows UN General Assembly resolution 73/295,
which affirms the Chagos Archipelago as part of Mauritius. Consequently, the
UK is now considered a state that fishes in the region but does not hold the
rights or obligations of a coastal state under the Indian Ocean Tuna
Commission framework.