International police organization

Law enforcement agency

The **International Criminal Police Organization – INTERPOL** (abbreviated as
**ICPO–INTERPOL**), commonly known as **Interpol** (UK: /ˈɪntərpɒl/ _IN -tər-
pol_, US: /-poʊl/ _-⁠pohl_; stylized in allcaps), is an international
organization that facilitates worldwide police cooperation and crime control.
It is the world's largest international police organization. It is
headquartered in Lyon, France, with seven regional bureaus worldwide, and a
National Central Bureau in all 196 member states.

The organization today known as Interpol was founded on 7 September 1923 at
the close of a five-day International Police Congress in Vienna as the
**International Criminal Police Commission** (**ICPC**); it adopted many of
its current duties throughout the 1930s. After coming under Nazi control in
1938, the agency had its headquarters in the same building as the Gestapo. It
was effectively stagnant until the end of World War II. In 1956, the ICPC
adopted a new constitution and the name Interpol, derived from its telegraphic
address used since 1946.

Interpol provides investigative support, expertise and training to law
enforcement worldwide, focusing on three major areas of transnational crime:
terrorism, cybercrime and organized crime. Its broad mandate covers virtually
every kind of crime, including crimes against humanity, child pornography,
drug trafficking and production, political corruption, intellectual property
infringement, as well as white-collar crime. The agency also facilitates
cooperation among national law enforcement institutions through criminal
databases and communications networks. Contrary to popular belief, Interpol is
itself not a law enforcement agency.

Interpol has an annual budget of €142 million ($155 million), most of which
comes from annual contributions by member police forces in 181 countries. It
is governed by a General Assembly composed of all member countries, which
elects the executive committee and the president (currently Ahmed Naser Al-
Raisi of the United Arab Emirates) to supervise and implement Interpol's
policies and administration. Day-to-day operations are carried out by the
General Secretariat, comprising around 1,000 personnel from over 100
countries, including both police and civilians. The Secretariat is led by the
secretary-general, currently Valdecy Urquiza, the former vice president of
Interpol for the Americas.

Pursuant to its charter, Interpol seeks to remain politically neutral in
fulfilling its mandate, and is thus barred from interventions or activities
that are political, military, religious, or racial in nature and from
involving itself in disputes over such matters. The agency operates in four
languages: Arabic, English, French and Spanish.

## History

Until the 19th century, cooperation among police in different national and
political jurisdictions was organized largely on an ad hoc basis, focused on a
specific goal or criminal enterprise. The earliest attempt at a formal,
permanent framework for international police coordination was the Police Union
of German States, formed in 1851 to bring together police from various German-
speaking states. Its activities were centered mostly on political dissidents
and criminals. A similar plan was launched by Italy in the 1898 Anti-Anarchist
Conference of Rome, which brought delegates from 21 European countries to
create a formal structure for addressing the international anarchist movement.
Neither the conference nor its follow up meeting in St. Petersburg in 1904
yielded results.

Interpol headquarters in the 6th arrondissement of Lyon, France

The early 20th century saw several attempts to formalize international police
cooperation, driven by increasing international travel and commerce, which
facilitated transnational criminal enterprises and fugitives on the run. The
first major effort was the International Criminal Police Congress, held in
Monaco in 1914. This event brought diplomats and legal officials from two
dozen countries to discuss international collaboration in criminal
investigations, the sharing of investigative techniques, and extradition
procedures. The Monaco Congress outlined twelve principles that would
eventually form the foundation of Interpol, such as establishing direct
communication between police forces in different countries, creating
international standards for forensics and data collection, and streamlining
the process for handling extradition requests. However, the idea of an
international police organization remained inactive during the First World
War. In 1922, the United States attempted a similar initiative through the
International Police Conference in New York City, but it failed to garner
international support.

A year later, in 1923, a new initiative was undertaken at another
International Criminal Police Congress in Vienna, spearheaded by Johannes
Schober, President of the Viennese Police Department. The 22 delegates agreed
to found the International Criminal Police Commission (ICPC), the direct
forerunner of Interpol, which would be based in Vienna. Founding members
included police officials from Austria, Germany, Belgium, Poland, China,
Egypt, France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Japan, Romania,
Sweden, Switzerland and Yugoslavia. The same year, wanted person notices were
first published in the ICPCs International Public Safety Journal. The United
Kingdom joined in 1928. By 1934, the ICPC's membership more than doubled to 58
nations.[_citation needed_]. The United States did not join Interpol until
1938, although a U.S. police officer unofficially attended the 1923 congress.

Following the _Anschluss_ in 1938, the Vienna-based organization fell under
the control of Nazi Germany; on November 29, 1941, Interpol had offices at _Am
Kleinen Wannsee 16_ ; the commission’s headquarters were eventually moved to
Berlin in 1942. Most member states withdrew their support during this period.
From 1938 to 1945, the presidents of the ICPC included Otto Steinhäusl,
Reinhard Heydrich, Arthur Nebe and Ernst Kaltenbrunner. All were generals in
the _Schutzstaffel_ (SS); Kaltenbrunner was the highest-ranking SS officer
executed following the Nuremberg trials.

In 1946, after the end of World War II, the organization was revived as the
International Criminal Police Organization (ICPO) by officials from Belgium,
France, Scandinavia, the United States and the United Kingdom. Its new
headquarters were established in Paris, then from 1967 in Saint-Cloud, a
Parisian suburb. They remained there until 1989 when they were moved to their
present location in Lyon.

Until the 1980s, Interpol did not intervene in the prosecution of Nazi war
criminals in accordance with Article 3 of its Charter, which prohibited
intervention in "political" matters.

On May 10, 2023, Operation Identify Me was launched.

## Constitution

The role of Interpol is defined by the general provisions of its constitution.

Article 2 states that its role is:

>   1. To ensure and promote the widest possible mutual assistance between all
> criminal police authorities within the limits of the laws existing in the
> different countries and in the spirit of the Universal Declaration of Human
> Rights.
>   2. To establish and develop all institutions likely to contribute
> effectively to the prevention and suppression of ordinary law crimes.
>

Article 3 states:

> It is strictly forbidden for the Organization to undertake any intervention
> or activities of a political, military, religious or racial character.

## Operating procedures

Contrary to the common idea due to frequent portrayals in popular media,
Interpol is not a supranational law enforcement agency and has no agents with
arresting powers. Instead, it is an international organization that functions
as a network of law enforcement agencies from different countries. The
organization thus functions as an administrative liaison among the law
enforcement agencies of the member countries, providing communications and
database assistance, mostly through its central headquarters in Lyon, along
with the assistance of smaller local bureaus in each of its member states.

Interpol's databases at the Lyon headquarters can assist law enforcement in
fighting international crime. While national agencies have their own extensive
crime databases, the information rarely extends beyond one nation's borders.
Interpol's databases can track criminals and crime trends around the world,
specifically by means of authorized collections of fingerprints and face
photos, lists of wanted persons, DNA samples, and travel documents. Interpol's
lost and stolen travel document database alone contains more than 12 million
records. Officials at the headquarters also analyze this data and release
information on crime trends to the member countries.

An encrypted Internet-based worldwide communications network allows Interpol
agents and member countries to contact each other at any time. Known as
I-24/7, the network offers constant access to Interpol's databases. While the
National Central Bureaus are the primary access sites to the network, some
member countries have expanded it to key areas such as airports and border
access points. Member countries can also access each other's criminal
databases via the I-24/7 system.

Interpol issues eight types of Interpol notices, seven of which are: red,
blue, green, yellow, black, orange, and purple. An eighth special notice is
issued at the special request of the United Nations Security Council. As of
2019[update], there were 62,448 valid Red and 12,234 Yellow notices in
circulation.

In the event of an international disaster, terrorist attack, or assassination,
Interpol can send an Incident Response Team (IRT). IRTs can offer a range of
expertise and database access to assist with victim identification, suspect
identification, and the dissemination of information to other nations' law
enforcement agencies. In addition, at the request of local authorities, they
can act as a central command and logistics operation to coordinate other law
enforcement agencies involved in a case. Such teams were deployed eight times
in 2013. Interpol began issuing its own travel documents in 2009 with hopes
that nations would remove visa requirements for individuals travelling for
Interpol business, thereby improving response times. In September 2017, the
organization voted to accept Palestine and the Solomon Islands as members.

## Finances

In 2019, Interpol's operating income was €142 million, of which 41 percent
were statutory contributions by member countries, 35 percent were voluntary
cash contributions and 24 percent were in-kind contributions for the use of
equipment, services and buildings. With the goal of enhancing the
collaboration between Interpol and the private sector to support Interpol's
missions, the Interpol Foundation for a Safer World was created in 2013.
Although legally independent of Interpol, the relationship between the two is
close enough for Interpol's president to obtain in 2015 the departure of HSBC
CEO from the foundation board after the Swiss Leaks allegations.

From 2004 to 2010, Interpol's external auditors was the French Court of Audit.
In November 2010, the Court of Audit was replaced by the Office of the Auditor
General of Norway for a three-year term with an option for a further three
years.

## Offices

In addition to its General Secretariat headquarters in Lyon, Interpol
maintains six regional bureaus and three special representative offices:

  * Buenos Aires, Argentina
  * Brussels, Belgium (special representative office to the European Union)
  * Yaoundé, Cameroon
  * Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire
  * San Salvador, El Salvador
  * Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (special representative office to the African Union)
  * Nairobi, Kenya
  * New York City, United States (special representative office to the United Nations)
  * Harare, Zimbabwe

Interpol's Command and Coordination Centres offer a 24-hour point of contact
for national police forces seeking urgent information or facing a crisis. The
original is in Lyon with a second in Buenos Aires added in September 2011. A
third was opened in Singapore in September 2014.

Interpol opened a Special Representative Office to the UN in New York City in
2004 and to the EU in Brussels in 2009.

The organization has constructed the Interpol Global Complex for Innovation
(IGCI) in Singapore to act as its research and development facility, and a
place of cooperation on digital crimes investigations. It was officially
opened in April 2015, but had already become active beforehand. Most notably,
a worldwide takedown of the SIMDA botnet infrastructure was coordinated and
executed from IGCI's Cyber Fusion Centre in the weeks before the opening, as
was revealed at the launch event.

## Leadership

### Secretaries General

| This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( March
2025)_  
---|---  
  
### Presidents

| This section **needs expansion**. You can help by adding to it. _( March
2025)_  
---|---  
  
#### Paul Dickopf (1968–1972)

Under the Nazi government of Adolf Hitler, Paul Dickopf was a member of the
National Socialist German Students' League, _Sturmabteilung_ and the
_Schutzstaffel_ before and during World War II.

Dickopf was elected as the president of Interpol in 1968, apparently aided by
the good contacts of François Genoud to the Arab world. While his former Nazi
connections were known, he maintained his post until 1972.

#### Jackie Selebi (2004–2008)

After being charged of corruption in January 2008, Jackie Selebi resigned as
president of Interpol and was put on extended leave as National Police
Commissioner of South Africa.

In July 2010 Selebi was found guilty of corruption by the South African High
Court in Johannesburg for accepting bribes worth €156,000 from a drug
trafficker.

#### Khoo Boon Hui (2008–2012)

Jackie Selebi was temporarily replaced by Arturo Herrera Verdugo [es], the
National Commissioner of Investigations Police of Chile and former vice
president for the American Zone, who remained acting president until the
appointment of Singaporean Khoo Boon Hui in October 2008.

#### Mireille Ballestrazzi (2012–2016)

On November 8, 2012, the 81st General Assembly closed with the election of
Deputy Central Director of the French Judicial Police, Mireille Ballestrazzi,
as the first female president of the organization.

#### Meng Hongwei (2016–2018)

In November 2016, Meng Hongwei, a politician from the People’s Republic of
China, was elected president during the 85th Interpol General Assembly, and
was to serve in this capacity until 2020.

At the end of September 2018, Meng was reported missing during a trip to
China, after being “taken away” for questioning by discipline authorities.
Chinese police later confirmed that Meng had been arrested on charges of
bribery as part of a national anti-corruption campaign. On October 7, 2018,
INTERPOL announced that Meng had resigned his post with immediate effect and
that the Presidency would be temporarily occupied by Interpol Senior Vice-
president (Asia) Kim Jong Yang of South Korea.

#### Kim Jong Yang (2018–2021)

On November 21, 2018, Interpol’s General Assembly elected Kim Jong Yang to
fill the remainder of Meng’s term, in a controversial election which saw
accusations that the other candidate, Vice President Alexander Prokopchuk of
Russia, had used Interpol notices to target critics of the Russian government.

Four American senators had accused Vice President Alexander Prokopchuk of
abusing Red Notices, likening his election to "putting a fox in charge of the
henhouse". A statement posted by the Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union and
signed by other NGOs raised concerns about his ability to use his Interpol
position to silence Russia's critics. Russian politicians criticized the U.S.
accusation as politically motivated interference.

#### Ahmed Nase Al-Raisi (2021 – )

On November 25, 2021, Ahmed Naser Al-Raisi, inspector general of the United
Arab Emirates’s interior ministry, was elected as president. The election was
controversial due to the UAE’s human rights record, with concerns being raised
by some human rights groups (e.g. Human Rights Watch) and some MEPs.

In June 2021, 35 French Parliamentarians, Members of Parliament and Senators,
including from the majority and the opposition, urged President Emmanuel
Macron to oppose the candidacy of the UAE's General Ahmed Nasser Al-Raisi,
citing the accusations of torture against him. It was the second appeal by the
deputy of the Rhône, Hubert Julien-Laferrière, who had first written to Macron
earlier in 2021. He questioned how a profile like Al-Raisi's, who was
responsible for the torture of political opponent Ahmed Mansoor and of a
British academic Matthew Hedges, can become the president of a most
respectable institution.

While the UAE was arranging trips for Al-Raisi to Interpol's member countries,
opposition against the Emirati candidate amplified. A number of German MPs
signed a petition to express "deep concern" and reject the candidacy of Al-
Raisi for the post of Interpol director. Rodney Dixon, the British lawyer of
Matthew Hedges and Ali Ahmad, submitted a complaint and urged the Swedish
authorities to arrest Al-Raisi upon his arrival in Sweden. The two Britons
also raised a similar request to arrest al-Raisi with the Norwegian police
authorities. Both Sweden and Norway apply jurisdiction that allows them to
open investigations of crime, irrespective of a person's nationality or the
origin country of the crime.

In October 2021, Al-Raisi had to face further opposition, as the lawyers
submitted a complaint to the French Prosecutor in Paris. The claims cited Al-
Raisi's role in the unlawful detention and torture of Ali Issa Ahmad and
Matthew Hedges. Filed under the principle of universal jurisdiction, the
complaint gave French officials the authority to investigate and arrest
foreign nationals. As Raisi is not a head of state, French authorities had all
the rights to arrest and question him on entering the French territory.

As the General Assembly was approaching, the opposition was rising. In
November 2021, a Turkish lawyer Gulden Sonmez filed a criminal complaint
against Al-Raisi's nomination in Turkey, where the vote was to take place.
Sonmez said the Emirates' attempt to cover its human rights records and to
launder its reputation. Besides, Hedges and Ahmad were also expected to file a
lawsuit in Turkey against Al-Raisi, ahead of the General Assembly.

## Criticism

Former Interpol President Meng Hongwei pleaded guilty for accepting bribes
over 14.5 million yuan.

### Abusive requests for Interpol arrests

Despite its politically neutral stance, some have criticized the agency for
its role in arrests that critics contend were politically motivated. In their
declaration, adopted in Oslo (2010), Monaco (2012), Istanbul (2013), and Baku
(2014), the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) criticized some OSCE member
States for their abuse of mechanisms of the international investigation and
urged them to support the reform of Interpol in order to avoid politically
motivated prosecution. The resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe of 31 January 2014 criticizes the mechanisms of operation of
the Commission for the Control of Interpol's files, in particular, non-
adversarial procedures and unjust decisions. In 2014, PACE adopted a decision
to thoroughly analyse the problem of the abuse of Interpol and to compile a
special report on this matter. In May 2015, within the framework of the
preparation of the report, the PACE Committee on Legal Affairs and Human
Rights organized a hearing in Yerevan, during which both representatives of
NGOs and Interpol had the opportunity to speak. According to Freedom House,
Russia is responsible for 38% of Interpol's public Red Notices. There
currently are "approximately 66,370 valid Red Notices, of which some 7,669 are
public."

Refugees who are included in the list of Interpol can be arrested when
crossing the border. In the year 2008, the office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees pointed to the problem of arrests of refugees on the
request of INTERPOL in connection with politically motivated charges.

In 2021, Turkey, China, the United Arab Emirates, Iran, Russia, and Venezuela
were accused of abusing Interpol by using it to target political opponents.
China used Interpol against the Uyghurs, where the government issued a Red
Notice against activists and other members of the ethnic minority group living
abroad. Since 1997, 1,546 cases from 28 countries of detention and deportation
of the Uyghurs were recorded. In the case of Turkey, Interpol had to turn down
800 requests, including one for NBA basketball player Enes Kanter Freedom. The
UAE was also accused as one of the countries attempting to buy influence in
Interpol. Using the Interpol Foundation for a Safer World, the Arab nation
gave donations of $54 million. The amount was estimated as equal to the
statutory contributions together made by the rest 194 members. It was asserted
that the Emirates' growing influence over Interpol gave it the opportunity to
host the General Assembly in 2018 and in 2020 (that was postponed due to the
COVID-19 pandemic).

#### World

Organizations such as Detained in Dubai, Open Dialog Foundation, Fair Trials
International, Centre for Peace Studies, and International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists, indicate that non-democratic states use Interpol to
harass opposition politicians, journalists, human rights activists, and
businessmen. The countries accused of abusing the agency include China,
Russia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, Iran, Turkey, Kazakhstan,
Belarus, Venezuela, and Tunisia.

The Open Dialog Foundation's report analysed 44 high-profile political cases
which went through the Interpol system. A number of persons who have been
granted refugee status in the European Union (EU) and the US—including Russian
businessman Andrey Borodin, Chechen Arbi Bugaev, Kazakh opposition politician
Mukhtar Ablyazov and his associate Artur Trofimov, and Sri Lankan journalist
Chandima Withana —continue to remain on the public INTERPOL list. Some of the
refugees remain on the list even after courts have refused to extradite them
to a non-democratic state (for example, Pavel Zabelin, a witness in the case
of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, and Alexandr Pavlov, former security chief of the
Kazakh oppositionist Ablyazov). Another case is Manuel Rosales, a politician
who opposed Hugo Chavez and fled to Peru in 2009 and was subject to a red
alert on charges of corruption for two weeks. Interpol deleted the request for
prosecution immediately. Interpol has also been criticized for mistaking
people on yellow alerts. One case was Alondra Díaz-Nuñez, who in April 2015
was apprehended in Guanajuato City, Mexico being mistaken for a missing
American teenager. Interpol came under heavy criticism from Mexican news and
media for helping out Policia Federal Ministerial, Mexican Federal Police, and
the U.S. Embassy and Consulate in Mexico, in what was believed to be a
kidnapping.[_citation needed_]

#### Eastern Europe

The 2013 PACE's Istanbul Declaration of the OSCE cited specific cases of such
prosecution, including those of the Russian activist Petr Silaev, financier
William Browder, businessman Ilya Katsnelson, Belarusian politician Ales
Michalevic, and Ukrainian politician Bohdan Danylyshyn.[_citation needed_]

On 25 July 2014, despite Interpol's Constitution prohibiting them from
undertaking any intervention or activities of a political or military nature,
the Ukrainian nationalist paramilitary leader Dmytro Yarosh was placed on
Interpol's international wanted list at the request of Russian authorities,
which made him the only person wanted internationally after the beginning of
the 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine. For a long time, Interpol
refused to place former President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych on the wanted
list as a suspect by the new Ukrainian government for the mass killing of
protesters during Euromaidan. Yanukovych was eventually placed on the wanted
list on 12 January 2015. However, on 16 July 2015, after an intervention of
Joseph Hage Aaronson, the British law firm hired by Yanukovych, the
international arrest warrant against the former president of Ukraine was
suspended pending further review. In December 2014, the Security Service of
Ukraine (SBU) liquidated[_clarification needed_] a sabotage and reconnaissance
group that was led by a former agent of the Ukrainian Bureau of INTERPOL that
also has family relations in the Ukrainian counter-intelligence agencies. In
2014, Russia made attempts to place Ukrainian politician Ihor Kolomoyskyi and
Ukrainian civic activist Pavel Ushevets, subject to criminal persecution in
Russia following his pro-Ukrainian art performance in Moscow, on the Interpol
wanted list.

On October 30, 2023, Belarusian filmmaker Andrey Gnyot got arrested when he
landed in Belgrade as he was put on an Interpol warrant list. He is accused by
the Belarusian authorities of tax evasion and issued an extradition request.
During the 2020–2021 Belarusian protests, Gnyot co-founded the Free
Association of Athletes (SOS-BY), bringing together athletes opposed to the
Lukashenko regime. He spent seven months in detention in Belgrade before being
transferred to house arrest in June 2024. Amnesty International called on the
Serbian authorities to cease the extradition process.

#### Middle East

According to a report by the Stockholm Center for Freedom that was issued in
September 2017, Turkey has weaponized Interpol mechanisms to hunt down
legitimate critics and opponents in violation of Interpol's own constitution.
The report lists abuse cases where not only arrest warrants but also
revocation of travel documents and passports were used by Turkey as
persecution tools against critics and opponents. The harassment campaign
targeted foreign companies as well. Syrian-Kurd Salih Muslim was briefly
detained at Turkey's request on 25 February 2018 in Prague, the capital of the
Czech Republic, but was released 2 days later, drawing angry protests from
Turkey. On 17 March 2018, the Czech authorities dismissed Turkey's request as
lacking merit.[_citation needed_]

After a senior UAE government official, Ahmed Naser Al-Raisi became the
President, Interpol ignored an injunction by the European Court of Human
Rights (ECHR), and cooperated with Serbian authorities to extradite a Bahraini
activist. Ahmed Jaafar Mohamed Ali was extradited to Bahrain in a charter
aircraft of Royal Jet, a private Emirati airline headed by an Abu Dhabi royal
family member. Critics raised concerns that it was just first example of how
"red lines will be crossed" under the presidency of Al-Raisi. Besides, a
warning was raised that after its decision, Interpol will be complicit in any
abuse that Ali will face. In 2021 it was reported that Ahmed Naser had also
allegedly tortured a number of people in the UAE before.

#### Appeals and requests withdrawals

The procedure for filing an appeal with Interpol is a long and complex one.
For example, the Venezuelan journalist Patricia Poleo and a colleague of
Kazakh activist Ablyazov, and Tatiana Paraskevich, who were granted refugee
status, sought to overturn the politically motivated request for as long as
one and a half years, and six months, respectively.

Interpol has previously recognized some requests to include persons on the
wanted list as politically motivated, e.g., Indonesian activist Benny Wenda,
Georgian politician Givi Targamadze, ex-president of Georgia Mikheil
Saakashvili, ex-mayor of Maracaibo and 2006 Venezuelan presidential election
candidate Manuel Rosales and ex-president of Honduras Manuel Zelaya Rosales;
these persons have subsequently been removed. However, in most cases, Interpol
removes a Red Notice against refugees only after an authoritarian state closes
a criminal case or declares amnesty (for example, the cases of Russian
activists and political refugees Petr Silaev, Denis Solopov, and Aleksey
Makarov, as well as the Turkish sociologist and feminist Pinar Selek).

### Diplomacy

In 2016, Taiwan criticized Interpol for turning down its application to join
the General Assembly as an observer. The United States supported Taiwan's
participation, and the US Congress passed legislation directing the Secretary
of State to develop a strategy to obtain observer status for Taiwan.

The election of Meng Hongwei, a Chinese national, as president and Alexander
Prokopchuk, a Russian, as vice president of Interpol for Europe drew criticism
in anglophone media and raised fears of Interpol accepting politically
motivated requests from China and Russia.

### Business

In 2013, Interpol was criticized over its multimillion-dollar deals with such
private sector bodies as FIFA, Philip Morris, and the pharmaceutical industry.
The criticism was mainly about the lack of transparency and potential
conflicts of interest, such as Codentify.[_clarification needed_] After the
2015 FIFA scandal, the organization has severed ties with all the private-
sector bodies that evoked such criticism, and has adopted a new and
transparent financing framework.

## Reform

From 1 to 3 July 2015, Interpol organized a session of the Working Group on
the Processing of Information, which was formed specifically in order to
verify the mechanisms of information processing. The Working Group heard the
recommendations of civil society as regards the reform of the international
investigation system and promised to take them into account, in light of
possible obstruction or refusal to file crime reports nationally.

The Open Dialog Foundation, a human rights organization, recommended that
Interpol, in particular: create a mechanism for the protection of rights of
people having international refugee status; initiate closer cooperation of the
Commission for the Control of Files with human rights NGOs and experts on
asylum and extradition; enforce sanctions for violations of Interpol's rules;
strengthen cooperation with NGOs, the UN, OSCE, the PACE, and the European
Parliament.

Fair Trials International proposed to create effective remedies for
individuals who are wanted under a Red Notice on unfair charges; to penalize
nations which frequently abuse the Interpol system; to ensure more
transparency of Interpol's work.

The Centre for Peace Studies also created recommendations for Interpol, in
particular, to delete Red Notices and Diffusions for people who were granted
refugee status according to 1951 Refugee Convention issued by their countries
of origin, and to establish an independent body to review Red Notices on a
regular basis.

## Emblem

Interpol emblem

The current emblem of Interpol was adopted in 1950 and includes the following
elements:

  * the globe indicates worldwide activity
  * the olive branches represent peace
  * the sword represents police action
  * the scales signify justice
  * the acronyms "OIPC" and "ICPO", representing the full name of the organization in both French and English, respectively.

## Membership

### Members

Interpol currently has 196 member countries:

Interpol members  
---  
  
  * Islamic Republic of Afghanistan – October 2002 (Former) 
  * Albania – November 1991
  * Algeria – August 1963
  * Andorra – November 1987
  * Angola – October 1982
  * Antigua and Barbuda – October 1986
  * Argentina – June 1956
  * Armenia – November 1992
  * Aruba – November 1987
  * Australia – June 1956
  * Austria – June 1956
  * Azerbaijan – November 1992
  * Bahamas – October 1973
  * Bahrain – September 1972
  * Bangladesh – October 1976
  * Barbados – November 1981
  * Belarus – September 1993
  * Belgium – June 1956
  * Belize – November 1987
  * Benin – September 1962
  * Bhutan – September 2005
  * Bolivia – August 1963
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina – November 1992
  * Botswana – November 1980
  * Brazil – October 1986
  * Brunei – September 1984
  * Bulgaria – November 1989
  * Burkina Faso – September 1961
  * Burundi – October 1970
  * Cambodia – June 1956
  * Cameroon – September 1961
  * Canada – October 1949
  * Cape Verde – November 1989
  * Central African Republic – June 1965
  * Chad – September 1962
  * Chile – June 1956
  * People's Republic of China – September 1961
  * Colombia – June 1956
  * Comoros – October 1998
  * Republic of the Congo – September 1961
  * Democratic Republic of the Congo – August 1963
  * Costa Rica – June 1956
  * Côte d'Ivoire – September 1961
  * Croatia – November 1992
  * Cuba – June 1956
  * Curaçao – October 2011
  * Cyprus – September 1962
  * Czech Republic – September 1993
  * Denmark – June 1956
  * Djibouti – November 1980
  * Dominica – November 1981
  * Dominican Republic – June 1956
  * East Timor – October 2002
  * Ecuador – September 1962
  * Egypt – June 1956
  * El Salvador – December 1959
  * Equatorial Guinea – November 1980
  * Eritrea – November 1999
  * Estonia – November 1992
  * Eswatini – October 1975
  * Ethiopia – September 1958
  * Fiji – September 1971
  * Finland – June 1956
  * France – June 1956
  * Gabon – September 1961
  * Gambia – October 1986
  * Georgia – September 1993
  * Germany – June 1956
  * Ghana – September 1958
  * Greece – June 1956
  * Grenada – October 1986
  * Guatemala – June 1956
  * Guinea – September 1961
  * Guinea-Bissau – November 1992
  * Guyana – October 1968
  * Haiti – June 1957
  * Honduras – September 1974
  * Hungary – November 1981
  * Iceland – September 1971
  * India – October 1949
  * Indonesia – June 1956
  * Iran – June 1956
  * Iraq – September 1967
  * Ireland – June 1956
  * Israel – October 1949
  * Italy – June 1956
  * Jamaica – August 1963
  * Japan – June 1956
  * Jordan – June 1956
  * Kazakhstan – November 1992
  * Kenya – October 1968
  * Kiribati – November 2018
  * Kuwait – June 1965
  * Kyrgyzstan – October 1996
  * Laos – June 1957
  * Latvia – November 1992
  * Lebanon – June 1956
  * Lesotho – September 1971
  * Liberia – June 1956
  * Libya – June 1956
  * Liechtenstein – October 1960
  * Lithuania – November 1991
  * Luxembourg – June 1956
  * Madagascar – September 1961
  * Malawi – August 1966
  * Malaysia – September 1961
  * Maldives – September 1984
  * Mali – October 1969
  * Malta – September 1972
  * Marshall Islands – September 1990
  * Mauritania – September 1962
  * Mauritius – October 1969
  * Mexico – June 1956
  * Moldova – September 1994
  * Micronesia – November 2021
  * Monaco – June 1956
  * Mongolia – November 1991
  * Montenegro – September 2006
  * Morocco – June 1957
  * Mozambique – November 1989
  * Myanmar – June 1956
  * Namibia – November 1992
  * Nauru – September 1971
  * Nepal – September 1967
  * Netherlands – June 1956
  * New Zealand – June 1956
  * Nicaragua – June 1965
  * Niger – September 1964
  * Nigeria – October 1960
  * North Macedonia – September 1993
  * Norway – June 1956
  * Oman – September 1972
  * Palau – November 2023
  * Pakistan – June 1956
  * Palestine – September 2017
  * Panama – September 1958
  * Papua New Guinea – October 1976
  * Paraguay – September 1977
  * Peru – September 1962
  * Philippines – June 1956
  * Poland – September 1990
  * Portugal – June 1956
  * Qatar – September 1974
  * Romania – October 1973
  * Russia – September 1990
  * Rwanda – September 1974
  * Saint Kitts and Nevis – November 1987
  * Saint Lucia – October 1983
  * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines – October 1985
  * Samoa – October 2009
  * São Tomé and Príncipe – November 1988
  * Saudi Arabia – June 1956
  * San Marino – September 2006
  * Senegal – September 1961
  * Serbia – September 1956
  * Seychelles – September 1977
  * Sierra Leone – September 1962
  * Singapore – October 1968
  * Sint Maarten – October 2011
  * Slovakia – September 1993
  * Slovenia – November 1992
  * Solomon Islands – September 2017
  * Somalia – October 1975
  * South Africa – September 1993
  * South Korea – September 1964
  * South Sudan – October 2011
  * Spain – June 1956
  * Sri Lanka – June 1956
  * Sudan – June 1956
  * Suriname – June 1956
  * Sweden – June 1956
  * Switzerland – June 1956
  * Syria – June 1956
  * Tajikistan – October 2004
  * Tanzania – September 1962
  * Thailand – June 1956
  * Togo – October 1960
  * Tonga – September 1979
  * Trinidad and Tobago – September 1964
  * Tunisia – June 1957
  * Turkey – June 1956
  * Turkmenistan – September 2005
  * Uganda – August 1966
  * Ukraine – November 1992
  * United Arab Emirates – October 1973
  * United Kingdom – June 1956
  * United States – June 1956
  * Uruguay – June 1956
  * Uzbekistan – September 1994
  * Vanuatu – November 2018
  * Vatican City – October 2008
  * Venezuela – June 1956
  * Vietnam – November 1991
  * Yemen – October 1976
  * Zambia – August 1966
  * Zimbabwe – November 1980

  
  
#### Subnational-bureaus

  * American Samoa
  * Anguilla
  * Bermuda
  * British Virgin Islands
  * Cayman Islands
  * Gibraltar
  * Hong Kong
  * Montserrat
  * Macau
  * Puerto Rico
  * Turks and Caicos Islands
  * United Nations for  Kosovo

#### Exclusions

Two member states of the United Nations and three partially-recognized states
are currently not members of Interpol: North Korea and Tuvalu, as well as
Kosovo, Taiwan, Western Sahara, and Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.

The Republic of China (Taiwan) joined Interpol in September 1961. After the
People's Republic of China was seated as "China" in the UN, Interpol
transferred its recognition from the ROC to the PRC in September 1984.

In 2023, over 60 Interpol member states voiced their support for Taiwan's bid
to re-join the organization. Specifically, representatives from Taiwan's
diplomatic allies Eswatini, Palau, Paraguay, Belize, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, the Marshall Islands, and Saint Kitts and Nevis spoke up for
Taiwan during the assembly.