Advisory academic institution to the League of Nations

ICIC Archives in Geneva

The **International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation** , sometimes
**League of Nations Committee on Intellectual Cooperation** , was an advisory
organisation for the League of Nations which promoted international exchange
between scientists, researchers, teachers, artists and intellectuals.
Established in 1922, it counted such figures as Henri Bergson, Albert
Einstein, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Jagadish Chandra Bose, Nitobe Inazo, Marie
Curie, Gonzague de Reynold, Leonardo Torres Quevedo, and Robert A. Millikan
among its members.

## The International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation (Geneva)

The International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation (ICICIC), formally
established in August 1922. Having started out with 12 members, its membership
later grew to 19 individuals, mostly from Western Europe. The first session
was held on August 1, 1922, under the chairmanship of Henri Bergson. During
its lifetime, the committee attracted a variety of prominent members, for
instance Albert Einstein, Marie Curie, Kristine Bonnevie, Jules Destrée,
Robert Andrews Millikan, Alfredo Rocco, Paul Painlevé, Leonardo Torres
Quevedo, Gonzague de Reynold, Jagadish Chandra Bose and Sarvepalli
Radhakrishnan. Einstein resigned in 1923, protesting publicly the committee's
inefficacy; he rejoined in 1924 to mitigate the use German chauvinists made of
his resignation. The body was successively chaired by:

  * Henri Bergson (1922–1925)
  * Hendrik Lorentz (1925–1928)
  * Gilbert Murray (1928–1939).

The ICIC maintains a number of sub-committees (e.g. Museums, Arts and Letters,
Intellectual Rights or Bibliography) which also work with figures such as Béla
Bartók, Thomas Mann, Salvador de Madariaga and Paul Valéry.

The ICIC works closely with the International Educational Cinematographic
Institute created in Rome in 1928 by the Italian government under Mussolini.

  * ICIC Plenary session (date unknown, between 1924 and 1927).

  * Henri Bergson (ICIC president) to Inazo Nitobe (International Bureaux Section director), 1924.

  * ICIC Plenary session 1939.

  * The Palais Wilson (Geneva), seat of the LoN and the ICIC between 1922 and 1937.

## The International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation (Paris)

A side of the Palais-Royal (Paris), where the IIIC was installed in 1926.

To support the work of the commission in Geneva, the organization was offered
assistance from France to establish an executive branch, the International
Institute of Intellectual Cooperation (IIIC), in Paris in 1926. However, the
IIIC had an autonomous status and was almost only financed by the French
government, giving it a certain independence that created tensions with the
League of Nations. It maintained relations with the league's member states,
which established national commissions for intellectual cooperation and
appointed delegates to represent their interests at the institute in Paris.
While being an international organisation, each of the IIIC's three successive
directors was French:

  * Julien Luchaire (1926–1930)
  * Henri Bonnet (1931–1940)
  * Jean-Jacques Mayoux (1945–1946)

From 1926 to 1930, Alfred Zimmern – the well-known British classicist and a
pioneering figure in the discipline of international relations – served as the
IIIC's deputy director.

As a result of the Second World War, the institute was closed from 1940 to
1944. It re-opened briefly from 1945 to 1946. When it closed for good in 1946,
UNESCO inherited its archives and some parts of its mission.