International research institute in Colombia, member of CGIAR

The **International Center for Tropical Agriculture** (known as **CIAT** from
its Spanish-language name _**Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical**_)
is an international research and development organization dedicated to
reducing poverty and hunger while protecting natural resources in developing
countries. It is based in Palmira, Colombia, where it employs over 300
scientists.

CIAT is one of the 14 agricultural research centers of the CGIAR. In 2019,
CIAT joined with Bioversity International (as the Alliance of Bioversity
International and CIAT) to "deliver research-based solutions that harness
agricultural biodiversity and sustainably transform food systems to improve
peopleâ€™s lives".

## Future Seeds Gene bank

CIAT has one of the 11 gene banks of the CGIAR, with a collection of more than
65,000 accessions of three crops: beans (37,000); tropical forages (23,000)
and cassava (6,000), from more than 100 countries. With funding from the
United Kingdom, the Colombian government and others, in 2022 inaugurated a new
facility to host those accessions called 'Future seeds' in which not only
expanded its capacity to up tp 250,000 accessions, but creating an
architectural landmark and environmentally sustainable infrastructure, and a
hub for research and learning

The research conducted at this center includes, as of 2013, a research on
developing better varieties of grain legumes. The goals are tolerances to
drought, low phosphorus soils, and heat; in addition to improved nitrogen
fixation. CIAT coordinated the activities of the Pan-Africa Bean Research
Alliance (PABRA) in 29 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. This effort was
supported by the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)