Tuber research institute in Peru

The **International Potato Center** (known as **CIP** from its Spanish-
language name _**Centro Internacional de la Papa**_) is a research facility
based in Lima, Peru, that seeks to reduce poverty and achieve food security on
a sustained basis in developing countries through scientific research and
related activities on potato, sweet potato, other root and tuber crops, and on
the improved management of natural resources in the Andes and other mountain
areas.

## History

The International Potato Center was established in 1971 by decree of the
Peruvian government.

In 1991 the World Vegetable Center (WVC) chose to end its sweet potato
research. The WVC duplicated and transferred its research and germplasm to the
International Potato Center and Taiwan Agricultural Research institute.

CIP is one of the 15 specialized research centers of the Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research, an international consortium of
agricultural research organizations, having joined in 1972.

In late 2015, it partnered with NASA to attempt to grow potatoes in a
simulated Martian environment. In March 2017, it announced that preliminary
indications are positive.

## CIP-Georgia

In 2015, CIP began a 3-year project to "Enhance the rural livelihood of
Georgia", for which in 2017 the Republic of Austria provided funding,
delegated to the Austrian Development Agency, which was extended an additional
three years. The project's goal is to "improve the livelihoods of Georgian
farmers by increasing profitability and sustainability of their potato crops
and to increase capacity of national players in the potato seed value chain."

## Directors

Jan Low, regional director for Africa of the CIP, catches up with Segenet
Kelemu, director general of the International Centre of Insect Physiology and
Ecology.

  * Richard L. Sawyer, founding Director 1971–1991
  * Hubert Zandstra, 1991–2004
  * Pamela K. Anderson, 2004–2013
  * Barbara Wells, 2014
  * Simon Heck, 2023