The **International Food Policy Research Institute** (**IFPRI**) is an
international research center focused on agriculture and food systems that
provides research-based policy solutions to reduce poverty and end hunger and
malnutrition throughout low- and middle-income countries in environmentally
sustainable ways. For nearly 50 years, IFPRI has worked with policymakers,
academics, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, development
practitioners, and others to carry out research, capacity strengthening, and
policy communications on food systems, economic development, and poverty
reduction.

IFPRI is a Research Center of CGIAR, the world's largest international
agricultural research network, and the only CGIAR center solely dedicated to
food policy research. IFPRI's research is supported by more than 185 donors,
and through a multi donor trust fund for the CGIAR, which is funded by
national governments, multilateral funding and development agencies, and
private foundations.

IFPRI's researchers work on a range of disciplines and topics, including
agricultural economics, political economy, rural poverty and transformation,
social protection, women's empowerment, food environments, digital innovations
and practices, and policy analysis and modeling. The Institute collaborates
with hundreds of local, regional, and national partners along the research and
policy life cycle.

IFPRI's regional programs for Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, and
South Asia, as well as its country-level programs, respond to national demands
for food policy research, strengthen local capacities for research and policy
analysis, and support country-led development. The Institute has around 600
employees from around the world working in over 80 countries, with more than
half of its researchers based in low- and middle-income countries. In Africa,
IFPRI maintains a regional office in Senegal and country programs in Egypt,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Rwanda, and Sudan. IFRI's South Asia
office is based in India, with country offices in Bangladesh, China, and
Myanmar. The Institute also operates a country office in Papua New Guinea.

IFPRI is recognized as a leader in global development research worldwide. The
Institute is ranked highly among all agricultural economics departments
worldwide, in the field of African economics, and in development economics,
and is listed in the top 1% of all institutions registered in Research Papers
in Economics (RePEc). Independent, peer-reviewed assessments of IFPRI's impact
show that the Institute's research work has benefited 270 million people
worldwide, and just a few of its efforts—including work on Mexico's Progresa
social protection program, the liberalization of rice markets in Viet Nam, and
Ethiopia's Productive Safety Net Program, among others—have been estimated to
lead to more than US$1 billion in economic returns and environmental benefits.
The Institute's researchers and their activities have been recognized by
several prestigious organizations, including the Agricultural & Applied
Economics Association and the International Association of Agricultural
Economists.

The Institute publishes and shares its research and analysis through a range
of publications, including peer-reviewed articles, books, briefs, and reports,
blogs, and interactives, and different events, including conferences and
seminars, among other activities. IFPRI regularly contributes to major
international meetings and events, such as the 28th UN Climate Change
Conference of the Parties (COP28) in 2023 in Dubai, where its researchers
organized and participated in multiple events focusing on the nexus between
climate change and food security and nutrition, social equity, gender
equality, and resilience, among other topics.

## Scope

IFPRI's research and engagement centers on a holistic three-pronged approach
to contribute to reducing poverty and ensuring that all people have access to
sustainable diets: (1) clarify the situation and outlook of a particular
situation or challenge, (2) test and scale potential technological and policy
solutions, and (3) help build an enabling environment to facilitate change.

IFPRI collaborates with more than 300 partner organizations to increase the
impact of the Institute's research and build connections across topical areas
and the policy community for sustainable, resilient, and equitable agriculture
and food systems. These partners include a wide range of local and national
partners in low- and middle-income countries, as well as research, scaling,
advocacy, and funding partners, who help provide rigorous, policy-relevant
evidence and recommendations to policymakers, donors, the private sector, and
civil society. As part of CGIAR, IFPRI also maintains strong engagement with
colleagues from other CGIAR Centers.

## Research Areas

IFPRI conducts cross-cutting research on a wide range of topics, including
nutrition, food prices, gender, climate change, natural resource management,
agricultural innovation, social protection, and agricultural extension. The
Institute's efforts focus on research and innovation to deliver integrated
policies, investments, governance processes, and capacity building that
support equitable and sustainable food systems transformation, as well as
improved livelihoods and healthy diets. IFPRI adapts its research and capacity
strengthening work to address diverse challenges and opportunities in
different countries around the world.

As a Research Center of CGIAR, IFPRI's research activities align with CGIAR's
five impact areas: nutrition, health, and food security; poverty reduction,
livelihoods, and jobs; environmental health and biodiversity; gender equality,
youth, and social inclusion; and climate adaptation and mitigation.

## Products and publications

IFPRI's policy and research products are targeted to multiple audiences,
including policymakers, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), civil society
organizations, donors, advisors, and the media. IFPRI publications are open
access.

IFPRI's publications and outputs include books, reports, newsletters, briefs,
fact sheets, blogs, and photo essays. The Institute is also involved in the
collection of primary data and the compilation and processing of secondary
data. IFPRI researchers publish extensively in top journals in the fields of
agricultural economics, development, food policy, nutrition, and more.

The Global Food Policy Report is IFPRI's flagship publication. To meet the
needs of policymakers and researchers focused on food security and nutrition,
this annual report presents an overview of a salient topic in the field and
discusses relevant challenges and solutions in major world regions.

In recent years, the Global Food Policy Report has focused on pressing issues
facing the world's food systems, including the role of sustainable healthy
diets in human and planetary well-being, approaches to building resilience to
food crises, food system actions to increase adaptation and resilience to
climate change, and the need for food systems transformation in the aftermath
of the COVID-19 pandemic.

## Director's General

  * Johan (Jo) Swinnen (2020–Present)
  * Shenggen Fan (2009–2020)
  * Joachim von Braun (2002–2009)
  * Per Pinstrup-Andersen (1992–2002)
  * Just Faaland (interim DG, 1990–1992)
  * John Williams Mellor (1977–1990)
  * Dale E. Hathaway (1975–1977, founding director general)

## Impact

Evaluating the impact of policy-oriented research is a complex undertaking,
considering difficulties in quantifying the impact of knowledge and ideas on
reduced poverty and/or increased income or the attribution of a change in
these numbers to a specific study or research project.

Despite the challenges of evaluating research impact, IFPRI has commissioned
46 independent, peer-reviewed assessments of its work. The Institute also
works with researchers to validate its efforts and shares these findings
through peer-reviewed briefs, brochures, blogs, events, and other outputs.
IFPRI publishes a blog series called Making a Difference, which showcases
impact stories that represent a range of research, communications, and
capacity-strengthening work.

Conservative estimates of IFPRI's impact show that just a few of the
Institute's activities—in Bangladesh, Ethiopia, India, Kenya, Mexico,
Tanzania, and Viet Nam—have led to economic and environmental benefits
exceeding US$1 billion. IFPRI's research has also been shown to have
indirectly benefited more than 270 million people around the world. In Brazil,
IFPRI's evaluation of the country's conditional cash transfer program led to
changes in the targeting approach of its successor program, Bolsa Família,
which has 52 million beneficiaries. In Viet Nam, the Institute's policy advice
on rice market reforms helped create better incomes and food security for 24
million people engaged in rice farming. IFPRI's research on the economic
benefits of road building in India helped 18 million people escape poverty
through the Prime Minister's Rural Roads Program.

## Criticism

Evaluations from the early 2000s and late 1990s praise the Institute's quality
and quantity of work, but critique its priorities in selecting research topics
and its efforts to undertake capacity-strengthening and other outreach
activities. Critics have also questioned whether IFPRI focused too much on
conducting world supply-demand projections and following technical pursuits to
the detriment of doing analyses of applied policies, political economy, and
the impacts of agricultural subsidies and incentives for investment in
agricultural research and development.

IFPRI and CGIAR have also been criticized for receiving funding from the Bill
& Melinda Gates Foundation, with critics fearing that the Foundation's
influence will lead to the promotion of an agribusiness agenda that ignores
broader social and economic factors.

Critics argue that several efforts to improve collaboration, effectiveness,
and efficiency among the CGIAR Research Centers have been too slow or
inadequate, and some critiques have pointed to a perceived lack of clear
research priorities, buy-in from the Global South, and diversity in
leadership, as well as an overly bureaucratic, "business-as-usual" approach to
restructuring.