Autonomous intergovernmental organisation

| This article **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "International Energy Agency" – news **·** newspapers **·**
books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( December 2024)__(Learn how and when to
remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **International Energy Agency** (**IEA**) is a Paris-based autonomous
intergovernmental organization, established in 1974, that provides policy
recommendations, analysis and data on the global energy sector. The 31 member
countries and 13 association countries of the IEA represent 75% of global
energy demand.

The IEA was set up under the framework of the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis to
respond to physical disruptions in global oil supplies, provide data and
statistics about the global oil market and energy sector, promote energy
savings and conservation, and establish international technical collaboration.
Since its founding, the IEA has also coordinated use of the oil reserves that
its members are required to hold.

By regularly underestimating the role of renewable energies and overestimating
the growth of nuclear energy, the IEA promotes the nuclear industry.

In subsequent decades, the IEA's role expanded to cover the entire global
energy system, encompassing traditional fuels such as gas, and coal as well as
cleaner and fast-growing energy sources and technologies including renewable
energy sources; solar photovoltaics, wind power, biofuels as well as nuclear
power, and hydrogen, and the critical minerals needed for these technologies.

The core activity of the IEA is providing policy advice to its member states
and Associated countries to support their energy security and advance their
transition to clean energy. Recently, it has focused in particular on
supporting global efforts to accelerate clean energy transition, mitigate
climate change, reach net zero emissions, and prevent global temperatures from
rising above 1.5 °C. All IEA member countries have signed the Paris Agreement
which aims to limit warming to 1.5 °C, and two thirds of IEA member
governments have made commitments to emission neutrality by 2050.

The Embassy of Australia, Paris, where the IEA headquarters are located

The IEA's executive director is Fatih Birol, who took office in late 2015. IEA
publishes a range of reports and other information including its flagship
publication, the annual _World Energy Outlook_ , as well as the _Net Zero by
2050_ report.

## History

The IEA was founded on November 18, 1974, after the 1973 oil crisis, to avoid
future shocks by helping to ensure reliable energy supplies, promote energy
efficiency, ensure energy security and encourage technological research and
innovation.

The Agreement on an International Energy Program (IEP Agreement) established
the mandates and structure of the IEA, chartering it as an autonomous
organisation under the umbrella of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD). In 1996, the IEA relocated its headquarters from the
Château de la Muette, which it shared with the OECD, to commercially leased
space located within the Embassy of Australia, Paris.

The IEA operates autonomously, with its own budget and governance structure.
The organization began with 16 founding member countries and has since
expanded to 31, with the latest addition being Lithuania in 2022. Full members
of the IEA must also be members of the OECD and are required to hold 90 days
worth of oil imports as emergency stocks. These emergency stocks can be
released to stabilize oil markets worldwide and have been activated five
times: January 1991 due to the Gulf War, 2005 after devastation in the Gulf of
Mexico from hurricanes Katrina and Rita, 2011 during the Libyan crisis, and
twice in 2022 in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

In addition to the emergency release mechanism, the IEA's initial mandates
include reducing dependence on oil, developing alternative energy sources,
energy research and development, and collaboration with oil-producing
companies and countries to create a stable energy market. Members are expected
to draw up plans on demand reduction and efficiency measures that can be
implemented during energy emergencies.

In September 2015, the IEA's chief economist Fatih Birol was appointed
executive director, the first time an official from within the organization
was picked to lead it. They have a mandate to modernize the agency on three
major pillars: broadening the IEA's mandate on energy security beyond oil to
include natural gas and electricity; increasing engagement in emerging
economies through new Association partnerships; and expanding the IEA's core
focus on clean energy technology and energy efficiency. That December, the
Paris Agreement was adopted at the United Nations Climate Change Conference
(COP21) and the Agency transitioned into direct advocacy for the shipping
industry to adopt greener alternatives to hydrocarbon fuels.

IEA chief Fatih Birol called on policymakers to do more to speed up the energy
transition and reduce emissions.

The new category of "Association countries" was created in 2015, allowing
countries that do not fit the criteria for IEA membership to become affiliated
with the organization and participate in its work. China, Indonesia, and
Thailand were the first to join and the IEA now has thirteen Association
countries, including Ukraine since July 2022. IEA member and Association
countries represent over 75% of global energy consumption.

In 2021, IEA chief Birol called on policymakers to do more to accelerate the
clean energy transition and reduce emissions, saying that "Clean-energy
technologies are slowly but surely going to replace the existing energy
industry." The following year, Birole was appointed to an unprecedented third
four-year leadership term.

After the IEA's 2022 Ministerial meeting, a bi-annual high-level meeting of
IEA countries, member countries once again expanded the organisation's mandate
to include accelerating the global clean energy transition by "supporting
countries in the global effort to attain net zero greenhouse gas emissions in
the energy sector by mid-century." The "IEA 3.0" mandate also doubles down on
strengthening energy security and recognizes the importance of tracking
critical minerals and materials to the clean energy transition.

## Leadership

Executive Directors of the International Energy Agency  No.  | Name  | Country of origin  | Took office  | Left office  | Previous position  | Ref.   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1  | Ulf Lantzke |  Germany | 1975  | 31 March 1984  | Special Advisor on Energy Issues to the Secretary General of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)  |   
2  | Helga Steeg |  Germany | 1 July 1984  | 30 September 1994  | Director-General for Trade, Federal Ministry of Finance of the Federal Republic of Germany |   
3  | Robert Priddle |  United Kingdom | 1 December 1994  | 31 December 2002  | Head of Consumer and Corporate Affairs, UK Department of Energy and Trade and Industry |   
4  | Claude Mandil |  France | 1 February 2003  | 31 August 2007  | Chairman and CEO of the Institut français du pétrole, 2000–2003  |   
5  | Nobuo Tanaka |  Japan | 1 September 2007  | 31 August 2011  | Director for Science, Technology and Industry at the OECD, 1992–2007  |   
6  | Maria van der Hoeven |  Netherlands | 1 September 2011  | 31 August 2015  | Minister of Economic Affairs of the Netherlands, 2007–2010  |   
7  | Fatih Birol |  Turkey | 1 September 2015  | _Incumbent_ | Chief Economist, International Energy Agency  |   
  
## Structure

The IEA's structure includes a Governing Board, Ministerial Meetings, and
Standing Groups and Committees.

The Governing Board constitutes the main decision-making body of the
organisation. It is composed of member country representatives and meets three
to four times a year. The Governing Board is responsible for the IEA's
administrative proceedings and approving binding decisions in relation to
energy developments.

The IEA Ministerial Meeting is the biennial gathering of energy ministers who
determine the broad direction of the IEA. The Ministerial allows for the
development of ideas which are subsequently put to the Governing Board.

Standing Groups meet multiple times a year and are made up of officials from
member states. The IEA has several Standing Groups and Committees, focusing on
energy research and technology, long-term cooperation, emergency preparedness,
and other topics.

## Membership

The 31 member countries and 13 association countries of the IEA represent 75%
of global energy demand.

### Member countries

Only OECD member states may join the IEA. Members are required to maintain
total oil stock levels equivalent to at least 90 days of the previous year's
net imports. Member countries commit to respond to significant oil disruptions
through a collective action to allow more crude oil to enter the global
market.

Country  | Membership  | Notes   
---|---|---  
Australia | 1979  |   
Austria | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Belgium | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Canada | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Czech Republic | 5 February 2001  |   
Denmark | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Estonia | 9 May 2014  |   
Finland | 1992  |   
France | 1992  |   
Germany | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Greece | 1976  |   
Hungary | 3 June 1997  |   
Ireland | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Italy | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Japan | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Latvia | ?  |   
Lithuania | 2022  |   
Luxembourg | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Mexico | 2018  |   
Netherlands | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
New Zealand | 1977  |   
Norway | 18 November 1974  | Founding member (under a special Agreement)   
Portugal | 1981  |   
Poland | 25 September 2008  |   
Slovakia | 30 November 2007  |   
South Korea | 20 April 2001  |   
Spain | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Sweden | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Switzerland | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
Turkey | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
United Kingdom | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
United States | 18 November 1974  | Founding member   
  
### Accession countries

Accession countries are those going through the process of becoming full
members. The process involves authorisation by the Governing Board,
discussions with the executive director, and the sharing of information
related to the criteria for membership with the Secretariat.

The following countries are undergoing the accession process:

  * Chile
  * Colombia
  * Costa Rica
  * Israel

### Association countries

Association was formally launched in 2015 with a 13 country membership. The
IEA collaborates with Association countries on a wide range of energy-related
issues determined through joint programmes of work. Association countries may
also participate in most Standing Groups and Ministerial meetings. Egypt and
Argentina joined as Association countries in March 2022, and Ukraine was
formally invited on 16 June 2022, and joined in July 2022.In July 2025, Brazil
started the process to become a member country.

     Argentina
     Brazil
     China
     Egypt
     India
     Indonesia
     Kenya
     Morocco
     Senegal
     Singapore
     South Africa
     Thailand
     Ukraine

## Areas of work

The IEA produces analyses on all energy sources and technologies, on global
and regional markets, as well as specific country-level reports and studies on
key technologies, minerals, and materials for the clean energy transition. It
also produces comprehensive data and statistics for over 150 countries.

The IEA's analytical work is split into various categories including policy
recommendations, tracking, market forecasts, technical roadmapping, and
scenario analysis.

### Data

The IEA publishes comprehensive data, statistics, and analysis that inform
national energy policies and support long-term planning for energy sector
investments. The IEA analyses and releases data and information on trends in
energy supply, demand, prices, public research and development, and energy
efficiency metrics. The data also serves to track short- and long-term trends
in countries energy transitions.

The Policies and Measures Database (PAMS) makes available to the public data
on government policies and programs to reduce carbon emissions, support energy
efficiency, and improve the development and use of renewable and clean energy
sources. The database compiles data from several IEA and International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) data sources dating back to 1999 and includes
information on past, current, and planned policy measures.

### Scenarios

IEA publications give projections based on sets of assumptions called
_scenarios_ , with criteria that includes:

  * Stated Policies Scenario (STEPS): Assumes implementation of governments' existing policies and firm commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
  * Announced Pledges Scenario (APS): Assumes implementation of policies as in the STEPS, and also assumes fulfillment of looser pledges that are not yet backed by policy and legislation.
  * Net Zero Scenario (NZE): Assumes implementation of the IEA's pathway to net zero emissions by 2050 while minimising cost and meeting key UN Sustainable Development Goals.

Older scenarios include:

  * 450 Scenario: Environmental groups have become critical of the IEA's 450 Scenario (created to align with the 2009 Copenhagen Accord), contending it does not align with up-to-date climate science, nor is it consistent with the Paris climate agreement that aspires to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius. In March 2017, the IEA (along with IRENA) published a report that considers a safer climate scenario than the then-current 450S. This scenario offers improved chances of limiting global warming to less than two degrees, but – according to research organization Oil Change International – still falls short of adequately addressing climate science and the decarbonization required to reach agreed upon global climate limits. The IEA has stopped updating this safer climate scenario
  * Sustainable Development Scenario: Concerns regarding the IEA's Sustainable Development Scenario (the successor to the 450 scenario) has also been raised by climate scientists and key financial institutions, who have called for 1.5°C scenario placed centrally in the World Energy Outlook. The IEA's Sustainable Development Scenario only gets to net-zero by 2070, two decades too late.

### Key publications

**World Energy Outlook** (WEO)

The annual _World Energy Outlook_ (_WEO_) is the International Energy Agency's
(IEA) flagship publication on global energy projections and analysis. It
contains medium to long-term energy market projections, extensive statistics,
analysis and advice for both governments and the energy business regarding
energy security, environmental protection and economic development. The first
WEO was published in 1977 and it has been an annual publication since 1998.

The World Energy Outlook uses three scenarios to examine future energy trends.
The Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario is normative, in that it is designed
to achieve specific outcomes – an emissions trajectory consistent with keeping
the temperature rise in 2100 below 1.5 °C (with a 50% probability), universal
access to modern energy services and major improvements in air quality – and
shows a pathway to reach it. The Announced Pledges Scenario, and the Stated
Policies Scenario are exploratory, in that they define a set of starting
conditions, such as policies and targets, and then see where they lead based
on model representations of energy systems, including market dynamics and
technological progress. The scenarios are not predictions but enable policy-
makers and other readers to compare different possible versions of the future
and the levers and actions that produce them, with the aim of stimulating
insights about the future of global energy.

A 2022 report on renewable energy

**Net Zero by 2050: a roadmap for the global energy sector**

Net Zero by 2050 was published in May 2021 and presented the first
comprehensive pathway for the global energy sector to reach net zero emissions
by 2050. The report introduced the Net Zero Emissions scenario, showing how to
transition to net zero by 2050 while maintaining secure and affordable energy
supplies, extending energy access, and encouraging robust economic growth. The
report was the basis for a game created by the IEA and the Financial Times in
which players compete to see if they can reduce emissions to net zero.

**Energy Technology Perspectives** (ETP)

First issued in 2006, ETP is a bi-annual guidebook on clean energy technology.
The publication focuses on challenges, growth areas, and strengths of emerging
clean energy technologies and their contribution to global energy and
environmental policy-making.

**Global EV Outlook** (GEVO)

Published annually with the support of the members of the Electric Vehicles
Initiative, GEVO highlights and analyses recent developments in EVs and
electric mobility. The publication combines historical analysis with
projections to 2030 for topics such as charging infrastructure, CO2 emissions,
energy use, and related policy developments. The report includes policy
recommendations to advance EV adoption.

**Oil Market Report**

First published in 1983, the monthly Oil Market Report analyses the global oil
market, providing data and forecasts aimed for an audience of industry,
financial, and government officials as well as an academic and NGO audience.
Country specific analysis on trade and production tracks both OECD and non-
OECD states.

**Electricity Market Report**

The Electricity Market Report provides regular forecasts for global
electricity demand, supply, generation and emissions, with a special focus on
recent developments.

**Gas Market Report**

The Gas Market Report is updated quarterly, providing the latest developments
and data for global gas markets.

**Energy Efficiency**

Energy Efficiency is an annual report on global progress and developments in
the crucial role that efficient appliances, equipment, buildings, transport
and industry play in reducing energy use and the resulting emissions.

**Renewable Energy Market Update**

The Renewable Energy Market Update surveys new additions in global renewable
power capacity and demand for biofuel. The report, which is updated several
times a year, also discusses important variables and policy implications that
may affect projections for the years to come.

**World Energy Investment**

The annual World Energy Investment tracks investment across the energy world,
examining how investors are assessing risks and opportunities across all areas
of fuel and electricity supply, critical minerals, efficiency and research and
development.

**Tracking Clean Energy Progress**

TCEP reports on the status of 46 critical energy technologies and sectors
needed to achieve net zero emissions by mid-century, and provides
recommendations on how to accelerate their development and deployment.

**Country Reviews**

Since 1976, the IEA has published in-depth energy policy reviews. These
country policy reviews are typically conducted every five years for member
countries, and cover the full range of the country's energy systems and
policies, with recent reports placing particular focus on progress towards
reaching climate goals. The most recent reports were on Norway, Poland,
Belgium, and Canada. The IEA also produces in-depth energy reviews of its
accession and association countries, as well as partner countries.

### Energy Efficiency

In its focus on energy efficiency, the IEA convenes policy leaders and other
stakeholders with an eye toward scaling up progress on energy efficiency as a
way to mitigate climate change, contribute to energy security, and deliver
economic, and support economies and communities. The IEA has created Energy
Efficiency Indicators based on over ten years of data to highlight the drivers
of individual nations' energy use in order to track energy efficiency and
improve national policies. The data covers major sectors such as residential
services, industry, and transport.

### Clean Energy Transitions Programme

CETP's focus is to "accelerate global clean energy transitions, particularly
in major emerging economies." The program supports governments whose energy
policies will be key to the global energy transition and involves
collaborative analytics, technology cooperation, stakeholder convenings, and
training and capacity-building. CETP has identified Brazil, China, India,
Indonesia, Mexico, and South Africa as priority countries as well as the
regions of Southeast Asia, Latin America and Africa.

### People-Centered Clean Energy Transition

As part of its work on the energy transition, the IEA convenes the Global
Commission for People-Centred Clean Energy Transitions to "ensure the benefits
and costs involved in the transformation of our energy system are distributed
fairly and in a way that protects the most vulnerable in society." The
approach focuses on skill development, jobs, worker protections, economic
development, equity and fairness, social inclusion, and engaging individuals
as stakeholders in the process. The commission is composed of national
leaders, government ministers, and representatives from civil society. In
October 2021, the Commission published a report for twelve recommendations for
a people-centered approach to the clean energy transition.

### Resilience of the Energy Sector to Climate Change Impacts

Given the implications of climate change impacts for energy security, the IEA
also works to understand climate impacts on energy systems and provide
guidance on measures to improve their resilience to these impacts. This
includes an assessment of hydropower under different climate scenarios and a
report focused on climate hazards for power systems and measures to enhance
their climate resilience. The IEA also provides an overview of the level of
climate hazards in its member countries, along with key planning and policy
documents to address energy sector climate resilience.

### Technology Collaboration Programs (TCPs)

TCPs provide support to independent, international groups of government and
industry experts to research, develop, and commercialise energy technologies
and related issues. Over 6,000 experts are involved in TCPs across
approximately 300 organisations in 55 countries. Examples of TCPs include the
Energy in Buildings and Communities (EBC), Photovoltaic Power Systems (PVPS),
and Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (HEV).

## Criticism

### Bias against renewable energy

Real development of global photovoltaics additions vs. predictions by the IEA,
2002–2016

The IEA has been criticised for systematically underestimating the role of
renewable energy sources in future energy systems such as photovoltaics and
their cost reductions.

In the past, the IEA has been criticized by environmental groups for
underplaying the role of renewable energy technologies in favor of nuclear and
fossil fuels. In 2009, Guy Pearse stated that the IEA has consistently
underestimated the potential for renewable energy alternatives.

The Energy Watch Group (EWG), a coalition of scientists and politicians which
analyses official energy industry predictions, claims that the IEA has had an
institutional bias towards traditional energy sources and has been using
"misleading data" to undermine the case for renewable energy, such as wind and
solar. A 2008 EWG report compares IEA projections about the growth of wind
power capacity and finds that it has consistently underestimated the amount of
energy the wind power industry can deliver.

For example, in 1998, the IEA predicted global wind electricity generation
would total 47.4 GW by 2020, but EWG's report states that this level was
reached by the end of 2004. The report also said that the IEA has not learned
the lesson of previous underestimates, and last year net additions of wind
power globally were four times greater than the average IEA estimate from its
1995–2004 predictions. This pattern seems to have continued through 2016.

In a press release, the IEA stated that ‘80% of the increase in global
electricity generation in 2024 was provided by renewable sources and nuclear’,
placing nuclear power production alongside renewable energy sources as if both
were being expanded on a grand scale. While it announced that renewables were
expanded by 700 GW, it concealed the fact that nuclear power capacity was not
even expanded by a hundredth of this, namely 6.84 GW. In the document
announced with the press release, it states the increase in nuclear power
capacity at 7 GW, but conceals the fact that, according to its own figures,
2.89 GW were lost in the same year due to the shutdown of nuclear power
plants.

Amid discontent from across the renewables sector at the IEA's performance as
a global energy watchdog, the International Renewable Energy Agency was formed
on January 26, 2009. The aim is to have the agency fully operational by 2010
with an initial annual budget of €25M.

The IEA forecasts for solar power during the 2010s were criticized as not in
accordance with the exponential growth in the sector. Authors Adam Whitmore of
Harvard's Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and Terje
Osmundsen, then the senior vice president of Scatec Solar, a Norwegian solar
power company, claimed that the agency's cost assumptions were 100% above
current market prices, creating misleading projections that perpetuate the
impression that the growth of solar power requires huge subsidies, which has
the potential to discourage investment in solar energy market and,
consequently, stymie faster growth.

### Accuracy of forecasting

Ahead of the launch of the _2009World Energy Outlook_, the British daily
newspaper _The Guardian_ , referring to an unidentified senior IEA official,
alleged that the agency was deliberately downplaying the risk of peak oil
under pressures from the US. According to a second unidentified former senior
IEA official it was "imperative not to anger the Americans" and that the world
has already entered the "peak oil zone".

_The Guardian_ also referred to a team of scientists from Uppsala University
in Sweden who studied the 2008 World Energy Outlook and concluded the
forecasts of the IEA were unattainable. According to their peer-reviewed
report, oil production in 2030 would not exceed 75 million barrels per day
(11.9×10~~^~~ 6 m3/d) while the IEA forecasts a production of 105 million
barrels per day (16.7×10~~^~~ 6 m3/d). The lead author of the report, Kjell
Aleklett, has claimed that IEA's reports are "political documents". Other
research from the same group has thoroughly reviewed oil projections done by
the IEA World Energy Outlook.

The anticorruption NGO Global Witness wrote in its report _Heads in the Sand_
that "Global Witness' analysis demonstrates that the Agency continues to
retain an overly-optimistic, and therefore misleading, view about potential
future oil production." According to Global Witness, "the Agency's over-
confidence, despite credible data, external analysis and underlying
fundamentals all strongly suggesting a more precautionary approach, has had a
disastrous global impact."

In 2023, the IEA predicted that demand for fossil fuels such as oil, natural
gas and coal would reach an all-time high by 2030. OPEC rejected the IEA's
forecast, saying "what makes such predictions so dangerous, is that they are
often accompanied by calls to stop investing in new oil and gas projects." The
IEA forecasts that ammonia will meet approximately 45% of shipping fuel
demands by 2050.

### Restricting access to data

In 2021, the IEA was publicly criticized by more than 30 international
academics and researchers at Our World in Data for publishing its detailed,
global energy data behind paywalls, "[making] it unusable in the public
discourse and [preventing] many researchers from accessing it". The authors of
the Our World in Data open letter suggested that "countries that fund the IEA
drop the requirement to place data behind paywalls and increase their
funding".

In January 2022, the IEA announced plans to make all its data and analyses
freely available and open-access, a move endorsed by its executive director
and governing board. This initiative was awaiting final endorsement from IEA
member countries to become effective.

In October 2023, the IEA made the World Energy Outlook 2023 dataset available
for non-commercial use under a Creative Commons license. This dataset
encompasses global aggregated data for various scenarios, alongside detailed
regional and country-specific data up to 2050.

### US shale

In 2018, the IEA was criticized at the World Economic Forum by Saudi Arabia's
Oil Minister Al-Falih, for hyping the US shale oil industry amid forecasts of
oversupply for the oil market in their January Oil Market Report. Al-Falih was
exasperated with those claims, arguing that natural depletion, and strong
demand growth meant that there was plenty of room for new supplies, while the
shale drillers would not crash the market. He further said that the IEA is
overstating the role of shale in a global market, and how the core job of the
IEA, is not to take things out of context.