Intergovernmental organization

The **International Hydrographic Organization** (**IHO**) (French:
_Organisation Hydrographique Internationale_) is an intergovernmental
organization representing hydrography. As of May 2025,[update] the IHO
comprised 102 member states.

A principal aim of the IHO is to ensure that the world's seas, oceans and
navigable waters are properly surveyed and charted. It does this through the
setting of international standards and through its capacity building programs
and offices.

The IHO enjoys observer status at the United Nations, where it is the
recognized competent authority on hydrographic surveying and nautical
charting. When referring to hydrography and nautical charting in conventions
and similar instruments, it is the IHO standards and specifications that are
normally used.

## History

During the 19th century, many maritime nations established hydrographic
offices to provide means for improving the navigation of naval and merchant
vessels by providing nautical publications, nautical charts, and other
navigational services. There were substantial differences in hydrographic
procedures charts, and publications. In 1889, an International Maritime
Conference was held at Washington, D.C., and it was proposed to establish a
"permanent international commission." Similar proposals were made at the
sessions of the International Congress of Navigation held at Saint Petersburg
in 1908 and the International Maritime Conference held at Saint Petersburg in
1912.

In 1919, the national Hydrographers of Great Britain and France cooperated in
taking the necessary steps to convene an international conference of
Hydrographers. London was selected as the most suitable place for this
conference, and on 24 July 1919, the First International Conference opened,
attended by the Hydrographers of 24 nations. The object of the conference was
"To consider the advisability of all maritime nations adopting similar methods
in preparation, construction, and production of their charts and all
hydrographic publications; of rendering the results in the most convenient
form to enable them to be readily used; of instituting a prompt system of
mutual exchange of hydrographic information between all countries; and of
providing an opportunity to consultations and discussions to be carried out on
hydrographic subjects generally by the hydrographic experts of the world."
This is still the major purpose of the IHO.

As a result of the 1919 Conference, a permanent organization was formed and
statutes for its operations were prepared. The IHB, now the IHO, began its
activities in 1921 with 18 nations as members. The Principality of Monaco was
selected as the seat of the Organization as a result of the offer of Albert I
of Monaco to provide suitable accommodation for the Bureau in the
Principality.

The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) was established in June 1921
as the International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB), with Vice Admiral Sir John
Parry, KCB of the United Kingdom serving as its first President. In 1970,
under the leadership of Guy Chatel of France, the organization adopted its
current name as part of a new International Convention on the IHO, which was
agreed upon by its member nations. The term "International Hydrographic
Bureau" continued to describe the IHO's secretariat until 8 November 2016,
when a major revision to the Convention took effect. Following this change,
the secretariat was renamed the "IHO Secretariat," which consists of an
elected Secretary-General, two supporting Directors, and a small permanent
staff (18 in 2020) at the Organization’s headquarters in Monaco.

## Structure

Until 2016 the IHO was administered by a secretariat headed by a Directing
Committee comprising a President and two Directors. Since 8 November 2016,
upon the entry in to force of revisions to the Convention on the IHO, the
secretariat is headed by a Secretary-General, supported by two Directors, with
Australia's Robert Ward serving as the first Secretary-General. As before, all
three senior members of the secretariat continue to be elected to their
positions by the Member States at the regular Assembly of the IHO (formerly,
IHO Conferences). The secretariat staff comprise a number of technical
specialists, administrators, and support personnel. The bulk of the IHO's
technical and specialist expertise comes from Member States' personnel, often
assisted by invited industry experts, who all provide technical contributions
through participation in various IHO committees and working groups. A Council,
comprising a sub-set of all the IHO Member States, meets annually and oversees
the work of the IHO. A full description, together with details of the workings
of all the organs of the IHO is available on the IHO website: www.iho.int

## Functions

### Training

The IHO ensures the safety of maritime navigation by developing hydrographic
survey capability and nautical charting standards. To develop and standardize
its member states' hydrographic survey capabilities, the IHO worked with the
International Federation of Surveyors (Fédération Internationale des
Géomètres) and the International Cartographic Association (ICA) to create the
IHO's Standards of Competence. These standards are used to educate and train
member states' respective hydrographic offices and nautical chart makers.
Additionally, the IHO also creates syllabi higher education institutions who
teach hydrography and nautical navigation. The IHO also has an Advisory Board
which is tasked with supervising and approving member states' education and
training programs.

### Standardization

Since 1968, the IHO has regularly published updated editions of the Standards
of Hydrographic Surveys, with the most recent being published in 2008. Each of
these publications was designed to incorporate technological advancements and
international shipping demands. This is especially true with regards to the
rise of electronic navigation equipment in the 1980s.

The IHO also works to standardize the specifications, style, and symbols used
in producing nautical charts. In 1971, the IHO was able to get its member
states to use one single chart series, also known as INT charts. According to
this IHO agreement, if one member state wants to publish a chart for an area
covered by another member's existing chart, the duplicate must be created
using the same data as the original chart. IHO Publication M-4, which was
published in 1984, set specific international standards for nautical charts.

The advent of the Electronic Chart Display and Information System (ECDIS) made
it clear to the IHO it also needed to standardize how electronic navigational
data is transferred and displayed on ships. Electronic chart data was
standardized and categorized in an international database referred to as
Electronic Navigational Charts (ENCs). The way this data is transferred from
publishers to users was also standardized, as was the display and capabilities
of the ECDIS.

### International Cooperation

The IHO has encouraged the formation of Regional Hydrographic Commissions
(RHCs). Each RHC coordinates the national surveying and charting activities of
countries within each region and acts as a forum to address other matters of
common hydrographic interest. The 15 RHCs plus the IHO Hydrographic Commission
on Antarctica effectively cover the world. The IHO, in partnership with the
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, directs the General Bathymetric
Chart of the Oceans program.

### Achievements

Establishment of the Chart Specifications Committee and International Charts:

  1. The exploration of the seabed and movements of the sea
  2. Standardization of maritime measurements, hydrographic terminology, marine cartographic products, and geographical information systems for navigation
  3. High efficiency of the rapid dissemination of information on safety at sea
  4. Training of hydrographers and nautical cartographers

## Publications

Most IHO publications, including the standards, guidelines and associated
documents such as the _International Hydrographic Review_ , _International
Hydrographic Bulletin_ , the _Hydrographic Dictionary_ and the _Year Book_ are
available to the general public free of charge from the IHO website. The IHO
publishes the international standards related to charting and hydrography,
including S-57, _IHO Transfer Standard for Digital Hydrographic Data_ , the
encoding standard that is used primarily for electronic navigational charts.

In 2010, the IHO introduced a new, contemporary hydrographic geospatial
standard for modelling marine data and information, known as S-100. S-100 and
any dependent product specifications are underpinned by an on-line registry
accessible via the IHO website. S-100 is aligned with the ISO 19100 series of
geographic standards, thereby making it fully compatible with contemporary
geospatial data standards.

Because S-100 is based on ISO 19100, it can be used by other data providers
for their maritime-related (non-hydrographic) data and information. Various
data and information providers from both the government and private sector are
now using S-100 as part of the implementation of the e-Navigation concept that
has been endorsed by the UN International Maritime Organization (IMO).

Another in the series of publications of interest is S-23, _Limits of Oceans
and Seas_. The 3rd edition dates back to 1953 while the potential 4th edition,
started in 1986, has remained a draft since 2002. It was distributed to IHO
members, but its official publication has been suspended pending agreement
between South Korea and Japan regarding the international standard name of the
sea called "Japan Sea" in the 1953 edition.