Intergovernmental organization

The **International Organization for Migration** (**IOM**) is a United Nations
related organization working in the field of migration. The organization
implements operational assistance programmes for migrants, including
internally displaced persons, refugees, and migrant workers.

The International Organization for Migration is a UN agency based in Geneva.
Its director general is Amy E. Pope.

## History

### Historical context and predecessor organizations (1951 to 1989)

The International Organization for Migration (IOM) was founded in 1951 in
response to the large number of internally displaced persons and war refugees
in Europe after the Second World War. The IOM was initially a logistics agency
that organized the transport of nearly one million migrants in the 1950s and
has undergone several name changes since its inception. The transition from
the Provisional Intergovernmental Committee for the Movement of Migrants from
Europe (PICMME) in 1951 to the Intergovernmental Committee for European
Migration (ICEM) in 1952, to the Intergovernmental Committee for Migration
(ICM) in 1980, and finally to the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) in 1989 reflects the evolution of the IOM's mandate over its existence,
becoming the leading intergovernmental organization in the field of migration.

### Integration into the United Nations and the present (1990 to date)

In 1992, it was granted observer status at the United Nations General Assembly
(GA resolution A/RES/47/4). In September 2016, the United Nations (UN) Member
States, through the General Assembly, unanimously adopted a resolution
approving the agreement to transform IOM into an affiliated organization of
the UN. This agreement has strengthened the relationship between IOM and the
UN and improved its ability to fulfill its respective mandates in the
interests of migrants and Member States.

The IOM supported the creation of the Global Compact for Migration, the first-
ever intergovernmental agreement on international migration which was adopted
in Marrakech, Morocco, in December 2018. To support the implementation,
follow-up and review of the Global Compact on Migration, the UN Secretary-
General António Guterres established the UN Network on Migration in 2019. IOM
coordinates the United Nations Network on Migration which includes UNHCR, WFP
and UNDP, among others. While the IOM's history tracks the man-made and
natural disasters of the past half century, including Kosovo and Timor 1999,
and the Asian tsunami, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the Pakistan earthquake of
2004/2005, the 2010 Haiti earthquake, and the European migrant crisis—its
credo that humane and orderly migration benefits migrants and society has
steadily gained more international acceptance.

## Structure

### Organization

International Organization for Migration headquarters in Geneva

The organization is headquartered in Geneva, with liaison offices in New York
City and Addis Ababa. The Global Migration Data Analysis Centre (GMDAC) is
based in Berlin. In 2020, the organization reported that it had over 15,311
employees, with 168 nationalities represented. The highest decision-making
body of the IOM is the council, in which all member states are represented. It
has rules of procedure and meets at regular intervals to adopt the annual
budget and determine the organization's programmatic objectives. The official
languages are English, French and Spanish. According to its own figures, the
organization's budget in 2020 was around two billion US dollars. This is made
up of voluntary contributions from the member states and donations.

### Director General

The Director General of the organization is elected by the delegates of the
IOM member states for a five-year term. The following table lists the previous
directors of the IOM and its predecessor organization, the ICEM. The current
Director General is Amy Pope from the United States of America, with Ugochi
Daniels from Nigeria serving as Deputy Directors General.

## Mandate

The organization's global mandate includes assistance to migrants, including
migrant workers, refugees and internally displaced persons. This broad mandate
of the organization has earned it praise for flexibility in crisis situations,
but also criticism for legal accountability in protection issues. Due to
complementary mandates, IOM often cooperates with the UNHCR.

For example IOM coordinates work in response to the situation in Venezuela
through the Office of International Organization for Migration Director
General's Special Envoy for the Regional Response to the Venezuela Situation
working with UNHCR and 17 countries in South and Central America and the
Caribbean.

According to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), IOM is one of the central actors in humanitarian aid within
the UN system, especially in the context of displacement. IOM's main aid
measures include shelter, protection, the provision of basic medical and
sanitary care, life safety, coordination, telecommunications and logistics. On
the instructions of the UN Emergency Relief Coordinator, IOM, together with
UNHCR, is primarily responsible for camp coordination and management in
humanitarian emergencies. The organization is also active in stabilization,
peacebuilding and development in the context of migration.

  * Internally displaced people receive humanitarian aid after an earthquake in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.

  * US Secretary of State Blinken during an IOM mission in Obock, Djibouti.

  * Evacuation after a tsunami in Banda Aceh, Sumatra, Indonesia.

  * Trees uprooted by Typhoon Haiyan are used for reconstruction aid in the Philippines.

  * In Zaatari, Jordan, IOM supports the medical care and education of refugees.

## Member states

Member states of the IOM:  
﻿ member  
﻿ observer  
﻿ non-members

As of 2023, the International Organization for Migration has 175 member states
and 8 observer states.

  * Afghanistan
  * Albania
  * Algeria
  * Angola
  * Antigua and Barbuda
  * Argentina
  * Armenia
  * Australia
  * Austria
  * Azerbaijan
  * Bahamas
  * Bangladesh
  * Barbados
  * Belarus
  * Belgium
  * Belize
  * Benin
  * Bolivia
  * Bosnia and Herzegovina
  * Botswana
  * Brazil
  * Bulgaria
  * Burkina Faso
  * Burundi
  * Cabo Verde
  * Cambodia
  * Cameroon
  * Canada
  * Central African Republic
  * Chad
  * Chile
  * China
  * Colombia
  * Comoros
  * Congo
  * Cook Islands
  * Costa Rica
  * Côte d'Ivoire
  * Croatia
  * Cuba
  * Cyprus
  * Czech Republic
  * Democratic Republic of the Congo
  * Denmark
  * Djibouti
  * Dominica
  * Dominican Republic
  * Ecuador
  * Egypt
  * El Salvador
  * Eritrea
  * Estonia
  * Eswatini
  * Ethiopia
  * Fiji
  * Finland
  * France
  * Gabon
  * Gambia
  * Georgia
  * Germany
  * Ghana
  * Greece
  * Grenada
  * Guatemala
  * Guinea
  * Guinea-Bissau
  * Guyana
  * Haiti
  * Holy See
  * Honduras
  * Hungary
  * Iceland
  * India
  * Iran
  * Ireland
  * Israel
  * Italy
  * Jamaica
  * Japan
  * Jordan
  * Kazakhstan
  * Kenya
  * Kiribati
  * Kyrgyzstan
  * Lao People's Democratic Republic
  * Latvia
  * Lesotho
  * Liberia
  * Libya
  * Lithuania
  * Luxembourg
  * Madagascar
  * Malawi
  * Maldives
  * Mali
  * Malta
  * Marshall Islands
  * Mauritania
  * Mauritius
  * Mexico
  * Micronesia
  * Mongolia
  * Montenegro
  * Morocco
  * Mozambique
  * Myanmar
  * Namibia
  * Nauru
  * Nepal
  * Netherlands
  * New Zealand
  * Nicaragua
  * Niger
  * Nigeria
  * North Macedonia
  * Norway
  * Pakistan
  * Palau
  * Panama
  * Papua New Guinea
  * Paraguay
  * Peru
  * Philippines
  * Poland
  * Portugal
  * South Korea
  * Republic of Moldova
  * Romania
  * Russian Federation
  * Rwanda
  * Saint Kitts and Nevis
  * Saint Lucia
  * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
  * Samoa
  * São Tomé and Príncipe
  * Senegal
  * Serbia
  * Seychelles
  * Sierra Leone
  * Slovakia
  * Slovenia
  * Solomon Islands
  * Somalia
  * South Africa
  * South Sudan
  * Spain
  * Sri Lanka
  * Sudan
  * Suriname
  * Sweden
  * Switzerland
  * Tajikistan
  * Thailand
  * Timor-Leste
  * Togo
  * Tonga
  * Trinidad and Tobago
  * Tunisia
  * Turkey
  * Turkmenistan
  * Tuvalu
  * Uganda
  * Ukraine
  * United Kingdom
  * United Republic of Tanzania
  * United States
  * Uruguay
  * Uzbekistan
  * Vanuatu
  * Venezuela
  * Viet Nam
  * Yemen
  * Zambia
  * Zimbabwe

**Observer States** :

  * Bahrain
  * Bhutan
  * Indonesia
  * Kuwait
  * Malaysia
  * Qatar
  * San Marino
  * Saudi Arabia

**Non-Member States** :

  * Brunei
  * Equatorial Guinea
  * Hong Kong
  * Iraq
  * Lebanon
  * Macau
  * North Korea
  * Oman
  * Singapore
  * Syria
  * Taiwan
  * United Arab Emirates

## Criticism

### 2003 Amnesty and Human Rights Watch

In 2003, both Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch were critical of
the IOM's role in the Australian government's "Pacific Solution" of
transferring asylum seekers to offshore detention centres. Human Rights Watch
criticized the IOM for operating Manus Regional Processing Centre and the
processing centre on Nauru despite not having a refugee protection mandate.
Human Rights Watch criticized the IOM for being part of "arbitrary detention"
and for denying asylum seekers access to legal advice. Human Rights Watch
urged the IOM to cease operation the process centres, which it stated were
"detention centres" and to hand management of the centres to the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Amnesty International expressed concern that the IOM undertook actions on
behalf of governments that negatively impacted the human rights of asylum
seekers, refugees and migrants. Amnesty International cited an example of
fourteen Kurds in Indonesia who were expelled from Australian waters by
Australian authorities and relocated to Indonesia. Amnesty International
requested an assurance that the IOM will abide by the principle of non-
refoulement.

### 2022 Refugee Council of Australia

In 2022, the role that the IOM played in housing refugees in Indonesia was
described by the Refugee Council of Australia as presenting a "humanitarian
veneer while carrying out rights-violating activities on behalf of Western
nations” by researchers Asher Hirsch and Cameron Doig in _The Globe and Mail_.

The community housing that the IOM operated, using Australian government
funding, was described by the Refugee Council of Australia "inhumane
conditions, solitary confinement, lack of basic essentials and medical care,
physical and sexual abuse, and severe overcrowding". Rohingya John Joniad
described the housing as an "open prison".

### Uyghur refugees

In 2024, the IOM was criticized for being unable or willing to intervene in
refugee cases involving Uyghurs.