Intergovernmental organization

The **Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission** (abbreviated **IATTC**) (Sp.:
_Comisión Interamericana del Atún Tropical_) is a tuna regional fishery
management organisation responsible for the conservation and management of
tuna and other marine resources in the eastern Pacific Ocean.

## History

The Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission was created by the **Convention
for the Establishment of an Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission** , signed
between the United States and Costa Rica on May 31, 1949. The Convention was
signed by United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Costa Rica's
Ambassador to the United States, Mario Echandi Jiménez. A number of additional
countries later joined the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission. Each
country is represented by up to four Commissioners.

In 2003, the members of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission signed the
Antigua Convention, strengthening the Commission's powers. Most members of the
Commission ratified the Antigua Convention between 2004 and 2009, Canada
included. The U.S. ratified the Antigua Convention in February 2016.

The headquarters of the IATTC are located in La Jolla, San Diego, California,
United States.

## Members of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission

Source:

An asterisk indicates that the state has ratified the Convention on the
Establishment of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Convention.

  * Belize
  * Canada* (denounced the Convention in 1983[_citation needed_])
  * China
  * Colombia*
  * Costa Rica*
  * Ecuador*
  * El Salvador*
  * European Union
  * France*
  * Guatemala*
  * Japan*
  * Kiribati
  * South Korea*
  * Mexico*
  * Nicaragua*
  * Panama*
  * Peru*
  * Chinese Taipei
  * United States*
  * Vanuatu*
  * Venezuela*

The IATTC also has significant responsibilities for the implementation of the
International Dolphin Conservation Program (IDCP), and provides the
Secretariat for that program.

The first objective of the Agreement on the International Dolphin Conservation
Program (AIDCP) is to reduce incidental dolphin mortalities in the purse-seine
fishery in the eastern Pacific Ocean to levels approaching zero. This
Agreement and its predecessor, the 1992 La Jolla Agreement, have been
spectacularly successful in meeting this objective, as shown by the reduction
in mortality of dolphins incidental to fishing.

During 2013 95.4% of all sets made on tuna associated with dolphins were
accomplished with no mortality or serious injury to the dolphins. Furthermore,
the total mortality of dolphins in the fishery has been reduced from about
132,000 in 1986 to about 800 in 2013.[_citation needed_]

### Cooperating Non-Members

  * Bolivia
  * Chile
  * Honduras
  * Indonesia
  * Liberia

## Tropical tunas research

The IATTC, through the Achotines Laboratory is a major contributor of research
in the early life history of tropical tunas. The Achotines Laboratory was
established as part of the IATTC's Tuna-Billfish Program. It is one of the few
research facilities in the world designed specifically for studies of the
early life history of tropical tunas. As tunas are pelagic (open-ocean) fish
they are difficult to study in their natural habitat. Little is known from
studies of live tunas of their reproductive activities or early life history
(egg, larval, and early-juvenile stages), and for that reason the IATTC
established a research laboratory to focus on these aspects of tuna biology.
The Achotines Laboratory provides a unique setting for studying the
reproductive behavior and early life stages of tropical tunas. While tunas are
the main focus at the Laboratory, there are ample facilities to support
research in other areas of marine and terrestrial science.