International organization

The **International Renewable Energy Agency** (**IRENA**) is an
intergovernmental organization mandated to facilitate cooperation, advance
knowledge, and promote the adoption and sustainable use of renewable energy.
It is the first international organisation to focus exclusively on renewable
energy, addressing needs in both industrialised and developing countries. It
was founded in 2009, and its statute entered into force on 8 July 2010. The
agency is headquartered in Masdar City, Abu Dhabi. The Director-General of
IRENA is Francesco La Camera, a national of Italy. IRENA is an official United
Nations observer.

## History

The first suggestions for an international renewable agency are based on the
1980 Brandt Report activities. NGOs and industry lobbying groups like
Eurosolar, the World Council for Renewable Energy (WCRE) and the World Wind
Energy Association (WWEA) have promoted IRENA for several decades. In 1990,
the Austrian government of Franz Vranitzky suggested a renewables agency to
the UN. One of the drivers was Hermann Scheer, a German politician and
lobbyist who was acting as president of EUROSOLAR and chair of WCRE.

On 15 June, at their annual event, the WWEA gave their 2010 World Wind Energy
Award to the Founding member States of IRENA. They stated: "The creation of
IRENA can be seen as the most important decision ever taken on the global
level in favour of renewable energy. The founding of IRENA sent out a very
strong signal to the world community that renewable energy will have to play
and will play a key role in the future energy supply all over the world. With
the Award, WWEA would also like to indicate that WWEA is committed to work
closely with IRENA and will continue to give its full support."

Since 1981, several meetings took place to discuss the formation of IRENA. The
Preparatory Conference for founding IREA was held on 10 and 11 April 2008 with
54 countries participating. Here, government representatives discussed the
objectives, activities, finances, and organizational structure of IRENA.
Participants expressed a need to begin a swift transition to a more secure,
sustainable renewable energy economy with the assistance of an international
body.

The Founding Conference of the International Renewable Energy Agency was held
in Bonn, Germany, on 26 January 2009. 75 countries signed the Agency's
statute. The statute entered into force on 8 July 2010, 30 days after the 25th
country deposited its instrument of ratification. The Founding Conference
established the Preparatory Commission for IRENA, which consists of all
signatory states.[_citation needed_]

During the first session of the Preparatory Commission in Bonn on 27 January
2009, the signatory countries adopted criteria and procedures for selecting
IRENA's Interim Director-General and its interim headquarters. An
Administrative Committee was created to assist the commission in preparing its
second session. The Administrative Committee prepared draft proposals for an
interim work programme and budget as well as for interim staff regulations and
interim financial rules. Nominations for the Interim Director-General and the
interim headquarters were submitted by 30 April 2009.

The second session of the Preparatory Commission met in Sharm el-Sheikh,
Egypt, on 29–30 June 2009, to elect the Interim Director General and decide
the location of IRENA's interim headquarters. It was decided that the interim
headquarters will be located in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. In addition,
an innovation and technology center will be located in Bonn, and an office
dedicated to liaising with the United Nations and other international
institutions will be located in Vienna. Hélène Pelosse was elected as the
Interim Director-General. The second session of the Preparatory Commission
also adopted an interim work programme and budget as well as interim staff
regulations and interim financial rules.

The fourth session of the Preparatory Commission on 24–25 October 2010 in Abu
Dhabi appointed Kenyan representative Adnan Amin, Deputy Interim Director-
General, to perform functions of Interim Director-General after resignation of
Hélène Pelosse. On 4 April 2011, Adnan Amin was sworn in as the first
Director-General.

The agency has staged a number of events bringing together member states for
interaction on ways and means of furthering renewable energy, and conducted
significant research and development into viable solutions for the future. On
8 September 2014, IRENA published a notable report on its works titled
_REthinking energy_ , which encouraged "speedier adoption of renewable energy
technologies," as "the most feasible route to reduce carbon emissions and
avoid catastrophic climate change." The study set out to gauge the global
power sector and establish how technological advances, economic growth and
climate change are transforming it. "A convergence of social, economic and
environmental forces are transforming the global energy system as we know it.
But if we continue on the path we are currently on and fuel our growing
economies with outmoded ways of thinking and acting, we will not be able to
avoid the most serious impacts of climate change," Amin said at a function to
release the report.

The Ninth Meeting of International Renewable Energy Agency Council was held on
10–11 June 2015 at Abu Dhabi.

### International Day of Clean Energy

On August 25, 2023, the United Nations General Assembly declared January 26 as
the International Day of Clean Energy through resolution A/77/327. This
particular date was chosen to coincide with the anniversary of the
establishment of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in 2009.

## Aims

IRENA aims to become the main driving force in promoting a transition towards
the use of renewable energy on a global scale:

> Acting as the global voice for renewable energies, IRENA will provide
> practical advice and support for both industrialised and developing
> countries, help them improve their regulatory frameworks and build capacity.
> The agency will facilitate access to all relevant information including
> reliable data on the potential of renewable energy, best practices,
> effective financial mechanisms and state-of-the-art technological expertise.

IRENA provides advice and support to governments on renewable energy policy,
capacity building, and technology transfer. IRENA will also co-ordinate with
existing renewable energy organizations, such as REN21.

## Member states

The statute to gain IRENA membership requires that a state be a member of the
United Nations and to regional intergovernmental economic-integration
organizations. States that gain membership to IRENA must uphold the
organizations statute to the best of its abilities.

On 9 January 2019, Canada became IRENA's 160th member.

As of July 2022, 168 states and the European Union are members of IRENA, and a
further 17 are in the process of accession.

## Institutional structure

### The Assembly

This assembly is IRENA's main institutional governing body, which includes one
delegate from each member state. The assembly meets once yearly to discuss all
IRENA management including things such as budget, membership applications and
yearly goals. The 9th Assembly took place in January 2019 with the 10th
Assembly scheduled for 11–12 January in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

### The Council

The IRENA council is composed of 21 elected officials from member states, who
each serve for two-year terms and must answer to the assembly. Council members
rotate between states to ensure an efficient and fair representation of
various member country sizes, geographic location, rates of development and
particular concerns. The council deals directly with IRENA matters related to
budgeting and annual reports.

### The Secretariat

The Secretariat is the executive branch of IRENA and consists of the Director-
General and their staff. The Secretariat acts as oversight to the council and
assembly and offers technical support to these governing bodies. The current
of Director-General of IRENA is the Italian Francesco La Camera who was
appointed to the position during IRENA's Ninth Assembly and assumed office on
4 April 2019.

IRENA's first Director-General was Adnan Z. Amin, a Kenyan national. He was
elected to the post in April 2011 and completed a second term that ended April
2019. Afterwards, he was accorded Amin the honorary title of _Director-General
Emeritus_. Along with his work as Secretariat, Amin also served as the
Director of the United Nations Environment Programme's (UNEP) at their New
York office and as Special Representative of the UNEP Executive Director where
he played a crucial role in reviewing international governance and his
organizations participation at the World Summit of Sustainable Development.
During his time as Director General of IRENA, the organization was involved in
the implementation of policies such as the Paris Agreement, the UN 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and the G7 and G20. IRENA's membership also grew
to include nearly all countries world-wide.

## United Nations

> Various UN organisations work in the field of renewable energy. But IRENA is
> the only one dedicated to the promotion of 100% renewable energy worldwide.
> IRENA and the UN will join forces to speed up the transformation of the
> global energy sector.

Hélène Pelosse, former Interim Director General of IRENA, met with UN
Secretary General Ban Ki-moon during 2009 Climate week in New York City, and
together with Ban explored future fields of cooperation between IRENA and
various UN bodies. IRENA also seeks to cooperate with the UN and associated
organisations like the United Nations University, UNESCO, the World Bank, GEF,
UNIDO, UNDP, UNEP, and WTO in the areas of education and training, financing,
access to energy, potential studies and trade.[_citation needed_]

## Renewable Energy Capacity Statistics

The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) compiles and publishes
statistics on the net generating capacity of renewable energy sources for
electricity production, covering a period since 2013. The agency gathers data
through a combination of its own surveys, official national statistics,
industry reports, research studies, and various news outlets.

### 2023

In its March 2024 publication, IRENA highlighted a marked rise in global
renewable electricity capacity, with an increase of 473 gigawatts (GW) in
2023. This figure represents 86% of all newly installed power generation
capacity during that year. China was the leading contributor to this growth.
The report also noted significant developments in solar and wind energy: solar
energy capacity expanded by 32.4% to reach 1.42 terawatts (TW), thus
overtaking hydropower, while wind energy capacity also achieved a noteworthy
milestone by exceeding 1 TW.

### 2024

In July 2025, IRENA published its 2024 report.

In 2024, global renewable power capacity additions reached 582 gigawatts (GW),
representing a 19.8% increase compared to the capacity additions delivered in
2023 and marking the highest annual expansion since records began in 2000.
Solar photovoltaics (PV) led this surge, accounting for 452.1 GW (77.8%) of
the total, followed by wind, with 114.3 GW. These additions brought the total
global installed renewable capacity to 4443 GW by the end of 2024.

In 2024, Asia added 413.2 GW of renewable capacity – a 24.9% increase that
brought the region’s total to 2 374 GW. China (PRC) accounted for 61.2% of
global PV additions (+ 276.8 GW) and 69.4% of new wind installations (+ 79.4
GW). Also the USA, India, Brazil and Germany were some of the notable
contributors.

91% of new renewable power projects commissioned in 2024 were more cost-
effective than any fossil fuel-fired alternative.

IRENA has emphasized in its papers, speeches and press releases that the
global goal is to triple the utilization of renewable energy sources and
achieve a total capacity of 11.2 terawatts by 2030. This entails the annual
addition of an average of 1,044 gigawatts of new renewable energy capacity.
This action would cut carbon dioxide emissions by 43 percent by 2030 and 60
percent by 2035.