Intergovernmental organisation

The **International Bureau of Weights and Measures** (French: _Bureau
international des poids et mesures_ , **BIPM**) is an intergovernmental
organisation, through which its 64 member-states act on measurement standards
in areas including chemistry, ionising radiation, physical metrology, as well
as the International System of Units (SI) and Coordinated Universal Time
(UTC). It is headquartered in the Pavillon de Breteuil in Saint-Cloud, near
Paris, France. The organisation has been referred to as **IBWM** (from its
name in English) in older literature.

## Function

The BIPM has the mandate to provide the basis for a single, coherent system of
measurements throughout the world, traceable to the International System of
Units (SI). This task takes many forms, from direct dissemination of units to
coordination through international comparisons of national measurement
standards (as in electricity and ionising radiation).

Following consultation, a draft version of the BIPM Work Programme is
presented at each meeting of the General Conference for consideration with the
BIPM budget. The final programme of work is determined by the CIPM in
accordance with the budget agreed to by the CGPM.

Currently, the BIPM's main work includes:

  * Making brochures that define the International System of Units.
  * Scientific and technical activities carried out in its four departments: chemistry, ionising radiation, physical metrology, and time
  * Liaison and coordination work, including providing the secretariat for the CIPM Consultative Committees and some of their Working Groups and for the CIPM MRA, and providing institutional liaison with the other bodies supporting the international quality infrastructure and other international bodies
  * Capacity building and knowledge transfer programs to increase the effectiveness within the worldwide metrology community of those Member State and Associates with emerging metrology systems
  * A resource centre providing a database and publications for international metrology

The BIPM is one of the twelve member organisations of the International
Network on Quality Infrastructure (INetQI), which promotes and implements QI
activities in metrology, accreditation, standardisation and conformity
assessment.

The BIPM has an important role in maintaining accurate worldwide time of day.
It combines, analyses, and averages the official atomic time standards of
member nations around the world to create a single, official Coordinated
Universal Time (UTC).

## Structure

The BIPM is overseen by the International Committee for Weights and Measures
(French: _Comité international des poids et mesures, CIPM_), a committee of
eighteen members that meet normally in two sessions per year, which is in turn
overseen by the General Conference on Weights and Measures (French:
_Conférence générale des poids et mesures, CGPM_) that meets in Paris usually
once every four years, consisting of delegates of the governments of the
Member States and observers from the Associates of the CGPM. These organs are
also commonly referred to by their French initialisms.

## History

The creation of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures followed the
Metre Convention of 1875, after the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871), at the
initiative of the International Geodetic Association. This process began with
the 1855 Paris Exposition, shortly after the Great Exhibition, when the need
for international standardization of weights and measures became apparent.
During the process of unification of Germany, geodesists called for the
establishment of an International Bureau of Weights and Measures in Europe.
These trends culminated in the 1889 General Conference on Weights and
Measures, with the distribution of the metre and kilogram standards to the
States parties to the Metre Convention.

When the metre was adopted as an international unit of length, it was well
known that it no longer corresponded to its historical definition. Carlos
Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero, first president of both the International Geodetic
Association and the International Committee for Weigths and Measures, took
part to the remeasurement and extension of the arc measurement of Delambre and
Méchain. At that time, mathematicians like Legendre and Gauss had developed
new methods for processing data, including the least squares method which
allowed to compare experimental data tainted with observational errors to a
mathematical model. Moreover, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures
would have a central role for international geodetic measurements as Charles
Édouard Guillaume's discovery of invar minimized the impact of measurement
inaccuracies due to temperature systematic errors.

### Geodetic standards and the Expositions Universelles (1855 /1867)

Replicas of historical metric standards, including an iron copy of the _mètre
des Archives_.

In the 19th century, units of measurement were defined by primary standards,
and unique artifacts made of different alloys with distinct coefficients of
expansion were the legal basis of units of length. A wrought iron ruler, the
Toise of Peru, also called _Toise de l'Académie_ , was the French primary
standard of the toise, and the metre was officially defined by an artifact
made of platinum kept in the National Archives. Besides the latter, another
platinum and twelve iron standards of the metre were made by Étienne Lenoir in
1799. One of them became known as the Committee Meter in the United States and
served as standard of length in the United States Coast Survey until 1890.

Ibáñez apparatus calibrated on the metric Spanish standard and used at
Aarberg, in canton of Bern, Switzerland in 1880.

In 1855, the Dufour map (French: _Carte Dufour_), the first topographic map of
Switzerland for which the metre was adopted as the unit of length, won the
gold medal at the Exposition Universelle. However, the baselines for this map
were measured in 1834 with three toises long measuring rods calibrated on a
toise made in 1821 by Jean Nicolas Fortin for Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von
Struve.

The geodetic measuring device calibrated on the metre devised by Carlos Ibáñez
e Ibáñez de Ibero and Frutos Saavedra Meneses, was displayed by Jean Brunner
at the Exhibition. The four-metre-long Spanish measuring instrument, which
became known as the Spanish Standard (French: _Règle espagnole_), was compared
with Borda's double-toise N° 1, which served as a comparison module for the
measurement of all geodesic bases in France, and was also to be compared to
the Ibáñez apparatus. In order to maintain measurement traceability it was
important to control the temperature during these intercomparisons in order to
avoid systematic errors.

The Earth measurements thus underscored the importance of scientific methods
at a time when statistics were implemented in geodesy. As a leading scientist
of his time, Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero was one of the 81 initial members
of the International Statistical Institute (ISI) and delegate of Spain to the
first ISI session (now called World Statistic Congress) in Rome in 1887. On
the sidelines of the Exposition Universelle (1855) and the second Congress of
Statistics held in Paris, an association with a view to obtaining a uniform
decimal system of measures, weights and currencies was created in 1855. Under
the impetus of this association, a Committee for Weights and Measures and
Monies (French: _Comité des poids, mesures et monnaies_) would be created
during the Exposition Universelle (1867) in Paris and would call for the
international adoption of the metric system.

### The metre and Struve Geodetic Arc (1816/1855)

In 1858, a Technical Commission was set up to continue cadastral surveying
inaugurated under Muhammad Ali. This Commission suggested to buy geodetic
devices which were ordered in France. Mohammed Sa'id Pasha entrusted to Ismail
Mustafa al-Falaki the study of the precision apparatus calibrated against the
metre intended to measure geodetic baselines and built by Jean Brunner in
Paris. Ismail Mustafa had the task to carry out the experiments necessary for
determining the expansion coefficients of the two platinum and brass bars, and
to compare the Egyptian standard with a known standard. The Spanish standard
designed by Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero and Frutos Saavedra Meneses was
chosen for this purpose, as it had served as a model for the construction of
the Egyptian standard.

Metre Convention signatories

It was not until 1954 that the connection of the southerly extension of the
Struve Geodetic Arc, a chain of survey triangulations stretching from
Hammerfest in Norway to the Black Sea, with an arc running northwards from
South Africa through Egypt would bring the course of a major meridian arc back
to land where Eratosthenes had founded geodesy. The Struve Geodetic arc
measurement extended on a period of forty years and initiated an international
scientific collaboration between Russian Empire and the United Kingdoms of
Sweden and Norway with the involvement of proeminent astronomers such as
Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve, Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel, Carl Friedrich
Gauss and George Biddell Airy. A French scientific instrument maker, Jean
Nicolas Fortin, made three direct copies of the Toise of Peru, one for
Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve, a second for Heinrich Christian Schumacher
in 1821 and a third for Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel in 1823. In 1831, Henri-
Prudence Gambey also realised a copy of the Toise of Peru which was kept at
Altona Observatory in Hamburg.

According to geodesists, these standards were secondary standards deduced from
the Toise of Peru. In continental Europe, except Spain, surveyors continued to
use measuring instruments calibrated on the Toise of Peru. Among these, the
toise of Bessel and the apparatus of Borda were respectively the main
references for geodesy in Prussia and in France. These measuring devices
consisted of bimetallic rulers in platinum and brass or iron and zinc fixed
together at one extremity to assess the variations in length produced by any
change in temperature. The combination of two bars made of two different
metals allowed to take thermal expansion into account without measuring the
temperature.

### Metric act of 1866 and calls for an international standard unit of length

In 1866, Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler's use of the metre and the creation of the
Office of Standard Weights and Measures as an office within the Coast Survey
contributed to the introduction of the Metric Act of 1866 allowing the use of
the metre in the United States, and preceded the choice of the metre as
international scientific unit of length and the proposal by the 1867 General
Conference of the European Arc Measurement (German: _Europäische Gradmessung_)
to establish the International Bureau of Weights and Measures. Moreover, it
was asserted that the Toise of Peru, the standard of the toise constructed in
1735 for the French Geodesic Mission to the Equator, might be so much damaged
that comparison with it would be worthless, while Bessel had questioned the
accuracy of copies of this standard belonging to Altona and Koenigsberg
Observatories, which he had compared to each other about 1840.

This assertion was particularly worrying, because when the primary Imperial
yard standard had partially been destroyed in 1834, a new standard of
reference was constructed using copies of the "Standard Yard, 1760", instead
of the pendulum's length as provided for in the Weights and Measures Act 1824,
because the pendulum method proved unreliable.

### International Geodetic Association

The intimate relationships that necessarily existed between metrology and
geodesy explain that the International Association of Geodesy, founded to
combine the geodetic operations of different countries, in order to reach a
new and more exact determination of the shape and dimensions of the Globe,
prompted the project of reforming the foundations of the metric system, while
expanding it and making it international. Not, as it was mistakenly assumed
for a certain time, that the Association had the unscientific thought of
modifying the length of the metre, in order to conform exactly to its
historical definition according to the new values that would be found for the
terrestrial meridian. But, busy combining the arcs measured in the different
countries and connecting the neighbouring triangulations, geodesists
encountered, as one of the main difficulties, the unfortunate uncertainty
which reigned over the equations of the units of length used. Adolphe Hirsch,
General Baeyer and Colonel Ibáñez decided, in order to make all the standards
comparable, to propose to the Association to choose the metre for geodetic
unit, and to create an international prototype metre differing as little as
possible from the _mètre des Archives._

In 1867 at the second General Conference of the International Association of
Geodesy held in Berlin, the question of an international standard unit of
length was discussed in order to combine the measurements made in different
countries to determine the size and shape of the Earth. According to a
preliminary proposal made in Neuchâtel the precedent year, the General
Conference recommended the adoption of the metre in replacement of the toise
of Bessel, the creation of an International Metre Commission, and the
foundation of a World institute for the comparison of geodetic standards, the
first step towards the creation of the International Bureau of Weights and
Measures.

### Saint Petersburg Academy

Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler's metrological and geodetic work also had a
favourable response in Russia. In 1869, the Saint Petersburg Academy of
Sciences sent to the French Academy of Sciences a report drafted by Otto
Wilhelm von Struve, Heinrich von Wild, and Moritz von Jacobi, whose theorem
has long supported the assumption of an ellipsoid with three unequal axes for
the figure of the Earth, inviting his French counterpart to undertake joint
action to ensure the universal use of the metric system in all scientific
work. The French Academy of Sciences and the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris
drew the attention of the French government to this issue. In November 1869,
Napoleon III issued invitations to join the International Metre Commission.

### The International Metre Commission (1870/1872)

Creating the metre-alloy in 1874 at the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers.
Present Henri Tresca, George Matthey, Saint-Claire Deville, and Debray Closeup
of National Prototype Metre Bar No. 27, made in 1889 by the International
Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) in collaboration with Johnson Mattey and
given to the United States, which served as the standard for American
cartography from 1890 replacing the Committee Meter, an authentic copy of the
_Mètre des Archives_ produced in 1799 in Paris, which Ferdinand Rudolph
Hassler had brought to the United States in 1805.

The French government gave practical support to the creation of an
International Metre Commission, which met in Paris in 1870 and again in 1872
with the participation of about thirty countries. There was much discussion
within this commission, considering the opportunity either to keep as
definitive the units represented by the standards of the Archives, or to
return to the primitive definitions, and to correct the units to bring them
closer to them. Since its origin, the metre has kept a double definition; it
is both the ten-millionth part of the quarter meridian and the length
represented by the _Mètre des Archives_. The first is historical, the second
is metrological. The first solution prevailed, in accordance with common sense
and in accordance with the advice of the French Academy of Sciences.
Abandoning the values represented by the standards, would have consecrated an
extremely dangerous principle, that of the change of units to any progress of
measurements; the Metric System would be perpetually threatened with change,
that is to say with ruin. Thus the Commission called for the creation of a new
international prototype metre which length would be as close as possible to
that of the _Mètre des Archives_ and the arrangement of a system where
national standards could be compared with it.

At the session on 12 October 1872 of the Permanent Committee of the
International Metre Commission, which was to become the International
Committee for Weights and Measures, Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero was
elected president. On 19 April 1875, Ibáñez' presidency was confirmed and
Adolphe Hirsch was elected secretary of the International Committee for
Weights and Measures. On 6 May 1873 during the 6th session of the French
section of the Metre Commission, Henri Étienne Sainte-Claire Deville cast a
20-kilogram platinum-iridium ingot from Matthey in his laboratory at the École
normale supérieure (Paris). On 13 May 1874, 250 kilograms of platinum-iridium
to be used for several national prototypes of the metre was cast at the
Conservatoire national des arts et métiers. When a conflict broke out
regarding the presence of impurities in the metre-alloy of 1874, a member of
the Preparatory Committee since 1870 and president of the Permanent Committee
of the International Metre Commission, Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero
intervened with the French Academy of Sciences to rally France to the project
to create an International Bureau of Weights and Measures equipped with the
scientific means necessary to redefine the units of the metric system
according to the progress of sciences. In fact, the chemical analysis of the
alloy produced in 1874 by the French section revealed contamination by
ruthenium and iron which led the International Committee for Weights and
Measures to reject, in 1877, the prototypes produced by the French section
from the 1874 alloy. It also seemed at the time that the production of
prototypes with an X profile was only possible through the extrusion process,
which resulted in iron contamination. However, it soon turned out that the
prototypes designed by Henri Tresca could be produced by milling.

### The 1875 Metre Convention and the founding of the BIPM

Seal of the BIPM

The principal tasks facing the delegates at the 1875 conference was the
replacement of the existing metre and kilogram artefacts that were held by the
French Government and the setting up of an organization to administer the
maintenance of standards around the globe. The conference did not concern
itself with other units of measure. The conference had undertones of Franco-
German political manoeuvring, particularly since the French had been
humiliated by the Prussians during the war a few years previously. Although
France lost control of the metric system, they ensured that it passed to
international rather than German control and that the international
headquarters were in Paris.

Two members of the Permanent Committee of the International Metre Commission,
the German astronomer, Wilhelm Julius Foerster, director of the Berlin
Observatory and director of the German Weights and Measures Service, and the
Swiss geodesist of German origin, Adolphe Hirsch were also among the main
architects of the Metre Convention. While the German astronomer Wilhelm Julius
Foerster along with the Russian and Austrian representatives boycotted the
Permanent Committee of the International Metre Commission in order to prompt
the reunion of the Diplomatic Conference of the Metre and to promote the
foundation of a permanent International Bureau of Weights and Measures,
Adolphe Hirsch, delegate of Switzerland at this Diplomatic Conference in 1875,
conformed to the opinion of Italy and Spain to create, in spite of French
reluctance, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in France as a
permanent institution at the disadvantage of the _Conservatoire national des
arts et métiers_.

Spain notably supported France for this outcome and the first president of the
International Committee for Weights and Measures, the Spanish geodesist,
Carlos Ibáñez e Ibáñez de Ibero received the Grand Officer medal of the Légion
d'Honneur for his diplomatic role on this issue and was awarded the Poncelet
Prize for his scientific contribution to metrology. Indeed, as Carlos Ibáñez e
Ibáñez de Ibero was collaborating with the French on the extension of the arc
measurement of Delambre and Méchain since 1853, and was president of both the
Permanent Committee of the International Metre Commission since 1872 and the
Permanent Commission of the International Association of Geodesy since 1874,
he was to play a pivotal role in reconciling French and German interests. The
Metre Convention was signed on 20 May 1875 in Paris and the International
Bureau of Weights and Measures was created under the supervision of the
International Committee for Weights and Measures, presided by Carlos Ibáñez e
ibáñez de Ibero.

### The 1889 General Conference on Weights and Measures

In 1889, the General Conference on Weights and Measures, presided by Alfred
Descloizeaux, met at the Pavillon de Breteuil, the seat of the International
Bureau of Weights and Measures. It performed the first great deed dictated by
the motto inscribed in the pediment of the splendid edifice that is the metric
system: "_A tous les temps, à tous les peuples_ " (For all times, to all
peoples); and this deed consisted in the approval and distribution, among the
governments of the states supporting the Metre Convention, of prototype
standards of hitherto unknown precision intended to propagate the metric unit
throughout the whole world.

For metrology the matter of expansibility was fundamental; as a matter of
fact, the temperature measuring error related to the length measurement in
proportion to the expansibility of the standard and the constantly renewed
efforts of metrologists to protect their measuring instruments against the
interfering influence of temperature revealed clearly the importance they
attached to the expansion-induced errors. It was common knowledge, for
instance, that effective measurements were possible only inside a building,
the rooms of which were well protected against the changes in outside
temperature, and the very presence of the observer created an interference
against which it was often necessary to take strict precautions. Thus, the
Contracting States also received a collection of thermometers whose accuracy
made it possible to ensure that of length measurements. The international
prototype metre would also be a "line standard"; that is, the metre was
defined as the distance between two lines marked on the bar, so avoiding the
wear problems of end standards.

The comparison of the new prototypes of the metre with each other involved the
development of special measuring equipment and the definition of a
reproducible temperature scale. The BIPM's thermometry work led to the
discovery of special alloys of iron–nickel, in particular invar, whose
practically negligible coefficient of expansion made it possible to develop
simpler baseline measurement methods, and for which its director, the Swiss
physicist Charles-Edouard Guillaume, was granted the Nobel Prize in Physics in
1920. Guillaume's Nobel Prize marked the end of an era in which metrology was
leaving the field of geodesy to become an autonomous scientific discipline
able of redefining the metre through technological applications of physics. On
the other hand, the fondation of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
by Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler paved the way to the actual definition of the
metre, with Charles Sanders Peirce being the first to experimentally link the
metre to the wavelength of a spectral line. Albert Abraham Michelson soon took
up the idea and improved it.

### Additional roles for standardized time

In 1987 the International Bureau of Weights and Measures took over some of the
work of the International Time Bureau when it was dissolved in 1987. The
remaining tasks were assigned to the International Earth Rotation and
Reference Systems Service (IERS), which replaced the International Polar
Motion Service and the earth-rotation section of the International Time
Bureau. Already in 1936, irregularities in the speed of Earth's rotation due
to the unpredictable movement of air and water masses were discovered through
the use of quartz clocks. They implied that the Earth's rotation was an
imprecise way of determining time. In 1967, the second was redefined based on
atomic clocks. resulting in the International Atomic Time (TAI). The
International Bureau of Weights and Measures began to establish atomic clocks
world-wide, numbering more than 450 currently.

### The 2019 revision of the SI

The International System of Units (SI, abbreviated from the French _Système
international (d'unités)_), the modern form of the metric system was revised
in 2019. It is the only system of measurement with an official status in
nearly every country in the world. It comprises a coherent system of units of
measurement starting with seven base units, which are the second (the unit of
time with the symbol s), metre (length, m), kilogram (mass, kg), ampere
(electric current, A), kelvin (thermodynamic temperature, K), mole (amount of
substance, mol), and candela (luminous intensity, cd). Since 2019, the
magnitudes of all SI units have been defined by declaring exact numerical
values for seven _defining constants_ when expressed in terms of their SI
units. These defining constants are the hyperfine transition frequency of
caesium Δ _ν_ Cs, the speed of light in vacuum _c_ , the Planck constant _h_ ,
the elementary charge _e_ , the Boltzmann constant _k_ , the Avogadro constant
_N_ A, and the luminous efficacy _K_ cd.

## Directors

Pavillon de Breteuil in Saint-Cloud, France

Since its establishment, the directors of the BIPM have been:

Name | Country | Mandate | Notes   
---|---|---|---  
Gilbert Govi | Italy | 1875–1877 |   
J. Pernet | Switzerland | 1877–1879 | Acting director   
Ole Jacob Broch | Norway | 1879–1889 |   
J.-René Benoît | France | 1889–1915 |   
Charles Édouard Guillaume | Switzerland | 1915–1936 |   
Albert Pérard | France | 1936–1951 |   
Charles Volet | Switzerland | 1951–1961 | Honorary director   
Jean Terrien | France | 1962–1977 |   
Pierre Giacomo | France | 1978–1988 |   
Terry J. Quinn | United Kingdom | 1988–2003 | Honorary director   
Andrew J. Wallard | United Kingdom | 2004–2010 | Honorary director   
Michael Kühne | Germany | 2011–2012 |   
Martin J. T. Milton | United Kingdom | 2013–present |