Human aid independent organization

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "International Bamboo and Rattan Organization" – news **·**
newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( July 2021)__(Learn how and
when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| **A major contributor to this article appears to have aclose connection with
its subject.** It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content
policies, particularly neutral point of view. Please discuss further on the
talk page. _( August 2023)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **International Bamboo and Rattan Organization** (**INBAR**) is an
independent intergovernmental organization established in 1997 to develop and
promote innovative solutions to poverty and environmental sustainability using
bamboo and rattan.

## History

INBAR evolved from an informal network of bamboo and rattan researchers set up
in 1984 by the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada. The
name "International Network for Bamboo and Rattan" was chosen in 1993. Work to
launch INBAR as an independent organization started in 1995, and was completed
in 1997 when INBAR became an independent organization with its headquarters in
Beijing, China. Bangladesh, Canada, China, Indonesia, Myanmar, Nepal, Peru,
the Philippines and the United Republic of Tanzania made up INBAR's nine
founding members. Since then, INBAR has grown considerably in strength and
scope away from a research-only organization and towards a more action-focused
mandate. In November 2016 the name of the organization was changed to
International Bamboo and Rattan Organization to reflect this change.

## Membership and structure

Membership of INBAR is open to member states of the United Nations and to
intergovernmental organizations. INBAR currently has 50 Member States. INBAR's
supreme governing body is its Council of representatives of its Member States,
which meets biennially. The Board of Trustees, made up of appointed experts
from relevant fields from many countries, is the second tier of governance,
and develops appropriate policies, oversees management and ensures efficient
operations at its annual meetings.

The Director General is a member of the Board of Trustees and is responsible
for day-to-day running of the organization. The current Director General is
Ambassador Ali Mchumo.

INBAR's headquarters is in Beijing, China, and it has regional offices in
South Asia (New Delhi, India), Central Africa (Yaoundé, Cameroon), East Africa
(Addis Ababa, Ethiopia), West Africa (Kumasi, Ghana) and Latin America and the
Caribbean (Quito, Ecuador). INBAR is managed by its Executive Management team,
which comprises the Director General, Deputy Director General, and the
Directors of Global Program, Membership Affairs, Host Country Affairs, and
Communications.

### Involvement with UN organizations

INBAR collaborates with numerous UN organizations. INBAR was awarded Observer
status to the UN General Assembly in 2017, and is also Observer to the UN
Economic and Social Council. INBAR signed a Memorandum of Understanding with
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the UN in 2020 to strengthen
collaboration in bamboo resource assessment and assess the plant's potential
contributions to UN Sustainable Development Goals and Global Forest Goals. In
2021, INBAR also became part of the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, and in
the same year also signed an agreement with the UN Industrial Development
Organization to cooperate on bamboo and rattan business development. In 2023,
INBAR was awarded Observer status to the UN Conference on Trade and
Development.

INBAR also participates at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the Convention on Biological Diversity, and the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification, where it advocates for bamboo and rattan
as solutions to global issues across the UN platforms.

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) has been a key
partner, providing long-term support to INBAR’s work on rural poverty
alleviation. In 2015, INBAR estimated that IFAD-funded activities alone have
helped generate around 250,000 jobs.

### Involvement with other organizations

As an international intergovernmental organization, INBAR collaborates with a
wide range of institutions and bodies. INBAR is a partner of the CGIAR
Research Program on Forests, Trees and Agroforestry, member of the
International Union for Conservation of Nature, a charter member of the Global
Landscapes Forum, and a member of the International Union of Forest Research
Organizations. Project donors include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation, the
Global Environment Facility, the European Union and more.[_citation needed_]

## Member States as of August 2023

  * Argentina
  * Bangladesh
  * Benin
  * Bhutan
  * Brazil
  * Burundi
  * Cambodia
  * Cameroon
  * Canada
  * Central African Republic
  * Chad
  * China
  * Chile
  * Colombia
  * Republic of the Congo
  * Cuba
  * Democratic Republic of the Congo
  * Ecuador
  * Eritrea
  * Ethiopia
  * Fiji
  * Ghana
  * India
  * Indonesia
  * Jamaica
  * Kenya
  * Liberia
  * Madagascar
  * Malawi
  * Malaysia
  * Mozambique
  * Myanmar
  * Nepal
  * Nigeria
  * Pakistan
  * Panama
  * Peru
  * Philippines
  * Rwanda
  * Senegal
  * Sierra Leone
  * Sri Lanka
  * Suriname
  * Tanzania
  * Thailand
  * Togo
  * Tonga
  * Uganda
  * Venezuela
  * Viet Nam

## Bamboo as a Substitute for Plastic

The Bamboo as a Substitute for Plastic (BASP) initiative is a part of the
Global Development Initiative (GDI). The BASP initiative is aimed at
mitigating plastic pollution and tackling climate change.[_citation needed_]

Over 400 million tonnes of plastic waste is generated annually, with billions
of tonnes of plastics ending up in landfills and natural environments. This
has led to negative environmental impacts linked to climate change,
biodiversity loss and pollution. The BASP initiative seeks to address these
issues by promoting the use of bamboo substitutes over plastic goods.