Research institute based in Ibadan, Nigeria

| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "International Institute of Tropical Agriculture" – news **·**
newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( January 2016)__(Learn how
and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **International Institute of Tropical Agriculture** (**IITA**) is a
nonprofit organization that works with partners to enhance crop quality and
productivity, reduce producer and consumer risks, and generate wealth from
agriculture, with the ultimate goals of reducing hunger, malnutrition, and
poverty. IITA's research-for-development (R4D) focuses on addressing the
development needs of tropical countries. The institute was established in 1967
and headquarters located in Ibadan, Nigeria, with several research stations
spread across Africa. The organization is governed by a Board of Trustees,
supported by several countries and the Consultative Group on International
Agricultural Research (CGIAR).

## History

IITA was established in 1967 in Ibadan as a result of the Ford and Rockefeller
Foundations' desire to establish a center for the improvement of the quality
of tropical foods. The institute came into existence with the enactment of
decree 32. of 1967. Part of the institute's initial goals was to develop a
better productive farming system, the selection and breeding of high-yielding
crop varieties that are resistant to diseases and pests, and strengthening
agricultural research in the humid and tropic regions. The institute was
initially situated on a 1000-hectare land. The institute focused on a cereal
improvement program, grain and legumes improvement program, farming systems,
and root and tuber improvement program. The grain and legume improvement
system consisted of soybean, cowpea and tuber program composed of yam and
cassava.

IITA joined CGIAR in 1971. It later added tree products such as plantain and
banana.

## Partnership

The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) is partnered with
the federal government of Nigeria and World Bank to improve agriculture in
Nigeria.

### Jigawa

The institute partners with the Jigawa government to revolutionize agriculture
in Jigawa state.

### Training

In early 2024, the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA)
trained youth in agriculture business to empower and boost productivity in
agriculture in Nigeria.

## Stations

  * Benin
  * Cameroon
  * DR Congo (Bukavu)
  * DR Congo
  * Ghana (Accra)
  * Ghana (Tamale)
  * Kenya
  * Malawi
  * Mozambique
  * Nigeria (Abuja)
  * Nigeria (Ibadan) – Headquarters
  * Nigeria (Kano)
  * Nigeria (Rivers)
  * Tanzania (Arusha)
  * Tanzania (Dar es Salaam)
  * Uganda
  * Zambia