| This article needs to be **updated**. The reason given is: SESAME has been
successfully operating for a number of years. There are 3 beamlines, the HESEB
line was inaugurated in June 2022. Even the logo is different. Please help
update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.
_( June 2022)_  
---|---  
  
The **Synchrotron-Light for Experimental Science and Applications in the
Middle East** (**SESAME**) is an independent laboratory located in Allan in
the Balqa governorate of Jordan, created under the auspices of UNESCO on 30
May 2002.

Aimed at promoting peace between Middle Eastern countries, Jordan was chosen
as the location for the laboratory, as it was then the only country that
maintained diplomatic relations with all the other founding members; Bahrain,
Cyprus, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Pakistan, the Palestinian Authority, and Turkey.
The idea, to create a joint Arab-Israeli scientific collaboration, goes back
to the 1980s and took a more concrete form in discussions at CERN in 1993. The
project was launched in 1999 and the ground breaking ceremony was held on 6
January 2003. Construction work began the following July, and the facility was
finally inaugurated on 16 May 2017 under the patronage and presence of King
Abdullah II.

The construction of the project cost around $98 million, with $5 million
donated each by Jordan, Israel, Turkey, Iran, and the European Union. The rest
was donated by CERN from existing equipment. Jordan became the greatest
contributor to the project by donating land and building construction costs,
and by pledging to build a $7 million solar power plant, which will make
SESAME the first accelerator in the world to be powered by renewable energy.
The annual operational cost of $6 million are pledged by the members according
to the size of their economies.

The facility is the only synchrotron radiation facility in the Middle East and
is one of around 60 in the world. As of May 2017[update], the president of the
SESAME Council is Rolf Heuer. He was preceded by Christopher Llewellyn Smith
(2008-2017) and Herwig Schopper (2004-2008). All three were previously
directors-general of CERN. Khaled Toukan, the chairman of the Jordan Atomic
Energy Commission, is the current director and former vice-president of
SESAME.

## Background

Synchrotron light (also referred to as synchrotron radiation) is radiation
that is emitted when charged particles moving at speeds near the speed of
light are forced to change direction by a magnetic field. It is the brightest
artificial source of X-rays, allowing for the detailed study of molecular
structures. When synchrotrons were first developed, their primary purpose was
to accelerate particles for the study of the nucleus. Today, there are almost
60 synchrotron light sources around the world dedicated to exploiting the
special qualities, which allow it to be used across a wide range of
applications, from condensed matter physics to structural biology,
environmental science and cultural heritage.

Mohammad Abdus Salam

## History

Herwig Schopper

The need for a large-scale scientific project to bring the Middle-East back
into the scientific community as well as promote peace and foster
international collaboration has been recognised for almost 40 years. In his
speech at the 1979 Nobel Prize banquet, Pakistani physicist Mohammad Abdus
Salam stated that we should "strive to provide equal opportunities to all so
that they can engage in the creation of Physics and science for the benefit of
all mankind".

In his paper presented at the Symposium on the "Future Outlook of the Arabian
Gulf University", on 11 May 1983, in Bahrain, titled The Gulf University and
Science in the Arab-Islamic Commonwealth, Abdus Salam proposed the founding of
a Super Gulf University and an international laboratory in material sciences
in Bahrain. Such a laboratory was proposed for the University of Jeddah, to
emphasise science and technology transfer in the material sciences, including
a laboratory with a synchrotron radiation light source. Ultimately, the
proposal did not come through, possibly because it had the sponsorship of a
single university rather than a consortium of universities.

In 1997, Herman Winick and Gustav-Adolf Voss [de] suggested building a light
source in the Middle-East using components from the soon-to-be decommissioned
BESSY I facility in Berlin, during two seminars organized in 1997 in Italy and
in 1998 in Sweden by Tord Ekelöf with the CERN-based Middle East Scientific
Co-operation (MESC) group headed by Sergio Fubini. Winick was credited with
the idea of moving the machine to the Middle-East during discussions about the
future of the machine. He explained "(his) main motivation is to help create a
project in which people can work constructively and collectively."

This proposal was adopted and pursued by MESC. The German government agreed to
donate the necessary equipment at the request of Fubini and Herwig Schopper.
Believing that the only chance of realizing such a project was following the
example of CERN, the plan was brought to the attention of Federico Mayor, then
Director-General of UNESCO, who organized the Consultative Meeting on a Middle
East Synchrotron Light Facility, at UNESCO headquarters in Paris in June 1999.
The meeting resulted in the launching of the project and the establishment of
an International Interim Council under the chairmanship of Herwig Schopper.

In May 2002, the executive board and Director General of UNESCO unanimously
approved the establishment of the Centre under UNESCO auspices, through
resolution 31C/Resolution 19.

The groundbreaking ceremony for SESAME took place at Al-Balqa' Applied
University in Jordan, on 6 January 2003. SESAME used offices at the UNESCO
Office in Amman until the completion of the building in 2008.

In April 2004, the centre formally came into existence when the required
number of Members had informed UNESCO of their decision to join. and a
permanent Council was established. The founding members were Bahrain, Egypt,
Israel, Jordan, Pakistan, and Turkey. The current Members are Cyprus, Egypt,
Iran, Israel, Jordan, Pakistan, the Palestinian Authority, and Turkey. The
Observers are Brazil, Canada, China, the European Union, France, Germany,
Greece, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden,
the United Kingdom, and the United States.

SESAME was officially opened on 16 May 2017 by King Abdullah II of Jordan.

### Early Criticism

The German and French Ambassadors to UNESCO complained that Kōichirō Matsuura,
then Director General of UNESCO, had not followed UNESCO protocol while making
this decision. Schopper explained the difficult circumstances the project was
facing and they withdrew their complaints. Matsuura did not need formal
approval to provide the required funds because the Japanese government had
given him a budget to be used at his discretion when he was appointed Director
General.

SESAME faced a further setback when the German government was asked to
withdraw the authorization of export of BESSY I after public criticism was
raised because some scientists claimed that it is possible to produce nuclear
materials for atomic bombs with SESAME. Schopper was invited to a televised
discussion with Professor Dr. Reinhard Brandt, one of the scientists who made
the critical claims. The objections were eventually resolved, as Schopper
explained that although some plutonium could have been produced, it would not
have been a sufficient amount to develop a bomb. The BESSY I components were
eventually shipped from Berlin to Hamburg and then to the Zarqa Free Zone in
Jordan, where they were held by the Jordanian government until SESAME was
formally founded and the building was ready to accept the components.

## Location

Before UNESCO could formally approve SESAME, the issue of finding a host
country and a site had to be resolved. The Interim Council agreed on a set of
criteria which had to be satisfied by the host country and site. The lab had
to be accessible, geographically and politically, to scientists from all over
the world, and the host state should be strongly committed to the project, and
should provide the land on which the lab would be based for free, as well as
provide the building itself and the technical infrastructure (roads, water,
electricity).

Seven Members (Armenia, Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Oman, Palestine and Turkey)
proposed 12 sites. UNESCO Assistant Director General for Natural Sciences,
Maurizio Iaccarino, and Schopper visited Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Palestine
in September 1999. The Armenian, Iranian and Turkish proposals were explored
at Interim Council Meetings.

Although Egypt expressed strong interest in the project, a long procedure
which involved going through many authorities was necessary before the project
could be presented to the Prime Minister, and the proposal was ultimately
deemed unfit. The Palestinian National Authority, although interested in the
project, did not have the financial capacity to meet the Interim Council's
criteria. For political reasons, Israel could not provide a site accessible to
all scientists. Additionally, Israel was already heavily involved in the ESRF
laboratory at Grenoble, and were contractually bound to provide considerable
funds. Furthermore, biologists did not see how they would benefit from SESAME
since they already had access to other laboratories across the world. Armenia
offered to host SESAME in their building Synchrotron Laboratory at Erevan
since their accelerator was outdated. Their proposal was strengthened with the
backing of wealthy Iraqi-born Armenian-American businessman Kevork Hovnanian.
However, it was later realized that several alterations to the building were
necessary to make it a viable site for SESAME. Iran, considered a rogue state
at the time, though interested in the project, could not guarantee access to
scientists from all countries, and so the proposal was ultimately
unsuccessful.

### Approving Jordan

In Jordan, Adnan Badran, deputy director of UNESCO from 1992 to 1998,
organised a meeting with representatives from universities and other
organisations. No government members could be met, and no commitment was
obtained. In a last ditch effort to save the project, Schopper contacted his
former student Isa Khubeis, then vice-president of Al-Balqa Applied
University. Khubeis invited Iaccarino and Schopper to dinner along with Khaled
Toukan, President of Al-Balqa University, and Prince Ghazi Bin Muhammad, who
chairman of the Board of Governors of the university and a close advisor of
King Abdullah II. Schopper explained the situation to Prince Ghazi, who
arranged a meeting with King Abdullah for the following day. King Abdullah
formally committed Jordan to the project during the meeting in a signed letter
addressed to the Director General of UNESCO.

After long discussions and a series of votes, Jordan was formally approved to
be the host of the Centre at the third meeting of the SESAME Interim Council
in June 2000. Egypt and Iran withdrew their proposals before the final round
of voting. The decision was ratified by 9 votes in favour and 1 abstention.
Jordan was seen as an appropriate location for the project because it was the
only country at the time to have maintained diplomatic relations with all
other founding members: Bahrain, Cyprus, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Pakistan, the
Palestinian Authority, and Turkey.

## Cost

The project cost around $98 million, with $5 million donated each by Jordan,
Israel, Turkey, Iran and the European Union. The rest was in kind donations of
equipment by CERN, and land by Jordan (the largest contributor to the
project). Jordan also contributed the building construction costs, and a $7
million solar power plant, making SESAME the first accelerator in the world
powered solely by renewable energy. The annual operational cost of $6 million
is split between the members, according to the sizes of their economies.

## Funding

The BESSY facility in Berlin

As well as the drawn-out process in deciding which country should host SESAME,
the project came across several other difficulties on its path to completion.
Possibly the largest issue was its funding. Because the major components of
the laboratory from the decommissioned BESSY I experiment, originally valued
at $60 million, were being donated by the German government, funding on that
front was not an issue. However, the German government stipulated that the
cost of dismantling, including documentation, packing and transport, had to be
provided by SESAME. The cost was an estimated $600,000, and had to be
guaranteed before the end of 1999 because the BESSY building had been promised
to the Max Planck Society. Schopper had been informed of this condition only a
few hours before the Interim Council meeting, and asking for voluntary
contributions would have been ineffective because most delegates at the
meeting would not have had the authority to make financial decision. After a
discussion between the Interim Council, the United States State Department,
Sweden and Russia agreed to provide $200,000. Schopper saw only one possible
option to save the project. He asked UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura
to arrange an emergency meeting. They had a lunch together, and Schopper asked
Matsuura to fund the missing $400,000 immediately. Matsuura agreed to the
request and the Interim Council Members were informed after the lunch.

Because the BESSY components were used only as an injector system, the
construction of a new main ring was still needed for SESAME. The estimated
cost of the ring was $10 million so additional sources of funding were
required. On 23 July 2001 a formal proposal supported by the German and French
Ministers of Research, and later the Commissioner for Research Philippe
Busquin, was submitted to European Commissioner Chris Patten. In October 2001
_chef de cabinet_ of Commissioner Patten, Anthony Cary, informed Schopper that
an independent evaluation by a panel of international experts was needed. The
_Techno-Economic Feasibility Study_ was under the guidance of Professor Guy Le
Lay of the University of Marseille. The report concluded that the project was
promising and would "effectively stimulate scientific activity and cooperation
in the Middle East". However, in August 2003, Commissioner Patten stated that
"the Commission is not in a position at this stage to provide Community
funding to SESAME". In a subsequent meeting arranged between the Jordanian
government, SESAME representatives and the EU Commission, the main of
contention was the project's energy level. It was claimed that a competitive
facility needed a higher energy level. A compromise was reached that the
machine should start at 2 GeV, with 2.5 GeV available at a later stage. This
would have increased the cost of the ring by another $2 million.

The issue was eventually resolved through negotiations started by Director
General Rolf Heuer between CERN and the Commissioner for Research and
Innovation, Carlos Moedas. About $5 million were approved for CERN to be used
for the construction of the magnets of the SESAME main ring.

The Sergio Fubini Guesthouse that was inaugurated in December 2019 was funded
by the Government of Italy represented by the Ministry for Education,
University and Research through INFN.

Sergio Fubini Guesthouse at SESAME

## Design

The machine works in four stages.

### Microtron

The microtron accelerates electrons to the energy of 22.5 MeV, and injects
them into the booster. It was fully operational in November 2011.

### Booster synchrotron

The booster synchrotron receives electrons from the microtron, and accelerates
them to 800 MeV, for injection into the storage ring. The booster was created
with parts from the German synchrotron facility BESSY, which was
decommissioned in 1999.

### Storage ring

The storage ring accelerates electrons to 2.5 GeV, and keeps them circulating
for as long as two hours. As the electrons go around the storage ring, they
emit x-rays. Lost energy is replaced as the beam travels through radio
frequency cavities along the ring.

### Beamlines

X-rays from the storage ring are directed to beamlines, where research
experiments are performed.

  1. BASEMA (Beamline for Absorption Spectroscopy for Environmental and Material Applications ), a beamline for X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy, the 'day-one' beamline to be ready in March/April 2017
  2. EMIRA (ElectroMagnetic Infrared RAdiation) for IR (Infrared Spectromicroscopy), is the second 'day-one' beamline, in this case that to start operations in April/May 2017
  3. SUSAM (SESAME USers Application for Materials Science) or Materials Science (MS), to be completed at the end of the third quarter of 2017
  4. MX (Macromolecular Crystallography), the beamline to be completed in 2019
  5. Soft X-ray Beamline
  6. SAXS/WAXS (Small Angle and Wide Angle X-ray Scattering)
  7. Tomography Beamline

## Initial beams

Although the current facility has space for seven light beams, only two beams
were operational when the facility opened in 2017. The first beam is an X-ray
beam that will be used to study pollution in the Jordan Valley, among other
things. While the second beam provides infrared radiation for a microscope
that would study biological tissue; including cancer cells. The rest are
planned for later, with the third beam, an X-ray source used for
crystallography, slated for late 2017.

## Deaths and delays

Dr. Masoud Alimohammadi and Dr. Magid Shahriari, two Iranian members of
SESAME, were killed in two different attacks, for which an Iranian prosecutor
accuses the Israeli Mossad in 2010. The roof of the laboratory collapsed
during the 2013 Middle East cold snap due to heavy snowfall, which led to
delays.