International plant breeding organization

The **International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center** (known – even in
English – by its Spanish acronym **CIMMYT** for _**Centro Internacional de
Mejoramiento de Maíz y Trigo**_) is a non-profit research-for-development
organization that develops improved varieties of wheat and maize with the aim
of contributing to food security, and innovates agricultural practices to help
boost production, prevent crop disease and improve smallholder farmers'
livelihoods. CIMMYT is one of the 15 CGIAR centers. CIMMYT is known for
hosting the world's largest maize and wheat genebank at its headquarters in
Mexico.

CIMMYT's ninth director general, Bram Govaerts, replaced Martin Kropff in
2021. Other notable scientists like Thomas Lumpkin have served as director
general of CIMMYT.

## Origins

CIMMYT emerged from cooperative efforts of the Mexican government and the
Rockefeller Foundation that led in 1943 to the founding of the Office of
Special Studies, an organization within the Mexican Secretariat of
Agriculture. The goal of the office was to ensure food security in Mexico and
abroad through selective plant breeding and crop improvement.

The project developed into a collaboration between Mexican and international
researchers. It established global networks to test experimental crop
varieties. One of its researchers, wheat breeder Norman Borlaug, developed
dwarf wheat varieties that put more energy into grain production and responded
better to fertilizer than older varieties. He was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1970 in recognition of his contributions to world peace through
increasing food supply. The program was renamed and morphed into CIMMYT in
1963, though it was still under the Secretariat of Agriculture's jurisdiction.
As international demand grew and it became apparent CIMMYT required internal
organization and increased funding, the center was reorganized and established
as a non-profit scientific and educational institution in its own right in
1966.

In the early 1970s, a small cadre of development organizations, national
sponsors, and private foundations organized CGIAR to further spread the impact
of agricultural research to more nations. CIMMYT became one of the first
international research centers to be supported through CGIAR. Today, CGIAR
comprises 15 such centers, all dedicated to sustainable food security through
scientific research.

## Activities

CIMMYT scientists support national research systems and work through small- to
medium-scale seed enterprises to offer affordable, improved seed and
sustainable farming methods to smallholder farmers. Though its headquarters
are in Mexico, the center operates through 12 regional offices (Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, China, Colombia, Ethiopia, India, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Nepal,
Pakistan, Turkey, and Zimbabwe), as well as number of experimental stations.

CIMMYT's researchers promote the sustainable intensification of farming
systems, for example, through the use of machinery that allows for resource-
poor female farmers in Africa and South Asia to reduce labor costs and
conservation agriculture practices such as no-till farming, which allows
direct planting without plowing or preparing the soil.

CIMMYT hosts the largest collection of maize and wheat in the world: 28,000
unique kinds of maize and 140,000 types of wheat. Materials are made available
under the terms and conditions of the multilateral system of access and
benefit sharing, using the Standard Material Transfer Agreement (SMTA). A
duplicate of these wheat varieties is stored at the Svalbard Global Seed Vault
in Svalbard, Norway. Through CIMMYT's global breeding system and partner
network, this genetic diversity is used to develop maize and wheat varieties
that have higher yields, and can survive climate stress and diseases.

Last year, CIMMYT scientists have developed 70% of wheat varieties presently
planted globally and about half of the world's corn, or maize, varieties. By
CIMMYT's own accounts, the pedigrees of about half of the maize and wheat
varieties sown in low- and middle-income countries carry contributions from
its breeding research.

## Criticisms

Despite its noble goals of sustainability and self-sufficiency, one of the
organization's founders and researchers, Norman Borlaug, has faced criticism.
Borlaug's obituarist, Christopher Reed argued in an interview with _The
Guardian_ from 2014 that although his Green Revolution and high-yielding
agricultural techniques averted poverty in the short term, in the long time
they might have added to it. Critics of CIMMYT argue that it is important to
consider the social and ecological changes that the Green Revolution, and
subsequently CIMMYT, create for local farmers. According to critics,
dependency on expensive 'high-yielding' seeds that demand expensive
fertilizers has pushed local farmers who cannot afford them out of the market,
causing further social inequalities and, in some cases, cropping
intensification has degraded soils and depleted aquifers. At the time Norman
Borlaug began the Green Revolution, the US agricultural science establishment
and agribusiness industries supported him because it allowed their industries
to grow around the world as dependency on their patented seeds and herbicides
increased. Nonetheless, in contrast to the preceding observations, which are
sourced from the popular press, a widely-cited 2003 article in the peer-
reviewed journal _Science_ notes that "...it is unclear what alternative
scenario would have allowed developing countries to meet, with lower
environmental impact, the human needs posed by the massive population
expansion of the 20th century." Today, CIMMYT still works closely with both
public and private partners, including seed companies, to foster farmers'
access to seed of improved varieties and agro-chemicals of their choice. One
example is "StrigAway," a herbicide-coated maize seed variety that combats
Striga, a parasitic weed that infests up to 50 million hectares of Sub-Saharan
African land. Much of the wheat seed in the South is produced by the public
sector; in the case of maize, seed companies play a key role in seed
production and marketing. CIMMYT maize and wheat breeding are available free
of charge to public and private partners, as international public goods.

## Partners and funders

Main funders include Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, CGIAR, Foundation for
Food and Agriculture Research (FFAR), OCP Group and the national governments
of Australia, Britain, Canada, China, Germany, Mexico, Norway and the United
States.

Historically, CIMMYT received funding from the European Commission and the
Rockefeller Foundation.

## Notable scientists

  * Norman Borlaug (1914-2009) – Wheat breeder. Recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970. Established the World Food Prize in 1986.
  * Sanjaya Rajaram (1943-2021) – Recipient of the World Food Prize in 2014.
  * Surinder Vasal (born 1938) – Recipient of the World Food Prize in 2000.
  * Evangelina Villegas (1924-2017) – Biochemist whose work with maize led to the development of quality protein maize (QPM). Recipient of the World Food Prize in 2000.