Intergovernmental science organization

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "International Council for the Exploration of the Sea" – news
**·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( March 2016)__(Learn
how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **may rely excessively on sourcestoo closely associated with
the subject**, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and
neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate
citations to reliable, independent sources. _( March 2016)__(Learn how and
when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **International Council for the Exploration of the Sea** (**ICES** ;
French: _Conseil International de l'Exploration de la Mer_ , _CIEM_) is a
regional fishery advisory body and the world's oldest intergovernmental
science organization. ICES is headquartered in Copenhagen, Denmark, where its
multinational secretariat staff of 51 provide scientific, administrative and
secretarial support to the ICES community. It was established on July 22,
1902, in Copenhagen.

## Functions

ICES is a leading multidisciplinary scientific forum for the exchange of
information and ideas on all aspects of marine sciences pertaining to the
North Atlantic, including the adjacent Baltic Sea and North Sea, and for the
promotion and coordination of marine research by scientists within its member
nations. Its principal functions, both when it was established and continuing
to the present time, are to: (i) promote, encourage, develop, and coordinate
marine research; (ii) publish and otherwise disseminate results of research;
and (iii) provide non-biased, non-political scientific advice to member nation
governments and international regulatory commissions.

## History

International Council for the Exploration of the Sea with President Walter
Archer

In the late 19th century, a growing concern over the well-being of fish stocks
in the North Sea coupled with efforts by different groups of scientists in
neighboring countries to promote and encourage international scientific marine
cooperation resulted in the establishment of ICES on July 22, 1902. The new
organization was created in Copenhagen, Denmark by eight founding nations:
Denmark, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Russia, and the
United Kingdom. The council's membership has fluctuated over the years with
nations joining/leaving/rejoining at different times as a result of wars and
political decisions.

An exchange of letters among the original eight member nations was sufficient
to establish the council in 1902. This type of arrangement continued until the
early 1960s when this informal status became unacceptable in light of the
establishment of the United Nations and its subsidiary bodies as well as other
international organizations. Steps were initiated to achieve full
international recognition of the council by the host country, Denmark. At a
conference convened in Copenhagen on September 7, 1964, a formal convention
was signed which subsequently came into force on July 22, 1968, following its
ratification by the then 17 member nations.

ICES today has 20 member nations, including the eight original members plus
twelve additional nations: Belgium, Canada, Estonia, France, Iceland, Ireland,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Portugal, Spain, and the United States. It also has
affiliate institutes with observer status from: Australia, Chile, Greece,
Peru, and South Africa. Formal observer status has been given to two non-
governmental organizations: Worldwide Fund for Nature and Birdlife
International.

## Structure

The principal decision and policy-making body of ICES is the council. The
council consists of a president and two delegates from each of the 20 member
nations. Delegates elect the president, first vice-president, and five
additional vice-presidents (all for three-year terms) to comprise the bureau
or executive committee. The bureau is responsible for carrying out the
council's decisions, preparing and convening council meetings, formulating
council budgets, appointing a secretariat staff, and performing other tasks as
assigned by the council. A finance committee consisting of five delegates
provides oversight to the council's fiscal matters. Delegates are also
responsible for appointing a general secretary, who serves as the council's
chief executive officer and is charged with managing the council's secretariat
facilities and staff, finances, meetings, reports, publications, and
communications.

The council's scientific work is accomplished by various committees and
working groups. During the long history of ICES, the committee and working
group structure has changed periodically to reflect the needs of the time. At
present, there is an advisory committee (ACOM) that provides advice to clients
on fisheries and marine ecosystem issues, a Science Committee (SCICOM;
formally the Consultative Committee as established in the ICES Convention)
that oversees all aspects of the scientific work, and steering groups that
coordinate the more than 100 expert groups covering most aspects of the marine
ecosystem that work under them.

A recently prepared strategic plan focuses on science that is broad-based,
relevant, and farsighted, and providing advice that is rigorous, reliable, and
objective. The plan identifies a mission which calls for 1) establishing
effective arrangements to provide scientific advice; 2) informing interested
parties and the public objectively and effectively about marine ecosystem
issues; 3) coordinating and enhancing physical, chemical, biological, and
interdisciplinary research; 4) fostering partnerships with other organizations
that share a common interest; and 5) developing and maintaining accessible
marine databases. The strategic plan addresses six critical themes: 1)
Science, 2) Collaboration, 3) Advice, 4) Data, 5) Communication, and 6)
Service support. An action plan specifies the activities that will be
undertaken over the coming years in order to achieve the goals. It explains
how ICES will continue to advance scientific knowledge and improve scientific
advice, whereas the goals in the strategic plan tell what the overall
objectives will be.

## ICES work

The scientific work of ICES is done by a community of more than 1600 marine
scientists from research institutes and universities in member and affiliate
nations collaborating to gather information about the marine ecosystem, fill
gaps in existing knowledge, and develop unbiased, non-political advice in
addressing terms of reference developed each year by the advisory and science
committees at the week-long ICES Annual Science Conference (ASC). The reports
of the expert groups are presented at the ASCs and made available on the ICES
website. Some groups produce special reports, such as “ICES Report on Ocean
Climate” or “ICES Zooplankton Status Report”, that are published in the ICES
Cooperative Research Report series.

The ASC (formerly called the Statutory Meeting), held every year in September,
generally attracts 500–700 scientists from around the world. The programme
features plenary lectures by noted scientists, theme sessions of contributed
papers addressing timely multidisciplinary topics, and poster sessions. In
addition, meetings of the Committees, Bureau, and Council are held to conduct
the necessary business of the organization.

During the year, meetings of the more than 100 expert groups and workshops are
held either at ICES headquarters in Copenhagen or at venues in member (and
occasionally affiliate) nations to address terms of reference developed at the
previous ASC.

Symposia are an important part of the ICES work programme, not least because
they foster the broadening of the diversity of scientists who participate in
ICES activities. ICES welcomes proposals for stimulating symposia on topics
that are fundamental to the science components of the ICES Strategic Plan
including (a) understanding the physical, chemical, and biological functioning
of marine ecosystems, (b) understanding and quantifying human impacts on
marine ecosystems, including living marine resources, and (c) evaluating
options for sustainable marine-related industries, particularly fishing and
mariculture. ICES generally sponsors, either itself or in collaboration with
other organizations, at least two, and sometimes as many as seven or eight,
scientific symposia in a calendar year.

The ICES Recognition Programme honours individuals whose contributions have
improved ICES and the community of scientists associated with it, advanced
marine science, and/or exemplify the objective application of ICES scientific
information to societal decisions concerning the sustainable use of marine
ecosystems. The Programme consists of four awards:

  * Outstanding Achievement Award recognizes a sustained, outstanding performance and exceptional contribution by a member of the ICES community whose career has been distinguished by a sustained commitment to excellence in such endeavours as science and research, and leadership.
  * Prix d’Excellence Award recognizes the highest level of contribution to the ICES vision of “An international scientific community that is relevant, responsive, sound, and credible, concerning marine ecosystems and their relation to humanity”.
  * Merit Awards give formal recognition to the best research paper and poster given at the Annual Science Conference, and to the best up-and-coming new scientist making a presentation at the Annual Science Conference.
  * Service Awards recognize the achievements and contributions of outgoing chairs of expert groups, science and advisory groups, and conveners of Annual Science Conference theme sessions and ICES symposia which further the objectives of ICES.

## Advice

The council has delegated its advisory authority to the advisory committee
(ACOM), which designs strategies and processes for the preparation of advice,
manages the advisory processes, and creates and delivers advice, subject to
direction from the council. ACOM works on the basis of scientific analyses
prepared in the ICES expert groups, and the advisory process includes peer
review of the analyses before it can be used as the basis for advice. ACOM has
one member from each member nation under the direction of an independent ACOM
chair and four vice-chairs appointed by the council.

Unbiased scientific advice is provided to member nation governments and
international regulatory commissions in support of the management and
conservation of coastal and ocean resources and ecosystems. Advice on the
management of over 160 separate fin-fish and shellfish stocks is provided to
the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission (NEAFC), North Atlantic Salmon
Conservation Organization (NASCO), and the European Commission (EC). Advice
and scientific information on anthropogenic impacts to the marine environment
are provided to the Commission for the Protection of the Marine Environment of
the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR), the European Commission (EC), and the Baltic
Marine Environment Protection Commission (HELCOM).

## Publications

ICES produces a variety of publications, many of which can be accessed on the
ICES website. ICES issued its first publication within a year of its
establishment. Since then, it has published thousands more, including many
that are now considered to be the standard references in their fields. These
include:

  * _ICES Journal of Marine Science_ (_Journal du Conseil_) constitutes a primary source for articles on fishery-oriented marine science and is a standard reference for work in the fields of ecology, population studies, plankton research, and physical and chemical oceanography, among others. Since January 2007, the Journal has been published by Oxford University Press.
  * _ICES Advice_ annually presents the collected information from the advisory committee (ACOM). The advice is based on an ecosystem approach to management.
  * _ICES Cooperative Research Report_ (_Rapport des Recherches Collectives_) presents reports prepared by ICES Expert Groups and _ad hoc_ groups, and edited reports on cooperative research activities organized by the council.
  * _Techniques in Marine Environmental Sciences_ presents detailed descriptions of methods and procedures relating to chemical and biological measurements in the marine environment.
  * _ICES Identification Leaflets for Plankton_ (_Fiches d’Identification du Plancton_) furnish keys, in a standardized form, for the identification of the major plankton species in the North Atlantic.
  * _ICES Identification Leaflets for Diseases and Parasites of Fish and Shellfish_ (_Fiches d’Identification des Maladies et Parasites des Poissons, Crustacés et Mollusques_) serve as diagnostic aids and present, in a standardized format, information about the most important diseases and parasites of fish and shellfish in the North Atlantic and adjacent seas.
  * _ICES Fisheries Statistics_ present nominal catch statistics for the Northeast Atlantic for 1973–2000, presented using FishStat Plus software, as well as catch statistics for the entire Atlantic for 1950–1998.
  * _ICES Marine Science Symposia_ (_Actes du Symposium_) contains the scientific papers and proceedings of Symposia and Special Meetings held under the auspices of ICES independently or in collaboration with cooperating organizations. Since 1995, most of these volumes have been published as special numbers in the ICES Journal of Marine Science, but continue to be included in the consecutive numbering system of the ICES MSS series.
  * _ICES Insight_ is an annual publication that offers more in-depth articles exploring subjects that feature prominently in ICES work.
  * _ICES Annual Reports_ recap ICES annual activities and scientific network.
  * _ICES Inside Out_ is a regularly appearing electronic newsletter that updates subscribers on the activities of ICES and its secretariat.
  * CD-ROMs contain papers (CM Documents) presented at ICES Annual Science Conferences and may be ordered from the secretariat.
  * ICES Newsletters from years past are archived and available at the ICES website.

## Data

Scientists working through ICES gather information about the marine ecosystem.
The data from this work is held at the ICES Data Center, a cross-discipline
department with expertise in fisheries, oceanography and the marine
environment. The Data Center holdings include some of the largest databases in
the world on these subjects. The Data Center is staffed by data managers and
programmers who manage the data submissions and guidelines and develop tools
and products to facilitate the use of the data by end users ranging from
scientists to policy-makers. In addition, the ICES Data Center acts as the
Marine Data Center for the regional marine convention in the North-East
Atlantic (OSPAR) [1] and the Baltic Sea (HELCOM) [2]

In the 1970s, an area notation system known as ICES Statistical Rectangles was
developed for simplified analysis and visualisation of marine data over the
north-east Atlantic region. The component rectangles measure 1 degree of
longitude by 0.5 degrees of latitude and are intended to be roughly square in
temperate latitudes, approximately 30 nautical miles by 30 nautical miles
(55×55 km) at 60°N. More recently, some ICES applications such as "FishFrame",
and selected ICES reports have used 0.5×0.5 degree C-squares (part of a fully
hierarchical, global system designed for a similar purpose) for equivalent
activities, 2 c-squares (at that resolution) occupying exactly the same space
as a single ICES rectangle.

## Member countries

| This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section
by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged
and removed. _( April 2023)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
ICES has 19 member countries:[_clarification needed_]

  * Belgium 1903
  * Canada 1967
  * Denmark from 1902
  * Estonia 1924
  * Finland from 1902
  * France 1920
  * Germany from 1902
  * Iceland 1938
  * Ireland 1925
  * Latvia 1923
  * Lithuania 2006
  * The Netherlands from 1902
  * Norway from 1902
  * Poland 1922
  * Portugal 1920
  * Russian Federation from 1902 to 2024
  * Spain 1924
  * Sweden from 1902
  * United Kingdom from 1902
  * United States of America 1912
  * Italy 1927 and 1956–1974

## List of presidents

ICES maintains a complete list of bureau members (presidents, first vice-
presidents, vice-presidents and extraordinary members) since its inception on
its website.

Dr. Walther Herwig

  * Dr. Walther Herwig, Germany (1902–1908)
  * Walter Archer, C.B. F.R.S.E., UK (1908–1912)
  * Mr. F. Rose, Germany (1912–1915)
  * Prof. Otto Pettersson, Sweden (1915–1920)
  * Mr. Henry G. Maurice, UK (1920–1938)
  * Prof. Johan Hjort, Norway (1938–1948)
  * Dr. K. A. Andersson, Sweden (1948–1952)
  * Mr. A. T. A. Dobson, UK (1952–1955)
  * Prof. H .U. Sverdrup, Norway (1955–1957)
  * Dr Å. Vedel Tåning, Denmark (1957–1958)
  * Dr. J. Furnestin, France (1958–1963)
  * Dr. J. Hult, Sweden (1963–1966)
  * Dr. A. E. J. Went, Ireland (1966–1969)
  * Prof. W. Cieglewicz, Poland (1969–1972)
  * M. R. Letaconnoux, France (1972–1975)
  * Prof. G. Nikolsky, USSR (1975–1976)
  * Mr. B. B. Parrish, UK (1976–1979)
  * Prof. Gotthilf Hempel, Fed. Rep. of Germany (1979–1982)
  * Prof. W. S. Wooster, USA (1982–1985)
  * Mr. O. J. Østvedt, Norway (1985–1988)
  * Mr. Jakob Jakobsson, Iceland (1988–1991)
  * Mr. D. de G. Griffith, Ireland (1991–1994)
  * M A. Maucorps, France (1994–1997)
  * Dr. L. Scott Parsons, Canada (1997–2000)
  * Prof. Pentti Mälkki, Finland (2000–2003)
  * Dr. M. P. Sissenwine, USA (2003–2006)
  * Dr. Joe Horwood, UK (2006–2009)
  * Dr. Michael Sinclair, Canada (2009–2012)
  * Dr. Paul Connolly, Ireland (2012–2015)
  * Dr. Cornelius Hammer (2015–2018)
  * Dr. Fritz W. Köster (2018–2021)
  * William Karp, USA (2021–2024)

## List of General Secretaries

  * Dr. P. P. C. Hoek, The Netherlands (1902–1908)
  * Captain C. F. Drechsel, Denmark (1908–1927)
  * Captain K. Schøning, Denmark (1927–1932; Administrative Secretary)
  * Captain M. W. Nellemose, Denmark (1932–1944)
  * Ms. E. Brønniche, Denmark (1944–1945; Acting Administrative Secretary)
  * Dr. H. Blegvad, Denmark (1945–1950)
  * Dr. P. Jespersen, Denmark (1950–1952)
  * Mr. V. Dessau, Denmark (1952–1953)
  * Mr. Á. Fridriksson, Iceland (1954–1964)
  * Mr. H. Tambs–Lyche, Norway (1964–1983)
  * Dr. B. B. Parrish, UK (1983–1989)
  * Dr. E. D. Anderson, USA (1989–1993)
  * Prof. C. C. E. Hopkins, United Kingdom (1994–1999)
  * Mr. D. de G. Griffith, Ireland (2000–2006)
  * Dr. G. Hubold, Germany (2006–2012)
  * Dr. A. C. Brusendorff, Denmark (2012–2022)
  * Dr. Alan Haynie, USA (2022–present)