1947 collective defense treaty

The **Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance** (commonly known as the
**Rio Treaty** , the **Rio Pact** , the **Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance** ,
or by the Spanish-language acronym **TIAR** from _**Tratado Interamericano de
Asistencia Recíproca**_) is an intergovernmental collective security agreement
signed in 1947 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil at a meeting of the American states.

The central principle contained in its articles is that an attack against one
is to be considered an attack against them all; this was known as the
"hemispheric defense" doctrine. Despite this, several members have breached
the treaty on multiple occasions.

The treaty was initially created in 1947 and came into force in 1948, in
accordance with Article 22 of the treaty. The Bahamas was the most recent
country to sign and ratify it in 1982.

## Background

The United States maintained a hemispheric defense policy relative to European
influence under the Monroe Doctrine from 1823 onward, and became increasingly
interventionist following the 1904 promulgation of the Roosevelt Corollary.
During the 1930s the United States had been alarmed by Axis overtures
suggesting military cooperation with Latin American governments; apparent
strategic threats against the Panama Canal were of particular concern. These
were discussed in a series of meetings of the International Conference of
American States and at the 1936  Inter-American Conference for the Maintenance
of Peace. During World War II, the American government had been able to secure
support for the Allies from all individual governments in the Americas except
Uruguay (which remained neutral until 22 February 1945) and Argentina (which
had difficult relations with the Allied powers from 1944 to 1945 but declared
war on the Axis on 27 March 1945). Some countries had signed the Declaration
by United Nations in early 1942 and more had signed by the end of 1945.

However, Latin American countries were largely sidelined from the Allied
discussions of a postwar security order, held at Dumbarton Oaks from August to
October 1944. The Brazilian Ambassador to Washington, Carlos Martins Pereira e
Souza, "protested the violation of inter-American norms of consultation in the
preparation of postwar plans." These protests led to a series of consultations
as well as to a Mexican proposal for an inter-American meeting. At the Inter-
American Conference on the Problems of War and Peace, at Chapultepec Castle in
Mexico City during February and March 1945, discussions of the post-war world
order were held by the US Secretary of State and by the foreign secretaries of
all the Latin American countries except El Salvador and Argentina, resulting
in the **Act of Chapultepec** of 6 March 1945. The Act included a framework
for the negotiation of a regional security treaty. It also shaped Latin
American pressure during the United Nations conference in San Francisco for
clauses in the UN Charter to facilitate regional collective defense, under
Article 51.

Initially, the security conference was planned to be held in Rio de Janeiro in
October 1945 but it was postponed to March 1946. The March 1946 date was also
postponed indefinitely. Disputes between the United States and Argentina's
Juan Perón (President from 4 June 1946) led to the delays. The American
concern, alongside that of some countries in South America regarding Peronism
raised the possibility of including collective intervention to preserve
democracy in the security conference. During the delay, global tensions
between the United States and Soviet Union grew. In light of the developing
Cold War and following the statement of the Truman Doctrine on 12 March 1947,
the United States wished to make those[_which?_] new anti-communist
commitments permanent, as did many anti-communist leaders in Latin
America.[_citation needed_]

The following year, in 1948, delegates gathered in Bogotá, Colombia, where
they passed the charter of the Organization of American States (OAS). The OAS
was created to oversee different functions beyond defense. The OAS functioned
through debate and voting instead of the like-mindedness that characterized
NATO.

## History

### Signing

The Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance was the first of many so-
called "mutual security agreements", and the formalization of the Act of
Chapultepec. The treaty was adopted by the original signatories on 2 September
1947 in Rio de Janeiro (hence the colloquial name "Rio Treaty"). It came into
force on 3 December 1948 and was registered with the United Nations on 20
December 1948. With the exceptions of Trinidad and Tobago (1967) and the
Bahamas (1982), no countries that became independent after 1947 have joined
the treaty; Canada is yet to become a member, though it already has separate
defense commitments with the United States.

### Cold War

As revolutionary and nationalist governments spread through Latin America
through the 1950s and 1960s, the fear of a shared enemy that was experienced
during WWII dissipated and the idea of defensive cooperation became strained.
According to Slater, many Latin American governments participating in the
Treaty sought "to insulate the hemisphere from rather than involve it in world
conflict", though the United States pushed the smaller countries towards
confrontation with its ideological adversaries. Latin American governments
then began to view inter-American collaboration as bending to the will of the
United States, forfeiting their sovereignty. In 1962 American states had found
it necessary to break diplomatic relations with the Government of Cuba. The
Report of the Inter-American Peace Committee to the Eighth Meeting of
Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs suggested that the activity the
countries of the Sino-Soviet bloc and the Cuban government had with America
was described as a serious violation of fundamental principles of the inter-
American system.

Though the Cold War overtones of the Rio Treaty became increasingly evident,
during the immediate post-war years, Long argues that it was more closely tied
to pre-WWII regional antecedents and, even, Latin American diplomatic
pressure. Long states, "Despite many Latin American concerns about the United
States' ultimately interventionist nature, Latin American diplomats cited the
Monroe Doctrine and United States-led Pan-Americanism in support of a grand
bargain that would extend and institutionalize US engagement while restricting
unilateralism." However, the United States' often considered adherence to the
Treaty's principles of nonintervention as secondary to its Cold War concerns.

Though the action of the United States during the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état
and the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion raised questions among Latin American
governments, the unilateral approach of the United States invading the
Dominican Republic in 1965 during the Dominican Civil War, before the OAS's
Inter-American Peace Force was organized, caused many members to believe that
the United States did not respect the ideals of multilateralism. Conversely
during the Falklands War in 1982, the United States favored the United Kingdom
arguing that Argentina had been the aggressor and because Argentina had not
been attacked, as did Chile and Colombia. This was seen by most Latin American
countries as the final failure of the treaty. Due to this, by the beginning of
1988 sixteen Latin American countries had become full members of the Non-
Aligned Movement, while another eight countries were observers and supported
to different extents. The sixteen countries were Argentina, Belize, Bolivia,
Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Panama,
Peru, St. Lucia, Suriname, and Trinidad-Tobago. The eight that supported were
Barbados, Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominica, El Salvador, Mexico, Uruguay, and
Venezuela.

### 21st century

During a speech he made on 7 September 2001, the Mexican president, Vicente
Fox Quesada, pointed out the necessity of having a multidimensional and modern
security structure that responds to the real needs of the American hemisphere.
He pointed out that when the TIAR was created in 1947 it was a result of the
conditions from World War II. Since then it has been overtaken by a global
system in which the vulnerability of nations does not lie solely in military
or ideological threats. In September 2002, citing the Falklands example and
anticipating the invasion of Iraq, Mexico formally withdrew from the treaty;
after the requisite two years, in September 2004, Mexico ceased to be a
signatory. In 2008, the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) created a new
regional security council to manage their own defensive objectives. On 5 June
2012, Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA) countries Bolivia, Ecuador,
Nicaragua, and Venezuela, under the leadership of leftist governments,
initiated the retirement from the TIAR, a decision which the Obama
administration described as "unfortunate" but respected. The treaty was
officially denounced by Nicaragua on 20 September 2012, Bolivia on 17 October
2012, Venezuela on 14 May 2013, and Ecuador on 19 February 2014.

## Invocations and considerations

The treaty was invoked numerous times during the 1950s and 1960s, in
particular the unanimous support of the United States' naval blockade during
the Cuban Missile Crisis. In 2001, the United States invoked the Rio Treaty
after the September 11 attacks.

In 2019, during a presidential crisis in Venezuela between incumbent President
Nicolás Maduro and president of the opposition-led National Assembly of
Venezuela Juan Guaidó, the latter opened talks on rejoining TIAR. On 11 May,
Guaidó sent a letter to Organization of American States (OAS) secretary Luis
Almagro requesting that Venezuela be reinstated. On 29 May 2019, the National
Assembly approved its return to the Treaty in a preliminary discussion. The
National Assembly reiterated its approval to return to the treaty in July
2019. As in 2024, due to the result of the elections in Venezuela, citizens
have been collecting signatures to activate the TIAR in view of the crisis
being experienced, which is being viewed as fraud.

## Members

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various
multinational organizations in the Americas

  * v
  * t
  * e

Current members:

  * Argentina (1948–present)
  * The Bahamas (1982–present)
  * Brazil (1948–present)
  * Chile (1948–present)
  * Colombia (1948–present)
  * Costa Rica (1948–present)
  * Dominican Republic (1948–present)
  * El Salvador (1948–present)
  * Guatemala (1948–present)
  * Haiti (1948–present)
  * Honduras (1948–present)
  * Panama (1948–present)
  * Paraguay (1948–present)
  * Peru (1948–present)
  * Trinidad and Tobago (1967–present)
  * United States (1948–present)
  * Uruguay (1948–2019, 2020–present)
  * Venezuela (1948–2015, 2019–present)

Suspended members:

  * Cuba (1948–1962)

Former members:

  * Bolivia (1948–2014)
  * Ecuador (1948–2016)
  * Mexico (1948–2004)
  * Nicaragua (1948–2014)