International research organization

| This article contains **paid contributions.** It may require cleanup to
comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view.
Please discuss further on the talk page.  
---|---  
  
The **International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics**
(**ICRISAT**) is an international organisation which conducts agricultural
research for rural development, headquartered in Patancheru, Hyderabad,
Telangana, India, with several regional centres (Bamako (Mali), Nairobi
(Kenya)) and research stations (Niamey (Niger), Kano (Nigeria), Lilongwe
(Malawi), Addis Ababa (Ethiopia), Bulawayo (Zimbabwe)). It was founded in 1972
by a consortium of organisations convened by the Ford- and the Rockefeller-
foundations. Its charter was signed by the FAO and the UNDP.

Since its inception, host country India has granted a special status to
ICRISAT as a UN Organization operating in the Indian territory making it
eligible for special immunities and tax privileges.

ICRISAT is managed by a full-time Director General functioning under the
overall guidance of an international Governing Board. The current Director
General, Dr Himanshu Pathak, who took the post on 06 March 2025. The current
chairman of the Board is Cathy Reade

## The semi-arid tropics

Purple-rumped sunbird in the ICRISAT fields

The semi-arid tropics (SAT) region is characterized by highly variable, low-
to-medium rainfall and poor soils, further characterized by lack of
irrigation. In general, the historical average annual rainfall in the SAT is
below 700 millimetres (28 in). In agricultural policy terms, this region is
considered to be a less favored area (LFA).

## Research strategy

With almost 50 years of experience addressing the agricultural constraints in
the drylands of Africa and Asia, ICRISAT has developed key strengths which are
focused on delivering impact in the drylands in alignment with its mission and
mandate. ICRISAT has a unique role in dryland agriculture research for
development, working through diverse partnerships across Asia and Africa.
ICRISAT’s unique comparative strength has been to conduct upstream science and
to translate upstream science to applied research. This makes a difference in
farmers' lives by scaling scientific innovations with due attention to the
environment, policy, marketing and socioeconomics. In the complex farming
systems of the drylands where ICRISAT mandate crops including grain legumes
and dryland cereals are grown, integrated solutions are needed to address the
challenges of poverty, climate change, nutrition and sustainability of natural
resources.

ICRISAT founded the Smart Food initiative in 2013 with the Vision to create a
world where food is 'Smart' – good for you, the planet and the farmer. A key
objective is to diversify staples across Africa and Asia, with the initial
focus on millets and sorghum.

## Mandate crops

Pearl millet seed production plots at ICRISAT (Patancheru, India), the
panicles covered in parchment paper bags to ensure self-pollination in this
normally mainly cross-pollinating crop (February 2013)

ICRISAT performs crop improvement research, using conventional as well as
methods derived from biotechnology, on the following crops: chickpea,
pigeonpea, groundnut, pearl millet, sorghum, finger millet, teff, and small
millets.

ICRISAT's scientific information by topic, crop, location and resources is
found on Exploreit.

## Research themes and genebank

ICRISAT conducts its research under three Global Research Programs (GRPs):
Accelerated Crop Improvement, Resilient Farm and Food Systems, Enabling
Systems Transformations. These three GRPs are implemented through 18 research
clusters.

The ICRISAT genebank serves as a repository for the collection of germplasm of
the six mandate crops – sorghum, pearl millet, finger millet, chickpea,
pigeonpea and groundnut; and five small millets – foxtail millet, little
millet, kodo millet, proso millet and barnyard millet. The collection has over
128,446 germplasm accessions assembled from 144 countries. Several landraces
now conserved in the ICRISAT genebank have disappeared from their natural
habitats in Africa and Asia.

## Accelerated crop improvement research

Most of ICRISAT's crop improvement research is directed to deliver climate-
resilient improved crop varieties with pest and disease resistance, improved
nutritional quality and market preferred traits and improved genetic gains.

Based on an econometric analysis of time-series data for three different types
of agricultural areas (irrigated, high-potential rainfed, and low-potential
rainfed), non-ICRISAT experts found more favorable marginal returns (measured
as Indian rupees of agricultural production per additional hectare planted to
modern varieties) for crop improvement research in low-potential rainfed areas
than in either high-potential rainfed areas or irrigated areas. Moreover,
additional crop research investment in low potential rainfed areas lifts more
people out of poverty than in the other two types of areas.

ICRISAT-improved chickpea varieties have been widely adopted in a poor tribal
area in Gujarat, India, with favorable impacts on yields, unit production
costs, and net returns per hectare/per acre. ICRISAT's package of improved
groundnut varieties grown in combination with improved agronomy practices has
had a positive result in the semi-arid tropical areas of Central India.

Two major science-based breakthroughs attributed to crop improvement research
at ICRISAT relate to pearl millet and pigeonpea. A team of researchers at
ICRISAT have released the first public sector-bred, marker-assisted bred
hybrid pearl millet, HHB 67. This was released in India in 2006. It is
assessed to have superior agronomic performance and improved tolerance to
terminal drought. The first-ever release of a hybrid pigeonpea by ICRISAT
researchers has been reported in 2008.

## Information products and services

ICRISAT formally adopted an open-access policy for its research publications
in 2009. It is among a small number of agricultural research organisations to
do so. As of June 2010, about 3000 publications are available on the
organisation's website.

## Scientists

| **This section is empty.** You can help by adding to it. _( September 2024)_  
---|---