International Energy Forum IEF Map

The **International Energy Forum (IEF)** is an inter-governmental, non-profit
international organisation which aims to foster greater mutual understanding
and awareness of common energy interests among its members. The 73 Member
Countries of the Forum are signatories to the IEF Charter, which outlines the
framework of the global energy dialogue through this inter-governmental
arrangement.

Participants not only include IEA and OPEC countries, but also key
international actors such as Brazil, China, India, Mexico, Russia, and South
Africa. The IEF member countries account for more than 90 percent of global
oil and gas supply and demand.

The Forum's biennial Ministerial Meetings are the world's largest gathering of
Energy Ministers.

Through the Forum and its associated events, IEF Ministers, their officials,
energy industry executives, and other experts engage in a dialogue on global
energy security.

The IEF is promoted by a permanent Secretariat based in the Diplomatic Quarter
of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The International Energy Forum also coordinates the Joint Organisations Data
Initiative (JODI) which is a concrete outcome of the global energy dialogue.

## Objectives

The fundamental aims of the Forum are:

  * Fostering greater mutual understanding and awareness of common energy interests among its Members;
  * Promoting a better understanding of the benefits of stable and transparent energy markets for the health of the world economy, the security of energy supply and demand, and the expansion of global trade and investment in energy resources and technology;
  * Identifying and promoting principles and guidelines that enhance energy market transparency, stability and sustainability;
  * Narrowing the differences among energy producing, consuming and transit Member States on global energy issues and promoting a fuller understanding of their interdependency and the benefits to be gained from cooperation through dialogue among them, as well as between them and energy related industries;
  * Promoting the study and exchange of views on the inter-relationships among energy, technology, environmental issues, economic growth and development;
  * Building confidence and trust through improved information sharing among States; and
  * Facilitating the collection, compilation and dissemination of data, information and analyses that contribute to greater market transparency, stability and sustainability. 

## History

The concept of a systematic producer-consumer dialogue emerged in the 1970s as
a part of the general reorganisation in the global political and economic
order with energy markets transforming the structure within individual
countries as well as power balances and relations between countries. In the
wake of the first Gulf War in the early 1990s, consumers and producers
recognised their joint interest in the stability of the oil market, creating
greater awareness, and understanding sensitivities toward each other's
interests.

The Gulf War revealed the importance of a concerted and coordinated global
response to an adverse supply shock. On October 1, 1990, at the United Nations
General Assembly, Venezuelan President Carlos Andrés Pérez called for an
urgent meeting of producers and consumers under the auspices of the United
Nations to help the world face the growing uncertainties and politics of the
oil market. With the support of French President François Mitterrand and
Norwegian Prime Minister Gro Brundtland political support was gained for the
initiation of a Ministerial Seminar of producers and consumers.

Established in Paris in July 1991, the International Energy Forum was created
in order to stabilise the global energy market after the 1970s energy crisis,
and the 1980s oil glut. One of the main priorities of the Forum was to bring
together member-states and private corporations in order to increase awareness
of national and international interests, and the workings of the market in
order to avoid the instabilities of the previous two decades.

## Organizations

Headquartered in the Diplomatic Quarter of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, The
International Energy Forum is a Secretariat organization. The forum is
governed by an executive board which is composed of 31 representatives of
ministries of the respective member states. The body is led by Secretary
General, Joe McMonigle of USA. Mr McMonigle was appointed on August 1, 2020.

The International Energy Forum Secretariat is to ensure that the Forum is
promoting a neutral platform for the exchange of information and views
regarding conflicts and the future of the energy industry. Another goal of the
executive board is to include both public and private entities in the global
energy market in order to bring forth multiple viewpoints to the Forum.

Additional duties that are performed by the Executive Board include organizing
all of the Forum's activities. These include all meetings and summits that are
put on by the Forum, and also coordinates the Forum's Programme of Work.

## The Joint Organisations Data Initiative (JODI)

IEF Energy Ministers recognized that the exchange and free dissemination of
energy market data helps to mitigate uncertainty by improving market
transparency and facilitating well-informed decision-making that instills
investor confidence, supports market stability and strengthens energy
security. The Joint Organisations Data Initiative, coordinated by the IEF
since 2005, relies on the combined efforts of the eight JODI partner
organisations (APEC, EUROSTAT, GECF, IEA, OLADE, OPEC, and UNSD), and more
than 100 national administrations, and industry stakeholders to gather, verify
and transmit the official data that populates JODI's two public databases
JODI-Oil and JODI-Gas with key monthly supply and demand indicators.