Intergovernmental organization that manages the water resources of the Mekong
River

The **Mekong River Commission** (MRC) is an "...inter-governmental
organisation that works directly with the governments of Cambodia, Laos,
Thailand, and Vietnam to jointly manage the shared water resources and the
sustainable development of the Mekong River". Its mission is "To promote and
coordinate sustainable management and development of water and related
resources for the countries' mutual benefit and the people's well-being".

## History

### Mekong Committee (1957–1978)

The origins of the Mekong Committee are linked to the legacy of
(de)colonialism in Indochina and subsequent geopolitical developments. The
political, social, and economic conditions of the Mekong River basin countries
evolved dramatically since the 1950s, when the Mekong represented the "only
large river left in the world, besides the Amazon, which remained virtually
unexploited." The impetus for the creation of the Mekong cooperative regime
progressed in tandem with the drive for the development of the lower Mekong,
following the 1954 Geneva Conference which granted Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam
independence from France. A 1957 United Nations Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East (ECAFE) report, _Development of Water Resources in the Lower
Mekong Basin_ , recommended development to the tune of 90,000 km2 of
irrigation and 13.7 gigawatts (GW) from five dams. Based largely on the
recommendations of ECAFE, the "Committee for Coordination on the Lower Mekong
Basin" (known as the **Mekong Committee**) was established in September 1957
with the adoption of the _Statute for the Committee for Coordination of
Investigations into the Lower Mekong Basin_. ECAFE's Bureau of Flood Control
had prioritized the Mekong—of the 18 international waterways within its
jurisdiction—in the hopes of creating a precedent for cooperation elsewhere.
and "one of the UN's earliest spin-offs", as the organization functioned under
the aegis of the UN, with its Executive Agent (EA) chosen from the career
staff of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

The US government—which feared that poverty in the basin would contribute to
the strength of communist movements—proved one of the most vocal international
backers of the committee, with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation conducting a
seminal 1956 study on the basin's potential. Another 1962 study by U.S.
geographer Gilbert F. White, _Economic and Social Aspects of Lower Mekong
Development_ , proved extremely influential, resulting in the postponement of
(in White's own estimation) the construction of the (still unrealized)
mainstream Pa Mong Dam, which would have displaced a quarter-million people.
The influence of the United States in the committee's formation can also been
seen in development studies of General Raymond Wheeler, the former Chief of
the Army Corps of Engineers, the role of C. Hart Schaaf as the Mekong
Committee's Executive Agent from 1959 to 1969, and President Lyndon Johnson’s
promotion of the committee as having the potential to "dwarf even our own
T.V.A." However, US financial support was terminated in 1975 and did not
resume for decades due to embargoes against Cambodia (until 1992) and Vietnam
(until 1994), followed by periods of trade restrictions. However, Makim argues
that the committee was "largely unaffected by formal or informal U.S.
preferences" given the ambivalence of some riparians about US technical
support, in particular Cambodia's rejection of some specific types of
assistance. However, the fact remains that "international development agencies
have always paid the bills for the Mekong regime," with European (especially
Scandinavian) nations picking up the slack left by the United States, and then
(to a lesser extent) Japan.

The Mekong Committee was a forceful advocate for large-scale dams and other
projects, primarily preoccupied with facilitating projects. For example, the
1970 Indicative Basin Plan called for 30,000 km2 of irrigation by the year
2000 (up from 2,130 km2) as well as 87 short-term tributary development
projects and 17 long-term development projects on the mainstream. The
Indicative Basin Plan was crafted largely in response to criticisms of the
committee's "piecemeal" approach and declining political support of the
organization; for example, the committee had received no funds from Thailand,
normally the biggest contributor, during the 1970 fiscal year. The completion
of all 17 projects was never intended; rather the list was meant to serve as a
"menu" for international donors, who were to select 9 or 10 of the projects.
While a few of the short-term projects were implemented, none of the long-term
projects prevailed in the political climate of the ensuing decade, which
included the end of the Vietnam War in 1975. Several tributary dams were
constructed, but only one—the Nam Ngum Dam (completed 1971), in Laos—outside
of Thailand, whose electricity was sold to Thailand. According to Makim, Nam
Ngum was the "only truly intergovernmental project achieved" by the committee.

This period was also marked by efforts to expand the jurisdiction and mandate
of the committee between 1958 and 1975, which did not receive the consent of
all four riparians. However, these efforts culminated, in January 1975, in the
adoption of a 35-article _Joint Declaration of Principles for Utilization of
the Waters of the Mekong Basin_ by the sixty-eighth session of the Mekong
Committee, prohibiting the "unilateral appropriation" without "prior approval"
and "extra-basin diversion" without unanimous consent. However, no committee
sessions were held in 1976 or 1977, as no plenipotentiary members had been
appointed by Cambodia, Laos, or Vietnam—all of which experienced regime change
in 1975.

### Interim Mekong Committee (1978–1995)

Mekong River

The rise of the xenophobic and paranoid Khmer Rouge government in Cambodia
made Cambodia's continued participation unsustainable, so in April 1977 the
other three riparians agreed to the _Declaration Concerning the Interim Mekong
Committee_ , which resulted in the establishment of the **Interim Mekong
Committee** in January 1978. The weakened interim organization was only able
to study large-scale projects and implement a few small-scale projects in
Thailand and Laos, where the Dutch Government through the IMC funded fisheries
and agricultural development projects along the Nam Ngum, as well as port
facilities at Keng Kabao near Savannakhet; the institutional role of the
organization shifted nonetheless largely to data collection. The 1987 _Revised
Indicative Basin Plan_ —the high-water mark of the Interim Committee's
activity—scaled back the ambitions of the 1970 plan, envisioning a cascade of
smaller dams along the Mekong's mainstream, divided into 29 projects, 26 of
which were strictly national in scope. The Revised Indicative Basin Plan can
also be seen as laying the groundwork for Cambodia's readmission. The Supreme
National Council of Cambodia did request readmission in June 1991.

Cambodia's readmission was largely a side-show which masked the true issue
facing the riparians: that the rapid economic growth experienced in Thailand
relative to its neighbors had made even the modest sovereignty limitations
imposed by Mekong agreements seem undesirable in Bangkok. Thailand and the
other three riparians (led by Vietnam, the most powerful of the remaining
three states) were locked in disagreement over whether Cambodia should be
readmitted under the terms of the 1957 _Statute_ (and more importantly, the
1975 _Joint Declaration_), with Thailand preferring to negotiate an entirely
new framework to allow its planned Kong-Chi-Moon Project (and others) to
proceed without a Vietnamese veto. Article 10 of the _Joint Declaration_ ,
requiring unanimous consent for all mainstream development and inter-basin
diversion proved to be the main sticking point of Cambodia's readmission, with
Thailand perhaps prepared to walk away from the regime altogether. The
conflict came to a head in April 1992 when Thailand forced the executive agent
of the committee, Chuck Lankester, to resign and leave the country after
barring the secretariat from the March 1992 meeting. This prompted a series of
meetings organized by the UNDP (which was terrified that the regime in which
it had invested so much might disappear), culminating in the April 1995
_Agreement on the Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the Mekong
River Basin_ signed by Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam in Chiang Rai,
Thailand, creating the **Mekong River Commission** (MRC).

Since the dramatic confrontation of 1992, several seemingly overlapping
organizations were created, including the Asian Development Bank's Greater
Mekong Subregion (ADB-GMS, 1992), Japan's Forum of Comprehensive Development
of Indochina (FCDI, 1993), the Quadripite Economic Cooperation (QEC, 1993),
the Association of South East Asian Nations and Japan's Ministry of
International Trade and Industry's Working Group on Economic Cooperation in
Indochina and Burma (AEM-MITI, 1994), and (almost finalized) Myanmar and
Singapore's ASEAN-Mekong Basin Development Cooperation (ASEAN-ME, 1996).

### Mekong River Commission (1995–present)

The MRC has evolved since 1995. Some of the "thorny issues" set aside during
the negotiation of the agreement were at least partially resolved by the
implementation of subsequent programmes such as the Water Utilization
Programme (WUP) agreed to in 1999 and committed to implementation by 2005. The
commission's hierarchical structure has been repeatedly tweaked, as in July
2000 when the MRC Secretariat was restructured. The 2001 Work Programme has
largely come to be viewed as a shift "from a project-oriented focus to an
emphasis on better management and preservation of existing resources." On
paper, the Work Programme represents a rejection of the ambitious development
schemes embodied by the 1970 and 1987 _Indicative Basin Plans_ (calling for no
mainstream dams) and a shift to a holistic rather than programmatic approach.
In part, these changes represent a response to criticism of the MRC's failure
to undertake a "regional-scale project" or even a region-level focus.

2001 also saw a major shift in the MRC—at least on paper—when it committed to
a role as a "learning organization" with an emphasis on "the livelihoods of
the people in the Mekong region." In the same year its annual report
emphasized the importance of "bottoms-up" solutions and the "voice of the
people directly affected." Similarly, the 2001 MRC Hydropower Development
Strategy explicitly disavowed the "promotion of specific projects" in favor of
"basin-wide issues." In part, these shifts mark a retreat from past project
failures and recognition that the MRC faces multiple, and often more
lucrative, competitors in the project arena.

## Governance

The MRC is governed by its four member countries through the Joint Committee
and the council. Members of the Joint Committee are usually senior civil
servants heading government departments. There is one member from each
country. The Joint Committee meets two to three times a year to approve
budgets and strategic plans. Members of the council are cabinet ministers. The
Council meets once a year.

Technical and administrative support is provided by the MRC Secretariat. The
secretariat is based in Vientiane, Laos, with over 120 staff including
scientists, administrators, and technical staff. A chief executive officer
manages the secretariat.

In April 2010, the Mekong River Commission convened a summit in Hua Hin,
Thailand. All six riparian nations were in attendance, including China, Burma
(Myanmar), Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam.

### Leadership

From its conception until 1995 the organization was under the leadership of an
"executive agent". Since then it has had CEO's.

  * C. Hart Schaaf, Executive Agent, 1959 – November 1969
  * Willem van der Oord, Executive Agent, December 1969 – June 1980
  * Bernt Bernander, Executive Agent, July 1980 – 1983
  * Galal Magdi, Executive Agent, 1983 – 1987
  * Chuck Lankester, Executive Agent, 1988 – 1990
  * Jan Kamp, Executive Agent, 1990 – 1995
  * Yasunobu Matoba, CEO, 1995 – August 1999
  * Jörn Kristensen, CEO, October 1999 – 2004
  * Olivier Cogels, CEO, July 2004 – 2007
  * Jeremy Bird, CEO, 2008 – 2010
  * Hans Guttman, CEO, 2011
  * Pham Tuan Phan, CEO 2016–2018
  * An Pich Hatda, CEO, 2019 -

## Relations with the People's Republic of China and Burma

The Mekong River Commission and its predecessors have never included PR China
(which was not a member of the United Nations in 1957) or Burma (which does
not significantly rely on or tap the Mekong), whose territory contains the
upper Basin of the Mekong. Part of a joint initiative by the US agency for
International Development (USAID) and NASA, SERVIR Mekong project, with five
countries, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam including Myanmar which aims
to tap into the latest technologies to help the Mekong River region protect
its vital ecosystem. Although China contributes only 16–18 percent of the
Mekong's overall water volume, the glacial melt waters of the Tibetan plateau
take on increasing importance during the dry season. The ability of upstream
nations to undermine downstream cooperation was perhaps best symbolized by an
April 1995 ceremonial boat trip from Thailand to Vietnam—to celebrate the
signing of the 1995 Agreement—which ran aground mid-river as a result of China
filling the reservoir of the Manwan Dam. Although China and Burma became
"dialogue partners" of the MRC in 1996 and slowly but steadily escalated their
(non-binding) participation in its various forums, it is at present
unthinkable that either would join the MRC in the near future.

In April 2002, China began providing daily water level data to the MRC during
the flood season. Critics noted that the emphasis on "flood control" rather
than dry season flows represented an important omission given the concerns
prioritized by the Mekong regime. In July 2003, MRC CEO Joern Kristensen
reported that China had agreed to scale back its plans to blast rapids by
implementing only phase one (of three) of its Upper Mekong Navigation
Improvement Project; however, China's future intentions in this area are far
from certain. One area in which China has been particularly reticent is in
providing information about the operation of its dams, rather than just flow
data, including refusing to join emergency meetings in 2004. Only in 2005 did
China agreed to hold technical discussions directly with the MRC. On 2 June
2005, at the invitation of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the
Ministry of Water Resources, MRC CEO Dr. Olivier Cogels and a delegation of
the secretariat's senior staff made the first official visit to Beijing to
hold technical consultations under the framework of cooperation between China
and the MRC, within the scope of the Mekong Programme. The delegation
identified a number of potential areas of cooperation with the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Water Resources, and the Ministry of
Communication, Information and Transport. These discussions resulted in China
supplying the MRC (beginning in 2007) with 24-hour water level and 12-hour
rainfall data for flood forecasts in exchange for monthly flow data from the
MRC Secretariat. The incentives for China to enter into cooperative regimes on
the Mekong are substantially reduced by the alternative of the Salween River
as a commercial outlet for China's Yunnan province, made considerably more
attractive by requiring negotiation solely with Burma, rather than with four
different riparians. News media and official sources often portray China's
joining the commission as a panacea for resolving the overdevelopment of the
Mekong. However, there is no indication that China's joining the MRC would
provide downstream riparians with any real capacity to challenge China's
development plans, given the dramatic power imbalances exhibited by these
countries' relations with China.

The MRC has been hesitant to fully register concerns about Chinese upstream
hydro-development. For example, in a letter to the _Bangkok Post_ , MRC CEO
Dr. Olivier Cogels in fact argued that Chinese dams would increase the river's
dry season volume as their purpose was electricity generation and not
irrigation. While such dams certainly could increase dry season flows, the
only certainty about future Chinese reservoir policies seems to be that they
will be crafted outside of downstream cooperation regimes. Public statements
from MRC leaders in the same vein as Cogels' comments have—to some—earned the
MRC a reputation of being complicit in allowing "China's dam-building machine
float downstream."