1987 arms control understanding among 35 nations including the G7

MTCR members

The **Missile Technology Control Regime** (**MTCR**) is a multilateral export
control regime. It is an informal political understanding among 35 member
states that seek to limit the proliferation of missiles and missile
technology. The regime was formed in 1987 by the G-7 industrialized countries.
The MTCR seeks to limit the risks of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) by controlling exports of goods and technologies that could
make a contribution to delivery systems (other than manned aircraft) for such
weapons. In this context, the MTCR places particular focus on rockets and
unmanned aerial vehicles capable of delivering a payload of at least 500
kilograms (1,100 lb) to a range of at least 300 kilometres (190 mi) and on
equipment, software, and technology for such systems.

The MTCR is not a treaty and does not impose any legally binding obligations
on partners (members). Rather, it is an informal political understanding among
states that seek to limit the proliferation of missiles and missile
technology.

## Guidelines and the Equipment, Software and Technology Annex

The Regime’s documents include the MTCR Guidelines and the Equipment, Software
and Technology Annex. The Guidelines define the purpose of the MTCR and
provide the overall structure and rules to guide the member countries and
those adhering unilaterally to the Guidelines. The Equipment, Software and
Technology Annex is designed to assist in implementing export controls on MTCR
Annex items. The Annex is divided into “Category I” and “Category II” items.
It includes a broad range of equipment and technology, both military and dual-
use, that are relevant to missile development, production, and operation.
Partner countries exercise restraint in the consideration of all transfers of
items contained in the Annex. All such transfers are considered on a case by
case basis.

Greatest restraint is applied to what are known as Category I items. These
items include complete rocket systems (including ballistic missiles, space
launch vehicles and sounding rockets) and unmanned air vehicle systems
(including cruise missiles systems, target and reconnaissance drones) with
capabilities exceeding a 300km/500kg range/payload threshold; production
facilities for such systems; and major sub-systems including rocket stages,
re-entry vehicles, rocket engines, guidance systems and warhead mechanisms.

The remainder of the annex is regarded as Category II, which includes complete
rocket systems (including ballistic missiles systems, space launch vehicles
and sounding rockets) and unmanned air vehicles (including cruise missile
systems, target drones, and reconnaissance drones) not covered in item I,
capable of a maximum range equal to or greater than, 300km. Also included are
a wide range of equipment, material, and technologies, most of which have uses
other than for missiles capable of delivering WMD. While still agreeing to
exercise restraint, partners have greater flexibility in the treatment of
Category II transfer applications.

The MTCR Guidelines specifically state that the Regime is “not designed to
impede national space programs or international cooperation in such programs
as long as such programs could not contribute to delivery systems for weapons
of mass destruction.” MTCR partners are careful with satellite-launched
vehicle SLV equipment and technology transfers, however, since the technology
used in an SLV is virtually identical to that used in a ballistic missile,
which poses genuine potential for missile proliferation.

## History

The Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) was established in April 1987 by
the G7 countries: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. It was created to curb the spread of unmanned delivery
systems for nuclear weapons, specifically systems which can carry a payload of
500 kilograms (1,100 lb) for 300 kilometres (190 mi).

The MTCR applies to exports to members and non-members. An aide-mémoire
attached to the agreement says that it does not supersede prior agreements,
which NATO members say allows the supply of Category 1 systems between NATO
members. An example is the export by the United States of Trident missiles to
the United Kingdom for nuclear-weapons delivery.

At the annual meeting in Oslo from 29 June to 2 July 1992, chaired by Sten
Lundbo, it was agreed to expand the MTCR's scope to include nonproliferation
of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for weapons of mass destruction. Prohibited
materials are divided into two categories, which are outlined in the MTCR
Equipment, Software, and Technology Annex. Thirty-five nations are members,
with India joining on 27 June 2016.

According to the Arms Control Association, the MTCR has been successful in
helping to slow (or stop) several ballistic missile programs: "Argentina,
Egypt, and Iraq abandoned their joint Condor II ballistic missile program.
Brazil and South Africa also shelved or eliminated missile or space launch
vehicle programs. Some former Warsaw Pact countries, such as Poland and the
Czech Republic, destroyed their ballistic missiles, in part, to better their
chances of joining MTCR." In October 1994, the MTCR member states established
a "no undercut" policy: if one member denies the sale of technology to another
country, all members must do likewise.

China originally viewed the MTCR as a discriminatory measure by Western
governments, which sold sophisticated military aircraft while restricting
sales of competing ballistic missiles. It verbally agreed that it would adhere
to the MTCR in November 1991, and included the assurance in a letter from its
foreign minister in February 1992. China reiterated its pledge in the October
1994 US-China joint statement. In their October 1997 joint statement, the
United States and China said that they agreed "to build on the 1994 Joint
Statement on Missile Nonproliferation."[_not specific enough to verify_] The
Missiles and Missile-related Items and Technologies Export Control List, a
formal regulation, was issued in August 2002. The following year, the MTCR
chair invited China to participate. China requested to join the MTCR in 2004,
but membership was not offered because of concerns about the country's export-
control standards. Israel, Romania and Slovakia have agreed to follow MTCR
export rules, although they are not yet members.

The regime has its limitations; member countries have been known to
clandestinely violate the rules. Some of these countries, with varying degrees
of foreign assistance, have deployed medium-range ballistic missiles which can
travel more than 1,000 kilometres (620 mi) and are researching missiles with
greater ranges; Israel and China have deployed strategic nuclear SLCMs, ICBMs
and satellite-launch systems. Countries which are not MTCR members buy and
sell on the global arms market; North Korea is currently viewed as the primary
source of ballistic-missile proliferation in the world, and China has supplied
ballistic missiles and technology to Pakistan. China supplied DF-3A IRBMs to
Saudi Arabia in 1988 before it informally agreed to follow MTCR guidelines.
Israel cannot export its Shavit space-launch system due to its non-member MTCR
status, although the Clinton administration allowed an import waiver for US
companies to buy the Shavit in 1994.

Over 20 countries have ballistic missile systems. The International Code of
Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (ICOC), also known as the
Hague Code of Conduct, was established in 2002. The code, which calls for
restraint and care in the proliferation of ballistic missile systems capable
of delivering weapons of mass destruction, has 119 members. Its mission is
similar to the MTCR's, an export group.

India applied for membership in June 2015 with support from Russia, France and
the United States, and became a member on 27 June 2016.

Pakistan is not a member of the MTCR. Although it has expressed a desire to
join the group, it has not submitted an application. The Pakistani government
has pledged to adhere to MTCR guidelines, and analysts believe that the
country is doing so. However, they haven't provided any evidence in support of
the same.

In 2020, the U.S. government announced that it would reinterpret its
implementation of the MTCR to expedite sales of unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs) to other countries. The revised U.S. policy will reinterpret how the
MTCR applies to drones which travel at speeds under 800 kilometres per hour
(500 mph), such as the Predator and Reaper drones (made by General Atomics)
and the Global Hawk drone (made by Northrop Grumman).

## Members

The MTCR has 35 members.

  * Argentina, 1993
  * Australia, 1990
  * Austria, 1991
  * Belgium, 1990
  * Bulgaria, 2004
  * Brazil, 1995
  * Canada, 1987
  * Czech Republic, 1998
  * Denmark, 1990
  * Finland, 1991
  * France, 1987
  * Germany, 1987
  * Greece, 1992
  * Hungary, 1993
  * Iceland, 1993
  * India, 2016
  * Ireland, 1992
  * Italy, 1987
  * Japan, 1987
  * Luxembourg, 1990
  * Netherlands, 1990
  * New Zealand, 1991
  * Norway, 1990
  * Poland, 1997
  * Portugal, 1992
  * Republic of Korea, 2001
  * Russian Federation, 1995
  * South Africa, 1995
  * Spain, 1990
  * Sweden, 1991
  * Switzerland, 1992
  * Turkey, 1997
  * Ukraine, 1998
  * United Kingdom, 1987
  * United States, 1987

Non-members pledging to adhere to MTCR include:

  * China, 2002
  * Israel
  * Pakistan
  * Romania
  * Slovakia