International financial institution

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "Nordic Investment Bank" – news **·** newspapers **·** books
**·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( January 2021)__(Learn how and when to remove this
message)_  
---|---  
| This article **containspromotional content**. Please help improve it by
removing promotional language and inappropriate external links, and by adding
encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view. _( August
2014)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **Nordic Investment Bank** (NIB) is an international financial institution
founded in 1975 by the five Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway, and Sweden). In 2005, the three Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia, and
Lithuania) also became members of the Bank. NIB’s headquarters are located in
Helsinki, Finland. NIB acquires the funds for its lending by borrowing on the
international capital markets.

Nordic Investment Bank offices in Helsinki.

## Strategy

NIB offers loans to customers in both the private and public sectors. The
Bank's primary lending areas are:

  * Connectivity & Consumer
  * Industry & Real Estate
  * Project & Structured Finance
  * Public Sector & Utilities
  * Financial Institutions

In addition, NIB offers sustainability-linked loans that provide financial
incentives to help companies reach their sustainability objectives. The Bank
acquires the funds for its lending by borrowing from international capital
markets.

## Structure and management

Each member country designates a Governor to the Bank's Board of Governors,
which is the supreme decision-making body. The Control Committee is the Bank's
supervisory body. The Board of Directors makes policy decisions concerning the
operations and approves the financial transactions proposed by NIB's
President.

Presidents:

  * Bert Lindström, Sweden, 1975 – 1986
  * Jannik Lindbæk, Norway, 1986 – 1994
  * Jón Sigurðsson, Iceland, 1994 – 2005
  * Johnny Åkerholm, Finland, 2005 – 2012
  * Henrik Normann, Denmark, 2012 – 2021
  * André Küüsvek, Estonia, 2021 – present

The Bank has a staff of approximately 250 employees, both from the member
region and beyond. NIB's headquarters are located in Helsinki, Finland, and
English is the official language of the Bank.