| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article needs to be **updated**. Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. _( March 2018)_  
---|---  
| This article includes inline citations, but **they are notproperly
formatted.** Please improve this article by correcting them. _( March
2018)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "North Pacific Marine Science Organization" – news **·**
newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( May 2015)__(Learn how and
when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **North Pacific Marine Science Organization** , (referring to the
organization's status as a Pacific version of the International Council for
the Exploration of the Sea), is an intergovernmental organization that
promotes and coordinates marine scientific research in the North Pacific Ocean
and provides a mechanism for information and data exchange among scientists in
its member countries.

## Legal framework

PICES is an international intergovernmental organization established under a
Convention for a North Pacific Marine Science Organization. The Convention
entered into force on 1992-03-24 with an initial membership that included the
governments of Canada, Japan, and the United States of America. The Convention
was ratified by the People's Republic of China on 1992-08-31 to increase
membership to four countries. Although the Soviet Union had participated in
the development of the Convention, it was not ratified there until 1994-12-16,
by the Russian Federation. The Republic of Korea acceded to the Convention on
1995-7-30. The Republic of Mexico and the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea are located within the Convention Area (generally north of 30°N) but are
not members.

## Oversight

A Governing Council consisting of up to two delegates appointed by each member
country is the primary decision-making body. Day-to-day operations of the
organization are managed by the staff of the PICES Secretariat, located in
Canada at the Institute of Ocean Sciences (located on Patricia Bay in British
Columbia).

## History

The idea to create a Pacific version of ICES (International Council for the
Exploration of the Sea) was first discussed by scientists from Canada, Japan,
the Soviet Union, and the United States who were attending a conference,
sponsored by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, in
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada in February 1973. ICES had provided a
forum since 1902 for scientists bordering the Atlantic Ocean and its marginal
seas to exchange information, conduct joint research, publish their results,
and provide scientific advice about fisheries, primarily in the North
Atlantic. In recognition of its Atlantic heritage, the nickname PICES (Pacific
ICES) was adopted for the North Pacific Marine Science Organization. Informal
meetings of proponents occurred sporadically through the 1980s, eventually
entraining government officials into the discussion in the mid-1980s. The
final text of a convention for a new marine science organization was endorsed
in Ottawa, Canada on 1990-12-12. A scientific planning meeting was held in
Seattle, USA in December 1991 to prepare for decisions made at the first
annual meeting in October 1992 in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.

## Mandate

The primary mandate of the organization is to promote and to coordinate marine
scientific research in the North Pacific Ocean and to provide a mechanism for
information and data exchange among scientists in its member country. This has
been achieved through various means, but primarily by establishing major
integrative scientific programs such as the PICES/GLOBEC Scientific Program on
Carrying Capacity and Climate Change. The alignment of PICES with a global
research program (GLOBEC) in the mid 1990s was fundamental to building the
reputation of the organization in the international scientific community.
Research on climate and marine ecosystem variability, global warming, ocean
acidification and related topics was about to explode in the 1990s, and PICES
was strategically in a position to take a significant role in exploring how
oceans, atmospheres, and their biota were affected by the changes.

A fundamental difference between PICES and ICES was a much lower priority on
developing assessments of fisheries and fish stocks. International borders are
much farther apart in the North Pacific compared to the northeastern Atlantic,
so coastal fisheries that might compete are separated by large distances
involving fewer countries. As a result, transboundary and straddling stock
issues generally tend to be managed bilaterally, rather than multilaterally in
the North Pacific. Research on fish stocks in PICES has generally been
directed toward environmental influences on species. This has produced a
naturally synergy with ICES as the expertise on different topics of fisheries
science has developed.

## Committees

Since its creation, the primary scientific directions of the organization have
stemmed from its scientific committees (biological oceanography, fishery
science, physical oceanography and climate, marine environmental quality, and
human dimensions) supported by two technical committees (data exchange and
monitoring). Each committee has authority to create subsidiary expert groups,
with the approval of the Governing Council, to undertake the scientific work
of the committees. National membership of all committees and other expert
groups is determined by the delegates of each member country. Committee
chairmen serve on the PICES Science Board, which is responsible for
authorizing and overseeing all scientific activities of the organization.

## Scientific programs

To facilitate cooperative research on important topics by marine scientists in
member countries, PICES established two major integrative scientific programs
during its first two decades. From 1995 to 2006, the PICES/GLOBEC regional
programme on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity sought to improve
understanding of climate variation in the North Pacific, its effect on marine
ecosystems, and the productive capacity of the ocean. An important outcome of
the work was learning that decadal-scale variation is dominant in the North
Pacific, to the point where long-term changes are difficult to detect The
second program on Forecasting and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty and
Responses of North Pacific Marine Ecosystems (FUTURE) began in October 2009.
Its primary goals are to understand how marine ecosystems in the North Pacific
respond to climate change and human activities, to provide forecasts of
ecosystem status, and to communicate the results of the program broadly.

## Special Projects

From time to time, member countries have asked PICES to undertake scientific
studies on a particular topic of special interest to them. These differ from
the regular work of the expert groups because incremental funding is typically
provided to the organization to conduct the work. Recent examples, funding
sources, and links to their products are listed here:

  * climate regime shifts (U.S.A.)
  * harmful algal blooms (Japan)
  * invasive marine species (Japan)
  * survival of Fraser River sockeye salmon (Canada)
  * Marine ecosystem health and human well-being (Japan)
  * Assessing the debris-related impacts from the tsunami (Japan)
  * Building local warning networks for the detection and human dimension of Ciguatera fish poisoning in Indonesian communities (Japan)
  * Sea turtle ecology in relation to environmental stressors in the North Pacific region (Korea)

## Ecosystem status reporting

Recognizing the need to understand and to communicate information on
variability in marine ecosystems among member countries, PICES initiated a
pilot project in 2002 that would result in the publication of its first
ecosystem status report. Thereafter, ocean climate and marine ecosystem
reporting was seen as an important function of the organization so it
continued with an extensive update. This version placed greater emphasis on
basin-scale comparisons, the primary scale of interest of the organization,
but the cost and effort that was required to create such a document led to
simplifications. Future versions[_when?_] will feature greater use of
automation and technology, with printed versions appearing less frequently.

## Global collaboration

During its first decade, PICES became a major international forum for
exchanging results and discussing climatic-oceanic-biotic research in the
North Pacific. Awareness of the benefits of working cooperatively on
scientific problems led to increasing collaboration with like-minded
organizations in the North Pacific. The first occasion where PICES had a
leadership role was the Beyond El Niño Conference (La Jolla, USA – 2000). The
results of the conference appeared in the largest special issue of _Progress
in Oceanography_ ever published In the years that followed, PICES partnered
with ICES, IOC, SCOR, and others to build its scientific and organizational
reputations.

## Capacity building

Capacity building is a high priority activity in PICES and in many other
organizations. Initially, PICES focused on the need to develop capacity in
those member countries with developing economies, or economies in transition.
The primary goals are now focused on developing young scientific talents in
all member countries . This is achieved through an intern program at the
Secretariat, early career scientist conferences, summer schools, travel grants
to allow participation in the PICES Annual Meeting, sponsoring speakers at
international conferences, and awards and recognition of deserving early
career scientists.

## Officers

_Chairman_

  1. Warren Wooster (USA, 1992-1996)
  2. William Doubleday (Canada, 1996-1998)
  3. Hyung Tack Huh (Korea, 1998-2002)
  4. Vera Alexander (USA, 2002-2006)
  5. Tokio Wada (Japan, 2006-2010)
  6. Lev Bocharov (Russia, 2010-2012)
  7. Laura Richards (Canada, 2012-2016)
  8. Chul Park (Korea, 2016-2020)
  9. Enrique Curchitser (USA, 2020-)

_Executive Secretary_

  1. Douglas McKone (Canada, 1993-1998)
  2. Alexander Bychkov (Russia, 1999-2014)
  3. Robin Brown (Canada, 2015-2020)
  4. Sonia Batten (Canada, 2020-)

_Deputy Executive Secretary_

  1. Motoyasu Miyata (Japan, 1992-1996)
  2. Alexander Bychkov (Russia, 1996-1999)
  3. Stewart M. McKinnell (Canada, 1999-2014)
  4. Harold P. Batchelder (USA, 2014-2021)
  5. Sanae Chiba (Japan, 2021-)