Office of the United Nations Secretariat

The **Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict** (**OSRSG-SVC**) is an office of the United Nations
Secretariat tasked with serving the United Nations' spokesperson and political
advocate on conflict-related sexual violence, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict (SRSG-SVC). The Special
Representative holds the rank of Under-Secretary-General of the UN and chairs
the UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The mandate of the SRSG-SVC
was established by Security Council Resolution 1888, introduced by Hillary
Clinton, and the first Special Representative, Margot Wallström, took office
in 2010. The current Special Representative is Pramila Patten of Mauritius,
who was appointed by UN Secretary General António Guterres in 2017. The work
of the SRSG-SVC is supported by the UN Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law/Sexual Violence in Conflict, co-led by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPO), Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the UN Development Programme (UNDP), also established under Security Council
Resolution 1888.

## History and role

The mandate was established in 2009 by UN Security Council Resolution 1888,
one in a series of resolutions which recognized the detrimental impact that
sexual violence in conflict has on communities, and acknowledged that the
crime undermines peace and security efforts. The resolution signaled a change
in the way the international community views and responds to conflict-related
sexual violence. It is no longer seen as an inevitable by-product of war, but
rather a crime that is preventable and punishable under international human
rights law.

In April 2010, the first Special Representative, Margot Wallström of Sweden
took office and in September 2012 Zainab Hawa Bagura of Sierra Leone took over
and served until early 2017.

According to the 2023 Report of the Secretary-General on Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence, the Office focuses on 21 country situations, including 15
conflict settings, three post-conflict countries and three additional
situations of concern.

## Team of Experts

The Office's Team of Experts (TOE) on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict works to strengthen the capacity of national rule of law and justice
actors to investigate and prosecute for acts of conflict-related sexual
violence. The lack of adequate national capacity to deliver justice often
leads to widespread impunity and threatens survivors' access to justice,
security and safety. The Team of Experts has been operational since 2011 and
is the sole Security Council-mandated body tasked with building national
capacity to enhance accountability for conflict-related sexual violence. It
includes experts from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPO), the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which serve as co-lead entities. In
addition, the Team is complemented by a law enforcement expert seconded by the
Government of Sweden and a reparations expert. Pursuant to Security Council
Resolution 1888 (2009), the Team focuses on: (i) working closely with national
legal and judicial officials and other personnel in the relevant governments'
civilian and military justice systems to address impunity, including by
strengthening national capacity and drawing attention to the full range of
justice mechanisms to be considered; (ii) identifying gaps in national
response and encouraging a holistic national approach in addressing conflict-
related sexual violence, including by enhancing criminal accountability,
judicial capacity and responsiveness to victims (such as reparations
mechanisms); (iii) making recommendations to coordinate domestic and
international efforts and resources to reinforce governments' ability to
address conflict-related sexual violence; and (iv) working with other UN
mechanisms including UN Missions, Country Teams, and the SRSG-SVC towards the
full implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009), 1960 (2010), 2106
(2013) and 2331 (2016). The Team of Experts provides assistance to
governments, including in the areas of criminal investigation and prosecution;
military justice; legislative reform; protection of victims and witnesses;
reparations for survivors; and security sector oversight. In support of the
Office of the SRSG-SVC, the TOE also serves a catalytic role in implementing
joint communiqués and frameworks of cooperation agreed between the SRSG-SVC
and national authorities, regional actors and other UN entities, complementing
the work of UN country presences.

## UN Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict (UN Action)

UN Action is a cross-UN initiative that unites the work of 26 entities with
the goal of ending conflict-related sexual violence. The Chair of UN Action is
the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten.
Endorsed by the Secretary-General's Policy Committee in June 2007, it
represents a concerted effort by the UN to work as one by amplifying advocacy,
improving coordination and accountability and supporting country efforts to
prevent conflict-related sexual violence and respond effectively to the needs
of survivors.

The 26 entities in the network are: Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPO), International Labour Organization (ILO), International Organization for
Migration (IOM), International Trade Centre (ITC), Joint United Nations
Program of HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict (OSRSG/CAAC), Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children (OSRSG-VAC), United Nations
Department of Global Communications (UNDGC), United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women), United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) , United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), United Nations
Department of Political Affairs (DPA), United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA), United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention (OSAPG), United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office (UN-PBSO), United Nations Population
Fund(UNFPA), World Food Programme (WFP), World Health Organization (WHO), UN-
Habitat (UN-Habitat).

## Secretary-General's Report on Conflict-Related Sexual Violence

The Office publishes the Report of the Secretary-General on Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence annually to highlight a number of new and emerging concerns in
relation to the use of sexual violence by parties to armed conflict as a
tactic of war and terrorism. The report contains an annex of a list of parties
credibly suspected of committing or being responsible for patterns of rape or
other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict, the majority
of whom are non-state actors. It tracks developments relevant to the
implementation of Resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) in 21
conflict-affected and post-conflict states and it is compiled through the
analysis of data provided by United Nations offices, civil society and
regional organizations, as well as Member States. The 2023 Report covers the
following countries: Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Central African
Republic, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Ethiopia,
Haiti, Iraq, Israel and the State of Palestine, Libya, Mali, Myanmar, Nepal,
Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan (Darfur), Syrian Arab
Republic, Ukraine and Yemen.

## List of Special Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict

**Special Representatives of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict** No | Name | Country | Term   
---|---|---|---  
1  | Margot Wallström |  Sweden | 2010–12   
2  | Zainab Bangura |  Sierra Leone | 2012–17   
3  | Pramila Patten |  Mauritius | 2017–present