Intergovernmental organisation

Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Logo

The **Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States** (**OECS** ; French:
_Organisation des États de la Caraïbe orientale_ , **OECO**) is an inter-
governmental organisation dedicated to economic harmonisation and integration,
protection of human and legal rights, and the encouragement of good governance
between countries and territories in the Eastern Caribbean. It also performs
the role of spreading responsibility and liability in the event of natural
disaster.

The administrative body of the OECS is the Commission, which is headquartered
in Castries, the capital of Saint Lucia.

OECS operates an economic union within the larger CARICOM economic union.
Eight members operate as a currency union \- the Eastern Caribbean Currency
Union, using the Eastern Caribbean dollar.

## History

OECS was created on 18 June 1981, with the Treaty of Basseterre, which was
named after the capital city of St. Kitts and Nevis. OECS is the successor of
the Leewards Islands' political organisation known as the West Indies
Associated States (WISA).

One prominent aspect of OECS economic bloc has been the accelerated pace of
trans-national integration among its member states.

The seven protocol members of the OECS, as well as two of the five associate
members—Anguilla and the British Virgin Islands—are either full or associate
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and were among the second group
of countries that joined the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME).
Martinique is currently negotiating to become an associate member of the
Caribbean Community.

## Projects

### Passport

A common OECS Passport was originally planned for 1 January 2003 but its
introduction was delayed. At the 38th OECS Authority Meeting in January 2004,
the Secretariat was mandated to have the two companies expressing an interest
in producing the common passport (De La Rue Identity Systems and the Canadian
Banknote Company) make presentations at the next (39th) Authority Meeting. At
the 39th Meeting the critical issue of the relationship between the OECS
passport and the CARICOM passport was discussed and at the 40th OECS Authority
Meeting in November 2004, the OECS Heads of Government agreed to give CARICOM
a further 6 months (until May 2005) to introduce a CARICOM Passport. Failure
to introduce the CARICOM Passport by that time would have resulted in the OECS
moving ahead with its plans to introduce the OECS Passport. As the CARICOM
Passport was first introduced in January 2005 (by Suriname) then the idea of
the OECS Passport was abandoned. Had the passport been introduced however it
would not have been issued to Economic Citizens within the OECS states.

It would also be unknown if the islands under British sovereignty would join
the scheme.

### Economic union

The decision to establish an economic union was taken by OECS Heads of
Government at the 34th meeting of the Authority held in Dominica in July 2001.
At the 35th meeting of the Authority in Anguilla in January 2002, the main
elements of an economic union implementation project were endorsed. The
project was expected to be implemented over a two-year period with seven of
the nine OECS member states (i.e. Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada,
Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines)
participating in the economic union initiative. The remaining two member
states, Anguilla and the British Virgin Islands, would not have participated
immediately, but would have requested time to consider the issue further. In
2003, work had been initiated on the central issue of the creation of new
Treaty arrangements to replace the Treaty of Basseterre which established the
OECS. Among the elements of the project was the creation of a technical
committee for a draft OECS Economic Union Treaty. This technical committee was
inaugurated on 4 May 2004 and began designing the draft Treaty.

#### OECS Economic Treaty

The new OECS Economic Union Treaty was finally presented at the 43rd OECS
Meeting in St. Kitts on 21 June 2006. The Authority requested changes to allow
a role for national parliamentary representatives (both government and
opposition) of the Member States in the form of a regional Assembly of
Parliamentarians. This body, it was felt, was necessary to act as a
legislative filter to the Authority in its law making capacity. The Heads
further directed that the Treaty be reviewed by a meeting of members of the
Task Force, Attorneys General, the draftsperson for the Treaty and
representatives of the OECS Secretariat.

The presentation of the Treaty at the Meeting was followed by the signing of a
Declaration of Intent to implement the Treaty by the Heads of Government or
their representatives (except that of the British Virgin Islands). It was
agreed in the Declaration, that implementation of the Treaty would occur only
after a year of public consultation, through a mass national and regional
education programme with strong political leadership and direction. According
to the Declaration, the Treaty was to be signed, and the Economic Union was to
be established by 1 July 2007.

#### Revised treaty

This intended deadline was missed, however, and after the signing of the
_Revised Treaty of Basseterre Establishing the Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States Economic Union_ on 18 June 2010, the newest target date of 21
January 2011 was met when five of the six independent signatory Member States
ratified the Treaty. These were Antigua and Barbuda (30 December 2010), St.
Vincent and the Grenadines (12 January 2011), St. Kitts and Nevis (20 January
2011), Grenada (20 January 2011) and Dominica (21 January 2011). In order for
the Treaty to have entered into force at least four of the independent Member
States must have ratified it by 21 January 2011. Montserrat had received
entrustments from the United Kingdom to sign the Treaty but is unlikely to be
in a position ratify the Treaty before a new constitution comes into force in
the territory. Following the need of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank to
temporarily assume control of two indigenous commercial banks in Anguilla, the
Chief Minister of Anguilla, Hubert Hughes, announced on 12 August 2013 that
Anguilla will seek to join the OECS Economic Union as soon possible in order
to fully participate in the strategy of growth conceived by the Eastern
Caribbean Currency Union (which was crafted within the context of the Economic
Union). He was supported in his position by St. Lucia's Prime Minister, Dr.
Kenny Anthony, who also called on Anguilla to join the Economic Union to
complement its membership of the Currency Union.

#### Provisions of the Treaty

The provisions of the Economic Union Treaty prior to its ratification were
expected to include:

  * The free circulation of goods and trade in services within the OECS
  * Free movement of labour by December 2007
  * The free movement of capital (via support of the money and capital market programme of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank)
  * A regional Assembly of Parliamentarians
  * A common external tariff

Some of these provisions would already have been covered to some extent by the
CSME, but some, such as the Assembly of Parliamentarians, would be unique to
the OECS. Although some of the provisions would seem to duplicate efforts by
the CSME, the Declaration of Intent and statements by some OECS leaders,
acknowledge the CSME and give assurance that the OECS Economic Union would not
run counter to CARICOM integration but that it would become seamlessly
integrated into the CSME. To this end, the OECS Heads of Government agreed
that steps should be taken to ensure that the OECS Economic Union Treaty would
be recognised under the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas, just as the original
Treaty of Chaguaramas had recognised the Treaty of Basseterre.

This was achieved in 2013 at the Twenty-Fourth Inter-Sessional Meeting of the
Conference of Heads of Government of CARICOM held in Port-au-Prince, Haiti,
from 18–19 February 2013. At that conference CARICOM leaders adopted the OECS’
Revised Treaty of Basseterre into CARICOM’s Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas,
which St. Vincent and the Grenadines Prime Minister, Ralph Gonsalves said
would effectively give CARICOM member states the opportunity of integrating
initially with the OECS and taking a seemingly quicker path to integration. In
order to achieve this the Conference agreed that the Inter-Governmental Task
Force (IGTF) revising the Treaty of Chaguaramas would recognise the provisions
of the Treaty establishing the Economic Union of the Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States (OECS). The IGTF was mandated to refer back to the Conference
at its next meeting on this issue.

The Economic Union Treaty's provisions are now expected to establish a Single
Financial and Economic Space within which goods, people and capital move
freely; harmonize monetary and fiscal policies Member States are expected
continue to adopt a common approach to trade, health, education and
environment, as well as to the development of such critical sectors as
agriculture, tourism and energy. The Economic Union Treaty (or Revised Treaty
as it is sometimes known) will also create two new organs for governing the
OCES; The Regional Assembly (consisting of members of
parliaments/legislatures) and The Commission (a strengthened Secretariat). The
free movement of OECS nationals within the subregion is expected to commence
in August 2011 after a commitment towards that goal by the Heads of Government
at their meeting in May 2011.

This was achieved on schedule with the six independent OECS members and later
Montserrat with nationals being allowed to enter the participating Member
States without hindrance and remain for an indefinite period in order to work,
establish businesses; provide services or to reside. The free movement of OECS
nationals throughout the Economic Union is underpinned by legislation and is
facilitated by administrative mechanisms This is achieved by OECS nationals
entering the special immigration lines for CARICOM nationals when traveling
throughout the Economic Union and presenting a valid photo ID and completed
Entry/Departure form whereupon the immigration officer shall grant the
national entry for an indefinite period save where the national presents a
security risk or where there exists some other legal basis for prohibiting
entry.

## Membership

OECS currently has twelve members which together form a continuous archipelago
across the Leeward Islands and Windward Islands. Anguilla, the British Virgin
Islands, Guadeloupe and Martinique are only associate members of OECS.
Diplomatic missions of the OECS do not represent the associate members. For
all other purposes, associate members are treated as equals of full members.

Six of the members were formerly colonies of the United Kingdom. Three others,
Anguilla, the British Virgin Islands, and Montserrat remain overseas
territories of the UK while Martinique and Guadeloupe are French departments
and regions of France, and Saint-Martin is a French overseas collectivity.
Eight of the twelve members are constitutional monarchies with King Charles
III as their current monarch (Dominica is a republic with a President). There
is no requirement for the members to have been British colonies; however, the
close historical, cultural and economic relationship fostered by almost all of
them having been British colonies is as much a factor in the membership of the
OECS as their geographical proximity.

All seven full members are also the founding members of the OECS, having been
a part of the organisation since its founding on 18 June 1981. The British
Virgin Islands was the first associate member, joining on 22 November 1984 and
Anguilla was the second, joining in 1995. Martinique became an associate
member on 12 April 2016 becoming the first non-British or formerly British
territory to join the OECS. Guadeloupe joined as an associate member of the
OECS on 14 March 2019 at a Special Meeting of the OECS Authority held on that
island on 14–15 March 2019. In 2019 the OECS Authority agreed to approve the
transition of Saint-Martin from observer status to associate membership by the
end of December 2019.

The list of full and associate members of the OECS is as follows:

State  | Status  | Capital  | Joined  | Pop. (2017) | Area (km²) | GDP (Nominal)  
(millions of US$) | GDP (Nominal)  
per cap. | HDI (2023) | Curr. | Official  
Language(s)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Antigua and Barbuda | Member | St. John's | Founder  | 091,244  | 0,443 | 01,524 | $16,702 | 0.851 | EC$ | None   
Commonwealth of Dominica | Member | Roseau | Founder  | 070,693 | 0,751 | 00,557 | $07,879 | 0.761  | EC$ | English  
Grenada | Member | St. George's | Founder  | 107,541 | 0,344 | 01,119 | $10,405 | 0.791  | EC$ | English  
Montserrat | Member | Brades | Founder  | 004,417  | 0,102 | 00,063 | $12,301 | –  | EC$ | English  
Saint Kitts and Nevis | Member | Basseterre | Founder  | 055,411 | 0,261 | 00,964 | $17,397 | 0.840  | EC$ | English  
Saint Lucia | Member | Castries | Founder  | 175,498 | 0,617 | 01,684 | $09,607 | 0.748  | EC$ | English  
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines | Member | Kingstown | Founder  | 110,185 | 0,389 | 00,785 | $07,124 | 0.798  | EC$ | English  
Anguilla | Associate Member | The Valley | 1995  | 015,253  | 0,096 | 00,337 | $22,090 | – | EC$ | English  
British Virgin Islands | Associate Member | Road Town | 1984  | 035,015  | 0,151 | 01,164 | $33,233 | – | US$ | English  
Guadeloupe | Associate Member | Basse-Terre | 2019  | 393,640  | 1,628 | 10,946 | $27,808 | – | Euro | French  
Martinique | Associate Member | Fort-de-France | 2015  | 374,780  | 1,128 | 10,438 | $27,851 | – | Euro | French  
  
Anguilla, the British Virgin Islands, and Montserrat are British Overseas
Territories. Thus, foreign relations are the responsibility of the UK
government. Guadeloupe and Martinique are Republic of France Overseas
departments and regions. Thusly foreign relations are the responsibility of
the French government.

### Possible future memberships

Although almost all of the current full and associate members are past or
present British dependencies, other islands in the region have expressed
interest in becoming associate members of the OECS. The first was the United
States Virgin Islands, which applied for associate membership in February 1990
and requested that US Federal Government allow the territory to participate as
such. At that time, it was felt by the US government that it was not an
appropriate time to make such a request. However, the US Virgin Islands
remained interested in the OECS and, as of 2002, stated that it would revisit
the issue with the US government at a later date. In 2001, Saba, an island of
the Netherlands Antilles, decided to seek membership in the OECS. Saba's
Island Council had passed a motion on 30 May 2001 calling for Saba's
membership in the organisation and subsequently on 7 June 2001, the Executive
Council of Saba decided in favour of membership. Saba's senator in the
Netherlands Antilles parliament was then asked to present a motion requesting
the Antillean parliament to support Saba's quest for membership. In addition
to the support from the Antillean parliament, Saba also required a
dispensation from the government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to become
an associate member of the OECS. Saba's bid for membership was reportedly
supported by St. Kitts and Nevis and discussed at the 34th meeting of OECS
leaders in Dominica in July. Also in 2001, Sint Maarten, another part of the
Netherlands Antilles, explored the possibility of joining the OECS. After
learning of Saba's intentions to join, St. Maarten suggested exploring ways in
which Saba and St. Maarten could support each other in their pursuit of
membership.

None of the prospective members have become associate members as yet, but
Saba, St. Eustatius and St. Maarten do participate in the meetings of the
Council of Tourism Ministers (as the Forum of Tourism Ministers of the Eastern
Caribbean, along with representatives of Saint-Martin, Saint Barthélemy,
Martinique and Guadeloupe).

### Political union with Trinidad and Tobago

On 13 August 2008 the leaders of Trinidad & Tobago, Grenada, St. Lucia, and
St. Vincent & the Grenadines announced their intention to pursue a sub-
regional political union within CARICOM. As part of the preliminary
discussions the Heads of Government for the involved states announced that
2011 would see their states entering into an economic union. This was however
derailed by a change of government in Trinidad and Tobago in 2010.

### Venezuela seeking membership

In 2008 the heads of the OECS also received a request from Venezuela to join
the grouping.

The OECS Director General at the time Len Ishmael confirmed Venezuela's
application was discussed at the 48th Meeting of the OECS Authority held in
Montserrat. But she said OECS decision-makers within the region were yet to
determine whether membership should be granted for Venezuela. Since that
application, Membership was not granted as it has been limited to the Eastern
Caribbean archipelago.

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various
Supranational Caribbean Organisations and agreements

  * v
  * t
  * e

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various
multinational organizations in the Americas

  * v
  * t
  * e

## Composite & Organs

### Secretariat

OECS Secretariat building.

The functions of the Organisation are set out in the Treaty of Basseterre and
are coordinated by the Secretariat under the direction and management of the
Director General.

The OECS functions in a rapidly changing international economic environment,
characterised by globalisation and trade liberalisation which are posing
serious challenges to the economic and social stability of their small island
members.

It is the purpose of the Organisation to assist its Members to respond to
these multi-faceted challenges by identifying scope for joint or coordinated
action towards the economic and social advancement of their countries.

The restructuring of the Secretariat was informed by considerations of cost
effectiveness in the context of the need to respond to the increasing
challenges placed on it, taking into account the limited fiscal capacities of
its members. The Secretariat consists of four main Divisions responsible for:
External Relations, Functional Cooperation, Corporate Services and Economic
Affairs. These four Divisions oversee the work of a number of specialised
institutions, work units or projects located in six countries:
Antigua/Barbuda, Commonwealth of Dominica, St Lucia, Belgium, Canada, and the
United States of America.

In carrying out its mission, the OECS works along with a number of sub-
regional and regional agencies and institutions. These include the Eastern
Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB); the Caribbean Community (Caricom) Secretariat;
the Caribbean Regional Negotiating Machinery (RNM) and the Caribbean
Development Bank (CDB).

### Director General

The authority within the OECS Secretariat is led by the Director General. The
current Director General of the OECS is Dr. Didacus Jules (Registrar and Chief
Executive Officer of the Barbados-based Caribbean Examinations Council), who
took his new position on 1 May 2014. The former Dr. Len Ishmael demitted the
office at the end of December 2013.

## Central Bank

Many of the OECS member-states are participants in the Eastern Caribbean
Central Bank (ECCB) monetary authority. The regional central bank oversees
financial and banking integrity for the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean
States economic bloc of states. Part of the bank's oversight is maintaining
the financial integrity of the East Caribbean dollar (XCD). Of all OECS
member-states, only the British Virgin Islands, Guadeloupe and Martinique do
not use the East Caribbean dollar as their de facto native currency.

All other members belong to the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union.

## Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court

The Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (ECSC), which was created during the era
of WISA, today handles the judicial matters in the Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States. When a trial surpasses the stage of High Court in an OECS
member state, it can then be passed on to the ECSC at the level of Supreme
court. Cases appealed from the stage of ECSC Supreme Court will then be
referred to the jurisdiction of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
The Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ) was established in 2003, but
constitutional changes need to be put in place before the CCJ becomes the
final Court of Appeal.

### Other agencies

  * Eastern Caribbean Civil Aviation Authority

## Security

The OECS sub-region has a military support unit known as the Regional Security
System (RSS). It is made up of the independent countries of the OECS along
with Barbados and Guyana. The unit is based in the island of Barbados and
receives funding and training from various countries including the United
States, Canada and the People's Republic of China.

## Foreign missions

**Country** | **Location** | **Mission**  
---|---|---  
Belgium | Brussels | Embassies of the Eastern Caribbean States and Missions to the European Union  
Switzerland | Geneva | Permanent Delegation of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States in Geneva   
  
## Health – Pharmaceutical Procurement Service

The Pharmaceutical Procurement Service, also known as the Eastern Caribbean
Drug Service, procures medicines and allied health equipment on behalf of the
member States. It has an 840 item product portfolio based on the regional
formulary. it is said to generate savings of $5 million a year.

## Symbols, flag and logo

The flag and logo of the OECS consists of a complex pattern of concentric
design elements on a pale green field, focused on a circle of nine inwardly
pointed orange triangles and nine outwardly pointed white triangles. It was
adopted 21 June 2006, and first raised on that day at Basseterre, St. Kitts
and Nevis.