Regional economic organisation

Timeline of EAEU Integration from the World Trade Organization report.
Regional Trade Agreements Database of the World Trade Organization. Regional
Trade Agreements Database of the World Trade Organization.

The **Eurasian Economic Community** (**EAEC** or **EurAsEC**) was a regional
organisation between 2000 and 2014 which aimed for the economic integration of
its member states. The organisation originated from the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) on 29 March 1996, with the treaty on the
establishment of the Eurasian Economic Community signed on 10 October 2000 in
Kazakhstan's capital Astana by Presidents Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus,
Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, Askar Akayev of Kyrgyzstan, Vladimir Putin
of Russia, and Emomali Rahmon of Tajikistan. Uzbekistan joined the community
on 7 October 2005, but later withdrew on 16 October 2008.

During the 14 years, the EAEC implemented a number of economic policies to
unify the community. The Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Russia was
formed on 1 January 2010, and later renamed the Eurasian Customs Union. The
four freedoms of movement modelled after the European Union (goods, capital,
services, and people) were fully implemented by 25 January 2012, with the
formation of the Eurasian Economic Space.

On 10 October 2014, an agreement on the termination of the Eurasian Economic
Community was signed in Minsk after a session of the Interstate Council of the
EAEC. The Eurasian Economic Community was terminated from 1 January 2015 in
connection with the launch of the Eurasian Economic Union.[_citation needed_]
While the Eurasian Economic Union effectively replaces the community,
membership negotiations with Tajikistan are still ongoing. All other EAEC
members have joined the new union.

## Membership

### Members

  * Belarus
  * Kazakhstan
  * Kyrgyzstan
  * Russia
  * Tajikistan

Uzbekistan was previously a member of the EAEC, however it suspended its
membership in 2008.[_citation needed_]

In accordance with the Charter of the EurAsEC, observer status could be
granted to the states or intergovernmental organizations at their request. The
observers had the right to attend the public meetings of the Eurasian Economic
Community, to speak at these meetings and with the consent of the presiding
officer to obtain public documents and decisions taken by the Community.
Observer status did not allow states to take part in decision-making at the
meetings of the Eurasian Economic Community. Observer states were:

## Aims

The Eurasian Economic Community was established for effective promotion of the
creation by the Customs Union member states of a Single Economic Space and for
coordinating their approaches while integrating into the world economy and the
international trade system. One of the Organization's chief activity vectors
is ensuring the dynamic evolution of the Community states through coordinating
their economic and social reforms while effectively using their economic
potentials to improve the living standards of their peoples. Among the
principal tasks of the Community are:

  * completing the formalization of a free trade regime in all respects, creating a unified customs tariff and a unified system of nontariff regulation measures;
  * laying down the common rules for trade in goods and services and their access to internal markets;
  * Ensuring the free movement of capital
  * introducing a unified procedure for foreign exchange controls;
  * creating a common unified system of customs regulation;
  * Harmonization of economies for the transition to a future single currency
  * drawing up and implementing joint programs of economic and social development;
  * creating equal conditions for production and entrepreneurial activities;
  * forming a common market for transportation services and a unified transport system;
  * forming a common energy market;
  * creating equal conditions for access by foreign investment to the sides' markets;
  * giving the citizens of the Community states equal rights in receiving education and medical assistance throughout its territory;
  * converging and harmonizing national legislation;
  * ensuring the coordination of the legal systems of the Eurasian Economic Community states with a view to creating a common legal space within the Community.

## Institutional framework

Representatives of EAEC and CSTO.

  * Interstate Council
  * Integration Committee 
    * Energy Policy Council
    * Transport Policy Council
    * Council on Border Issues
    * Council of Heads of Customs Services
    * Council of Heads of Tax Services
    * Council of Ministers of Justice
  * Secretariat
  * Commission of Permanent Representatives
  * Interparliamentary Assembly
  * Community's Court of Justice

### Interstate Council

The supreme body of the Eurasian Economic Community is composed of the Heads
of State and Government of the member states. The Interstate Council considers
the main issues of the Community relating to the common interests of member
states, determines the strategy, direction and prospects of integration and
takes decisions aimed at achieving the goals and objectives of the Community.
The Interstate Council meets at the level of Heads of State at least once a
year, and the heads of government - at least twice a year. The council takes
decisions by consensus. The decisions taken are binding on all Member States
of the Community.

### Integration Committee

The Integration Committee is a permanent organ of the Eurasec. It consists of
deputy heads of governments of the countries of the Community. The Integration
Committee meetings must be held at least four times a year.

In integration, the committee's decisions are taken by a two-thirds majority.

Every member state has a certain number of votes:

  * Russia \- 40 votes
  * Belarus \- 15 votes
  * Kazakhstan \- 15 votes
  * Kyrgyzstan \- 7.5 votes
  * Tajikistan \- 7.5 votes
  * Uzbekistan (suspended) - 15 votes

Some boards and commissions within the Integration Committee:

  * Commission for the protection of national markets;
  * Commission on cooperation in the field of export control;
  * Commission on technical regulations, sanitary, veterinary and phytosanitary trade;
  * Commission on Tariffs and non-tariff regulation;
  * Cooperation Council In the field of atomic energy for peaceful purposes;
  * Council for Culture;
  * Council of the agro-industrial policy;
  * Council Transportation Policy;
  * Council for Energy Policy;
  * Council on Migration Policy;
  * Council of Social Policy;
  * Council on Intellectual Property.
  * Board of Health;
  * Board of Education;
  * Board of Environmental Protection;
  * Chief Executives Board authorized to regulate the securities market body;
  * Council of Heads of Tax Services;
  * Council of Heads of insurance supervision and regulation of insurance business;
  * Council of Heads of Customs;

### Secretariat

The Secretariat is headed by the Secretary General of the Eurasec, the highest
Community official, appointed by the interstate Council. The seats of the
Secretariat are in the cities of Almaty (Kazakhstan) and Moscow (Russia).

### The Interparliamentary Assembly

The Interparliamentary Assembly of the Eurasian Economic Community serves as
body of parliamentary cooperation in the framework of the Eurasian Economic
Community. It addresses the issues of harmonization (convergence,
harmonization) of national legislation and bring it into line with the
agreements concluded in the framework of the Eurasian Economic Community.
Assembly is composed of members of parliament, delegated by the parliaments of
member states. Its structure includes:

  * Russia: 42 members
  * Belarus: 16 members
  * Kazakhstan: 16 members
  * Kyrgyzstan: 8 members
  * Tajikistan: 8 members

The Secretariat of the Interparliamentary Assembly is located in St.
Petersburg, Russia.

## Economic data

Country | Population | GDP 2011 (In Millions USD) | GDP 2012 (In Millions USD) | per capita   
---|---|---|---|---  
Belarus | 9,459,000 | 59,735 | 63,259 | 6,739   
Russia | 143,455,000 | 1,899,056 | 2,021,960 | 14,247   
Kazakhstan | 17,027,000 | 183,107 | 196,419 | 11,773   
Kyrgyzstan | 5,717,000 | 6,199 | 6,473 | 1,158   
Uzbekistan | 30,214,000 | 45,353 | 51,168 | 1,737   
Tajikistan | 8,044,000 | 6,523 | 7,592 | 953   
EAEC total | 213,916,000 | 2,189,991 | 2,346,871 | 10,971   
  
## Economic cooperation

### Single Economic Space

After discussion about the creation of a common market between the CIS
countries of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, agreement in principle
about the creation of this space was announced after a meeting in the Moscow
suburb of Novo-Ogarevo on 23 February 2003. The Common Economic Space would
involve a supranational commission on trade and tariffs that would be based in
Kyiv, would initially be headed by a representative of Kazakhstan, and would
not be subordinate to the governments of the four nations. The ultimate goal
would be a regional organisation that would be open for other countries to
join as well, and could eventually lead even to a single currency. On 22 May
2003 The Verkhovna Rada (the Ukrainian Parliament) voted 266 votes in favor
and 51 against the joint economic space. However, Viktor Yushchenko's victory
in the Ukrainian presidential election of 2004 was a significant blow against
the project: Yushchenko had shown renewed interest in Ukrainian membership in
the European Union, and such membership would have been incompatible with the
envisioned common economic space. On March 1, 2010, the first deputy head of
the presidential administration of newly elected Ukrainian President Viktor
Yanukovych, Iryna Akymova stated that Ukraine does not intend to join the
Customs Union of Russia, Kazakhstan and Belarus in the near future "Since the
customs union contradicts and will greatly complicate Ukraine's membership in
the WTO".

A single market for the Eurasian Economic Community came into effect in
January 2012, followed by the creation of the Eurasian Economic Union on 1
January 2015.

### Customs Union of the Eurasian Economic Union

Forming a customs union between EurAsEC member states became a top priority
from Spring 2008, when the EU announced its Eastern Partnership. Since that
time, there has been discord between the EU and Russia with both sides
accusing the other of attempting to carve out spheres of influence over the
countries at issue (Belarus, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova and
Ukraine). A supranational body of the customs union—the Eurasian Economic
Commission—was established on December 12, 2008. Boiled down to its essence,
Russia has offered EurAsEC members access to its markets (i.e., for
Kazakhstan) and lower energy prices (i.e., Belarus, Ukraine). The EU's offer
to membership countries amounts to promises of _de facto_ EU integration, such
as relaxed visa entry requirements.

Kazakhstani President Nursultan Nazarbayev had proposed the creation of a
common noncash currency called yevraz for the community. This would have
reportedly helped insulate the countries from the global economic crisis.

On 3 September 2013, EUobserver reported that Armenia had decided to join the
Eurasian Customs Union. The website quoted a Russian government communique
stating that, "Armenia [has] decided to join the Customs Union and take the
necessary practical steps to subsequently participate in the formation of the
Eurasian Economic Union."

### Anti-Crisis Fund

On 9 June 2009, Member States of the EurAsEC in collaboration with Armenia,
announced the establishment of an anti-crisis of Eurasec Fund to deal with the
effects of the 2008 financial crisis.

The Russian Finance Minister, Alexei Kudrin clarified: "The money from the
fund will be used to grant sovereign loans and stabilization credits to Member
States and to finance interstate investment projects. Therefore, this fund
will be a kind of replica of the Regional International Monetary Fund (IMF)
and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). As we know,
the IMF provides credit stabilization globally, while the EBRD grants loans
for investment projects. Russia has refused to increase the amount of its
contribution to the IMF, which would have been used to grant loans to
stabilize countries in need around the world. Instead, it creates a regional
fund to help its neighbors and allies. "

Belarusian President, Alexander Lukashenko said: "The Eurasian Economic
Community will establish a fund of $10 billion to deal with the financial
crisis." On June 9, 2009, the Fund was established at a meeting of the
EurAsEc.

Russia and Kazakhstan contributed $7.5 billion and $1 billion respectively to
the anti-crisis fund.

## History

### Origins of the Eurasian Economic Community

Summit of the EurAsEC on 31 May 2001

On October 10, 2000, when reforms on the CIS were reached the Eurasian
Economic Community was formed. The EurAsEC aimed to erase the failures of the
CIS, to form a true common market, face the challenges of globalization and to
resume the integration processes within the CIS. Very quickly, the EurAsEC
emerged as the economic complement of the CSTO.

### The dissolution of the CEC into the EurAsEC

In 2004, Russia joined the Central Asian Economic Community (ECSC) in order to
strengthen its presence in Central Asia. Soon after, Moscow expressed its
desire to dissolve the ECSC in the EurAsEC. In late 2005, Uzbekistan argued
for its accession to the EurAsEC, which led other members of the ECSC to
negotiate and eventually merge the two organizations. This merge was effective
on January 25, 2006. Most of the functions of the Central Asian Economic
Community were transferred to the EurAsEC since 2006.

However the status of current observers of the ECSC that are not observers of
EurAsEC is not yet settled (including Georgia and Turkey, the latter activist
which is also for accession to the European Union) .

Members wanted the EurAsEC to become a viable economic bloc between the
powerful EU in the West, and the growing economies in the east, which
established the ASEAN).

### Uzbekistan's withdrawal from the EurAsEC

On October 16, 2008, Uzbekistan submitted an official note to the EurAsEC
Secretariat, requesting to withdraw from the Eurasian Economic Community
(EurAsEC). Although Uzbekistan has not given any official reason, many
interpret the move as an attempt to revive stagnating relations with the West
and to assertively dismissing Russian influence. Other views interpret
Uzbekistan's move as a nationalist attempt in response to an economic crisis,
in order to regain tighter control over its economy.

### Legacy of the Eurasian Economic Community

The Customs Union members—Kazakhstan, Belarus and Russia—reached an agreement
on a unified customs tariff in June 2009 and endorsed a schedule for creating
a unified customs territory. The new Customs Union is intended to go into
effect on July 1, 2010

The Russian, Kazakhstani, and Belarusian leaders have approved documents to
establish a “single economic space” on 1 January 2012 – a single market for
goods, investment, and labor.

On 29 May 2014, a meeting of the Supreme Eurasian Economic Council took place
in Astana, following which Vladimir Putin, President of Kazakhstan Nursultan
Nazarbayev and President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko signed an Agreement
on the Eurasian Economic Union.