| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | **A major contributor to this article appears to have aclose connection with its subject.** It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view. Please discuss further on the talk page. _( May 2022)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **may rely excessively on sourcestoo closely associated with
the subject**, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and
neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate
citations to reliable, independent sources. _( May 2022)__(Learn how and when
to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
Organization maintaining the Domain Name System and Internet exchange points

**Packet Clearing House** (**PCH**) is the international organization
responsible for providing operational support and security to critical
Internet infrastructure, including Internet exchange points and the core of
the Domain Name System. The organization also works in the areas of
cybersecurity coordination, regulatory policy and Internet governance.

## Overview

Packet Clearing House (PCH) was formed in 1994 by Chris Alan and Mark Kent to
provide efficient regional and local network interconnection alternatives for
the West Coast of the United States. It has grown to become a leading
proponent of neutral independent network interconnection and provider of
route-servers at major exchange points worldwide.

PCH provides equipment, training, data, and operational support to
organizations and individual researchers seeking to improve the quality,
robustness, and Internet accessibility.

Major PCH projects include:

  * Building and supporting nearly half of the world's approximately 700 Internet exchange points (IXPs), and maintaining the canonical index of Internet exchange points, with data going back to 1994;
  * Operating the world's largest anycast Domain Name System (DNS) server platform, including two root nameservers, more than 400 top-level domains (TLDs) including the country-code domains of more than 130 countries, and the Quad9 recursive resolver;
  * Operating the only FIPS 140-2 Level 4 global TLD DNSSEC key management and signing infrastructure, with facilities in Singapore, Zurich, and San Jose,
  * Implementing network research data collection initiatives in more than 130 countries;
  * Publishing original research and policy guidance in the areas of telecommunications regulation, including the 2011, 2016 and 2021 _Interconnection Surveys_ , country reports such as those for Canada in 2012 and 2016 and Paraguay in 2012, and a survey of critical infrastructure experts for the GCSC; and
  * Developing and presenting educational materials to foster a better understanding of Internet architectural principles and their policy implications among policymakers, technologists, and the general public.

Notable past projects include the INOC-DBA critical infrastructure protection
hotline communications system, now operated by the Brazilian CERT.

PCH has more than 500 institutional donors, including the Soros Open Society
Institute, which funded PCH in developing open source tools which help
Internet service providers (ISPs) optimize their traffic routing, reduce costs
and increase performance of Internet service delivered to the public; the
United Nations Development Programme; Cisco Systems; NTT/Verio; Lumen;
Equinix; the governments of Sweden, Denmark, Canada, Mexico, France,
Singapore, Chile, Switzerland, and the United States; and hundreds of Internet
service providers and individuals.

PCH works closely with the United States Telecommunications Training Institute
(USTTI) to offer courses on telecommunications regulation, Internet
infrastructure construction and management, Domain Name System management, and
Internet security coordination, three times a year in Washington, D.C. It also
teaches in 80 to 100 on-location workshops a year throughout the world.

## Locations

As of July 2025, PCH maintains staffed offices in Paris, San Francisco,
Amsterdam, Kathmandu, Budapest, Johannesburg, Abu Dhabi, Washington and
Portland and operates critical network infrastructure within 333 Internet
exchange points.

## Board of directors

PCH's board of directors consists of Steve Feldman (chairman), Bill Woodcock
(secretary general), Sylvie LaPerriere, Gregory Akers, and Mark Tinka.