Strategic dialogue between Australia, India, Japan, and the United States

The **Quad** is a grouping of Australia, India, Japan, and the United States
that is maintained by talks between member countries. The grouping follows the
"Tsunami Core Group" and its "new type of diplomacy" developed in response to
the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. It was initiated in 2007 by
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, with the support of Australian prime
minister John Howard, Indian prime minister Manmohan Singh and U.S. vice
president Dick Cheney.[_failed verification_] The dialogue was paralleled by
joint military exercises of an unprecedented scale, titled Exercise Malabar.
The diplomatic and military arrangement was widely viewed as a response to
increased Chinese economic and military power.

The partnership is known formally as the "Quad," not the "Quadrilateral
Security Dialogue," noting its nature as a diplomatic, not security,
partnership. The "Quadrilateral Security Dialogue" is a misnomer not used
officially by the Quad governments.[_citation needed_]

The Quad ceased in 2008 following the withdrawal of Australia during Kevin
Rudd's tenure as prime minister, reflecting ambivalence in Australian policy
over the growing tension between the United States and China in the Indo-
Pacific. Following Rudd's replacement by Julia Gillard in 2010, enhanced
military cooperation between the United States and Australia was resumed,
leading to the placement of U.S. Marines near Darwin, overlooking the Timor
Sea and Lombok Strait. Meanwhile, India, Japan, and the United States
continued to hold joint naval exercises under Malabar.[_citation needed_]

During the 2017 ASEAN Summits in Manila, all four former members led by Abe,
Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, Indian prime minister Narendra
Modi, and U.S. president Donald Trump agreed to revive the Quad partnership in
order to counter China militarily and diplomatically in the Indo-Pacific
region, particularly in the South China Sea. Tensions between Quad members and
China have led to fears of what was dubbed by some commentators "a new Cold
War" in the region, and the Chinese government responded to the Quad dialogue
by issuing formal diplomatic protests to its members, calling it "Asian NATO".

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Brazil, Israel, New Zealand, South Korea, and
Vietnam were invited to "Quad Plus" meetings to discuss their responses to it.

## Background

### Strategic framework of US–China competition

In the early twenty-first century, the strategic preoccupation of the United
States with Iraq and Afghanistan served as a distraction from major power
shifts in the Asia-Pacific, brought about by increased Chinese economic power,
which undermined America's traditional role in the region. In the long term
the United States has sought a policy of "soft containment" of China by
organizing strategic partnerships with democracies at its periphery. While US
alliances with Japan, Australia and India now form the bulwark of this policy,
the development of closer US military ties to India has been a complex process
since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Australian commentaries showed mixed
attitudes to a Quadrilateral partnership isolating China.

### India–US military relations

Donald H. Rumsfeld, U.S. Secretary of Defense and Pranab Mukherjee, Minister
of Defence for India, at Pentagon, Washington, D.C., 2005.

Active US-Indian military cooperation expanded in 1991 following the economic
liberalization of India when American Lt. General Claude C. Kicklighter, then
commander of the United States Army Pacific, proposed army-to-army
cooperation. This cooperation further expanded in the mid-1990s under an early
Indian centre-right coalition, and in 2001 India offered the United States
military facilities within its territory for offensive operations in
Afghanistan. US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and his Indian counterpart
Pranab Mukherjee signed a "New Framework for India-US Defense" in 2005 under
the Indian United Progressive Alliance government, increasing cooperation
regarding military relations, defence industry and technology sharing, and the
establishment of a "Framework on maritime security cooperation." India and the
United States conducted dozens of joint military exercises in the ensuing
years before the development of the Quad, interpreted as an effort to
"contain" China. Indian political commentator Brahma Chellaney referred to the
emerging Quadrilateral partnership between the United States, Japan, Australia
and India as part of a new "Great Game" in Asia, and Indian diplomat M. K.
Rasgotra has maintained that American efforts to shape security pacts in Asia
will result not in an "Asian Century," but rather in an "American Century in
Asia."

Some, like US Lt. General Jeffrey B. Kohler, viewed US-India defence
agreements as potentially lucrative for American defence industries and
oversaw the subsequent sale of American military systems to India.
Nevertheless, some Indian commentators opposed increased American military
cooperation with India, citing the American presence in Iraq, hostility to
Iran and "attempts at encircling China" as fundamentally destabilizing to
Asian peace, and objecting to the presence of American warships with nuclear
capabilities off the coast of southern India, or to American calls for the
permanent hosting of American naval vessels in Goa or Kochi.

### Trilateral Security Dialogue (TSD)

The Trilateral Strategic Dialogue (TSD) was a series of trilateral meetings
between the United States, Japan, and Australia. The TSD originally convened
at senior officials level in 2002, then was upgraded to ministerial level in
2005. The United States expected regional allies to help facilitate evolving
US global strategy to fight against terrorism and nuclear proliferation. In
return, Japan and Australia expected benefits including continued US strategic
involvement and the maintenance of strategic guarantees in the region.

### 2004 Tsunami Cooperation

The Quad's origins, also referred to as "Quad 1.0", go back to the
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief to the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami,
later leading to a wider range of initiatives including maritime, health
security, and education, and "with a focus on securing a free and open Indo-
Pacific".

In 2021, some commentators wrote that an ad-hoc Tsunami Core Group in response
to the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami may have been an early
precursor to the Quad.

### South China Sea

The _nine-dash line_ refers to the ill-defined demarcation line used by the
People's Republic of China (China) and the Republic of China (Taiwan), for
their claims of the major part of the South China Sea. The contested area in
the South China Sea includes the Paracel Islands, the Spratly Islands, and
various other areas including Pratas Island and the Vereker Banks, the
Macclesfield Bank and the Scarborough Shoal. Despite having made the vague
claim public in 1947, neither the PRC nor the ROC has (as of 2018[update])
filed a formal and specifically defined claim to the area. An early map
showing a U-shaped eleven-dash line was published in the then-Republic of
China on 1 December 1947. Two of the dashes in the Gulf of Tonkin were later
removed at the behest of Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai, reducing the total to
nine. Chinese scholars asserted at the time that the version of the map with
nine dashes represented the maximum extent of historical claims to the South
China Sea. Subsequent editions added a tenth dash to the east of Taiwan island
in 2013, extending it into the East China Sea.

#### Condemnation of Pahalgam Terror Attack

In July 2025, the Quad foreign ministers—representing the United States,
India, Japan, and Australia—condemned the April 22 terrorist attack in
Pahalgam, Jammu and Kashmir, that killed 26 civilians, most of them tourists.
In a joint statement issued from Washington, the Quad called for the
perpetrators, organisers, and financiers of the attack to be brought to
justice without delay. Though not naming Pakistan explicitly, the group’s call
aligned with growing international concern over cross-border terrorism
originating from Pakistani soil.

The Quad also expressed serious concerns over coercive actions and
militarisation in the East and South China Seas. In the wake of the Pahalgam
attack, India launched Operation Sindoor on May 7, targeting terror
infrastructure in Pakistan and Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. The Quad’s statement
marked a clear show of solidarity with India’s right to defend its citizens
from state-sponsored terrorism

## Members

Overview of QUAD members  Member  | Population | Nominal GDP  
(million US$)  | PPP GDP  
(million US$)  | Nominal GDP  
per capita (In USD)  | PPP GDP  
per capita (In USD)  | Trade  
(billions of USD)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Australia | 27,400,013  | 1,771,681  | 1,980,022  | 64,547  | 72,138  | 804   
India | 1,413,324,000  | 4,187,017  | 17,647,050  | 2,878  | 12,132  | 1,612   
Japan | 123,360,000  | 4,186,431  | 6,741,192  | 33,956  | 54,677  | 2,013   
United States | 340,110,988  | 30,507,217  | 30,507,217  | 89,105  | 89,105  | 6,786   
  
## List of Leaders Summits

No.  | Date  | Host country  | Leader  | Location  | Key Themes and Discussions  | Image   
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1st  | March 24, 2021  | Virtual meeting  |  Joe Biden  
Scott Morrison  
Narendra Modi  
Yoshihide Suga | Video conference  | COVID-19 response, climate change, regional security, technological cooperation   
2nd  | September 24, 2021  |  USA |  Joe Biden  
Scott Morrison  
Narendra Modi  
Yoshihide Suga | Washington, D.C. | COVID-19 vaccination efforts, climate change, economic security, Indo-Pacific security  |   
3rd  | March 4, 2022  | Virtual meeting  |  Joe Biden  
Scott Morrison  
Narendra Modi  
Fumio Kishida | Video conference  | Russian invasion of Ukraine and ensuing humanitarian crisis   
4th  | May 24, 2022  |  Japan | Fumio Kishida  
Anthony Albanese  
Narendra Modi  
Joe Biden | Tokyo | Indo-Pacific security, COVID-19 response, climate change and Sustainability, economic resilience  |   
5th  | May 20, 2023  |  Japan | Fumio Kishida  
Anthony Albanese  
Narendra Modi  
Joe Biden | Hiroshima | Indo-Pacific security, climate change, health security, technology and cybersecurity  |   
6th  | September 21, 2024  |  United States |  Joe Biden  
Anthony Albanese  
Narendra Modi  
Fumio Kishida | Wilmington | Climate change/disaster response, maritime security, infrastructure, technology and cybersecurity  |   
7th  | TBD, 2025  |  India |  Narendra Modi  
Anthony Albanese  
Shigeru Ishiba  
Donald Trump | New Delhi | TBD   
  
## Creation and cessation of the Quad (2007–2008)

### Creation

In early 2007, Prime Minister Abe proposed the Quad, under which India would
join a formal multilateral dialogue with Japan, the United States and
Australia.

The initiation of an American, Japanese, Australian and Indian defence
arrangement, modelled on the concept of a Democratic Peace, was credited to
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. The Quad was supposed to establish an
"Asian Arc of Democracy", envisioned to ultimately include countries in
Central Asia, Mongolia, the Korean Peninsula, and other countries in Southeast
Asia: "virtually all the countries on China’s periphery, except for China
itself." This led some critics, such as former U.S. State Department official
Morton Abramowitz, to call the project "an anti-Chinese move", while others
have called it a "democratic challenge" to the projected Chinese century,
mounted by Asian powers in coordination with the United States. While China
has traditionally favoured the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, the Quad was
viewed as an "Asian NATO;" Daniel Twining of the German Marshall Fund of the
United States has written that the arrangement "could lead to military
conflict," or could instead "lay an enduring foundation for peace" if China
becomes a democratic leader in Asia.

### China's opposition

Naval vessels from Australia, India, Japan, Singapore, and the United States
take part in Malabar Exercise in the Bay of Bengal in 2007.

China sent diplomatic protests to all four members of the Quad before any
formal convention of its members. In May 2007 in Manila, Australian Prime
Minister John Howard participated with other members in the inaugural meeting
of the Quad at Cheney's urging, one month after joint naval exercises near
Tokyo by India, Japan and the United States. In September 2007 further naval
exercises were held in the Bay of Bengal, including Australia. These were
followed in October by a further security agreement between Japan and India,
ratified during a visit by Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to Tokyo, to
promote sea lane safety and defence collaboration; Japan had previously
established such an agreement only with Australia.

Though the Quadrilateral initiative of the Bush administration improved
relationships with New Delhi, it gave the impression of "encircling" China.
The security agreement between Japan and India furthermore made China
conspicuous as absent on the list of Japan's strategic partners in Asia. These
moves appeared to "institutionally alienate" China, the Association of South-
East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and promote a "Washington-centric" ring of
alliances in Asia.

The Japanese Prime Minister succeeding Abe, Taro Aso, downplayed the
importance of China in the Japan-India pact signed following the creation of
the Quad, stating, "There was mention of China – and we do not have any
assumption of a third country as a target such as China." Indian Foreign
Secretary Shiv Shankar Menon similarly argued that the defence agreement was
long overdue because of Indian freight trade with Japan, and did not
specifically target China. On the cusp of visits to China and meetings with
Prime Minister Wen Jiabao and President Hu Jintao in January 2008, the Indian
prime minister, Manmohan Singh, declared that "India is not part of any so-
called contain China effort," after being asked about the Quad.

### Australia's departure during Rudd

In 2008 Kevin Rudd terminated the Quad, signaling closer relations with China.

Fears over Chinese military spending and missile capacities had helped drive
Australia towards a defence agreement with the United States, as outlined by
the 2007 Canberra Defense Blueprint; Sandy Gordon of the Australian Strategic
Policy Institute had recommended the sale of uranium to India on the basis of
similar considerations, as it appeared that the United States was backing it
as a "counter to a rising China." Chinese anger over the Quad however caused
uneasiness within Australia even before the agreements were initiated.

On becoming Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd visited China's foreign minister, Yang
Jiechi, even before visiting Japan, and subsequently organized a meeting
between Yang and the Australian foreign minister, Stephen Smith, in which
Australia unilaterally announced it would "not be proposing" a second round of
dialogue between the four partners. Within Australia, this decision was seen
as motivated by the uncertainty of China-United States relations and by the
fact that Australia's principal economic partner, China, was not its principal
strategic partner. Rudd may furthermore have feared regional escalations in
conflict and attempted to diffuse these via an "Asia-Pacific Union."

Some US strategic thinkers criticized Rudd's decision to leave Quad; the
former Asia director of the United States National Security Council, Mike
Green, said that Rudd had withdrawn in an effort to please China, which had
exerted substantial diplomatic effort to achieve that aim. A December 2008
leaked diplomatic cable authored by US ambassador Robert McCallum reveals that
Rudd did not consult the United States before leaving the Quad.

The Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, a region claimed by China to be part of
Tibet.

US President Obama's efforts in November 2009 to improve US–Indian relations
raised alarms in India and Australia both that a deepening military alliance
between these powers could lead to regional escalations. According to analyst
John Lee, "For realists ... New Delhi has been warily balancing and competing
against Beijing from the very moment of India's creation in 1947;" significant
tensions between China and India were associated with the disputed Indian
province of Arunachal Pradesh, and with Chinese nuclear weapons stationed on
the Tibetan Plateau. Rudd's calculation may have been that as a regional
economic power, China was too important to contain through a simplistic
Quadrilateral Initiative undertaken by US, India, Japan and Australia in 2007,
when many regional powers are hedging their alliances in the event of a
Japanese and an American decline.

## Intermission (2009–2017)

### Continued naval exercises

In the years between the cessation and restart of the Quad, Quad members
continued to cooperate on a bilateral or trilateral level, sometimes with non-
Quad members involved. This was especially the case in joint military
exercises: Japan joined for the first time the Australian Kakadu and Nichi
Trou Trident naval exercises in respectively 2008 and 2009, Japan and India
held for the first time a joint naval exercise in 2012 and Australia and India
did the same in 2015, Australia joined the US-Philippines Balikatan exercise
for the first time in 2014 and Japan did the same in 2017, Japan joined for
the first time the Indian Malabar exercise in 2015, and Japan joined for the
first time the Australian-US joint Defence Exercise Talisman Saber in 2015.

### Australia's foreign policy under the Liberal-National governments

Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard with US Ambassador Jeff Bleich in June
2010.

Rudd's replacement as Australian prime minister by Julia Gillard in June 2010
was associated with a shift in Australian foreign policy towards a closer
relationship to the United States and a distancing from China. _The
Australian_ , which has written extensively on the Quad and on Australian
defence issues, argued after Rudd's replacement that "Australia's national
interest is best served by continuing to engage and encourage our long-
standing ally, the US, to retain its primacy in the region." Despite Gillard's
rapprochement with the US and increased US-Australian military cooperation,
Rudd's decision to leave the Quad remained an object of criticism from Tony
Abbott and the Liberal Party.

Australia's decision not to sell uranium to India had weakened the Quad, a
move also criticized by the Liberal Party; the Party has however backed
Gillard's support for a US military presence near Darwin, overlooking the
Timor Sea and the Lombok Strait. With support from the United States, Gillard
and the Labor party have since reversed policy and backed the sale of uranium
to India, which has refused to sign the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty. On 5
September 2014, Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott agreed to sell Uranium
to India.

### US' "Pivot to Asia"

The Obama administration's 2011 US "Pivot to Asia" represented a significant
shift of resources and priorities in the foreign policy of the United States
away from the Middle Eastern/European sphere and the US began to invest
heavily in East Asian countries, some of which are in close proximity to the
People's Republic of China. The pivot also included taking the lead in the
Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement and rejecting the Chinese claims on
the islands in the South China Sea. The US policy shift towards East-China was
generally seen as a move to oppose the growing influence of China in the
region. In July 2013, when Obama named Susan Rice the US National Security
Advisor, Rice sought a cooperative relationship with China.

### Japan's reorientation to the Indo-Pacific

Japan opened a naval base in Djibouti in 2011, its first long term naval base
overseas, and part of its growing involvement in the wider Indo-Pacific
region. In December 2012, Shinzo Abe had prepared a proposal on strategic
framework "Asia's Democratic Security Diamond [ja]", a sort of Quad remake, to
be published from an international media organization before his second
administration in Japan, and it was published on the next day of his prime
minister designate. The Japanese government had worked to clarify the concepts
in Prime Minister Abe's proposal of 2012, implemented in diplomatic
statements, and prepared the official announcement of "Free and Open Indo-
Pacific" in 2016.

### China's foreign policy under Xi

Territorial claims in the South China Sea

In 2012, Xi Jinping became the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist
Party, succeeding the leader of China. Since then, tensions between China and
each of the four Quad countries have increased. Xi has taken a hard-line on
security issues as well as foreign affairs, projecting a more nationalistic
and assertive China on the world stage than was the case with China's peaceful
rise policy advanced by Xi's predecessor Hu Jintao. Xi's political program
calls for a China more united and confident of its own value system and
political structure.

Under Xi's leadership, the PRC has resorted to island building in the Spratly
Islands and the Paracel Islands region. According to Reuters, island building
in the South China Sea primarily by Vietnam and the Philippines has been going
on for decades; while China has come late to the island building game, its
efforts have been on an unprecedented scale as it had from 2014 to 2016
constructed more new island surface than all other nations have constructed
throughout history and as of 2016 placed military equipment on one of its
artificial islands unlike the other claimants. A 2019 article in Voice of
America that compared China and Vietnam's island building campaign in the
South China Sea similarly noted that the reason why Vietnam in
contradistinction to China has been subject to little international criticism
and even support was because of the slower speed and widely perceived
defensive nature of its island-building project.

In a 2020 opinion column, former Indian general S. K. Chatterji described
China's foreign policy as "salami slicing.". Between 2015 and mid-2017, the US
has conducted five freedom of navigation naval operations (FONOP) in the
region. In July 2016, an arbitration tribunal constituted under Annex VII of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) ruled against the
PRC's maritime claims in _Philippines v. China_. The tribunal did not rule on
the ownership of the islands or delimit maritime boundaries. Both the People's
Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) stated that they did not
recognize the tribunal and insisted that the matter should be resolved through
bilateral negotiations with other claimants.

### India's shift in position and "Act East"

In the years following the cessation of the Quad, India was not keen to
reinstate the grouping, out of fear it would antagonize China. After several
years of growing tensions with China on a range of topics, and particularly
after the 2017 border standoff, India started to express renewed interest.

## Restarting the Quad (2017–present)

### 2017 ASEAN Summit

In August 2017, Japan invited Australia, India and the US to hold a joint
foreign ministers meeting during the ASEAN summit in November.

In November 2016, American president-elect Donald Trump and Prime Minister Abe
met and agreed to pursue what Japan calls a "Free and Open Indo-Pacific"
strategy, "originally advanced by Japan, although the regional concept of the
Indo-Pacific was truly sparked by the former US Secretary of State, Hillary
Clinton". The agreement was regarded as a response to China's Belt and Road
Initiative, and Chinese minister Geng Shuang responded by stating that "such
multilateral initiatives should promote cooperation among countries concerned
and not be turned into exclusionary frameworks."

The visit coincided with a meeting by Japanese, Indian, Australian and
American officials to continue military cooperation ahead of the ASEAN and
East Asia Summits in November 2017. The meeting included discussion of China's
increased prominence in the South China Sea, and may have signalled U.S.
president Trump's interest in reviving a formal Quad.

Naval vessels from the United States, Australia, Japan and India take part in
the Malabar Exercise in 2020.

### Follow-up meetings

The Quad met five times in 2017–2019. During the Raisina Dialogue in New Delhi
in 2018, the navy chiefs of Japan, US, Australia and India came together, one
of the first indications of the revival of the Quad's security structure.

In 2019, four ministers met in New York City to discuss reforming the Quad,
and then again in Bangkok. The next summer, India, Japan and US invited
Australia to the co-ordinated navy exercise at Malabar; the exercises were
delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi in his opening statement, on 24 May 2022,
remarked the Quad has gained a significant place on the world stage and that
it is a “force for good” for the Indo-Pacific region.

### Quad Plus meetings

In March 2020, the Quad members held a meeting with representatives from New
Zealand, South Korea and Vietnam to discuss their respective approaches to the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The participation of representatives from New
Zealand, South Korea and Vietnam, the latter being the first country from
Southeast Asia/ASEAN to join, was seen as another attempt to expand the
importance of the QUAD as well as the growing threat China posed in the
region. Instigated by the US, this new grouping of key Indo-Pacific states was
referred to as "**Quad Plus** ". A further meeting was held in May 2021 where
Brazil and Israel, two countries with no border to the Pacific Ocean, were
invited into the Plus format to discuss the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines.

### Comparisons to NATO

Following the 2020 Malabar naval exercises, American secretary of state and
former CIA director Mike Pompeo met with members of the Quad to discuss
converting the security arrangement into an "Asian NATO" with "shared security
and geopolitical goals". One commentator at the _South China Morning Post_
described the concept as "a bulwark against the rise of China", and a Chinese
diplomat protested the concept as an attempt to "wind back the clock of
history." Indian Foreign Minister S. Jaishankar denies China's allegations and
claimed India never had ‘NATO mentality’.

The foreign secretary of Sri Lanka raised concerns in October 2020 about the
militarization of the Quad in the Indian Ocean. At the same time, Japan, the
US and Canada held a joint naval exercise called _Keen Sword_ in October,
which was one of several Canadian naval exercises in the Taiwan straits that
year, and which was accompanied by diplomatic meetings in Tokyo, though no
joint statement was produced from the meeting. With a visit by Australian
Prime Minister Scott Morrison to Tokyo, Australia and Japan agreed in
principle to a defence pact that will increase military ties.

In 2021, Li Jimming, the Chinese ambassador to Bangladesh, warned Bangladesh
not to join the Quad saying any attempt to do so would seriously damage
relations with China. The ambassador described the Quad as “a military
alliance aimed against China’s resurgence.” Within Bangladesh these comments
attracted criticism both from the government and otherwise for infringing on
Bangladesh's sovereignty. Following the controversy Li Jimming walked back his
statement saying that he was only expressing his personal view on the issue.
However the Chinese Foreign Ministry appeared to defend the ambassador with
Hua Chunying stating that “We all know what kind of mechanism the Quad is.
China opposes certain countries’ efforts to form an exclusive clique, portray
China as a challenge, and sow discord between regional countries and China.”

### Expanding scope

On 3 March 2021, The White House, now under president Biden, issued the
"Interim National Security Strategic Guidance", and two days later, Australian
Prime Minister Morrison announced that the leaders of the Quad would hold
their first-ever meeting virtually. Morrison said he had discussed
arrangements with US President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris in
recent weeks. The next week, on 12 March, the first summit meeting was held
virtually by US President Biden. In a joint statement, the Quad members
described "a shared vision for a Free and Open Indo-Pacific" and a "rules-
based maritime order in the East and South China seas," which they state are
needed to counter Chinese maritime claims. Further development of the Quad
included the launches of the senior-level Quad Vaccine Experts Group, the Quad
Climate Working Group, and the Quad Critical and Emerging Technology Working
Group. It had been reported before the summit meeting that the four countries
are working to develop a plan to distribute COVID-19 vaccines to countries in
Asia as part of a broader strategy to counter China's influence, and that
India had urged the other three countries to invest in its vaccine production
capacity. The next summit meeting was to be held in person by the end of 2021.
In March 2021, the Quad pledged to respond to the economic and health impacts
of COVID-19.

### Other meetings

Quad foreign ministers meet in New York at the margins of the 2022 UN General
Assembly

On 15 March 2021, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Defense Secretary
Lloyd Austin arrived at the Yokota Air Base in Tokyo. They had contributed to
a Washington Post article before their flight. On 16 March, the two US
officials participated in a Security Consultative Committee (SCC), the so-
called "two-plus-two", with Japanese Foreign Minister Toshimitsu Motegi and
Defense Minister Nobuo Kishi. Also, the two US officials have met and talked
with Prime Minister Suga.

On 19 March, US Defense Secretary Austin arrived at India, and met with Prime
Minister Narendra Modi and Indian National Security Adviser Ajit Doval. The
next day, he discussed with Indian Defence Minister Rajnath Singh.

On 13 April, the foreign and defence ministers of Japan and Germany held the
first "two-plus-two" dialogue between the two nations, with each expected to
affirm security cooperation in an apparent counter to China's increasing
assertiveness in its regional waters. On 16 April, in Washington, D.C., US
President Biden and Japanese Prime Minister Suga met and showcased the
alliance between their two countries as well as their shared resolve in
dealing with China. The US and Japanese governments have been working to
strengthen technology supply chains independent of China during a shortage of
semiconductors that's worrying businesses around the world. Both countries are
expected in coming days to make deeper commitments to cutting climate-wrecking
fossil fuel emissions, in line with Biden's climate summit with 40 world
leaders next week.

Suga planned to visit India and the Philippines. With India and the US, he
also sought to further solidify the Quad framework. Japan and India would hold
a "two-plus-two" foreign and defence ministerial meeting in Tokyo in late
April, government sources said.

Senior military commanders from Quad member countries, including India's chief
of defence staff General Anil Chauhan, were meeting in Rancho Mirage,
California on 15–17 May 2023, discussing the Indo-Pacific security.

### Regular summit meetings

From left to right: Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga, Indian Prime
Minister Narendra Modi, U.S. President Joe Biden and Australian Prime Minister
Scott Morrison held the first in-person Quad meeting in Washington, D.C., 2021
From left to right: Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, U.S. President
Joe Biden, Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida and Indian Prime Minister
Narendra Modi in Tokyo, Japan on 24 May 2022.

Since March 2021, member states of the Quad and their leaders have hosted
regular “Leaders Summits”, which have been both online and in-person. The
summits have aimed to solidify the positions of the Quad and demonstrate the
alliances commitment to cooperation.

The first "Quad Leaders Summit" was held virtually on 24 March 2021, hosted by
U.S. President Joe Biden. Attending leaders included Australian Prime Minister
Scott Morrison, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga and Indian Prime
Minister Narendra Modi.

On 24 September 2021, U.S. President Joe Biden hosted the second Quad Leaders
Summit, and the first in-person meeting of the group, at the White House in
Washington, with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Australian Prime
Minister Scott Morrison and Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga all
participating.

On 4 March 2022, the third Quad Leaders Summit was held via video conference,
with leaders and representatives of Australia, India, Japan and the United
States participating. During the meeting leaders “reaffirm[ed] their
commitment to the Indo-Pacific” and “discussed the ongoing conflict and
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.”

On 24 May 2022, Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida hosted the fourth Quad
Leaders Summit and the second in-person meeting in Tokyo, Japan. U.S.
President Joe Biden, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and newly elected
Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, all attended the meeting. The
summit concluded with a joint statement from the leaders that vowed their
"steadfast commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific that is inclusive and
resilient."

On 24 May 2023, Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese was set to host the
fifth Quad Leaders Summit in Sydney, with proceedings being held at the Sydney
Opera House. On 17 May, a week before the scheduled summit, plans were
cancelled following an announcement by President Biden that he would not be
attending due to domestic negotiations over the debt-limit. The leaders
instead met during the 49th G7 summit held in Japan on 20 May. Although Prime
Minister Modi still visited Sydney for a bilateral meeting with Albanese after
the summit.

The 2024 meeting was originally set to be hosted by Indian Prime Minister
Narendra Modi and was scheduled to be held in January immediately following
Republic Day in India. The meeting was then postponed to September in that
year and was hosted by US president Joe Biden in Delaware, United States.
During a visit by Eric Garcetti, the idea of a QUAD satellite, to be built in
co-operation between the US and India was mooted. The summit held on 21
September 2024 committed the nations to the Quad Cancer Moonshot Initiative,
and to the elimination of cervical cancer.

The joint statement of the Quad foreign ministers' meeting on 21 January 2025
affirmed strengthening a free and open Indo-Pacific, and its opposition to
"any unilateral actions that seek to change the status quo by force or
coercion". The statement did not mention the Quad's commitment to
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, signalling the US government's shift
to recognize North Korea as nuclear state.

## Concept of the Indo-Pacific

The four Quad members have played a major role in purposefully redefining the
"Asia-Pacific" as the "Indo-Pacific", to deepen trans-regional ties between
the Indian and Pacific Ocean areas, and to, in their words, deal more
effectively with the rise of China in Asia, the Middle East and Africa. The
term "Indo-Pacific" gained traction in the political lexicon and strategic
thinking of not only the Quad members, but as of recently also of ASEAN, the
European Union, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the Netherlands, used
mainly with regards to China.

### European and Canadian pivot to the Indo-Pacific

At the Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore in June 2018, French and British
defence ministers announced they would sail warships through the South China
Sea to challenge China's military expansion. In a similar move, on 16
September 2020, France, the UK and Germany together submitted a note verbale
to the United Nations, which reaffirmed that the integrity of UNCLOS needs to
be maintained, stating that China's territorial claims in the South China Sea
do not comply with it.

On 20 January 2021, Joe Biden became the president of the United States, and
two days later, US and Japanese top security officials discussed security
issues. Three days after that, the Japanese Foreign Minister, Toshimitsu
Motegi, attended the EU Foreign Affairs Council to promote cooperation between
Japan and the EU in the Indo-Pacific. On 18 February, during the third
ministerial meeting, the United States, Australia, Japan and India agreed to
strongly oppose any use of force by China, and vowed to work with ASEAN and
Europe to meet their aims.

#### Canada

While Canada has not published an Indo-Pacific strategy, it started increasing
its naval presence in the region in 2020. In June 2020, Canadian frigate HMCS
_Regina_ and auxiliary vessel MV _Asterix_ sailed through the Taiwan Strait.
In January 2021, HMCS _Winnipeg_ did the same and later joined the navies of
the Quad members in the naval exercise Sea Dragon, according to a Canadian
official "to demonstrate the strength and durability of our alliances in the
Indo-Pacific region". In late March, the Canadian frigate HMCS _Calgary_
passed near the Spratly Islands, which China claims.

#### European Union

The first Quad summit, held in March 2021, explored a partnership with Europe.
France, Germany, and the Netherlands have announced their Indo-Pacific
visions, and the EU is in the midst of formulating its own.

#### France

According to Brendan Berne, then the Australian ambassador to France, French
president Macron said, when they met in late 2017 that "he was aware of the
threat situation in the Indo-Pacific and that Australia would not be alone".
Six months later, in June 2018, the same month as the 2018 Shangri-La
Dialogue, France, with 1.6 million of its citizens living and over 90% of its
exclusive economic zone located in the Indo-Pacific region, was the first EU
member to publish an Indo-Pacific strategy, following increased Chinese
assertiveness in the region, and updated it in May 2019. It was also the first
EU member to use the geopolitical concept of the Indo-Pacific. Partnerships
with all four members of the Quad as well as with ASEAN are a key component of
France's Indo-Pacific strategy. As part of this strategic shift, French
frigate Vendémiaire sailed through the Taiwan Strait in 2018, possibly the
first-ever such passage for the modern French Navy, and was seen as a freedom
of navigation patrol, countering China's claim over the Strait.

On 9 September 2020, France, India and Australia held their first India-
France-Australia Trilateral Dialogue, with their foreign secretaries meeting
through videoconference. In December 2020, France also revealed it would join
for the first time the joint military drills with Japan and the US in May
2021. On 10 February 2021, the French submarine Emeraude patrolled through the
South China Sea, proving its capacity to deploy over long distances and work
together with the navies of Australia, the US, and Japan. On 24 February 2021,
a second India-France-Australia Trilateral Dialogue meeting was held, to
evaluate progress on the actions defined in the first trilateral meeting in
September. On 30 March 2021, French Navy’s amphibious assault helicopter
carrier Tonnerre and escort frigate Surcouf arrived at the Kochi port in
Kerala, India, ahead of a joint naval exercise with the four Quad member
countries. The French naval drill exercise called La Perouse was scheduled to
take place from 5 to 7 April 2021. _South China Morning Post_ reported this as
the first instance of naval exercises to involve all four Quad members. In
late April, India and France held their separate annual Varuna naval exercise.
The two French warships were on a five-month-long deployment in the Indo-
Pacific. On 13 April 2021, a third India-France-Australia Trilateral Dialogue
meeting took place in New Delhi.

#### Germany

On 1 September 2020, the German government followed, releasing a policy
document in which the country for the first time officially endorsed the
concept of the Indo-Pacific, and among others includes actively building
partnerships in the region, including on security matters, calling on the EU
to do the same. In December 2020, in an online meeting between Japan's and
Germany's defence ministers, Japan expressed hopes for Germany to send a
warship to the Indo-Pacific region, and join drills with Japan Self-Defense
Forces, In March 2021, Germany confirmed that it would send a frigate in
August to the South China Sea, making it the first German warship since 2002
to traverse the region. In mid-April 2021, the foreign and defence ministers
of Japan and Germany would meet via videoconference to discuss Indo-Pacific
security topics.

#### Italy

Mirroring the India-France-Australia Trilateral, an India-Italy-Japan
Trilateral was formed in June 2021, aiming to create a rules-based
international order in the Indo-Pacific region.

#### Netherlands

In November 2020, the Netherlands published its Indo-Pacific strategy, making
it the third EU member to do so, following France and Germany. The policy
document calls on the EU to build partnerships in the region and to reject
Chinese territorial claims more strongly. As part of this policy shift, the
Netherlands would send the frigate HNLMS Evertsen to the Indo-Pacific as part
of the British aircraft carrier group in 2021. In April 2021, Dutch prime
minister Rutte and Indian prime minister Modi held a videoconference meeting
to discuss cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region.

#### United Kingdom

In 2016 the UK moved a satellite in its Skynet military communications system
eastward to extend coverage to east Asia and the western Pacific Ocean, and
opened a new Australian ground station. At the opening ceremony the British
High Commissioner referred to the territorial disputes in the South China Sea.

In December 2020, the UK announced it would dispatch an aircraft carrier
strike group to waters near Japan as soon as early 2021, to conduct joint
exercises with US military and Japan Self-Defense Forces in May. The strike
group would consist of: the carrier HMS Queen Elizabeth (R08) with an embarked
air group (consisting of 24 F-35 aircraft from No. 617 Squadron RAF and Marine
Fighter Attack Squadron 211, along with 9 Merlin helicopters and a number of
Wildcat helicopters); two Type 45 destroyers; two Type 23 frigates; two Royal
Fleet Auxiliary logistics vessels; an Astute-class submarine; the American
destroyer USS _The Sullivans_, and the Dutch frigate HNLMS _Evertsen_. Once it
set sail, the strike group would also be joined by "at least a frigate" of the
Royal Australian Navy, HMNZS Te Kaha and HMNZS Aotearoa from the Royal New
Zealand Navy, and a number of vessels from the Japan Maritime Self-Defense
Force, before it was reported that it would enter the South China Sea.

In March 2021, the UK published a policy document titled the "Integrated
Review" which confirmed the UK's foreign policy shift towards the Indo-Pacific
and included a nine-step plan detailing what this shift entails. The document
acknowledged that trade between the UK and China was mutually beneficial, yet
it also named China as "the biggest state-based threat to the U.K.’s economic
security" and called on middle powers to work together in this new
geopolitical context. Britain's "Indo-Pacific tilt" is exemplified in projects
such as AUKUS, CPTPP, and GCAP.

## Analysis

According to the American think tank Center for a New American Security
(CNAS), the United States pursued the Quad in an effort to adapt to an
increasingly economically powerful China in the Asia-Pacific, where great
power rivalry, massive military investment, social inequality, and
contemporary territorial disputes have all made war in Asia "plausible."
According to the CNAS, establishing a series of alliances among nations
recognized as democratic by the United States furthers its own interests: "It
is precisely because of the rise of Chinese power and the longer term trend
towards multipolarity in the international system that values can and should
serve as a tool of American statecraft today."

Prominent U.S. politicians from both Democratic and Republican parties have
advocated a more aggressive diplomacy in Asia. During the 2008 US presidential
campaign, President Obama called for a new worldwide concert of democracies to
counter the influence of Russia and China in the UN Security Council; key
officials of Obama's administration were involved in the Princeton Project,
whose final report called for the construction of a new "concert of
democracies". Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s Policy Planning Director at
the State Department, Anne-Marie Slaughter, authored the Princeton Project’s
final report, which "called for reconstituting the quadrilateral military
partnership among the United States, Japan, Australia and India". John McCain
also called for a "league of democracies", and Rudy Giuliani for incorporating
Asia's militarily capable democracies into NATO. The development of the Quad
took place in the context of Chinese military modernization, geared towards
contingency in Taiwan Strait but also towards "force projection capabilities".
Some US officials view Chinese assertiveness in South China Sea as
demonstrated by the naval confrontation between the USNS _Impeccable_ and
Chinese naval vessels near Hainan Island.

According to academic Jeremy Garlick, publishing in early 2024, the Quad had
not yet achieved much in practice. Academic Jeffrey Crean concludes that as of
2024, the Quad had yet to find common ground or a coherent strategic approach.
Crean writes that while Quad members have various conflicts with China, those
conflicts arise in significantly different areas or with regard to different
issues and this has been an obstacle to unified action.