Organization for renewable energy

| **A major contributor to this article appears to have aclose connection with
its subject.** It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content
policies, particularly neutral point of view. Please discuss further on the
talk page. _( March 2024)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
The logo of the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership (REEEP),
including tagline " Developing Clean Energy Markets"

The **Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership** (**REEEP**) is a
Vienna-based Quasi-International Organisation that advances markets for
renewable energy and energy efficiency with a particular emphasis on the
emerging markets and developing countries.

REEEP was originally launched by the government of the United Kingdom, along
with other partners, at the Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable
Development (WSSD) in August 2002. Since 2004 it has been headquartered at the
United Nations Office in Vienna and is supported by the Government of Austria
among others.

REEEP develops and implements programmes which use a combination of financial
instruments, capacity building, facilitation of stakeholder cooperation and
technical assistance to encourage private sector investment in clean energy
markets, primarily in low- and middle income countries.

## Origins and funders

In 2002, accelerating the development of renewable energy and energy
efficiency technologies was one of the priorities of a large group of
countries at the WSSD. Margaret Beckett, then UK Minister for the Environment
announced the initiative to form REEEP at the summit's closing session. It
grew from an agreement with other committed governments, businesses and NGOs
to deliver WSSD commitments others, in particular to take forward the key
recommendations of the G8 Renewable Energy Task Force.

From January 2003 until May 2004, the REEEP was housed within the UK Foreign
and Commonwealth Office (FCO) where it continued following the UN Type II
Partnership process of stakeholder consultation. In June 2004, REEEP obtained
formal, legal non-profit status as an international NGO and has since been
located at the UN complex in Vienna, Austria. In 2016, REEEP was granted
status as a Quasi-International Organisation in Austria, along with four other
organisations.

As of 2024, the organisation has been funded primarily by governments
including: Australia, Austria, Canada, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Spain,
Switzerland, The Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United States and the
European Commission.

## Projects

| This section **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. _( March 2024)__(Learn how
and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
In the first phase of its existence (2002-2014) REEEP acted largely as a re-
granting institution. The majority have targeted emerging markets such as
India, China, and southern Africa.

Since 2014, REEEP has focused its work toward the targeted "de-risking" of
specific markets and sectors, such as solar-powered irrigation systems in East
Africa, solar-powered dairy cooling in Bangladesh, or innovative decentralized
mini-grid models in Tanzania.

Regionally, REEEP has shifted concentration to low- and middle-income
countries, although it continues to work in India and South Africa, which are
generally considered to be emerging markets.

It designed and implemented the Beyond the Grid Fund for Zambia, funded by
Sweden, which won the Ashden Award in 2019 and delivered energy service
subscriptions to over 1 million Zambians. The programme has been expanded into
the Beyond the Grid Fund for Africa which as of 2024 aims to reach over 8.6
million people across Burkina Faso, DRC, Liberia, Uganda and Zambia.

REEEP's other completed projects include:

  * Powering Agrifood Value Chains - a project to develop evidence-based intervention guidance for energy utilisation in the food-producing agricultural sector.
  * Climate Change, Clean Energy and Urban Water Works in Southern Africa - a joint REEEP-UNIDO project to accelerate market-based solutions for energy-related investment to improve municipal water works in Southern Africa.
  * SWITCH Africa Green - a project to support African countries in their transition to an Inclusive Green Economy and promoting sustainable consumption and production (SCP) practices and patterns.
  * Climate Knowledge Brokers Group - a community of practice that furthers improvements and efficiency gains in the global climate knowledge system.

## Internet-based resources

### reegle.info

reegle was developed by REEEP in collaboration with REN21, and was funded by
the governments of Germany, Netherlands, United Kingdom. reegle was an
advocate of the Linked Open Data movement, which seeks to make public data
available on the web in open formats that are machine-readable.

## Partners

As of 2023, REEEP has 385 partners, 45 of which are governments, including all
the G7 countries and key government agencies from India and China, other
emerging markets and the developing world. Partners also include a range of
businesses, NGOs and civil society organisations.

Among other organisations, REEEP has worked with the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the International Renewable Energy Agency, the
International Energy Agency, the Global Village Energy Partnership, CLASP and
the Johannesburg Renewable Energy Coalition.