The **Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat** (**TCS**) is an international
organization established with a vision to promote "Lasting Peace, Common
Prosperity, and Shared Culture" among China, Japan, and South Korea. Upon the
agreement signed and ratified by each of the three governments, the TCS was
officially inaugurated in Seoul, on 1 September 2011. On the basis of equal
participation, each government shares 1/3 of the total operational budget.

## Background

### Development of Trilateral Cooperation

The idea of a trilateral framework between China, Japan and the Republic of
Korea has its roots in the breakfasts attended by the three leaders at the
sidelines of the 1999 ASEAN+3 Summit in Manila. This meeting marked the first
step for developing trilateral cooperation and its framework, with 1999 being
celebrated as the first year of China-Japan-South Korea cooperation.

The three countries continued to hold annual meetings at the ASEAN+3 Summit.
After several years of negotiations, the three countries agreed at the 2007
ASEAN+3 Summit to hold separate stand-alone meetings in the future. Hence, in
2008, what began as a side-conference to the ASEAN meetings officially
developed into the first China-Japan-South Korea Trilateral Summit, held in
Fukuoka, Japan.

### Foundation of the Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat (TCS)

Discussions of a stand-alone secretariat began in 2009 at the 2nd Trilateral
Summit held in Beijing, China. This was officially agreed upon by the three
countries in May 2010 at the 3rd Trilateral Summit held in Jeju, Republic of
Korea, where the three leaders signed the Memorandum. Later in December 2010,
the three governments signed the _Agreement on the Establishment of the
Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat_ , and the Trilateral Cooperation
Secretariat was finally established in Seoul, Republic of Korea in September
2011.

## Organization

The TCS consists of a Consultative Board and four departments.

### Consultative Board

The Consultative Board, the executive decision-making body of the
organization, is composed of a secretary-general (SG) and two deputy
secretaries-general (DSG). The secretary-general is appointed on a two-year
rotational basis in the order of South Korea, Japan, and China. The other two
countries nominate a deputy secretary-general each.

| SG  | DSG   
---|---|---  
1st Board Sep. 2011 - Aug. 2013  | SHIN Bong-kil | MATSUKAWA Rui  | MAO Ning  
2nd Board Sep. 2013 - Aug. 2015  | IWATANI Shigeo  | CHEN Feng | LEE Jong-heon  
3rd Board Sep. 2015 - Aug. 2017  | YANG Houlan | LEE Jong-heon | UMEZAWA Akima   
4th Board Sep. 2017 - Aug. 2019  | LEE Jong-heon | YAMAMOTO Yasushi  | HAN Mei  
5th Board Sep. 2019 - Aug. 2021  | MICHIGAMI Hisashi  | CAO Jing | KANG Do-ho  
6th Board Sep. 2021–Present  | OU Boqian | BEK Bum-hym | SAKATA Natsuko  
7th Board Sep. 2023–Present  | LEE He-sup | ZUSHI Shuji | YAN Liang  
  
### Departments

Under the Consultative Board, there are four departments: Political Affairs,
Economic Affairs, Socio-Cultural Affairs, and Management and Coordination. The
four departments are composed of officials seconded by the three countries and
general service staff recruited through open competition from the three
countries.

## Functions

Under the mission of promoting "Lasting Peace, Common Prosperity, and Shared
Culture," the TCS aims to serve as a hub for the Trilateral Cooperation that
encompasses a broad spectrum of sectors and actors.

  1. Supporting Trilateral Consultative Mechanism
  2. Promoting Public Awareness on Trilateral Cooperation
  3. Exploring and Facilitating Cooperative Projects
  4. Collaborating with Other International Organizations
  5. Compiling Database and Conducting Research

## Projects

**Youth Exchange**

  * Trilateral Youth Exchange Network (TYEN)[1]
  * Young Ambassador Program (YAP)[2]
  * Trilateral Youth Summit (TYS)[3]
  * Trilateral Youth Speech Contest (TYSC)[4]
  * CAMPUS Asia Alumni Network (CAAN) and Workshop
  * CJK Children's Story Exchange Alumni Program
  * Young Scholars Forum
  * Young Rural Leaders Exchange Program

**Promoting trilateral cooperation / Cooperative projects**

  * International Forum for Trilateral Cooperation (IFTC)[5]
  * Trilateral Entrepreneurs Forum (TEF)[6]
  * Trilateral Journalist Exchange Program (TJEP)[7]
  * CJK Virtual Marathon [8]
  * Inter-regional Dialogue for Regional Cooperation

**Research and Publications**

  * Trilateral Statistics Hub [9]
  * Report “An Evolving Trilateral Cooperation: Reality and Outlook”[10]
  * Trilateral Economic Report [11]
  * Trilateral Common Vocabulary Dictionary (TCVD) [12]
  * Trilateral Best Practices: Application of Technology for Reducing Disaster Risks in China, Japan and Korea [13]
  * Annual Reports [14]
  * Other publications relating to political, economic and socio-cultural cooperation
  * Compilation of information database regarding trilateral cooperation