International organization

The **United Nations Programme for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women** , also known as **UN Women** , is a United Nations agency charged with
working for gender equality and the empowerment of women. UN Women is charged
with advocating for the rights of women and girls, and focusing on a number of
issues, including violence against women and violence against LGBT people.

UN Women was established by a merger of the UN Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM, established in 1976) and other agencies and became operational in
2011. The organization operates under a governance structure and has an
executive board representing different regions. Former President of Chile
Michelle Bachelet was its inaugural executive director and Jordanian Sima Sami
Bahous is its current executive director. UN Women is a member of the UN
Development Group.

## History

In response to UN General Assembly resolution 63/311, in January 2010 the
Secretary-General presented report A/64/588, entitled _Comprehensive Proposal
for the Composite Agency for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women_. In
his report, the Secretary-General resolved that, rather than relieving other
parts of the United Nations system of their responsibility for contributing to
the promotion of gender equality and women's empowerment, the new agency
should seek to sharpen the focus and impact of the gender equality activities
of the entire United Nations system. Additionally, Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon estimated that approximately $125 million per annum were needed for
operating costs and "start-up" capacity at the country, regional, and
headquarters levels. Moreover, an additional $375 million per annum were
needed in the initial phase to respond to country-level requests for
programmatic support.

After years of negotiations between UN member states, women's groups, and
civil society, on 2 July 2010 the General Assembly unanimously adopted
resolution 64/289, thus creating UN Women by merging the Division for the
Advancement of Women (DAW); the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW, established in 1976); the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women (OSAGI, established
in 1997), and the UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM, established in 1976).
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon announced at the founding of the movement that
he was "grateful to Member States for having taken this major step forward for
the world's women and girls. UN Women will significantly boost UN efforts to
promote gender equality, expand opportunity, and tackle discrimination around
the globe."

On 14 September 2010, it was announced that former President of Chile Michelle
Bachelet was appointed as head of UN Women. Various countries supported the
creation of the body and welcomed Bachelet as chief. During General Debate at
the opening of the 65th General Assembly of the UN, world leaders commended
the creation of the body and its intention to "empower women", as well as
welcoming Bachelet as the inaugural head. On 11 March 2011, John Hendra of
Canada and Lakshmi Puri of India were appointed as first deputy executive
directors at the level of UN Assistant Secretary-General.

The provisions set forth by resolution 63/311 on system-wide coherence,
adopted by the General Assembly on 2 October 2010, constituted the blueprint
for UN Women. Seeking to strengthen the UN's institutional arrangements for
gender equality and women empowerment, resolution 63/311 supported the
consolidation of four distinct parts of the UN system that focused exclusively
on gender equality and women's empowerment into a composite entity to be led
by an Under-Secretary-General. Moreover, the resolution requested that the
Secretary-General produce a proposal specifying the mission statement of the
composite entity and its organizational arrangements, including an
organizational chart, funding, and the executive board to oversee its
operational activities.

## Structure and functioning

Resolution 64/289 determined that the entity should be headed by an Under-
Secretary-General, to be appointed by the Secretary-General in consultation
with member states, for a term of four years, with the possibility of renewal
for one term.[_citation needed_]

The organization is governed by a multi-tiered intergovernmental governance
structure in charge of providing normative and operational policy guidance.
The General Assembly, Economic and Social Council, and the Commission on the
Status of Women (CSW) constitute the governance structure that sets forth the
normative policy guiding principles of the Entity. The intergovernmental
governance structure in charge of providing operational policy guidance to UN
Women includes the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
organization's executive board.[_citation needed_] The latter consist of 41
members, elected by the Economic and Social Council for a term of three years
and distributed as follows:

  * Ten from the Group of African States
  * Ten from the Group of Asian States
  * Four from the Group of Eastern European States
  * Six from the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
  * Five from the Group of Western European and Other States
  * Six from contributing countries. Four seats will be selected by and from the top ten largest providers of voluntary core contributions to UN Women. The remaining two seats will be allocated to two developing countries not members of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (DAC/OECD). These two countries will be selected by the developing countries not members of the Development Assistance Committee among the top ten providers of voluntary core contributions to the entity.[_citation needed_]

The resources required to fund all normative processes are obtained from the
Entity's regular budget and approved by the General Assembly, whereas the
budget for service operational processes and activities at all levels are
funded from voluntary contributions and approved by the executive board of UN
Women.

### Executive Board

The IWD 2014 parade

Jordanian Sima Sami Bahous is the executive director of UN Women as of 2023.
The 2020 executive board consists of:

  * **Africa:** Angola, Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Morocco, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone.
  * **Asia-Pacific:** Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Mongolia, Nepal, Republic of Korea, and Saudi Arabia.
  * **Eastern Europe:** Georgia, Hungary, Lithuania, and Russia.
  * **Latin America and the Caribbean:** Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, and Mexico.
  * **Western Europe and other States:** Belgium, Canada, Germany, New Zealand, Switzerland.
  * **Contributing countries:** Finland, Senegal, Sweden, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States.

## Mandate

The mandate and functions of UN Women consist of the consolidated mandates and
functions of the Office of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, the Division for the Advancement of Women, the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, and the International Research and
Training Institute for the Advancement of Women. In addition, the entity must
lead, coordinate, and promote the accountability of the United Nations system
in its work on gender equality and women's empowerment. The goal of UN Women
is to "enhance, not replace, efforts by other parts of the UN system (such as
UNICEF, UNDP, and UNFPA), which will continue to have a responsibility to work
for gender equality and women's empowerment in their areas of expertise."

In accordance with the provisions of resolution 64/289, UN Women is to work
within the framework of the UN Charter and the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action, including its 12 critical areas of concern and the
outcome of the 23rd special session of the General Assembly, as well as other
applicable UN instruments, standards, and resolutions that address gender
equality and the empowerment and advancement of women.

UN Women executive director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka speaking at Girl Summit
2014

UN Women's main areas of work include:

  * Leadership and political participation
  * Economic empowerment
  * Ending violence against women
  * Humanitarian action
  * Peace and security
  * Governance and national planning
  * The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
  * HIV and AIDS

In late 2013, a series of ads used genuine Google searches to reveal the
widespread prevalence of sexism and discrimination against women The ads
featured the faces of four women and where their mouths should be were Google
auto-complete suggestions. The suggestions were all sexist or misogynist. A
similar campaign was also run to raise awareness for gay rights.

UN Women promotes the rights of LGBTIQ people.

UN Women advocates an intersectional feminism.

Also in late 2013, UN Women launched a constitutional database that examines
constitutions through a gender lens. The first of its kind, this database maps
the principles and rules that guarantee, deny, or protect the rights of women
and girls around the world. This tool for gender equality and human rights
activists is annually updated and searchable, and provides a comprehensive
overview of the current status of provisions relevant to women's rights and
gender equality across various countries throughout the world. Users can
search though the database by keyword, and legal provisions are grouped into
16 categories that were carefully defined by reviewing the constitutions from
a human rights perspective.

UN Women is one of the lead agencies coordinating International Women's Day
events as well as the Commission on the Status of Women.

The year 2015 marked a number of milestones, such as the 20th anniversary of
the Fourth World Conference on Women and adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, which was the focus of the 59th session of the
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW59) from 9–20 March 2015, where global
leaders took stock of progress and remaining challenges for implementing this
landmark agreement for gender equality and women's rights. UN Women played an
active role in major intergovernmental negotiations and processes including
the Financing for Development Conference in Addis Ababa in July 2015, the
outcome of which was strong on the need to adequately fund gender equality and
incorporate it in development planning, as well as the negotiations and
successful adoption of the new post-2015 development agenda on 25 September
2015. The new global development roadmap includes a stand-alone goal on gender
equality and women's empowerment (Sustainable Development Goal 5), and
mainstreams these priorities throughout all 17 goals.

Sustainable Development Goal #5: Gender Equality

### Goals

UN Women is empowered to:

  * support intergovernmental bodies, such as the Commission on the Status of Women, in their formulation of policies, global standards, and norms
  * help UN member states implement the above standards
  * enable member states to hold the UN system accountable for its own commitments on gender equality, including regular monitoring of system-wide progress

## Criticism

### Hamas attacks on women

Following the Hamas attack on Israel on 7 October 2023, women's rights groups
criticized UN Women for not issuing a timely and clear condemnation of Hamas's
gender-based war crimes on Israeli women. Sarah Weiss Maudi, senior adviser to
the president of the 77th Session of the U.N. General Assembly, said that UN
Women refused to acknowledge that atrocities were committed against Israeli
women and young girls despite many of the atrocities having been filmed by
Hamas and other Palestinian terrorists themselves.

On 13 October, an initial statement by UN Women condemned the attack on
Israeli civilians but did not mention women. Subsequent posts and comments by
the organization focused only on the impact of the conflict on Palestinian
women. A month after the attack, the UN Women's website contained only one
reference to women and girls stating the following, “devastating impact of the
crisis in Gaza on women and girls.” Michal Herzog, First Lady of Israel,
criticized UN Women for having a "double standard" and has lobbied openly
about the topic. Several women's rights group criticized UN Women, as did
Canadian Anne Bayefsky, director of the Touro University Institute on Human
Rights and the Holocaust."

On 29 November, over 80 members of the U.S. House of Representatives accused
UN Women of disregarding Hamas’s gender based violence on Israeli females and
minors in a bipartisan letter driven by Representatives Young Kim
(R-California) and Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick (D-Florida). The 80
Representatives wrote to UN Women Executive Director Sima Bahous stating, "The
failure by UN Women to publicly stand up for Israeli women and condemn Hamas’
systematic atrocities undermines UN Women and highlights its one-sided
approach."

UN Women states that it was one of the first organisations to condemn the
attacks by Hamas and their use of gender-based violence. In regards to a
deleted post condemning the Hamas attacks, a representative for UN Women gave
a statement to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency saying, “In any social media team
managing multiple campaigns and during a very busy time like the one we are
now in with 16 Days of Activism, mistakes can occur.”

Israel's ambassador to the UN criticized UN Women and UN Secretary General
Antonio Guterres for the delay in calling an investigation into the sexual
violence committed by Hamas on 7 October 2023.

A corresponding protest event took place at the UN on December 4, 2023.