Supranational union of Belarus and Russia

The **Union State** is a supranational union consisting of Belarus and Russia,
with the stated aim of deepening the relationship between the two states
through integration in economic and defence policy. Originally, the Union
State aimed to create a confederation; however, both countries currently
retain their independence.

The Union State is based on a previous international treaty between Russia and
Belarus made on 2 April 1997. Although it consists of only Russia and Belarus,
other countries are allowed to join. The supranational union is ruled through
the Supreme State Council and other governing bodies. As of 2025, the current
president of the Supreme State Council of the Union is Alexander Lukashenko,
who has held the position since 2000. The present goal of the Union State
mainly focuses on economic integration, taxation, and integration of defence
and intelligence apparatus.

## History of formation

Presidents Alexander Lukashenko and Boris Yeltsin signing the founding treaty
of the Russian-Belarusian Union at the Grand Kremlin Palace in Moscow, 2 April
1997 Russian postage stamp commemorating the Treaty between the Russian
Federation and the Republic of Belarus establishing the Union on 2 April 1996

The _Community of Belarus and Russia_ was founded on 2 April 1996, following
1995 agreements that established a Russian military presence in Belarus. The
basis of the union was strengthened on 2 April 1997 with the signing of the
"Treaty on the Union between Belarus and Russia", at which time its name was
changed to the _Union of Belarus and Russia_.

Several further agreements were signed on 25 December 1998, with the intention
of providing greater political, economic and social integration.

Nevertheless, the nature of the political entity remained vague. Under
pressure from his political opponents, who argued for a reunion of the two
states, and from Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko, who sought to tie
his excessively weak economy to Russia's stronger one, Russian President Boris
Yeltsin initiated the creation of the Union to harmonize the political and
economic differences between the two countries. According to some observers,
Lukashenko's intention was also to gain great power, becoming president of a
future Russia-Belarus federation after Yeltsin's demise due to his all-time
low popularity. However, after Yeltsin resigned, Vladimir Putin was elected in
2000 to succeed him as Russian president. There was also the Freedom March, a
1999 protest against unification in the Belarusian capital of Minsk. Putin's
election and the Freedom March forced Lukashenko to cancel his plans and
maintain a balance between the independence of Belarus and Putin's increasing
pressure for further integration of the two countries into the Union State.

The _Treaty on the Creation of a Union State of Russia and Belarus_ was signed
on 8 December 1999. The intention was to achieve a federation like the Soviet
Union, with a common head of state, legislature, flag, coat of arms, anthem,
constitution, army, citizenship and currency. The Union was ratified by the
Russian State Duma on 22 December 1999 and the National Assembly of Belarus on
26 January 2000. On the latter date the Treaty and the Union came into effect.

Then Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev had put forward a similar proposal
in 1994, envisioning the founding of a Eurasian union, but this proposal was
not adopted until 29 May 2014 with the formation of the Eurasian Economic
Union.

## Governing bodies and legal framework

The _Treaty on the Creation of a Union State_ creates legal framework as
constitutional act and establishes the following institutions

  * Supreme State Council
  * Council of Ministers
  * Union Parliament
  * Court of the Union
  * Accounting Chamber

The Union State based on its founding treaties has exclusive jurisdiction over
the creation of a single economic space and legal foundations for a common
market, monetary union, single tax and pricing policy, unified development and
procurement of defence equipment, unified system of technical support for the
armed forces. Common command of regional military is further realized through
many other documents based on this Union State jurisdiction, common border
policy and other jurisdictions.

Besides exclusive jurisdictions of the Union State there are joint
jurisdiction of the Union State and the subjects of the Union State that
includes joint defence policy, harmonization and unification of the
legislation of the subjects of the Union State, development of science,
education, culture, formation of a common scientific, technological and
information space, migration, working conditions and labor protection, social
security, combating terrorism, corruption and others.

Outside the limits of the exclusive jurisdiction of the Union State and
subjects of joint jurisdiction of the Union State and the subjects of the
Union State, the subjects of the Union State retain the full completeness of
state power.

Pavel Borodin was the first State Secretary of the Union. He was first
appointed by the Supreme State Council on 26 January 2000 for a four-year
term. In 2004 and 2008 his term was renewed for an additional four years,
leaving office in 2011. Since then the office has been held by Grigory Rapota,
Dmitry Mezentsev and Sergey Glazyev.[_citation needed_]

Union State is ruled through Supreme State Council of the Union. The Supreme
State Council of the Union includes the member heads of states, respective
governments, and both chambers of parliaments. Decisions on Supreme Council
are made by principle of one state – one vote and presidents of states give
that vote. Supreme Council includes the chairman of the Executive Committee of
the Union that have an advisory vote. The President of the Supreme State
Council is the head of one of the participating States on a rotation basis,
unless the participating States agree otherwise.

Supreme State Council makes decisions on issues regarding the security of the
member states of the Union including their collective protection from outside
threats, the protection of the Union's borders, military development, and many
other issues.

The Council of Ministers is composed of the member states' Prime Ministers,
Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Economy, and Finance and the State Secretary of
the Union. Permanent Committee of the Union State is formed as permanent
working body of Council of Ministers. Current president of Council of
Ministers is Mikhail Mishustin.

20th Anniversary of Russia Belarus Union Treaty

Parliamentary Assembly of the Union comprises two chambers – the _House of the
Union_ and the _House of Representatives_. The _House of Representatives_
should contain 75 deputies from Russia and 28 from Belarus, elected by the
general populace of each. According to treaty, currently only House of the
Union is formed and it consists of 72 deputies – 36 from Russia and 36 from
Belarus. Before the elections for the House of Representatives of the Union
State Parliament, the functions of the Union State Parliament are performed by
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union of Belarus and Russia in accordance
with paragraph 4 of Article 70 of the Treaty on the Establishment of the Union
State of 8 December 1999. Regular sessions of the Parliamentary Assembly House
of the Union are held twice a year and for Quorum at least two third is needed
to be present. House of the Union Parliament has 1 president and 4 vice
presidents and 8 permanent committees for different areas of legislature.
Current president of Parliamentary Assembly of Union is Vyacheslav Volodin On
12 December 2020, the 59th joint session of the House of the Union parliament
was held to consider the Union State budget for 2021. in 4715,15 millions of
roubles or approximately 61.631.112 US dollars[_vague_]

Court of Union should consist of nine judges appointed for six-year terms. But
while provisions for court are given in adopted treaty court was not formed.

Accounting Chamber, is tasked with controlling the implementation of the Union
State budget. It consists of 11 members appointed for a period of 6 years from
among the citizens of the member states who have experience in control and
audit who are appointed by the Parliament of the Union State on the proposal
of the Council of Ministers. The Accounting Chamber establishes its own
regulations, which are approved by the Council of Ministers.

## Language

The official languages of the Union State are the state languages of the
participating states. Russian is used as a working language in the common
organs of the Union State.

## Developments

Shortly after its inauguration, both member states seemed to have lost their
enthusiasm for the Union, with first Russia, and then Belarus, restoring
customs controls along their common border in 2001, effectively suspending the
customs union until it was restored in 2010. Plans had also been set in motion
to implement a common currency across the Union, but these have been postponed
several times.

On 16 November 2010, it was announced by the Union State website that the
Constitutional Act was 99% ready.

### Common currency

Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko promised to introduce a common
currency on 1 January 2004. The currency was not introduced, and the plan was
pushed back by one year. On 1 January 2005, the Union State again failed to
introduce a common currency, and it was again postponed by one year, which, in
2006, happened once again. During a press-conference in Minsk on 2 February
2006, Pyotr Prokopovich, chief of the National Bank of Belarus, announced that
a "common currency might be introduced in 2007". This, however, failed to
occur in 2007. The National Bank of the Republic of Belarus announced that,
starting in 2008, the Belarusian ruble would be pegged to the United States
dollar instead of the Russian ruble.[_needs update_]

### Citizenship and freedom of migration

Union State grants citizenship to citizens in both states meaning that every
citizen of the Russian Federation and every citizen of the Republic of Belarus
is at the same time a citizen of the Union with the guaranteed right to move
and reside freely within the territory of the other party, allowing Belarusian
citizens to travel freely in Russia and have the right to settle there to work
or study, and vice versa including possession, use and disposal of property on
the territory of another state. The Union State does provide citizens of
Russia and Belarus the right to work and permanently settle in either country
without formal immigration procedures otherwise mandatory for foreign
nationals. They retain their national passports and other identification
papers.

### Military

On 10 February 2009, Russia and Belarus implemented the first stage of joint
military officer training programs designed to integrate the military
structures of the countries. This military collective is called the Regional
Forces Group of Belarus and Russia (RGF). The goal of these operations is to
ensure cohesive training, practice and implementation of military interests
for the nations, and were aimed at strategic and battle training taking place
in February and March 2009. Furthermore, the military doctrine of the Russian
Federation provides that "an armed attack on the state-participant in the
Union State, as well as all other actions involving the use of military force
against it," should be deemed "an act of aggression against the Union State",
authorizing Moscow to "take measures in response". On 6 December 2024, Russia
and Belarus signed a treaty about mutual security guarantees. The treaty was
ratified by Russia on 28 February 2025 and by Belarus on 4 March 2025. The
accord entered into force on 13 March 2025.

### Proposed symbols

Proposed flag of the Union State

Since the formation of the Union State in 1997, Belarus and Russia have thus
far failed to institute any symbols or even a flag for the Union State. There
have, however been several proposals for flags and coats of arms.

Two proposals have been made for the flag of the Union. In all cases, they are
modifications to the flag of the Soviet Union, but representing the state (not
communism). In both cases, two gold stars are placed in the canton of the red
flag (to represent the two states of the Union).

A proposed coat of arms is a modification of the double-headed eagle holding
the coats of arms of Russia and Belarus.

A song called "Sovereign Union of Nations" (Russian: Державный союз народов
_Derzhavny soyuz narodov_ , Belarusian: Дзяржаўны саюз народаў _Dzyarzhauny
sayuz narodau_) has been proposed as the Union's unofficial anthem. The song,
which was modified from the National Anthem of the Soviet Union, refers to a
wider union of the two nations.

### Value-added tax controversy

Belarus and Russia had been collecting a value-added tax (VAT), meant to
finance the Union State, in the country of origin, but from 1 January 2005,
VAT is collected in the country of destination, as in most other independent
countries of the world. This change gave rise to a considerable degree of
confusion and has disrupted many trade operations between Belarus and Russia.
On 10 February 2005, private entrepreneurs in Belarus staged a one-day warning
strike, protesting the new VAT scheme between the two countries and
Lukashenko's economic policies.

### Contemplated expansion

Member states

States that had previously expressed interest in joining

  * Abkhazia and  South Ossetia both currently have observer status in parliamentary sessions.[_citation needed_] Both Abkhazia and South Ossetia expressed a desire to join the Russia-Belarus Union State, although neither is recognized by Belarus.
  * Armenia: Several political parties including the Constitutional Rights Union, National Unity, and the Towards Russia Party have expressed their desire for the country to join the Union. In April 2025, the newly-elected Mayor of the second-largest city of Gyumri from the Communist Party Vardan Ghukasyan supported joining the Union State.
  * Kazakhstan had expressed interest in forming a separate customs union with Russia and Belarus by 2010. This Customs Union was formed as planned at the beginning of 2010. Kazakhstan has mentioned that it may join the Union State after some time. In late May 2023, however, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev declined an offer by President Alexander Lukashenko to join the union, referring to it as a "joke."
  * Kyrgyzstan: As of June 2007, opposition in Kyrgyzstan, which has been locked in political turmoil, had initiated a nationwide referendum to join the union of Russia and Belarus.
  * Moldova: In 2001, president of Moldova Vladimir Voronin announced right after his election that he had plans for Moldova to join the Union of Russia and Belarus. The coming to power of the Alliance for European Integration at the 2009 Moldovan elections has since shifted Moldovan interest towards the European Union.
  * Transnistria: in the Transnistrian referendum of 2006, the government said 97.2% of the population voted for the integration of the unrecognized state of Transnistria into Russia, which analysts say indicates a possibility that Transnistria might unilaterally ask to join the Union, once it is established. Already in spring 1998, 66.5% of Transnistrian voters supported joining the Union of Russia and Belarus in a non-binding referendum by the Transnistrian state. However, not being recognised by either member, this is unlikely to happen in the near future.
  * Ukraine: In response to speculation about Ukraine joining the Union, then-president of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, declared that Ukraine is an independent sovereign state and this is not something that can be questioned by anyone in the government. The issue is to be reconsidered in the new light of the Revolution of Dignity and the developments of the Euromaidan movement seeking for the integration into the European Union. During the term of office of the fifth President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, the Constitution of Ukraine in 2019 was amended to consolidate the irreversibility of Ukraine's course to join the European Union and NATO after the events of the Revolution of Dignity in 2014. In 2021, the sixth president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, stated that the creation of a "true union state" between Belarus and Russia is a real danger for Ukraine. Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022 in an escalation of the Russo-Ukrainian War that continues today.
  * Novorossiya: During the 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine, Deputy Prime Minister Rustam Temirgaliev of the Russian-annexed Republic of Crimea expressed the hope that southeastern Ukraine would form a "Ukrainian Federation" and join the Union State. However, only the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republic broke away from Ukraine, and the confederate Novorossiya political project was frozen at the start of 2015.
  * FR Yugoslavia/ Serbia: On April 12, 1999, the Federal Assembly of the FR Yugoslavia passed the Decision on the accession of the FRY to the Union state of Russia and Belarus. The legal successor of that decision is the Republic of Serbia. In 2007, Speaker of Parliament Tomislav Nikolić said during a speech that he wished that Serbia would strengthen its ties with and eventually join the Union State rather than joining the European Union, but he resigned from his position less than a week later. Although Nikolić did eventually serve as President of Serbia from 2012–2017, Serbia had submitted a membership application to the EU in 2009 and had received full candidate status in March 2012, prior to his term.

### Renewed interest

A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships among various
supranational organisations in the territory of the former Soviet Union

  * v
  * t
  * e

On 15 December 2006, talks over the Union State were heating up.[_citation
needed_] By January 2007, however, talks appeared to be stalled, as President
Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus stated: "The Russian leadership is demanding
that we join the Russian Federation—that's what is in the heads of the Russian
leadership. I don't want to bury the sovereignty and independence of
[Belarus]." He added: "From all the consultations and discussions, I have
understood that we have different approaches and understandings of the
building of a Union State", and opposed "the possibility of the incorporation
into Russia [of Belarus]".

However, on 19 October 2007, Russian Prime Minister Viktor Zubkov announced
that the budget of the Union State "will grow by no less than ten percent next
year, and that growth will provide for worthy funding of our common projects."
This has led to speculation that the Russian government have renewed their
interest in the idea.

A meeting between President Lukashenko of Belarus, President Vladimir Putin of
Russia and Union State Secretary Pavel Borodin was held in Minsk 13–14
December 2007. This meeting received a considerable amount of media attention
and raised speculation that a Union State might indeed be the focus of a new
initiative by both governments. Of primary interest was renewed discussion of
the Union Parliament (which, although planned, was never actually realized)
and a _Union State Constitutional Act_ , an instrument which could strengthen
the authority of the Union. According to State Secretary Borodin, five
variants of this Act were discussed at the meeting, each of which would
involve a 7 to 10 year transitional period in the Union's development. Trade
and energy issues were also discussed.

On 27 May 2008, President Lukashenko, acting in his capacity as Chairman of
the Supreme State Council named then Russian Prime Minister and current
President Putin Chairman of the Council of Ministers. This move raised
speculation that the Union was about to undergo a significant political
transformation. However, the most visible and arguably important official in
the Union has been the State Secretary, who runs the Union State's day-to-day
operations. In the same meeting, State Secretary Borodin announced that the
2009 Union State budget would total 6–7 billion roubles, an increase of over 2
billion roubles from 2008.

On 1 August 2011, Putin stated he supported a union of Russia, Belarus, and
possibly South Ossetia. Belarusian Foreign Minister spokesman Andrei Savinykh
rejected the idea, as did Dmitri Medojev, South Ossetia's ambassador to
Moscow, who stated "Our people voted for independence in a referendum in 2006
and they do not relish the idea of becoming part of the Russian Federation."

Since 2015, focus on developing relations between former members of the Soviet
Union is on continued development of the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU),
itself a further development of the Eurasian Customs Union established in
2010. It is modelled on the integration of the European Union and comprises 5
member states: Belarus, Russia, Kazakhstan, Armenia and Kyrgyzstan. Tajikistan
has also expressed an interest in joining.[_citation needed_] However, the
EAEU is only an economic union, and at present, political integration remains
within the remit of the Union State.

Deeper economic integration is proposed in 2021 within current talks of member
states. In November 2021, Russia and Belarus signed an agreement to provide
for common policies on taxation, banking, industry, agriculture, and energy.

#### 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine

Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, part of which was staged from
Belarus' territory, Russia and Belarus came under sanctions and boycotts. On 3
March, Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko said he stood fully behind
Russian president Vladimir Putin's campaign in Ukraine as part of Belarus's
longstanding commitment to the Union State with Russia. On 14 March, Russian
Prime Minister Mikhail Mishustin met with Belarusian Prime Minister Roman
Golovchenko in Moscow, telling reporters that they "coordinated measures to
protect our economic security and the technological sovereignty of Russia and
Belarus" and "consider it necessary to strengthen integration in the Union
State". On 18 March, the Russian government announced that all restrictions on
the movement of citizens between Russia and Belarus would be lifted. On 1 July
2022, Russian President Vladimir Putin announced that the "unification"
process has been accelerated to alleviate the economic damage of the
sanctions.

In October 2022, following the September 2022 mobilisation of reservists in
Russia, a contingent of approximately 9,000 Russian soldiers arrived in
Belarus. According to the Belarusian ministry of defence the purpose of this
deployment was to create a "regional military grouping" of the Union State. In
the same month it was announced that Russian air forces were patrolling the
borders of the Union State in Belarus.

#### 2023 nuclear deterrence

In an interview aired by Russia's state television in late May 2023,
Lukashenko stated that other countries who were willing to join the Union
State would be given nuclear weapons: "If someone is worried ... (then) it is
very simple: join in the Union State of Belarus and Russia. That's all: there
will be nuclear weapons for everyone." This was just a few days after he had
confirmed that the movement of some of Russia's tactical nuclear weapons to
Belarus had begun and the Russian Defence Minister had said he was signing
documents concerning the procedure for storing tactical nuclear weapons in
Belarus, the plan for which had first been announced by Putin in March.

#### 25th anniversary of the Treaty on the Creation of the Union State

On 6 December 2024, coinciding with the 25th anniversary of the Treaty on the
Creation of the Union State, signed on December 9, 1999, at a meeting of the
Supreme State Council of the Union State, the Russian President Vladimir Putin
and his Belarusian counterpart Alexander Lukashenko expanded the defense and
security cooperation between the two countries by signing the Russia-Belarus
Treaty on security guarantees within the Union State.