Intergovernmental organization

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article **may need to be rewritten** to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards. You can help. The talk page may contain suggestions. _( November 2020)_  
---|---  
| This article needs to be **updated**. The reason given is: The article needs
to be updated for the period 2018 – Present. Please help update this article
to reflect recent events or newly available information. _( May 2024)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **Union for the Mediterranean** (**UfM** ; French: _Union pour la
Méditerranée_ , Arabic: الاتحاد من أجل المتوسط _Al-Ittiḥād min ajl al-
Mutawasseṭ_) is an intergovernmental organization of 43 member states from
Europe and the Mediterranean Basin: the 27 EU member states (including those
not on the Mediterranean) and 16 Mediterranean partner countries from North
Africa, Western Asia and Southern Europe. It was founded on 13 July 2008 at
the Paris Summit for the Mediterranean, with an aim of reinforcing the Euro-
Mediterranean Partnership (Euromed) that was set up in 1995 as the Barcelona
Process. Its general secretariat is located in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

The union has the aim of promoting stability and integration throughout the
Mediterranean region. It is a forum for discussing regional strategic issues,
based on the principles of shared ownership, shared decision-making and shared
responsibility between the two shores of the Mediterranean. Its main goal is
to increase both north–south and South-South integration in the Mediterranean
region, in order to support the countries' socioeconomic development and
ensure stability in the region. The institution, through its course of
actions, focuses on two main pillars: fostering human development and
promoting sustainable development. To this end, it identifies and supports
regional projects and initiatives of different sizes, to which it gives its
label, following a consensual decision among the 42 countries.

These projects and initiatives focus on 6 sectors of activity, as mandated by
the UfM Member States:

  * Business Development & Employment
  * Higher Education & Research
  * Social & Civil Affairs
  * Energy & Climate Action
  * Transport & Urban Development
  * Water, Environment & Blue Economy

## Members

Flags of UfM members, located at the Royal Palace of Pedralbes, in Barcelona
(UfM headquarters)

The members of the Union of the Mediterranean are the following (those on the
Mediterranean in **bold**):

  * From the European Union side: 
    * The 27 European Union member states: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, **Croatia** , **Cyprus** , the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, **France** , Germany, **Greece** , Hungary, Ireland, **Italy** , Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, **Malta** , the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, **Slovenia** , **Spain** and Sweden.
    * The European Commission.
  * From the side of the Mediterranean Partner countries: 
    * 16 member states: **Albania** , **Algeria** , **Bosnia and Herzegovina** , **Egypt** , **Israel** , Jordan, **Lebanon** , Mauritania, **Monaco** , **Montenegro** , North Macedonia, **Morocco** , **Palestine** , **Syria** (suspended 2011; reentered in 2025), **Tunisia** and **Turkey**.

Additionally, Libya is an observer state. The UfM has expressed a desire to
grant Libya full membership, and Mohamed Abdelaziz, Libya's Foreign Minister
from January 2013 to August 2014, once stated that his country is "open" to
joining. The Arab League also participates in UfM meetings.

## History

### Context

#### Antecedents: Barcelona Process

Former French President Jacques Chirac, one of the founders of the Barcelona
Process

The Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, also known as the Barcelona Process, was
created in 1995 as a result of the Conference of Euro-Mediterranean Ministers
of Foreign Affairs held in Barcelona on 27 and 28 November under the Spanish
presidency of the EU. The founding act of the Partnership in 1995 and Final
Declaration of the Barcelona Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conference is
called the Barcelona Declaration, which is often used to refer to the Process
itself.

The Partnership culminated in a series of attempts by European countries to
articulate their relations with their North African and Middle Eastern
neighbours: the global Mediterranean policy (1972–1992) and the renovated
Mediterranean policy (1992–1995).

Javier Solana opened the conference by saying that they were brought together
to straighten out the "clash of civilizations" and misunderstandings that
there had been between them, and that it "was auspicious" that they had
convened on the 900th anniversary of the First Crusade. He described the
conference as a process to foster cultural and economic unity in the
Mediterranean region. The Barcelona Treaty was drawn up by the 27 countries in
attendance, and Solana, who represented Spain as its foreign minister during
the country's turn at the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, was
credited with the diplomatic accomplishment.

According to the 1995 Barcelona Declaration, the aim of the initiative was
summed up as: "turning the Mediterranean basin into an area of dialogue,
exchange and cooperation guaranteeing peace, stability and prosperity". The
Declaration established the three main objectives of the Partnership, called
"baskets" (i.e., strands or facets):

  1. Definition of a common area of peace and stability through the reinforcement of political and security dialogue (Political and Security Basket).
  2. Construction of a zone of shared prosperity through an economic and financial partnership and the gradual establishment of a free-trade area (Economic and Financial Basket).
  3. Rapprochement between peoples through a social, cultural and human partnership aimed at encouraging understanding between cultures and exchanges between civil societies (Social, Cultural and Human Basket).

The European Union stated the intention of the partnership was "to strengthen
its relations with the countries in the Mashreq and Maghreb regions". Both
Ehud Barak and Yasser Arafat had high praises for Solana's coordination of the
Barcelona Process. The Barcelona Process, developed after the Conference in
successive annual meetings, is a set of goals designed to lead to a free trade
area in the Mediterranean Basin by 2010.

The agenda of the Barcelona Process is:

  * Security and stability in the Mediterranean;
  * Agreeing on shared values and initializing a long-term process for cooperation in the Mediterranean;
  * Promoting democracy, good governance and human rights;
  * Achieving mutually satisfactory trading terms for the region's partners, the "region" consisting of the countries that participated;
  * Establishing a complementary policy to the United States' presence in the Mediterranean.

The Barcelona Process comprises three "baskets", in EU jargon, or strands:

  * economic – to work for shared prosperity in the Mediterranean Region, including the Association Agreements on the bilateral level
  * political – promotion of political values, good governance and democracy
  * cultural – cultural exchange and strengthening civil society

The Euro-Mediterranean free trade area (EU-MEFTA) is based on the Barcelona
Process and European Neighbourhood Policy. The Agadir Agreement of 2004 is
seen as its first building block.

At the time of its creation, the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership comprised 27
member countries: 15 from the European Union and 12 Mediterranean countries
(Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, Palestine,
Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey). As a result of the European Union's enlargements
of 2004 and 2007 the number of EU member states grew up to 27, and two of the
Mediterranean partner countries—Cyprus and Malta—became part of the European
Union. The EU enlargement changed the configuration of the Barcelona Process
from "15+12" to "27+10". Albania and Mauritania joined the Barcelona Process
in 2007, raising the number of participants to 39.

#### Euromediterranean Summit 2005

The 10th anniversary Euromediterranean summit was held in Barcelona on 27–28
November 2005. Full members of the Barcelona Process were:

  * 27 Member States of the European Union.
  * 10 countries from the southern Mediterranean shore: Algeria, Palestine, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey (already part of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, the latter began EU accession talks on 3 October).
  * Croatia, a candidate to join the EU, which began accession talks on 3 October.
  * The European Parliament, the European Commission, and the Secretary General of the Council of the EU

Moreover, the Barcelona Process included 6 countries and institutions
participating as permanent observers (Libya, Mauritania, the Secretary-General
of the Arab League) and invited observers, such as the European Investment
Bank, the Arab Maghreb Union, the Anna Lindh Foundation for the Dialogue
between Cultures, the Economical and Social Committee or the Euromed
Economical and Social Councils.

According to the ISN, "Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and Turkish Prime
Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan were the only leaders from the Mediterranean
countries to attend, while those of Israel, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, Algeria,
Morocco, Tunisia, and Egypt were not present."[1]

From the official web site, "The new realities and challenges of the 21st
century make it necessary to update the Barcelona Declaration and create a new
Action Plan (based on the good results of the Valencia Action Plan),
encompassing four fundamental areas":

  * Peace, Security, Stability, Good Government, and Democracy.
  * Sustainable Economic Development and Reform.
  * Education and Cultural Exchange
  * Justice, Security, Migration, and Social Integration (of Immigrants).

#### Regional aspects

Regional dialogue represents one of the most innovative aspects of the
Partnership, covering at the same time the political, economic and cultural
fields (regional co-operation). Regional co-operation has a considerable
strategic impact as it deals with problems that are common to many
Mediterranean Partners while it emphasises the national complementarities.

The multilateral dimension supports and complements the bilateral actions and
dialogue taking place under the Association Agreements.

Since 2004 the Mediterranean Partners are also included in the European
Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) and since 2007 are funded via the ENPI.

#### The Euromed Heritage Programme

As a result of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, the Euromed Heritage
program was formed. This program has been active since 1998, and has been
involved in programs to identify the cultural heritages of Mediterranean
states, promote their preservation, and educate the peoples of partner
countries about their cultural heritages.

#### Response

By some analysts, the process has been declared ineffective [_who?_]. The
stalling of the Middle East Peace Process is having an impact on the Barcelona
Process and is hindering progress especially in the first basket. The economic
basket can be considered a success, and there have been more projects for the
exchange on a cultural level and between the peoples in the riparian states.
Other criticism is mainly based on the predominant role the European Union is
playing. Normally it is the EU that is assessing the state of affairs, which
leads to the impression that the North is dictating the South what to do. The
question of an enhanced co-ownership of the process has repeatedly been
brought up over the last years.

Being a long-term process and much more complex than any other similar
project, it may be many years before a final judgment can be made.

Bishara Khader argues that this ambitious European project towards its
Mediterranean neighbours has to be understood in a context of optimism. On the
one hand, the European Community was undergoing important changes due to the
reunification of Germany after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the
beginning of the adhesion negotiations of Eastern and Central European
countries. On the other, the Arab–Israeli conflict appeared to be getting
closer to achieving peace after the Madrid Conference (1991) and the Oslo
Accords (1992). As well, Khader states that the Gulf War of 1991, the Algerian
crisis (from 1992 onwards) and the rise of Islamic fundamentalism throughout
the Arab world are also important factors in Europe's new relations with the
Mediterranean countries based on security concerns.

Criticism of the Barcelona Process escalated after the celebration of the 10th
Anniversary of the Euro-Mediterranean Summit in Barcelona in 2005. First, the
absence of Heads of State and Government from the Southern Mediterranean
countries (with the exception of the Palestinian and Turkish ones) heavily
contrasted with the attendance of the 27 European Union's Heads of State and
Government. Second, the lack of consensus to define the term "terrorism"
prevented the endorsement of a final declaration. The Palestinian Authority,
Ba'athist Syria, and Algeria argued that resistance movements against foreign
occupation should not be included in this definition. Nevertheless, a code of
conduct on countering terrorism and a five-year work program were approved at
Barcelona summit of 2005. both of which are still valid under the Union for
the Mediterranean.

For many, the political context surrounding the 2005 summit – the stagnation
of the Middle East Peace Process, the US-led war on Iraq, the lack of
democratisation in Arab countries, and the war on terror's negative effects on
freedoms and human rights, among others—proved for many the inefficiency of
the Barcelona Process for fulfilling its objectives of peace, stability and
prosperity. Given these circumstances, even politicians that had been engaged
with the Barcelona Process since its very beginnings, like the Spanish
politician Josep Borrell, expressed their disappointment about the Euro-
Mediterranean Partnership and its incapacity to deliver results. Critiques
from Southern Mediterranean countries blamed the Partnership's failure on
Europe's lack of interest towards the Mediterranean in favour of its Eastern
neighbourhood; whereas experts from the North accused Southern countries of
only being interested on "their own bi-lateral relationship with the EU" while
downplaying multilateral policies.

However, many European Union diplomats have defended the validity of the
Barcelona Process' framework by arguing that the Euro-Mediterranean
Partnership was the only forum that gathered Israelis and Arabs on equal
footing), and identifying as successes the Association Agreements, the Code of
Conduct on Countering Terrorism and the establishment of the Anna Lindh
Foundation for the Dialogue between Cultures.

In 2006 the first proposals for improving the Partnership's efficiency,
visibility and co-ownership arouse, such as establishing a co-presidency
system and a permanent secretariat or nominating a "Mr./Ms. Med."

#### Mediterranean Union

As of 2007[update], on the initiative of France, States embark on a round
negotiations to revive the process.

A proposal to establish a "Mediterranean Union", which would consist
principally of Mediterranean states, was part of the election campaign of
Nicolas Sarkozy during the French presidential election campaign in 2007.
During the campaign, Sarkozy said that the Mediterranean Union would be
modelled on the European Union with a shared judicial area and common
institutions. Sarkozy saw Turkish membership of the Mediterranean Union as an
alternative to membership of the European Union, which he opposes, and as a
forum for dialogue between Israel and its Arab Neighbours.

Once elected, President Sarkozy invited all heads of state and government of
the Mediterranean region to a meeting in June 2008 in Paris, with a view to
laying the basis of a Mediterranean Union.

The Mediterranean Union was enthusiastically supported by Egypt and Israel.
Turkey strongly opposed the idea and originally refused to attend the Paris
conference until it was assured that membership of the Mediterranean Union was
not being proposed as an alternative to membership of the EU.

Among EU member states, the proposal was supported by Italy, Spain, and
Greece.

However the European Commission and Germany were more cautious about the
project. The European Commission saying that while initiatives promoting
regional co-operation were good, it would be better to build them upon
existing structures, notable among them being the Barcelona process. German
chancellor Angela Merkel said the UfM risked splitting and threatening the
core of the EU. In particular she objected to the potential use of EU funds to
fund a project which was only to include a small number of EU member states.
When Slovenia took the EU presidency at the beginning of 2008, the then
Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Janša added to the criticism by saying: "We do
not need a duplication of institutions, or institutions that would compete
with EU, institutions that would cover part of the EU and part of the
neighbourhood."

Other criticisms of the proposal included concern about the relationship
between the proposed UfM and the existing Euromediterranean Partnership
(Barcelona Process), which might reduce the effectiveness of EU policies in
the region and allow the southern countries to play on the rivalries to escape
unpopular EU policies. There were similar economic concerns in the loss of
civil society and similar human rights based policies. Duplication of policies
from the EU's police and judicial area was a further worry.

At the start of 2008, Sarkozy began to modify his plans for the Mediterranean
Union due to widespread opposition from other EU member states and the
European Commission. At the end of February of that year, France's minister
for European affairs, Jean-Pierre Jouyet, stated that "there is no
Mediterranean Union" but rather a "Union for the Mediterranean" that would
only be "completing and enriching" to existing EU structures and policy in the
region. Following a meeting with German Chancellor Angela Merkel it was agreed
that the project would include all EU member states, not just those bordering
the Mediterranean, and would be built upon the existing Barcelona process.
Turkey also agreed to take part in the project following a guarantee from
France that it was no longer intended as an alternative to EU membership.

The proposed creation of common institutions, and a Mediterranean Investment,
which was to have been modelled on the European Investment Bank, was also
dropped.

In consequence the new Union for the Mediterranean would consist of regular
meeting of the entire EU with the non-member partner states, and would be
backed by two co-presidents and a secretariat.

### Launch

At the Paris Summit for the Mediterranean (13 July 2008), the 43 Heads of
State and Government from the Euro-Mediterranean region decided to launch the
Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean. It was presented as a new
phase Euro-Mediterranean Partnership with new members and an improved
institutional architecture which aimed to "enhance multilateral relations,
increase co-ownership of the process, set governance on the basis of equal
footing and translate it into concrete projects, more visible to citizens. Now
is the time to inject a new and continuing momentum into the Barcelona
Process. More engagement and new catalysts are now needed to translate the
objectives of the Barcelona Declaration into tangible results."

The Paris summit was considered a diplomatic success for Nicolas Sarkozy. The
French president had managed to gather in Paris all the Heads of State and
Government from the 43 Euro-Mediterranean countries, with the exception of the
kings of Morocco and Jordan.

At the Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Foreign Affairs held in Marseille in
November 2008, the Ministers decided to shorten the initiative's name to
simply the "Union for the Mediterranean".

This meeting concluded with a new joint declaration, which completed the Paris
Declaration by defining the organisational structure and the principles on
which the UfM would be run. A rotating co-presidency was set up, held jointly
by one EUmember country and one Mediterranean partner. France and Egypt were
the first countries to hold this co-presidency. The presence of the Arab
League at all meetings is written into the rules. A secretariat with a
separate legal status and its own statutes was created. Its headquarters were
established in Barcelona.

The fact that the Union for the Mediterranean is launched as a new phase of
the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership means that the Union accepts and commits to
maintain the _acquis_ of Barcelona, the purpose of which is to promote "peace,
stability and prosperity" throughout the region (Barcelona, 2). Therefore, the
four chapters of cooperation developed in the framework of the Barcelona
Process during thirteen years remain valid:

  * _Politics and Security_
  * _Economics and Trade_
  * _Socio-cultural_
  * _Justice and Interior Affairs_. This fourth chapter was included at the 10th Anniversary Euro-Mediterranean Summit held in Barcelona in 2005.

The objective to establish a Free Trade Area in the Euro-Mediterranean region
by 2010 (and beyond), first proposed at the 1995 Barcelona Conference, was
also endorsed by the Paris Summit of 2008.

In addition to these four chapters of cooperation, the 43 Ministers of Foreign
Affairs gathered in Marseille in November 2008 identified six concrete
projects that target specific needs of the Euro-Mediterranean regions and that
will enhance the visibility of the Partnership:

  * _De-pollution of the Mediterranean_. This broad project encompasses many initiatives that target good environmental governance, access to drinkable water, water management, pollution reduction and protection of the Mediterranean biodiversity.
  * _Maritime and land highways_. The purpose of this project is to increase and improve the circulation of commodities and people throughout the Euro-Mediterranean region by improving its ports, and building highways and railways. Specifically, the Paris and Marseille Declarations refer to the construction of both a Trans-Maghrebi railway and highway systems, connecting Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia.
  * _Civil protection_. The civil protection project aims at improving the prevention, preparedness and response to both natural and man-made disasters. The ultimate goal is to "bring the Mediterranean Partner Countries progressively closer to the European Civil Protection Mechanism".
  * _Alternative energies: Mediterranean solar plan_. The goal of this project is to promote the production and use of renewable energies. More specifically, it aims at turning the Mediterranean partner countries into producers of solar energy and then circulating the resulting electricity through the Euro-Mediterranean region. In this connection the union and the industrial initiative Dii signed a Memorandum of Understanding for future collaboration in May 2012 which included developing their long-term strategies "Mediterranean Solar Plan" and "Desert Power 2050". At the signing in Marrakesh the union's Secretary General called the new partnership "a key step for the implementation of the Mediterranean Solar Plan".
  * _Higher education and research: Euro-Mediterranean University_. In June 2008 the Euro-Mediterranean University of Slovenia was inaugurated in Piran (Slovenia), which offers graduate studies programs. The Foreign Ministers gathered at Marseille in 2008 also called for the creation of another Euro-Mediterranean University in Fes, Morocco, Euro-Mediterranean University of Morocco (Euromed-UM). The decision to go ahead with the Fes university was announced in June 2012. At the 2008 Paris summit, the 43 Heads of State and Government agreed that the goal of this project is to promote higher education and scientific research in the Mediterranean, as well as to establish in the future a "Euro-Mediterranean Higher Education, Science and Research Area".
  * _The Mediterranean business development initiative_. The purpose of the initiative is to promote small and medium-sized enterprises from the Mediterranean partner countries by "assessing the needs of these enterprises, defining policy solutions and providing these entities with resources in the form of technical assistance and financial instruments".

#### 2008–2010: First years

A summit of heads of state and government is intended to be held every two
years to foster political dialogue at the highest level. According to the
Paris Declaration:

  * these summits should produce a joint declaration addressing the situation and challenges of the Euro-Mediterranean region, assessing the works of the Partnership and approving a two-year work program;
  * Ministers of Foreign Affairs should meet annually to monitor the implementation of the summit declaration and to prepare the agenda of subsequent summits; and
  * the host country of the summits would be chosen upon consensus and should alternate between EU and Mediterranean countries.

The first summit was held in Paris in July 2008. The second summit should have
taken place in a non-EU country in July 2010 but the Euro-Mediterranean
countries agreed to hold the summit in Barcelona on 7 June 2010, under the
Spanish presidency of the EU, instead. However, on 20 May the Egyptian and
French co-presidency along with Spain decided to postpone the summit, in a
move which they described as being intended to give more time to the indirect
talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority that had started that
month. In contrast, the Spanish media blamed the postponement on the Arab
threat to boycott the summit if Avigdor Lieberman, Israel's Minister of
Foreign Affairs, attended the Foreign Affairs conference prior to the summit.

At the time of the Paris summit, France—which was in charge of the EU
presidency—and Egypt held the co-presidency. Since then, France had been
signing agreements with the different rotator presidencies of the EU (the
Czech Republic, Sweden and Spain) in order to maintain the co-presidency for
alongside Egypt. The renewal of the co-presidency was supposed to happen on
the second Union for the Mediterranean Summit. However, due to the two
postponements of the summit, there has been no chance to decide which
countries will take over the co-presidency.

The conflict between Turkey and Cyprus has been responsible for the delay in
the endorsement of the statutes of the Secretariat, which were only approved
in March 2010 even though the Marseille declaration set May 2009 as the
deadline for the Secretariat to start functioning. At the Paris summit, the
Heads of State and Government agreed to establish five Deputy Secretaries
General from Greece, Israel, Italy, Malta and the Palestinian Authority.
Turkey's desire to have a Deputy Secretary General and Cyprus' rejection of
it, resulted in months of negotiation until Cyprus finally approved the
creation of a sixth Deputy Secreaty General post assigned to a Turkish
citizen.

Due to its seriousness, the Arab-Israeli conflict is the one that most deeply
affects the Union for the Mediterranean. As a result of an armed conflict
between Israel and Gaza from December 2008 to January 2009, the Arab Group
refused to meet at high level, thus blocking all the ministerial meetings
scheduled for the first half of 2009. As well, the refusal of the Arab
Ministers of Foreign Affairs to meet with their Israeli counterpart, Avigdor
Lieberman, resulted in the cancellation of two ministerial meetings on Foreign
Affairs in November 2009 and June 2010. Sectorial meetings of the Union for
the Mediterranean have also been affected by Israel's handling of the
Palestinian civilian population under its control. At the Euro-Mediterranean
ministerial meeting on Water, held in Barcelona in April 2010, the Water
Strategy was not approved due to a terminological disagreement of whether to
refer to territories claimed by Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese as
"occupied territories" or "territories under occupation". Two other
ministerial meetings, on higher education and agriculture, had to be cancelled
because of the same discrepancy.

After the initial postponement, both France and Spain announced their
intentions to hold peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority as
part of the postponed summit under the auspices of the US. In September, U.S.
President Barack Obama was invited to the summit for this purpose. The summit
which was then scheduled to take place in Barcelona on 21 November 2010, was,
according to Nicolas Sarkozy, "an occasion to support the negotiations".

Nevertheless, at the beginning of November 2010 the peace talks stalled, and
the Egyptian co-presidents conditioned the occurrence of the summit on a
gesture from Israel that would allow the negotiations to resume. According to
some experts Benjamin Netanyahu's announcement of the construction of 300 new
housing units in East Jerusalem ended all the possibilities of celebrating the
summit on 21 November. The two co-presidencies and Spain decided on 15
November to postpone the summit _sine die_ , alleging that the stagnation of
the Middle East Peace Process would hinder a "satisfactory participation".

Having been slowed down by the financial and political situation in 2009, the
UfM was given a decisive push in March 2010 with the conclusion of the
negotiations on the set-up of its General Secretariat and the official
inauguration of the same on 4 March 2010 in Barcelona, in the specially
refurbished Palau de Pedralbes.

The European Union Ambassador to Morocco, Eneko Landaburu, stated in September
2010 that he does "not believe" in the Union for the Mediterranean. According
to him, the division among the Arabs "does not allow to implement a strong
inter-regional policy", and calls to leave this ambitious project of 43
countries behind and focus on bilateral relations.

#### Since 2011

On 22 June 2011, the UfM labelled its first project, the creation of a
seawater desalination plant in Gaza. In 2012, the UfM had a total of 13
projects labelled by the 43 countries in the sectorial areas of transport,
education, water and development companies.

In 2013, the Union for the Mediterranean launches its first projects:

  * 30 April: Young women as job creators
  * 28 May: Governance & Financing Water in the Mediterranean area
  * 17 June: LogismedTA (Training Activities under the Programme on the Development of a Network of Euro-Mediterranean Logistics Platforms)

Between 2013 and 2018, thirteen sectorial ministerial meetings took place, in
presence of the ministers of the UfM Member States:

  * UfM Ministerial on Strengthening the role of women in society – September 2013
  * UfM Ministerial on Transport – November 2013
  * UfM Ministerial on Energy – December 2013
  * UfM Ministerial on Industrial cooperation – February 2014
  * UfM Ministerial on Environment and climate change – May 2014
  * UfM Ministerial on Digital Economy – September 2014
  * UfM Ministerial on Blue Economy – November 2015
  * UfM Ministerial on Regional Cooperation and Planning – June 2016
  * UfM Ministerial on Employment and Labour – September 2016
  * UfM Ministerial on Energy – December 2016
  * UfM Ministerial on Water – April 2017
  * UfM Ministerial on Urban Development – May 2017
  * UfM Ministerial on Strengthening the Role of Women in Society – November 2017
  * UfM Ministerial Conference on Trade – 19 March 2018

In 2015, the UfM had a total of 37 labelled projects 19 of which were in the
implementation phase.[AP2] On 18 November 2015, the review of the European
Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), published by the European External Action Service
and the commission and confirmed by the European Council ON 14 December,
positions the UfM as a driving force for integration and regional cooperation.

On 26 November 2015, on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the Barcelona
Declaration, at the initiative of the co-presidents of the UfM, Ms. Federica
Mogherini, Vice-President of the European Commission and High Representative
of the European Union for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, and Mr.
Nasser Judeh, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Jordan, held an
informal meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the countries of the UfM
in Barcelona to renew their political commitment to the development of
regional cooperation in the framework of the UfM.

On 14 December 2015 the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution A /
70/124 granting observer status to the Union for the Mediterranean.

In February 2016, the UfM-labelled project "Skills for Success" successfully
ended its training activities in Jordan and Morocco with high percentages of
job placements. The job placement percentage among the total number of job
seekers in Jordan and Morocco (115 graduates) is estimated at 49% and 6% of
the participants were placed in internships.

On 12 March 2016, the UfM was awarded the prestigious Badge of Honor from
Agrupación Española de Fomento Europeo (AEFE) in recognition of the value of
its work for the Universal Values and Human Rights in the Mediterranean
region.

On 2 June 2016, the UfM held its first Union for the Mediterranean Ministerial
Meeting for Regional Cooperation and Planning, at the invitation of EU
Commissioner Johannes Hahn and Imad N. Fakhoury, Jordanian Minister of
Cooperation and Planning.

Ministers recognised the need to boost economic integration among the
countries in the region as one of the means to create opportunities for the
necessary inclusive growth and job creation. They highlighted the crucial role
of the Union for the Mediterranean to that effect, welcoming the work of the
UfM Secretariat to help facilitate progress in regional cooperation and
integration, including by promoting region-wide projects.

On 18–19 July 2016, the UfM actively participated to the MedCOP Climate 2016,
as institutional partner of the Tangier region. MedCOP Climate 2016 provided a
forum to present various initiatives and projects supported by the UfM that
are helping to formulate a Mediterranean climate agenda, such as the creation
of a Mediterranean network of young people working on climate issues; the
Regional Committee for Cooperation on Climate Finance, to make funding for
climate projects in the region more efficient; and the launch of the UfM
Energy University by Schneider Electric.

On 10–11 October 2016, the UfM Secretariat organized in Barcelona the Third
High-Level Conference on Women Empowerment, which followed the 2014 and 2015
editions and in preparation of the Fourth UfM Ministerial Conference on
Strengthening the Role of Women in Society, due to take place late 2017. The
Conference provided a regional dialogue forum where the 250 participants from
more than 30 countries stressed the need to invest in the essential
contribution of women as a response to the current Mediterranean challenges. A
report was prepared following the request formulated by the UfM Paris
Ministerial Declaration on Strengthening the role of women in society. The
request was "to establish an effective follow-up mechanism as a Euro-
Mediterranean forum and to ensure an effective dialogue on women-related
policies, legislation and implementation".

On 1 November 2016, the UfM officially launched the "Integrated Programme for
the Protection of Lake Bizerte against Pollution" in Bizerte. Tunisia. The
event was held in the presence of Youssef Chahed, Head of Government of
Tunisia, Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European
Commission, and Fathallah Sijilmassi, Secretary General of the Union for the
Mediterranean. With a total budget of more than €90 million over a 5-year
period, the programme will contribute towards cleaning up Lake Bizerte in
northern Tunisia, improving the living conditions of the surrounding
populations and reducing the main sources of pollution impacting the entire
Mediterranean Sea. The project is supported by International financing
institutions, such as the European Investment Bank and the European
Commission, as well as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

In November 2016, the UfM Secretariat officially became observer to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) during the COP22,
while actively participating through the launch of specific regional
initiatives and projects aimed at helping achieve the Paris Agreement targets
in the Euro-Mediterranean region.

On 23 January 2017, the Union for the Mediterranean's Member States gave a
strong political commitment to strengthen regional cooperation in the
Mediterranean by endorsing the UfM roadmap for action at the second Regional
Forum of the UfM, which took place in Barcelona on 23–24 January 2017 under
the theme of "Mediterranean in Action: Youth for Stability and Development".

This Roadmap focuses on the following four areas of action:

  * Enhancing political dialogue amongst the UfM members;
  * Ensuring the contribution of UfM activities to regional stability and human development;
  * Strengthening regional integration;
  * Consolidating UfM capacity for action.

On 22 February 2017, the Secretariat of the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM)
and the Swedish International Development Agency (Sida) signed a €6.5 million
multi annual financial agreement to support UfM activities in favour of a more
sustainable and inclusive development in the region.

On 10 April 2017, the Heads of State or Government of Cyprus, France, Greece,
Italy, Malta, Portugal and Spain convened in Madrid at the 3rd Summit of
Southern European Union Countries, where they reaffirmed their support to the
Union for the Mediterranean and stressed its "_central role in the
consolidation of Euro-Mediterranean regional cooperation, as an expression of
co-ownership in the management of our common regional agenda in order to
effectively and collectively address our current challenges_ ".

In 2017, 51 regional cooperation projects, worth over €5.3 billion, have been
accorded the UfM label, through the unanimous support of the 43 Member States.
Implementation of the projects is accelerating and is producing positive
results on the ground.

27 November 2017 Ministers from the 43 Member countries of UfM gathered in
Cairo at the 4th UfM Ministerial Conference on "Strengthening the Role of
Women in Society" to agree on a common agenda to strengthen the role of women
in the Euro-Mediterranean region.

On 29 November 2017, the UfM Regional Stakeholder Conference on the Blue
Economy, brought together over 400 key stakeholders dealing with marine and
maritime issues from the entire region, including government representatives,
regional and local authorities, international organisations, academia, the
private sector and civil society.

On 20 March 2018, the European Commission and the Government of Palestine, in
partnership with the Union for the Mediterranean, hosted an international
donor Pledging Conference to consolidate financial support to the construction
of a large-scale desalination plant and its associated water supply
infrastructure in the Gaza Strip.

On 13 July 2018, the UfM celebrated its 10th anniversary, with 51 regional
cooperation projects labelled, 12 regional policy platforms created and over
300 expert fora organised.

## Aims and concrete projects

The UfM's goal is to enhance regional cooperation, dialogue and the
implementation of concrete projects and initiatives with tangible impact on
our citizens. The UfM has consolidated an action-driven methodology, with a
common ambition of creating effective links between the policy dimension and
its operational translation into concrete projects and initiatives on the
ground to adequately address the challenges of the region and its key
interrelated priorities. This methodology is composed of three components:
Policy framework, dialogue Platforms and regional Projects – namely the "Three
Ps".

### Policy Framework

The UfM complements the bilateral work of the European Neighbourhood Policy
set up in 2004 and the development policies of UfM member states, driving the
emergence of a shared Mediterranean agenda to achieve an impact, not just on
the situation of one country, but on regional integration as a whole.

With 43 members, the UfM acts as a central platform for setting regional
priorities and sharing experiences of the principal challenges that the region
faces.

The UfM Secretariat implements decisions taken at political level through
regional and sub-regional sectorial dialogues fora and follow-up activities
thereby following through on Ministerial commitments and promoting initiatives
to foster regional cooperation.

The work to achieve this goal is carried out in conjunction with other
organisations and regional cooperation forums (The Arab League, the Arab
Maghreb Union) and alongside sub-regional cooperation fora such as the 5+5
Dialogue with which the UfM is actively associated.

Structured regional dialogues fora have involved over 20,000 stakeholders from
around the Mediterranean, including parliamentarians and representatives of
international organisations, NGOs, civil society organisations, international
financial institutions, development agencies, industry and the private sector,
universities as well as think tanks.

In March 2015, the Inter-parliamentary Conference for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy and the Common Security and Defence Policy, in its final
conclusions, described the UfM as "the most efficient and multifaceted
cooperation forum in the region".

In May 2016, the Parliamentary Assembly of the UfM recognized, in the final
declaration of its 12th Plenary Session, the "importance of the pivotal role
played by the UfM in promoting cooperation and regional integration in the
Mediterranean […]".

In January 2017, at the occasion of the second UfM Regional Forum gathering
the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the 43 Member States, Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, declared: "we
have committed together to break this circle of lack of integration and
tensions and conflictuality and invest in a coherent manner on more political
dialogue and more regional integrational cooperation on very concrete fields
of actions through our Union for the Mediterranean."

The third Union for the Mediterranean (UfM) Regional Forum was held in
Barcelona on 8 October 2018 under the title '10 years: Building together the
future of regional cooperation'. Consolidated as the annual gathering of the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of UfM Member States, the Forum provided the
occasion to draw up a state-of-play of regional cooperation in the Euro-
Mediterranean area and its prospects, as well as to spotlight where the UfM
needs to redouble its efforts to meet current and future challenges. Ministers
took stock of the implementation of the UfM Roadmap endorsed a year ago and
committed to amplifying the impetus given to the Euro-Mediterranean
partnership. This third edition of the Regional Forum was chaired by the UfM
Co-Presidency, assumed by Federica Mogherini, EU High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European
Commission, and Ayman Safadi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Jordan, and
hosted by Josep Borrell, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Spain and Nasser
Kamel, the UfM Secretary General.

### Regional projects

Via the process of ‘’labelisation,’’ the UFM supports projects that address
common regional challenges that are likely to have a direct impact on the
lives of citizens. The UfM label guarantees regional recognition and
visibility for the selected projects. It also gives them access to funding
opportunities through the network of financial partners of the UfM.[_citation
needed_]

The main added value of the UfM lies in the interrelation created between the
policy dimension and its operational translation into concrete projects on the
ground, which in return nourishes the definition of relevant policies through
a multi-stakeholder approach. The adoption of projects on the ground follows
the principle of "variable geometry", providing a degree of flexibility by
which a smaller number of countries may decide, with the approval of all, to
cooperate and participate in projects of common interest.[_citation needed_]

In December 2015, 37 projects were labeled by the UfM. As of June 2018, more
than 50 projects were labeled by the UfM.

#### Human Development

After a consultation process with stakeholders, the UfM launched in 2013 a
regional initiative (Med4Jobs) that defines the priorities of intervention in
terms of employability, intermediary services and job creation in the region,
under which specific projects are developed.

By 2015, the secretariat of the UfM had labeled 13 projects addressing the
challenges of youth employability and inclusive growth. Framed by the
political mandate and the priorities expressed in regional dialogues, these
projects target 200,000 beneficiaries, mostly young people, and involve over
1,000 small and medium private enterprises.

On Women empowerment, it had also labeled 10 projects benefiting over 50,000
women in the Euro-Mediterranean region, this with the participation of over
1000 shareholders and with a budget of over 127 million euros.

The specific focus on Youth employability and Women empowerment is in line
with the UfM's aim at reinforcing human capital in the region, which is the
key issue for stability and security in the region.

As of June 2018, the UfM has 28 labelled projects addressing the regional
Human Development pillar.

##### Economic Development and Employment

  * Developing Youth Employability & Entrepreneurial Skills – Maharat MED
  * Mediterranean Entrepreneurship Network
  * Promoting Financial Inclusion via Mobile Financial Services in the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean Countries
  * Establishment of a Regional Platform for the Development of Cultural and Creative Industries and Clusters in the Southern Mediterranean
  * Generation Entrepreneur
  * EDILE – Economic Development through Inclusive and Local Empowerment
  * EMIPO – EUROMED Invest Promotion & Observatory
  * EMDC – Euro-Mediterranean Development Center for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
  * Agadir SME Programme – Fostering SME competitiveness and trade in the Agadir Agreement member countries
  * YouMatch – "Toolbox Project": Elaboration and implementation of a demand-driven toolbox for youth-orientated, innovative labour market services in the MENA region
  * Organization and Coordination of the SIEMed Network: Support for Entrepreneurship Initiatives in the Mediterranean
  * INCORPORA, A Labour Integration Program

##### Higher Education & Research

  * MedNC – New Chance Mediterranean Network
  * HOMERe – High Opportunity for Mediterranean Executive Recruitment
  * Higher Education on Food Security and Rural Development
  * EMUNI Master Programmes
  * Three areas of EMUNI PhD Research Programmes
  * Master Study Programme in Risk Science
  * The Euro-Mediterranean University of Fes
  * Eastern Mediterranean International School (EMIS)

##### Social & Civil Affairs

  * WOMED: the "next generation of leaders"
  * CEED GROW: Growing and Scaling Small and Medium-Sized Businesses
  * Forming Responsible Citizens – Promoting citizenship education to prevent school violence, particularly against girls and women
  * Developing Women Empowerment
  * Skills for Success – Employability Skills for Women
  * Young Women as Job Creators
  * Promoting women empowerment for inclusive and sustainable industrial development in the MENA region
  * Women's Right to Health – The WoRTH Project

#### Sustainable development

By 2015, 14 projects were labelled by the 43 countries of the UfM, included
the cleanup of Lake Bizerte in Tunisia, the construction of the desalination
plant in Gaza, and the integrated urban development of the city of Imbaba.

As of June 2018, the UfM has 23 labelled projects addressing the regional
Sustainable Development pillar. These projects are expected to have an
important socio-economic impact across the region, including on climate
action, renewable energy, transport, urban development, water, the blue
economy and environment.

##### Transport & Urban Development

  * UPFI Sfax Taparura Project
  * Bouregreg Valley Development
  * Imbaba Urban Upgrading Project
  * Jordanian Railway Network
  * Completion of the Central Section of the Trans-Maghreb Motorway Axis
  * LOGISMED Training Activities
  * Motorway of the Sea (MoS) Turkey-Italy-Tunisia Project
  * MoS OPTIMED IMPLEMENTATION – Towards a new Mediterranean Corridor: from South-Eastern to North-Western ports
  * UPFI Multi-Site Urban Regeneration Project in Jericho
  * İzmir Urban Integrated Waste Management Project
  * TranslogMED, capacity building activities in logistics chain

##### Energy & Climate Action

  * Tafila Wind Farm
  * UfM Energy University by Schneider Electric
  * SEMed Private Renewable Energy Framework - SPREF

##### Water, Environment & Blue Economy

  * Capacity Building Programme on Water Integrity in the Middle East and North Africa
  * BlueGreen Med-CS
  * MED RESCP – POST RIO +20: Supporting the adoption of Sustainable Consumption and Production (SCP) and Resource Efficiencu (RE) models in the Mediterranean region
  * Towards a Mediterranean Water Knowledge Platform
  * Integrated Programme for Protection of the Lake Bizerte against Pollution
  * Governance & Financing for the Mediterranean Water Sector
  * The "Desalination Facility for the Gaza Strip" Project
  * PLASTIC-BUSTERS for a Mediterranean free from litter
  * MedCoast4BG – Med Coasts for Blue Growth

## Results

European Union free trade agreements currently exist with Egypt, Algeria,
Tunisia, and Turkey, but the proposed union-wide free trade area has not been
created. In 2020, Haizam Amirah-Fernandez criticized European countries for
conducting foreign policy based on their perceived security interests, saying
it caused them to work with autocratic regimes rather than push for democracy.
He pointed out that since its creation 25 years earlier, only one member
country, Tunisia, has become democratic, and he argued that was despite and
not because of European powers.

## Institutions

In contrast with the Barcelona Process, one of the biggest innovations of the
Union for the Mediterranean is its institutional architecture. It was decided
at the Paris Summit to provide the Union with a whole set of institutions in
order to up-grade the political level of its relations, promote a further co-
ownership of the initiative among the EU and Mediterranean partner countries
and improve the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership's visibility.

### North and South Co-presidency system

Co-presidents of the UfM, Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, and Nasser Judeh,
Jordan's minister of foreign affairs, next to former Secretary General of the
UfM, M. Fathallah Sijilmassi

With the purpose of guaranteeing the co-ownership of the Union for the
Mediterranean, the Heads of State and Government decided in Paris that two
countries, one from the EU and one from the Mediterranean partner countries,
will jointly preside the Union for the Mediterranean. The 27 agreed that the
EU co-presidency had to "be compatible with the external representation of the
European Union in accordance with the Treaty provisions in force". "The
Mediterranean partner countries decided to choose by consensus and among
themselves a country to hold the co-presidency for a non-renewable period of
two years."

From 2008 to 2012, France & Egypt ensured the UfM's first co-presidency.

In 2012 the secretariat announced that the co-presidency of Egypt would be
succeeded by Jordan, and that of France by the European Union. The change
which, took place in September 2012 was decided at a meeting of the high
representatives in Barcelona on 28 June.

Northern Presidency  | Southern Presidency   
---|---  
France (July 2008 – March 2012)  |  Egypt (July 2008 – June 2012)   
European Union (March 2012 –)  |  Jordan (June 2012 –)   
  
### Meeting of UfM Senior Officials

The meeting of UfM Senior Officials, composed of ambassadors and senior
Foreign Affairs officials appointed individually by the 43 countries of the
UfM, is held several times a year, at regular intervals, at the seat of the
Secretariat of UfM in Barcelona or in one of the UfM countries. Its role is to
discuss regional issues, guide policies and actions of the organization and to
label the projects submitted to it. Each country has an equal vote and all
decisions are made by consensus. Alongside these meetings, other UfM meetings
take place, especially ministerial meetings that define the Mediterranean
agenda on specific issues, such as environment and climate change, the digital
economy, the role of women in society, transportation or industry.

### Secretariat

Headquarters of the Union for the Mediterranean

The Secretariat of the Union for the Mediterranean was inaugurated on 4 March
2010 in an official ceremony in Barcelona.

The task of the permanent Secretariat is to provide operational follow-up of
the sectorial ministerial meeting, identifying and monitoring the
implementation of concrete projects for the Euro-Mediterranean region, and
searching for partners to finance these projects and coordinating various
platforms for dialogue.

The Euro-Mediterranean Ministers of Foreign Affairs decided at the Marseille
conference of November 2008 that the headquarters of the Secretariat would be
at the Royal Palace of Pedralbes in Barcelona. They also agreed on the
structure of this new key institution and the countries of origin of its first
members:

  * The Secretary General is elected by consensus from a non-EU country. His term is for three years, which may be extended for another three. The first Secretary General was the Jordanian Ahmad Khalaf Masa'deh, the former Ambassador of Jordan to the EU, Belgium, Norway and Luxembourg, and Minister of Public Sector Reform from 2004 to 2005. He resigned after one year in office. In July 2011, the Moroccan diplomat Youssef Amrani takes office. When he is named deputy foreign minister by the Benkirane government, he was replaced as Secretary General by fellow Moroccan Ambassador Fathallah Sijilmassi until February 2018. In June 2018, Egyptian Ambassador Nasser Kamel took office as Secretary General of the UfM, bringing more than three decades of experience in Euro-Mediterranean relations to the role.
  * In order to enhance the co-ownership of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, six posts of Deputy Secretaries General were assigned to three countries from the EU and three from the Mediterranean partner countries. For the first term of three years (extendible to another three) the Deputy Secretaries General were: 
    * Panagiotis Roumeliotis (Greece) – Energy Division;
    * Ilan Chet (Israel) – Higher Education and Research Division;
    * Lino Cardarelli (Italy) – Business Development Division;
    * Amb. Celia Attard Pirotta (Malta) – Social and Civil Affairs Division;
    * Rafiq Husseini (Palestine) – Water and Environment Division;
    * Amb. Yigit Alpogan (Turkey) – Transport and Urban Development Division.

In 2017, the secretariat of the UfM has a staff of 60 persons from more than
20 nationalities, including the permanent presence of senior officials
seconded from the European Commission, the EIB, and CDC.

## Other organizations and euro-Mediterranean institutions

### Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly

The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) is not a new institution
inside the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership framework. It was established in
Naples on 3 December 2003 by the Euro-Mediterranean Ministers of Foreign
Affairs and had its first plenary session in Athens on 22–23 March 2004. The
EMPA gathers parliamentarians from the Euro-Mediterranean countries and has
four permanent committees on the following issues:

  * Political Affairs, Security and Human Rights
  * Economic, Financial and Social Affairs and Education
  * Promotion of the Quality of Life, Human Exchanges and Culture
  * Women's Rights in the Euro-Mediterranean Countries

The EMPA also has an _ad hoc_ committee on Energy and Environment. Since the
launch of the Union for the Mediterranean, the EMPA's role has been
strengthened for it is considered the "legitimate parliamentary expression of
the Union".

It was absorbed in 2010 by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union of the
Mediterranean (PA-UfM).

### Euro-Mediterranean Regional and Local Assembly

At the Euro-Mediterranean Foreign Affairs Conference held in Marseille in
November 2008, the Ministers welcomed the EU Committee of the Regions proposal
to establish a Euro-Mediterranean Assembly of Local and Regional Authorities
(ARLEM in French). Its aim is to bridge between the local and regional
representatives of the 43 countries with the Union for the Mediterranean and
EU institutions.

The EU participants are the members of the EU Committee of the Regions, as
well as representatives from other EU institutions engaged with the Euro-
Mediterranean Partnership. From the Mediterranean partner countries, the
participants are representatives of regional and local authorities appointed
by their national governments. The ARLEM was formally established and held its
first plenary session in Barcelona on 31 January 2010. The ARLEM's co-
presidency is held by the President of the EU Committee of the Regions, Luc
Van den Brande, and the Moroccan mayor of Al Hoceima, Mohammed Boudra.

In 5 November 2022, Turkish authorities detained at the port of İzmir the
First Vice-President of the European Committee of the Regions, Apostolos
Tzitzikostas, who was en route to co-chair a meeting of the Euro-Mediterranean
Regional and Local Assembly on behalf of the President of the Committee of the
Regions. The assembly released a statement condemning this action and
described it abusive and unprovoked and asked for clarification and credible
explanations from the Turkish government for the incident.

### Anna Lindh Foundation

The Anna Lindh Foundation for the Dialogue between Cultures, with headquarters
are in Alexandria, Egypt, was established in April 2005. It is a network for
the civil society organisations of the Euro-Mediterranean countries, aiming at
the promotion of intercultural dialogue and mutual understanding.

At the Paris Summit it was agreed that the Anna Lindh Foundation, along with
the UN Alliance of Civilizations will be in charge of the cultural dimension
of the Union for the Mediterranean.

In September 2010 the Anna Lindh Foundation published a report called "EuroMed
Intercultural Trends 2010". This evaluation about mutual perceptions and the
visibility of the Union of the Mediterranean across the region is based on a
Gallup Public Opinion Survey in which 13,000 people from the Union of the
Mediterranean countries participated.

### Partnerships with other organizations and Euro-Mediterranean institutions

As a platform for dialogue and cooperation, the Union for the Mediterranean
engages in strategic partnerships with global, regional and sub-regional
organizations.

During the past few years, the UfM strengthened its ties with relevant
stakeholders through the signature of various Memoranda of Understanding:

  * CIHEAM (International Center for Advanced Mediterranean Agronomic Studies) – 8 January 2015
  * EESC (European Economic and Social Committee) – 13 January 2015
  * Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness – 26 January 2015
  * AFAEMME (Association of Organisations of Mediterranean Businesswomen) – 11 February 2015
  * Agency for International Cooperation and Local Development in the Mediterranean – 16 February 2015
  * British University in Egypt – 14 March 2015
  * EMUNI University (Euro-Mediterranean University) – 8 April 2015
  * IRU (International Road Transport Union) – 10 April 2015
  * IPEMED (Institut de Prospective économique du monde Méditerranéen) – 4 May 2015
  * UNIDO – 22 May 2015
  * BUSINESSMED – 9 June 2015
  * BSEC (Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation) – 18 June 2015
  * UNESCO – 14 October 2015
  * CETMO (Center for Transportation Studies for the Western Mediterranean) – 26 November 2015
  * Energy Charter Secretariat – 26 November 2015
  * EMUNI University – 1 February 2016
  * International Energy Agency – 17 February 2016
  * Service de la Coopération Marocaine – 8 March 2016
  * UN Habitat – 5 April 2016
  * Conseil de la Région Tangier-Tétouan-Al Hoceima – 22 June 2016
  * Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Spain – 29 July 2016
  * ANIMA Investment Network – 7 September 2016
  * Groupe interacadémique pour le développement – 29 September 2016
  * IEMed (European Institute of the Mediterranean) – 20 January 2017
  * SIDA (Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency) – 23 January 2017
  * UN Office for South-South Cooperation – 24 January 2017
  * Fundación Mujeres por Africa – 24 January 2017
  * AGADIR Technical Unit – 24 January 2017
  * MENBO Permanent Secretariat – 10 March 2017
  * EMUNI University – 14 March 2017
  * Konrad Adenauer Stiftung – 10 April 2017
  * World Alliance for Efficient Solutions – 24 May 2017
  * SDSN Mediterranean – 1 June 2017
  * Institut Méditerranéen de l’Eau – 8 June 2017
  * Euro-Mediterranean University of Fes – 20 June 2017
  * IEMed – 20 July 2017
  * UNFCCC Secretariat, Organization of the 2017 Forum of the Standing Committee on Finance, 3 August 2017
  * ACUP, International Conference on Sustainable Development Goals, 15 September 2017
  * World Tourism Organization, Institutional cooperation – IO, 1 October 2017
  * Federal Ministry of Economy – Germany, Institutional cooperation, 5 October 2017
  * Eastern Mediterranean International School, YOCOPAS Conference, 11 October 2017
  * Arab League, Institutional cooperation – IO, 17 October 2017
  * Union Internationale Des Transports Publics, Institutional cooperation, 9 November 2017
  * AViTeM – Villa Méditerranée, Institutional cooperation, 21 November 2017
  * General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean of the FAO, Institutional cooperation – IO, 30 November 2017
  * Fédération de l'Energie du Maroc, Institutional cooperation, 19 December 2017
  * Le Plan Bleu, Joint Editing and publication of a report regarding the environmental changes in the Mediterranean, 22 December 2017

## Funding

The Paris Declaration states that contributions for the Union for the
Mediterranean will have to develop the capacity to attract funding from "the
private sector participation; contributions from the EU budget and all
partners; contributions from other countries, international financial
institutions and regional entities; the Euro-Mediterranean Investment and
Partnership Facility (FEMIP); the ENPI", among other possible instruments,

  * The European Commission contributes to the Union for the Mediterranean through the European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument (ENPI). In July 2009 the ENPI allocated €72 million for the following Union for the Mediterranean projects during 2009–2010: 
    * De-pollution of the Mediterranean (€22 million).
    * Maritime and land highways (€7.5 million).
    * Alternative energies: Mediterranean Solar Plan (€5 million).
    * Euro-Mediterranean University of Slovenia (€1 million)
  * The European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI) came into force in 2014. It is the financial arm of the European Neighbourhood Policy, the EU's foreign policy towards its neighbours to the East and to the South. It has a budget of €15.4 billion and will provide the bulk of funding through a number of programmes. The ENI, effective from 2014 to 2020, replaces the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument – known as the ENPI.
  * The European Investment Bank contributes to the Union for the Mediterranean through its Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Partnership (FEMIP). Specifically, the FEMIP was mandated by the Euro-Mediterranean Ministers of Finance in 2008 to support three of the six concrete projects: the de-pollution of the Mediterranean; alternative energies; and maritime and land highways. Following the June 2012 meeting the EIB announced it would give 500 million euros to support projects for the UfM.
  * The InfraMed Infrastructure Fund was established in June 2010 by five financial entities: the French Caisse des Dépôts, the Moroccan Caisse de Dépôts et de Gestion, the Egyptian EFG Hermes, the Italian Cassa Depositi e Prestiti and the European Investment Bank. On an initial phase, the Fund will contribute €385 million to the Secretariat's projects on infrastructure.
  * The World Bank has allocated $750 million for the renewable energy project through the Clean Technology Fund.

## List of Sectorial Ministerial meetings

  * Economic-Financial Meeting, 7 October 2008, Luxembourg City (Luxembourg).
  * Industry, 5–6 November 2008, Nice (France).
  * Employment and Labor, 9–10 November 2008, Marrakech (Morocco).
  * Health, 11 November 2008, Cairo (Egypt).
  * Water, 22 December 2008, Amman (Jordan).
  * Sustainable Development, 25 June 2009, Paris (France).
  * Economic-Financial Meeting, 7 July 2009, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Strengthening the Role of Women in Society, 11–12 November, Marrakech (Morocco).
  * Trade, 9 December 2009, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Water, 21–22 April 2010, Barcelona (Spain).
  * Tourism, 20 May 2010, Barcelona (Spain).
  * Employment and Labour, 21–22 November 2010, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Sustainable Urban Development, 9–10 November 2011, Strasbourg (France).
  * Strengthening the role of women in society – September 2013, Paris (France).
  * Transport – November 2013, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Energy – December 2013, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Industrial cooperation – February 2014, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Environment and climate change – May 2014, Athens (Greece).
  * Digital Economy – September 2014, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Blue Economy – November 2015, Brussels (Belgium).
  * Employment and Labour - September 2016, Dead Sea (Jordan).
  * Energy - December 2016, Rome (Italy).
  * Water - April 2017, Valletta (Malta).
  * Sustainable Urban Development - May 2017, Cairo (Egypt).
  * Strengthening the Role of Women in Society – November 2017, Cairo (Egypt).
  * Trade - March 2018, Brussels (Belgium).