UN body to administer trust territories

The **United Nations Trusteeship Council** is one of the six principal organs
of the United Nations, established to help ensure that trust territories were
administered in the best interests of their inhabitants and of international
peace and security.

The trust territories—most of them former mandates of the League of Nations or
territories taken from nations defeated at the end of World War II—have all
now attained self-government or independence, either as separate nations or by
joining neighbouring independent countries. The last was Palau, formerly part
of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, which became a member state of
the United Nations in December 1994.

## History

Arrival of UN Visiting Mission in Majuro, Trust Territory of the Pacific
Islands (1978). The sign reads "Please release us from the bondage of your
trusteeship agreement."

Provisions to form a new UN agency to oversee the decolonization of dependent
territories from colonial times were made at the San Francisco Conference in
1945 and were included in Chapter 12 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Those dependent territories (colonies and mandated territories) were to be
placed under the international trusteeship system created by the United
Nations Charter as a successor to the League of Nations mandate system.
Ultimately, eleven territories were placed under trusteeship: seven in Africa
and four in Oceania. Ten of the trust territories had previously been League
of Nations mandates; the eleventh was Italian Somaliland.

In order to implement the provisions of the trusteeship system, the General
Assembly passed resolution 64 on 14 December 1946, establishing the United
Nations Trusteeship Council. The Trusteeship Council held its first session in
March 1947.

In March 1948 the United States proposed that the territory of Mandatory
Palestine be placed under UN trusteeship with the termination of the British
Mandate in May 1948 (see American trusteeship proposal for Palestine).
However, the US did not make an effort to implement this proposal, which
became moot with the declaration of the State of Israel.

Under the Charter, the Trusteeship Council was to consist of representatives
of United Nations member states administering trust territories and an equal
number of representatives of non-administering states. Thus, the Council was
to consist of (1) all U.N. members administering trust territories, (2) the
five permanent members of the Security Council, and (3) as many other non-
administering members as needed to equalize the number of administering and
non-administering members, elected by the General Assembly for renewable
three-year terms. Over time, as trust territories attained independence, the
size and workload of the Trusteeship Council was reduced. Ultimately, the
Trusteeship Council came to include only the five permanent Security Council
members (China, France, the Soviet Union/Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom, and the United States), as the only country administering a Trust
Territory (the United States) was a permanent member.

With the independence of Palau, formerly part of the Trust Territory of the
Pacific Islands, in 1994, there presently are no trust territories, leaving
the Trusteeship Council without responsibilities. Since the Northern Mariana
Islands, which was a part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands,
became a commonwealth of the USA in 1986, it is technically the only area not
to have joined as a part of another state or gained full independence as a
sovereign nation.

The Trusteeship Council was not assigned responsibility for colonial
territories outside the trusteeship system, although the Charter did establish
the principle that member states were to administer such territories in
conformity with the best interests of their inhabitants.

## Present status

Its mission fulfilled, the Trusteeship Council suspended its operation on 1
November 1994, and, although under the United Nations Charter it continues to
exist on paper, its future role and even existence remains uncertain. The
Trusteeship Council has a president and vice-president, although the sole
current duty of these officers is to meet with the heads of other UN agencies
on occasion. According to the United Nations website:

> By a resolution adopted on 25th of May 1994, the Council amended its rules
> of procedure to drop the obligation to meet annually and agreed to meet as
> occasion required -- by its decision or the decision of its President, or at
> the request of a majority of its members or the General Assembly or the
> Security Council.

The chamber itself is still used for other purposes. Following a three-year
refurbishment, restoring its original design by Danish architect Finn Juhl,
the chamber was re-opened in 2013. The current president of the Trusteeship
Council is James Kariuki and the Vice-President is Nathalie Broadhurst
Estival.

## Future prospects

The formal elimination of the Trusteeship Council would require the revision
of the United Nations Charter. Though this has been proposed as part of reform
of the United Nations, the political difficulties of such changes mean that
these have not been enacted. Other functions for the Trusteeship Council have
been considered, such as the Commission on Global Governance's 1995 _Our
Global Neighbourhood_ report which recommended expanding the trusteeship
council's remit to the protection of environmental integrity and the global
commons on the two-thirds of the world's surface that is outside national
jurisdictions.

## Gallery

  * The world in 1945, UN Trusteeship territories are colored green

  * The world in 2010, with no trusteeship territories left