United Nations organization

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | **A major contributor to this article appears to have aclose connection with its subject.** It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view. Please discuss further on the talk page. _( January 2016)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction" – news
**·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( January
2016)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction** (**UNDRR**) was
created in December 1999 to ensure the implementation of the International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction.

The UNDRR is part of the United Nations Secretariat and it supports the
implementation and review of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
adopted by the third UN World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction on 18
March 2015 in Sendai, Japan. The Sendai Framework is a 15-year voluntary
people-centred approach to disaster risk reduction, succeeding the 2005–2015
framework.

UNDRR’s vision is anchored on the four priorities for action set out in the
Sendai Framework.

UNDRR is led by a United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Disaster Risk Reduction (SRSG) and has over 100 staff located in
its headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland, 5 regional offices (Africa: Nairobi,
the Americas: Panama City, Arab States: Cairo, Asia-Pacific: Bangkok and
Europe: Brussels) and other field presences in Addis Ababa, Almaty, Bone ,
Incheon, Kobe, New York-UN Headquarters, Rio de Janeiro and Suva.

UNDRR coordinates international efforts in disaster risk reduction (DRR) and
it reports on the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction. It convenes the biennial Global Platform on Disaster Risk
Reduction.

On 1 May 2019, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
officially changed its acronym to UNDRR (from UNISDR) to better reflect its
name. The former acronym had not been changed since the office was called the
International Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction.

## History

**1989 International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction**

Given the increasing concern about the impact of disasters, the UN General
Assembly declared 1990–1999 the International Decade for Natural Disaster
Reduction (IDNDR). Initially, IDNDR was influenced largely by scientific and
technical interest groups. However, the broader global awareness of the social
and economic consequences of disasters caused by natural hazards developed as
the decade progressed.

**1994 First World Conference on Disaster Reduction and the Yokohama Strategy
for a Safer World**

The Yokohama Strategy for a Safer World: Guidelines for Natural Disaster
Prevention, Preparedness and Mitigation and its Plan of Action was adopted at
the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, building on the mid-term
review of the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction.

**1999 International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR)**

The International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR) was launched 3 by the
Economic and Social Council and endorsed by the General Assembly as an
international framework for responding to the challenge presented to the
international community by the increasing incidence and scale of disasters.
UNISDR was created as an inter-agency secretariat of ISDR together with the
Inter-Agency Task Force on Disaster Reduction. The UNISDR mandate was then
expanded to serve as a focal point within the United Nations System for the
coordination of disaster reduction and to ensure synergies among the disaster
reduction activities of the UN system and regional organizations and
activities in socio-economic and humanitarian fields. Further mandates are to
promote public awareness and commitment, to expand networks and partnerships,
and to improve knowledge of disaster causes and options for risk reduction,
building on the Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action and as follow-up to the
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction.

**2002 The Johannesburg Plan of Action**

The World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg, South
Africa, noted that “an integrated, multi-hazard, inclusive approach to address
vulnerability, risk assessment and disaster management, including prevention,
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery, is an essential element of a
safer world in the twenty- first century.”4 The Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation provided UNISDR and the Inter-Agency Task Force with a concrete
set of objectives for integrating and mainstreaming risk reduction into
development policies and processes.

**2005 Second World Conference on Disaster Reduction and the Hyogo Framework
for Action 2005–2015**

The World Conference on Disaster Reduction was held in Kobe, Hyogo, Japan and
adopted the "Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of
Nations and Communities to Disasters", which is currently serving as the
guiding document in strengthening and building international cooperation to
ensure that disaster risk reduction is used as a foundation for sound national
and international development agendas.

**2007 First session of the Global Platform on Disaster Reduction**

The UN General Assembly established a biennial Global Platform on disaster
risk reduction to support the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for
Action, allowing government representatives, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), scientists, practitioners, private sector, IFIs and UN organizations
to share experiences, identify remaining gaps, formulate strategic guidance
and advice for the implementation of the HFA. Six Regional Platforms and over
80 National Platforms have also been established as multi-stakeholder forums.5
Regional Platforms also assess progress but focus on the details of the
regional plans of implementation and National Platforms act as the national
coordinating body for disaster risk reduction.

**2011 Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011–2020**

The Istanbul Programme of Action (IPoA) charts out the international
community’s vision and strategy for the sustainable development of LDCs for
the next decade with a strong focus on developing their productive capacities.
The Programme recognized that the scale and impact of natural disasters has
increased over recent decades, threatening hard-won development gains of LDCs.
It encourages LCDs to take action in implementing and integrating disaster
risk reduction in their national and long-term planning and policies.

**2012 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development - Rio+20**

The outcome Document - The Future We Want – of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development – Rio 20+ held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil on 20–22
June 2012 contains a section (Chapter V-A) on disaster risk reduction that
sets a firm foundation for discussions on a post-2015 framework to continue
guiding nations after the Hyogo Framework expires in 2015.

**2014 Third International Conference on Small Island Developing States and
the SIDS ACCELERATED MODALITIES OF ACTION (S.A.M.O.A.) Pathway**

The S.A.M.O.A. Pathway recognize that Small Island Developing States continue
to grapple with the effects of disasters, some of which have increased in
intensity and some of which have been exacerbated by climate change, which
impede their progress towards sustainable development. It recognize that
disasters can disproportionately affect small island developing States and
that there is a critical need to build resilience, strengthen monitoring and
prevention, reduce vulnerability, raise awareness and increase preparedness to
respond to and recover from disasters.

**2015 Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction and
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030**

The Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction was held
in Sendai, Japan from 14 to 18 March 2015, drawing 6,500 delegates to the
conference itself and 50,000 people to the associated Public Forum. The
Conference adopted the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030
(Sendai Framework) as the first major agreement of the Post-2015 Development
Agenda, with seven global targets and four priorities for action.

The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 is the successor
instrument to the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) 2005–2015: Building the
Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters. The HFA was conceived to
give further impetus to the global work under the International Framework for
Action for the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction of 1989,
and the Yokohama Strategy for a Safer World: Guidelines for Natural Disaster
Prevention, Preparedness and Mitigation and its Plan of Action, adopted in
1994 and the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction of 1999.

It is a 15-year non-binding agreement which recognizes that the State has the
primary role to reduce disaster risk but that responsibility should be shared
with other stakeholders including local government, the private sector and
other stakeholders. It aims for the following outcome:

"The substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods
and health and in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental
assets of persons, businesses, communities and countries."

**2017 Fifth session of the Global Platform on Disaster Reduction**

The 2017 Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held in Cancun, Mexico
on 22–26 May drew in more than 5000 participants, among which were policy
makers and disaster risk managers. Thousands of governments, international
organizations and civil society representatives were in attendance. It was the
first time the forum was organized outside Geneva and the global progress in
the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction adopted
in Japan in 2015 was reviewed. During the forum, Nigerian climate change
activist, Olumide Idowu, who was a member of the organizing committee and
represented youth and children, was assigned to lead the social media team.

## Mandate

UNDRR’s mandate has been defined by a number of United Nations General
Assembly Resolutions, the most notable of which is "to serve as the focal
point in the United Nations system for the coordination of disaster reduction
and to ensure synergies among the disaster reduction activities of the United
Nations system and regional organizations and activities in socio-economic and
humanitarian fields".

Its core areas of work includes ensuring DRR is applied to climate change
adaptation, increasing investments for DRR, building disaster-resilient
cities, schools and hospitals, and strengthening the international system for
DRR.

## Management

UNDRR is led by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Disaster Risk Reduction. Mami Mizutori took up office in this role on 1 March
2018, succeeding Robert Glasser of Australia. Prior to this, the organization
was led by Margareta Wahlström of Sweden, who was the first Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction and had
been appointed in November 2008. Robert Glasser took up his post in January
2016. From 1999 to 2008, UNDRR had been led by a UN Director-level official,
under the auspices of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

The functions of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Disaster Risk Reduction include leading and overseeing UNDRR in the executions
of its functions entrusted by the United Nations General Assembly, United
Nations Economic and Social Council and the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA)
and its successor the Sendai Framework, as well as policy directions by the
Secretary-General, overseeing the management of the Trust Fund for the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction, and carrying out high-level
advocacy and resource mobilization activities for risk reduction and
implementation. The Special Representative also ensures the strategic and
operational coherence between disaster-reduction and humanitarian disaster
preparedness and response activities, as well as socio-economic activities of
the UN system and regional organizations.

## Risk knowledge

### Global Assessment Report

The Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction (GAR) is the United
Nation’s biennial global review and analysis of the natural hazards that are
affecting humanity. The GAR monitors risk patterns and trends and progress in
disaster risk reduction while providing strategic policy guidance to countries
and the international community. The Report is produced in collaboration and
consultation with a wide range of stakeholders, including various UN agencies,
governments, academic and research institutions, donors and technical
organizations and specialists.

The Global Assessment Report 2015 is titled "Making Development Sustainable:
The Future of Disaster Risk Management" and reviews the disaster risk
governance under the HFA and assess to what extent the expected outcome of the
HFA has been achieved. The report can be accessed here Global Assessment
Report 2015.

### PreventionWeb

Launched in 2007, PreventionWeb provides a common online platform for
institutions to connect, exchange experiences and share information about DRR.
Readers can submit content to PreventionWeb, as well as syndicate
PreventionWeb content to their own websites. The website is updated daily and
contains DRR news, events, online discussions, contact directories, policy
documents, reference documents, training and academic programmes, jobs,
terminology, and country information, as well as audio and video content.

## Initiatives

### Making Cities Resilient

The Making Cities Resilient: 'My City is getting ready!' campaign, launched in
May 2010 initially for five years, addresses issues of local governance and
urban risk while drawing upon previous UNDRR Campaigns on safer schools and
hospitals, as well as on the sustainable urbanizations principles developed in
the UN-Habitat World Urban Campaign 2009–2013. As of August 2015, over 2,600
municipalities and local governments participate in “The Making Cities
Resilient: 'My City is getting ready!'” campaign.

**Ten Essentials**

The Making Cities Resilience campaign offers a Ten-point checklist to serve as
a guide for local level action:

  * Essential 1: Put in place organization and coordination to understand and reduce disaster risk, based on participation of citizen groups and civil society. Build local alliances. Ensure that all departments understand their role to disaster risk reduction and preparedness.
  * Essential 2: Assign a budget for disaster risk reduction and provide incentives for homeowners, low-income families, communities, businesses and public sector to invest in reducing the risks they face.
  * Essential 3: Maintain up-to-date data on hazards and vulnerabilities, prepare risk assessments and use these as the basis for urban development plans and decisions. Ensure that this information and the plans for your city's resilience are readily available to the public and fully discussed with them.
  * Essential 4: Invest in and maintain critical infrastructure that reduces risk, such as flood drainage, adjusted where needed to cope with climate change.
  * Essential 5: Assess the safety of all schools and health facilities and upgrade these as necessary.
  * Essential 6: Apply and enforce realistic, risk compliant building regulations and land use planning principles. Identify safe land for low-income citizens and develop upgrading of informal settlements, wherever feasible.
  * Essential 7: Ensure education programmes and training on disaster risk reduction are in place in schools and local communities.
  * Essential 8: Protect ecosystems and natural buffers to mitigate floods, storm surges and other hazards to which your city may be vulnerable. Adapt to climate change by building on good risk reduction practices.
  * Essential 9: Install early warning systems and emergency management capacities in your city and hold regular public preparedness drills.
  * Essential 10: After any disaster, ensure that the needs of the survivors are placed at the centre of reconstruction with support for them and their community organizations to design and help implement responses, including rebuilding homes and livelihoods.

**Role Model Cities**

"Role Model Cities" are cities, municipalities or local governments that are
participating in the Campaign and have demonstrated good practices and
innovation in DRR and resilience.

Role Model Cities demonstrate achievements in at least five areas out of the
10 Essentials in the “Ten-point checklist of Essentials for Making Cities
Resilient”. The nominated cities or local governments must show innovation,
sustained results in measuring and reducing disaster risk, their aims to
continue to do so as well as must be interested to showcase and share
experiences. They implemented innovative, creative, inclusive and efficient
measures and action plans to realize strong political will in the field of DRR
at local level. They inspire, share experience, create learning opportunities
and provide support to other cities to boost their efforts towards committed
resilient cities and communities.

### International Day for Disaster Risk Reduction

The International Day for Disaster Risk Reduction (IDDRR) started in 1989 with
the approval by the United Nations General Assembly. The UN General Assembly
sees the IDDRR as a way to promote a global culture of disaster reduction,
including disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness. It encourages
every citizen and government to take part in building more disaster resilient
communities and nations. Originally celebrated on the second Wednesday of
October, the UN General Assembly decided to designate October 13 as the date
to celebrate the IDDRR.

The Step Up initiative started in 2011 and has focused on a different group of
partners every year leading up to the Third United Nations World Conference
for Disaster Reduction in 2015 - children and young People (2011), women and
girls (2012), people living with disabilities (2013), the ageing population
(2014), and traditional, indigenous and local knowledge (2015).

In 2016 the "Sendai Seven Campaign" was launched to encourage implementation
of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction through IDDRR advocacy
campaigns focused on each of the seven SFDRR targets. The Sendai Seven
Campaigns have focused on reducing mortality from natural and man-made hazards
(2016, "Live to Tell"), reducing the number of people affected by disasters
(2017, "Home Safe Home"), reducing economic losses due to disasters (2018),
and reducing disaster damage to critical infrastructure and disruption of
basic services (2019, "Build to Last").

### UN Sasakawa Award

The United Nations Sasakawa Award for Disaster Reduction is awarded to an
individual or institutions that have taken active efforts in reducing disaster
risk in their communities and advocates for disaster risk reduction. Together
with the World Health Organization Sasakawa Health Prize and the UN
Environment Programme Sasakawa Environment Prize, the United Nations Sasakawa
Award for Disaster Reduction is one of three prestigious prizes established in
1986 by founding Chairman of the Nippon Foundation, Mr. Ryoichi Sasakawa.

**Past winners**

Year | Name/Institution | Country   
---|---|---  
2019 | Dr. P. K. Mishra | India   
2017  | Municipality of Amadora, and the Organization for Development, Renovation, and Equipping Schools (DRES)  | Portugal, Iran   
2015 | Dr. Allan Lavell | United Kingdom/Costa Rica   
2013 | Belo Horizonte and National Alliance for Risk Reduction and Response Initiative | Brazil, Bangladesh   
2011 | Cities of San Francisco, Santa Fe and the District of North Vancouver | Philippines, Argentina, Canada   
2009 | Dr. Eko Teguh Paripurno | Indonesia   
2007 | Professor Yoshiaki Kawata and Mr. Tony Gibbs | Japan, Grenada and Barbados   
2005 | Mr. Chimeddorj Batchulluun | Mongolia   
2004 | Dr. Omar Dario Cardona | Colombia   
2003 | Mrs. Tadzong, née Esther Anwi Mofor | Cameroon   
2002 | Dr. Serguei Balassanian | Armenia   
2001 | Global Fire Monitoring Center (GFMC) | Germany   
2000 | Fondo para la Reconstrucción y el Desarrollo Social del Eje Cafetero (FOREC) | Colombia   
and ... 1993 | Professor Oladapo Alabi Ladipo and Mrs Grace Ebun Delano (Nigeria) and the Arpana Research and Charities Trust (India) | Nigeria and India   
  
### ARISE

The UNDRR Private Sector Alliance for Disaster Resilient Societies, known for
short as ARISE, builds on and integrates the work of the UNDRR Private Sector
Partnership and the R!SE Initiative to support the implementation of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. The overall goal of ARISE, which
was launched in November 2015, is to create risk-resilient societies by
energizing the private sector in collaboration with the public sector and
other stakeholders to deliver on the targets of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction. ARISE will expand the number of private sector
organizations and others involved in supporting the implementation and allow
the private sector to implement tangible projects and initiatives that deliver
results critical to the achievement of the outcomes and goals of the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. ARISE facilitates exchange of
experience and knowledge on how to implement tangible disaster risk reduction
projects through seven work-streams: Disaster Risk Management strategies,
investment metrics, benchmarking and standards, education and training, legal
and regulatory, urban risk reduction & resilience, and insurance.