Body of the United Nations that oversees public-private partnerships

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article **containspromotional content**. Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links, and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view. _( June 2020)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **needs additional citations forverification**. Please help
improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
material may be challenged and removed.  
_Find sources:_ "United Nations Office for Partnerships" – news **·**
newspapers **·** books **·** scholar **·** JSTOR _( October 2021)__(Learn how
and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **United Nations Office for Partnerships** (**UNOP**) is a UN body
established in 2006 by Secretary-General Kofi Annan to co-create partnerships
within the private sector, civil society organizations, academia, and other
non-state actors in furtherance of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals.

UNOP oversees the United Nations Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP)
and the United Nations Democracy Fund (UNDEF).

## UN Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP)

The United Nations Fund for International Partnerships (UNFIP) was established
by Secretary-General Kofi Annan in March 1998 to serve as the interface
between the United Nations system and the United Nations Foundation—the public
charity responsible for administering resources in support of UN causes.

The Deputy Secretary-General is in charge of the UNFIP Advisory Board, which
oversees the work of UNFIP.

## UN Democracy Fund (UNDEF)

The United Nations Democracy Fund (UNDEF) was established by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in July 2005 to support democratization around the world. It
focuses on giving civil society a stronger voice, promoting human rights, and
making sure that all groups can take part in democratic processes. Through the
Fund, the Office gave money to almost 600 projects in more than 130 countries
around the world. These projects ranged from helping women and young people
get involved in civil society to media programs that let civil society get its
message out.[_citation needed_]

### UNDEF Priorities

The United Nations Democracy Fund was established during the 2005 World Summit
as a United Nations General Trust Fund and launched in April 2006, with the
United Nations Office for Partnerships (UNFIP) providing administrative
support and resource-sharing. Since then, it has become clear that the group
that gives grants is a fund for civil society organizations. It is the only
United Nations entity that has the word “democracy” in its name, the only
United Nations body with the primary purpose of supporting democracy through
empowering civil society, and one of the youngest entities in the United
Nations system. Most project money goes to local civil society groups in
countries that are both in the "transition" phase of democratization and in
the "consolidation" phase. By supporting the "demand" side of democratization
instead of the "supply" side, the Fund plays a huge role by making a
different, unique role that enhances and complements the traditional work of
the United Nations, which is working with governments, to strengthen
democratic governance around the world.

A key part of the Fund’s mission is to ensure that all levels of government
are accountable to those they serve by increasing the knowledge, capacity,
voice, and reach of citizen organizations. With the adoption of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in September 2015, the Fund agreed to give
priority to projects that, among other things, hold governments accountable
for meeting the Sustainable Development Goals.[_citation needed_]