United Nations agency

| This article includes a list of general references, but **it lacks
sufficient correspondinginline citations**. Please help to improve this
article by introducing more precise citations. _( May 2010)__(Learn how and
when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
The **United Nations Capital Development Fund** (**UNCDF**) assists developing
countries in the development of their economies by supplementing existing
sources of capital assistance by means of grants, loans and guarantees, first
and foremost for the least developed countries (LDCs) among the developing
countries.

As a Flagship Catalytic Blended Financing platform of the UN, UNCDF utilizes
its unique capability to crowd-in finance for the scaling of development
impact where the needs are greatest—a capability rooted in UNCDF’s unique
investment mandate—to support the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the realization of the Doha Programme of Action
for the least developed countries, 2022–2031.

Established by the General Assembly in 1966 and with headquarters in New York
City, UNCDF is an autonomous UN organization affiliated with UNDP.

UNCDF's CleanStart programme providing a shopkeeper with solar-powered
lighting to counter light poverty in an off-grid area of Uganda, as part of
its inclusive finance practice area

The original UNCDF mandate from the UN General Assembly (UNGA) is to “ _assist
developing countries in the development of their economies by supplementing
existing sources of capital assistance by means of grants and loans_ ”
(General Assembly Resolution 2186, 13 December 1966). The mandate was modified
in 1973 to serve first and foremost but not exclusively the LDCs.

The current Executive Secretary of UNCDF is Pradeep Kurukulasuriya.

## History

Former logo of UNCDF.

Created by the General Assembly in 1966 to promote economic development, UNCDF
officially was established as an "autonomous organization within the United
Nations" with the purpose to "assist developing countries in the development
of their economies by supplementing existing sources of capital assistance by
means of grants and loans".

In 1973, the Governing Council reoriented UNCDF's activities towards "first
and foremost the least developed among the developing countries" and it began
focusing on the world's least developed countries in 1974.

For the next twenty years, UNCDF financed stand-alone capital
infrastructure—roads, bridges, irrigation schemes—mostly in Africa. It
received about $40 million in core funding per year and operated out of UNDP
country offices.

In the mid-1990s, UNCDF began focusing on the role local governments could
play in planning, financing, and maintaining capital investments. Promoting
effective infrastructure investment and service delivery via decentralized
public financial management has been UNCDF's mainstay ever since. UNCDF's
other major area of expertise—microfinance—also dates to the mid-1990s, when
many of its rural development projects had credit components.

UNCDF's resources remain modest compared to many multilateral organizations.
However, it has developed a considerable track record of going where others do
not, and then “leveraging in” larger sources of public and private capital. In
the words of a 2008 assessment by the Government of Sweden, “ _UNCDF should be
seen as a development actor that paves the way for others, rather than a
financing mechanism._ ”

In 2013, UNCDF received the highest score in the SmartAid for Microfinance
Index, a measure of overall effectiveness in microfinance.