Research institute of the United Nations

UNRISD is based at the United Nations Office at Geneva.

The **United Nations Research Institute for Social Development** (**UNRISD**)
is "an autonomous research institute within the United Nations that undertakes
multidisciplinary research and policy analysis on the social dimensions of
contemporary development issues". UNRISD was established in 1963 with the
mandate of conducting policy-relevant research on social development that is
pertinent to the work of the United Nations Secretariat, regional commissions
and specialized agencies, and national institutions.

A small team of researchers coordinates UNRISD's research programmes, which
focus primarily on the developing world, working in collaboration with
national research teams from local universities and research institutes. The
Institute's work takes a holistic, multidisciplinary and political economy
approach. UNRISD's location at the United Nations Office at Geneva gives
researchers access to channels of policy influence through active
participation in events, meetings, conferences and working groups.

## History

UNRISD was established in 1963 "to conduct research into problems and policies
of social development, and relationships between various types of social
development and economic development". It was originally set up with a grant
from the Government of the Netherlands, and its first Board Chair was the
eminent economist Jan Tinbergen, who received the first-ever Nobel Prize for
economics in 1969.

UNRISD's initial research focused on the design of indicators to measure
development not just in terms of economic growth but also social factors, such
as nutrition, health and education. As such, it employed many statisticians in
its early years. Another early project focused on cooperatives as a tool for
development, which produced some controversial results.

In the 1970s, global population growth made food production, supply and
eventually food systems into a key topic in development. UNRISD's work on the
so-called Green Revolution (the introduction of newly bred high-yield grain
seeds to increase food production) took a typically critical view. It
highlighted the fact that the quantity of food available was only one factor
in ensuring populations in developing countries were not subject to hunger.
Power inequalities impacting on the distribution of foodstuffs played a key
role in determining who got enough to eat and who didn't.

By the 1980s, UNRISD was growing in size, in terms of both funding and
staffing. Its remit diversified to cover popular participation and refugee
issues, gradually leaving some of its early preoccupation with statistics
behind.

In the 1990s UNRISD thrived. A wide range of topics were addressed, ranging
from political violence to the socioeconomic impact of illicit drugs.
Globalization in the modern era and structural adjustment programmes in
developing countries brought about social crises which UNRISD researched and
criticized, arguing that unregulated markets required a healthy public sector
and stable governance to function properly.

Environmental issues took firm root in development debates during this decade.
UNRISD's take was typically critical: whatever the benefits of conservation,
it was often happening at the expense of social justice and the livelihoods of
minorities.

In the 2000s, as globalization continued apace and social dimensions began to
be re-introduced in the face of the sometimes catastrophic impacts of wide-
ranging economic liberalization, UNRISD criticized a narrow social policy
focus on safety nets and the targeting of vulnerable groups, arguing instead
in favour of universal transformative social policy.

In the 2010s, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by
UN member states in 2015 established new global roadmap for development.
UNRISD continued to work on social policy, often in conjunction with questions
related to the 2030 Agenda. It also took up the new issue of the social and
solidarity economy (SSE) and its contribution to sustainable development.
Output on gender issues since 2016 fell due to a lack of gender capacity in-
house following staff restructuring. Environmental issues are re-emerging as a
key area of work, especially as they relate to social policy and climate
justice.

## UNRISD themes and projects

The current research agenda is shaped by three major contemporary development
challenges: inequalities, conflict and unsustainable practices. It consists of
three programmes:

  * Social Policy and Development
  * Gender and Development
  * Social Dimensions of Sustainable Development

These programmes pursue a variety of projects including the following, some of
which are recently completed, others are still underway:

  * Understanding Gender-Egalitarian Policy Change: When and Why Do States Respond to Women's Claims-Making? (2010–2014)
  * Politics of Domestic Resource Mobilization for Social Development (2011–2018)
  * Potential and Limits of Social and Solidarity Economy (2012–2013)
  * New Directions in Social Policy: Alternatives from and for the Global South (2013–2018)
  * Innovations in Care Policies (2015–2016)
  * Valueworks: Effects of Financialization along the Copper Value Chain (2017–2018)
  * Social and Solidarity Economy for the SDGs: Spotlight on the Social Economy in Seoul (2017–2018)
  * Just Transition Research Collaborative Phase 1 (2018)
  * SSE Knowledge Hub for the SDGs (2018–2019)
  * Overcoming Inequalities in a Fractured World: Between Elite Power and Social Mobilization (2018–2020)
  * Sustainable Development Performance Indicators (2018–2022)
  * Transformative Adaptation to Climate Change in Coastal Cities (2019)
  * South-South Migration, Inequality and Development Hub (2019–2023)

UNRISD has recently introduced a new way of sourcing projects in the form of
an "Ideas Incubator", in which it actively seeks partners to expand its
research portfolio.

## Publications

UNRISD makes its research widely available through books (in partnership with
publishers like Routledge, Palgrave Macmillan and Wiley Blackwell), research
papers and occasional papers (which are peer-reviewed) and working papers
(which are not peer-reviewed). UNRISD researchers also regularly contribute
articles to scholarly journals. These publications are typically of interest
to an academic audience.

Other publications target an audience of policy-makers, programme designers
and decision-makers. These take the form of briefs, whether research and
policy briefs, or briefs concerning a specific project, issue or event.

UNRISD maintains on online open access repository with over 1300 publications,
in the form of the publications section of its website. The majority of items
published after 1990 can be downloaded free of charge. Others are books which
can be obtained from the publisher.

Some of these publications have received international recognition, success
and incorporation into major global debates. UNRISD regularly publishes
flagship reports which synthesize a significant body of recent research.

### Key publications: Flagship reports

  * UNRISD. 2016. Policy Innovations for Transformative Change: Implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. UNRISD, Geneva
  * UNRISD. 2010. Combating Poverty and Inequality: Structural Change, Social Policy and Politics. UNRISD, Geneva
  * UNRISD. 2005. Gender Equality: Striving for Justice in an Unequal World. UNRISD. Geneva
  * UNRISD. 2000. Visible Hands: Taking Responsibility for Social Development. UNRISD, Geneva
  * UNRISD. 1995. States of Disarray: The Social Effects of Globalization. UNRISD, Geneva

## UNRISD events

UNRISD frequently convenes conferences and seminars, as a means of refining
and developing its research and to disseminate its findings. Its events are
often closely linked with its policy impact, being the forums where
development policy makers and practitioners can come into contact with
academics working on social development.

### Recent major UNRISD conferences

In November 2018 UNRISD held a major international conference in Geneva which
convened innovative research from the global South and North. The title of the
conference was **"Overcoming Inequalities in a Fractured World: Between Elite
Power and Social Mobilization"**. Keynote speeches were given by François
Bourguignon and Vandana Shiva. The conference was preceded by a roundtable
discussing whether elites are the engines of inequalities, featuring Naila
Kabeer (London School of Economics), Saskia Sassen (Columbia University) and
Jomo Kwame Sundaram (Council of Eminent Persons, Malaysia).

As part of the celebrations of its 50th anniversary, UNRISD co-hosted a
conference with the ILO (International Labour Organization) in 2013 entitled
**"The Potential and Limits of the Social and Solidarity Economy"**. The
conference featured prominent speakers such as Guy Ryder, Jose Luis Coraggio,
Paul Singer and Sarah Cook. Over 40 academics presented research findings to
about 400 participants. There were several side events including a PhD poster
session, book presentations, a practitioners' forum, movie screenings and a
special session on alternative finance and complementary currencies hosted by
the UN-NGLS.

In 2011, UNRISD organized a conference held in Geneva on climate change as a
social development issue called **"Green Economy and Sustainable Development:
Bringing Back the Social Dimension"**. The conference created a forum for
developing a conceptual and policy framework to position social dimensions at
the centre of green economy and sustainable development. Policy reports and
other publications prepared for this conference informed the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) preparatory process and
subsequent policy discussions.

### Seminar Series

In addition to its international conferences, UNRISD organises a regular
Seminar Series to provide a space for open, informed and insightful
conversation around contemporary issues of concern to social development
research and policy. Recent seminars have included:

  * **Blockchain for Inclusive and Sustainable Development: Fact or Fantasy?** \- Helen Hai (Blockchain Charity Foundation and UNIDO Goodwill Ambassador); Ivonne Higuero (UNECE); Leander Bindewald (MONNETA / Network for Monetary Diversity)
  * **Changing Course for Sustainable Development: Bold Alternatives to Business as Usual** \- Gita Sen (DAWN); Kate Donald (Center for Economic and Social Rights); Sandra Vermuyten (Public Services International); Ziad Abdel Samad (Arab NGO Network for Development)
  * **The Challenge of Leaving No One Behind: Securing Political Commitment for Inclusive Development** \- David Hulme (academic) (University of Manchester); Sam Hickey (University of Manchester); Sohela Nazneen (Institute of Development Studies, UK)
  * **Towards a Post-Neoliberal World Order: Rebuilding Human Rights-Based Multilateralism** \- Jeremy Corbyn (MP, United Kingdom); Arancha Gonzalez (Executive Director International Trade Centre); Nikhil Seth (Executive Director UNITAR)

## Outreach and communication

In recent years, UNRISD's outreach and communication strategy has focused on
four core objectives:

  * Increase the visibility of UNRISD as an institution;
  * Promote the use of its research findings;
  * Translate research findings into strong messages that can be communicated to a range of audiences;
  * Document and communicate the impact of UNRISD work.

Communication of the research findings has proven to be a key component in
strengthening the ultimate purpose and impact of UNRISD activities as well as
increasing recognition and use of UNRISD research by the UN system, academia,
civil society, and funding bodies.

UNRISD is currently active on LinkedIn, Facebook and Twitter; on the last of
these it has recently reached 31,000 followers. UNRISD also produces
multimedia material as a means of making seminars and conferences available
through online videos and podcasts

## Policy influence and impacts

UNRISD's position within the UN system allows it a significant degree of
policy influence, while its governance structure and funding situation (see
below) give it more latitude for independence than other UN entities enjoy.
Its staff serve on UN system-wide committees, task forces and expert groups,
and undertake collaborative research with other UN agencies.

UNRISD's independent international events, conferences, seminars and
symposiums (see above) are held in order to discuss and present research
findings and debates in select fields of focus. These events often draw in the
participation of local and international NGOs, government representatives, the
media, universities and other research institutes, as well as individual
researchers and academics. UNRISD events have also been co-hosted and co-
organized with co-operating universities, NGOs and local governments. This
extensive cooperation with social development stakeholders is one of the
Institute's key channels of policy influence and impact.

In 2014, UNRISD published a brochure detailing the impact of its work in terms
of its agenda-setting capacity, its multiple spheres of influence, and its
networking and capacity building.

## UNRISD Staffing Structure

UNRISD has a small core staff, located in Geneva, Switzerland, which
coordinates an international network of collaborating researchers.
Collaboration with UNRISD may take one of several forms. Original research may
be directly commissioned for a centrally coordinated research project.
Alternatively, researchers can respond to a Call for Papers and submit
research already underway for publication as part of an UNRISD project. UNRISD
also publishes think pieces on its website by collaborating scholars.

UNRISD's network of currently active collaborating researchers numbers over
400, with a large proportion from the global South.

## Governance

UNRISD is overseen by a Board, headed by a Chairperson who is appointed by the
UN Secretary-General. Board members are selected based on their expertise and
qualifications, and membership is confirmed by the UN Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC). Board members participate in their individual capacity and
do not represent UN member states. The Board reports to the Commission for
Social Development biennially.

**Chairs of the Board**

  * Jan Tinbergen, Netherlands (1963–1974)
  * H.M.A. Onitiri, Nigeria (1975)
  * M.T. Diawara, Côte d'Ivoire (1976–1982)
  * K.A. Naqvi, India (1977)
  * Gustavo Esteva, Mexico (1983)
  * Paul-Marc Henry, France (1984–1988)
  * Keith Griffin, United Kingdom (1989–1994)
  * Juan Somavia, Chile (1995–1997)
  * Emma Rothschild, United Kingdom (1998–2005)
  * Lourdes Arizpe, Mexico (2006–2011)
  * Maureen O'Neil, Canada (2012–2017)
  * Joakim Palme, Sweden (2017–present)

**Directors**

The Director reports to both the Board and to ECOSOC via the Commission for
Social Development. The Director is responsible for UNRISD's research
activities, fundraising and external relations with the UN secretariat, senior
UN officials, specialized agencies, donors and other research entities.
Directors are also actively engaged in research.

  * Jan F. de Jongh (1964–1967)
  * Donald V. McGranahan (1967–1977)
  * Solon L. Barraclough (1977–1984)
  * Enrique J. Oteiza (1984–1987)
  * Dharam Ghai (1987–1997)
  * Thandika Mkandawire (1998–2009)
  * Sarah Cook (2009–2015)
  * Paul Ladd (2015–2024)
  * Magdalena Sepúlveda Carmona (2024–Present)

## Funding

UNRISD relies wholly on voluntary funding from governments, development
agencies and foundations, receiving no funding from the United Nations budget.
This arrangement, while fluctuant, at the same time guarantees the Institute's
independent status and gives it a certain critical latitude.

The following governments have contributed to UNRISD over the past 50 years:
Australia, Austria, Canada, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Hungary, Iran, Iraq, Italy, Jamaica, Mexico, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Norway, the Republic of Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the
United States of America and Yugoslavia.