Operational arm of the United Nations

The **United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS)** is a United Nations
agency dedicated to implementing humanitarian and development projects for the
United Nations System, international financial institutions, governments and
other partners around the world, with a focus on infrastructure, procurement
and project management The organization's global headquarters is located at
the UN City campus in Copenhagen, Denmark. UNOPS delivers around $3 billion
worth of development projects for its partners every year. Its activities have
ranged from managing the construction of schools in Afghanistan, to building
shelters in Haiti, to procuring ambulances to support the Ebola response in
Liberia.

UNOPS is a member of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board and
Senior Management Group, the Environment Management Group (EMG), the United
Nations Sustainable Development Group and works closely with UN partners,
governments, international financial institutions and multilateral development
banks, such as: the World Bank, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria, United Nations Department of Peace Operations, Government of
Argentina, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the European Union, and the government of the United States.

## History and mission

UNOPS was established in 1973 as part of the UNDP. It became an independent,
self-financing organization in 1995. UNOPS concentrates its support in the
areas of infrastructure, procurement, project management, human resources and
financial management services. UNOPS often works in post-disaster and peace
and security settings, developing countries and economies in transition. In
December 2010, the United Nations General Assembly reaffirmed the mandate of
UNOPS "as a central resource for the UN system in procurement and contracts
management as well as in civil works and physical infrastructure development,
including the related capacity development activities". Examples of such works
include building roads, schools, and health clinics; removing landmines; and
providing expertise for holding elections.

A new headquarters of UNOPS opened in Copenhagen in May 2009.

Today, UNOPS delivers around $3 billion worth of projects each year in more
than 130 nations across the world.

## Financing

UNOPS is self-financing. It covers its costs by charging a fee on each project
supported. UNOPS is not-for-profit.

## Services

UNOPS offers implementation, advisory and transactional services in its five
core areas of expertise:

  * Infrastructure
  * Procurement
  * Project Management
  * Financial Management
  * Human Resources

UNOPS provides specialized services to a range of partners, including: the
United Nations, its agencies, funds and programmes; international financial
institutions; governments; intergovernmental organizations; non-governmental
organizations; foundations; and the private sector.

In 2023, UNOPS created more than 23 million days of paid work for
beneficiaries. The organization supported its partners with the construction,
design and/or rehabilitation of more than 187 kilometers of roads, 55 schools,
and 7 hospitals and 49 health clinics, among others. UNOPS also procured
and/or distributed more than US$1.6 billion worth of goods and services for
its partners.

UNOPS is the legal and administrative host for several organizations. The
following entities are currently under hosting agreements by UNOPS, grouped by
theme:

  * Health: RBM Partnership to End Malaria, Stop TB Partnership, ATscale Global Partnership
  * Nutrition: Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement
  * Water and sanitation: Sanitation and Hygiene Fund (established 2020); and previously Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council â€“ now defunct)
  * Sustainable urban development: Cities Alliance
  * Disaster displacement: Platform on Disaster Displacement

In addition, UNOPS also managers several multi-stakeholder partnerships and
initiatives, including:

  * Initiative for Climate Action Transparency
  * South East Asia Energy Transition Partnership
  * Santiago Network Secretariat (together with United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction)

UNOPS was involved in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

In 2023 during COP28, UNOPS and the UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction,
were selected to co-host the secretariat for the Santiago Network for Loss and
Damage. The Santiago Network, established to address climate change impacts in
developing countries, acts as a crucial connector between technical assistance
and the Loss & Damage Fund, enhancing the capacity of these countries to
manage climate-related losses and damages.

In 2024, the Secretary-General appointed UNOPS to operationalise the newly
created Office of Senior Humanitarian and Reconstruction Coordinator for Gaza.
Led by Sigrid Kaag, the office was created in response to the Gaza war in an
effort to accelerate humanitarian relief consignments to Gaza through States
which are not party to the conflict.

## Governance

In 2008, UNOPS adopted a governance structure in line with General Assembly
resolutions. Since then, the executive director reports directly to the UN
Secretary-General and the Executive Board, and has the authority to apply
United Nations staff rules and regulations to UNOPS staff. Since 2009 the
executive director has been able to sign host country agreements with
governments.

UNOPS is accountable to member states of the United Nations through its
Executive Board, which it shares with the UNDP and the United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA).

UNOPS is also accountable to the UN Board of Auditors who audit UNOPS on an
annual basis.

## Transparency

In September 2011, UNOPS joined the International Aid Transparency Initiative
(IATI), becoming the first UN body to publish operational data in the IATI
format in October of the same year. IATI seeks to make information on aid
spending easier to access, understand, and use. UNOPS, along with other
prominent organizations such as the Gates Foundation, the World Bank, and the
European Commission, contributes to this initiative by providing detailed,
machine-readable data on their projects.

Project-level information, including financial transactions, is published
monthly to the IATI Registry by UNOPS. UNOPS also maintains an online
platform, data.unops.org, which enhances the transparency of UNOPS operations.

## Certifications

UNOPS attained a ISO 9001 quality management system certification in June
2011.

UNOPS gained an ISO 14001 certification for its commitment to protecting the
environment in 2013.

UNOPS reports according to the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI)
sustainability standards.

## Infrastructure

### UNOPS partnership with the University of Oxford and UN Environment
Programme

UNOPS has worked with the University of Oxford and UN Environment Programme in
a number of collaborations that focus on enhancing the sustainability of
infrastructure. This includes the report Infrastructure for Climate Action.
The report highlights the substantial role of infrastructure in generating
greenhouse gas emissions and adaptation costs, accounting for 79% and 88%
respectively.

The report advocates for fundamental shifts in the planning, delivery, and
management of infrastructure to align with critical climate and development
targets. It emphasizes the integration of nature-based solutions, which can
tackle a broad spectrum of sustainable development challenges while mitigating
the impacts of climate change, biodiversity loss, and pollution.

## Procurement

In 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018 UNOPS achieved gold level in sustainable
procurement from the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.

In 2022, the UNOPS was presented with the annual Sustainable Procurement and
Supply Award by the UN High-Level Committee on Management's Procurement
Network. This recognition highlights UNOPS' commitment to sustainable
procurement practices that support social and economic development while
protecting the environment.

## Investigations (2023-present) by law enforcement agencies

In 2014, Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon appointed Grete Faremo as head of
UNOPS. Her appointment led to a change in direction for the organization.
Between 2014 and 2021 its portfolio of projects expanded from $1.14 billion to
more than $3.4 billion. She bragged about how she immediately saw to it that
"more than 1,200 pages of rules went into the trash" and that she would
"rewrite (its) operational principles" in the name of running UNOPS more like
a fast and agile business. Under her tenure, UNOPS shed its former reputation
as an invisible go-between meant to ease contracting. UNOPS found itself with
a surplus of funds it could use for itself. However, Faremo was accused of
managing the money incompetently at best, and corruptly at worst. As part of
an initiative called the "Sustainable Investments in Infrastructure and
Innovation", or S3i for short, millions of US dollars worth of donor money was
given to contractors that had repeatedly failed to work on the projects they
were given. The UN is expected to have to write down over $25 million in bad
loans.

Faremo's deputy Vitaly Vanshelboim was placed on executive leave, as the
United Nations Office of Internal Oversight Services investigated the
allegations and audited the matter. Vanshelboim was later sacked in early
2023. Faremo resigned in early May 2022 after an investigation by _The New
York Times_ drew attention to the problems under Faremo's tenure.
International development news publication, Devex and blogger, Mukesh Kapila,
also wrote a series of articles on the matter. In 2025, Vitaly-Vanshelboi, the
former Deputy, was remanded in Spain for "alleged bribery, money laundering
and electronic fraud". As of 2025, he is central in a corruption
investigation, that is being done by the FBI. Earlier (December 2021),

## List of executive directors

No.  | Executive Director  | Assumed office  | Left office  | Country of origin   
---|---|---|---|---  
1  | Reinhart Helmke  | January 1995  | January 2003  | Germany  
_Interim_ | Gerald Walzer  | February 2003  | August 2003  | Austria  
2  | Nigel Fisher  | August 2003  | October 2005  | United Kingdom  
_Interim_ | Gilberto Flores  | 14 November 2005  | 11 June 2006  | Chile  
3  | Jan Mattsson  | 12 June 2006  | 10 June 2014  | Sweden  
4  | Grete Faremo | 01 August 2014  | 8 May 2022  | Norway  
_Interim_ | Jens Wandel  | 9 May 2022  | 13 April 2023  | Denmark  
5  | Jorge Moreira da Silva | 14 April 2023  | incumbent  | Portugal  
  
Jens Wandel was appointed acting executive director of UNOPS by the Secretary-
General on 9 May 2022. Wandel had served the UN in many different capacities
over a long career, most recently as the Secretary-General's designate for the
COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund. Previously, he served as special adviser
to the Secretary-General on UN Reforms and before that he was Director of
UNDP's Bureau for Management Services. He was tasked with correcting the
failures surrounding UNOPS S3i initiative and reforming the organisation. His
plans to realign UNOPS were accepted by the executive board in June 2022.

In April 2023, Jorge Moreira da Silva was appointed executive director on an
initial two-year term.