UN agency supporting Palestinian refugees

UNRWA operations, as of 1 January 2020 UNRWA staff member comforts a
distressed child at a school shelter in Nuseirat camp, Gaza Strip

The **United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East** (**UNRWA** , pronounced /ˈʌnrə/ _UN -rə_) is a UN agency that
supports the relief and human development of Palestinian refugees. UNRWA's
mandate encompasses Palestinians who fled or were expelled during the Nakba,
the 1948 Palestine war, and subsequent conflicts, as well as their
descendants, including legally adopted children. As of 2019, more than 5.6
million Palestinians are registered with UNRWA as refugees.

UNRWA was established in 1949 by the UN General Assembly (UNGA) to provide
relief to all refugees resulting from the 1948 conflict; this initially
included Jewish and Arab Palestine refugees inside the State of Israel until
the Israeli government took over this responsibility in 1952. As a subsidiary
body of the UNGA, UNRWA's mandate is subject to periodic renewal every three
years; it has consistently been extended since its founding, most recently
until 30 June 2026.

UNRWA employs over 30,000 people, most of them Palestinian refugees, and a
small number of international staff. Originally intended to provide employment
and direct relief, its mandate has broadened to include providing education,
health care, and social services to its target population. UNRWA operates in
five areas: Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem; aid for Palestinian refugees outside these five
areas is provided by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), established in 1950 as the main agency to aid all other refugees
worldwide. UNRWA is the only UN agency dedicated to helping refugees from a
specific region or conflict.

UNRWA has received praise and recognition for its work by various governments,
public figures, and independent monitors. It has also been subject to
controversy related to its operations, role in the Gaza Strip, relationship
with Hamas, and textbook content. Most recently, the agency faced allegations
by the Israeli government that twelve of its employees were involved in the
October 7 attacks, leading to lay-offs, an investigation, and the temporary
suspension of funding by numerous donors. As of May 2024, several major donors
have since resumed funding as the investigation remains ongoing.[_needs
update_] In October 2024, Israel's parliament passed a bill designating UNRWA
as a terrorist group and prohibiting it from operating within the country.
Israel has long opposed the Palestinian right of return and has accused UNRWA
of "perpetuating the refugee issue". In January 2025, Israel's UNRWA ban went
into effect.

## History and operations

Total number of Palestinian refugees registered by UNRWA (1950–2008) Part of a
series on  
---  
Palestinians  
Demographics  
  
  * Definitions
  * Palestine
  * History
  * Name
  * People
  * Origin
  * Nakba
  * Diaspora

  
Politics  
  
    _Previous_

  * Arab Higher Committee  

    * Depopulated villages
  * All-Palestine Protectorate
    * Government
    * Fedayeen militias
  * PLO
  * National Authority (PNA)

    (political parties)

* * *

    _Current_

  * Fatah
  * Hamas
  * PFLP
  * Islamic Jihad
  * Politics of the Palestinian National Authority
    * Enclaves
    * Governorates
    * Cities
  * Gaza Strip governance (Hamas)
    * Governorates of the Gaza Strip
  * National Council (PNC)
  * Legislative Council (PLC)

* * *

  * Flag
  * Law

  * Palestine  

    * West Bank
    * Gaza Strip
    * East Jerusalem

  
Religion / religious sites  
  
  * Christianity (In Gaza)
  * Islam
  * Judaism
  * Al-Aqsa
  * Cave of the Patriarchs
  * Church of the Holy Sepulchre
  * Church of the Nativity
  * Dome of the Rock
  * Great Mosque of Gaza
  * Joseph's Tomb
  * Lot's Tomb
  * Nabi Samwil
  * Rachel's Tomb

  
Culture  
  
  * Art
  * Cinema
  * Costume and embroidery
  * Cuisine
  * _Dabke_ (dance)
  * Handicrafts
  * Language
  * Literature
  * Music

  
List of Palestinians  
  
  * v
  * t
  * e

  
  
Following the outbreak of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War and the 1948 Palestinian
expulsion and flight of Palestinian Arabs, the United Nations General Assembly
passed Resolution 212 (III), dated 19 November 1948, which established the UN
Relief for Palestine Refugees (UNRPR) to provide emergency relief to Palestine
refugees in coordination with other UN or humanitarian agencies. In response
to the political aspects of the conflict, less than a month later the General
Assembly adopted Resolution 194, creating the United Nations Conciliation
Commission for Palestine (UNCCP), mandated to help achieve a final settlement
between the warring parties, including facilitating "the repatriation,
resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation of the refugees" in
collaboration with the UNRPR. By that time, the conflict had displaced over
700,000 people.

Unable to resolve the "Palestine problem" which required political solutions
beyond the scope of its mandate, the UNCCP recommended the creation of a
"United Nations agency designed to continue relief activities and initiate
job-creation projects" while an ultimate resolution was pending. Pursuant to
this recommendation and to paragraph 11 of Resolution 194 which concerned
refugees, on 8 December 1949 the General Assembly adopted Resolution 302(IV)
which established the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The resolution was adopted and passed
unopposed, supported by Israel and the Arab states with only the Soviet bloc
and South Africa abstaining.

UNRWA succeeded the UNRPR with a broader mandate for humanitarian assistance
and development and the requirement to function neutrally. When it began
operations in 1950 the initial scope of its work was "direct relief and works
programmes" to Palestine refugees in order to "prevent conditions of
starvation and distress… and to further conditions of peace and stability".
UNRWA's mandate was expanded in December 1950 through Resolution 393(V) which
instructed the agency to "establish a reintegration fund which shall be
utilized ... for the permanent re-establishment of refugees and their removal
from relief". A 26 January 1952 resolution allocated four times as much
funding on reintegration than on relief, requesting UNRWA to otherwise
continue providing programs for health care, education, and general welfare.

### Definition of refugee

UNRWA has developed its own working definition of "refugee" to allow it to
provide humanitarian assistance. Its definition does not cover final status.

> Palestine refugees are "persons whose regular place of residence was
> Palestine during the period 1 June 1946 to 15 May 1948, and who lost both
> home and means of livelihood as a result of the 1948 conflict."

The Six-Day War of 1967 generated a new wave of Palestinian refugees who could
not be included in the original UNRWA definition. Since 1991, the UN General
Assembly has adopted an annual resolution allowing the 1967 refugees within
the UNRWA mandate. UNRWA's "mandate" is not a single document but the sum of
all relevant resolutions and requests of the General Assembly. While focused
on Palestine refugees, it also extends to persons displaced by "the 1967 and
subsequent hostilities" and occasionally to a broader cross-section of the
local community. Several categories of persons have long been registered as
eligible to receive UNRWA services although not "Palestine refugees". The
descendants of Palestine refugee males, including adopted children, are also
eligible for registration as refugees.

## Organisation and mandate

UNRWA is a subsidiary organ of the United Nations General Assembly,
established pursuant to Articles 7(2) and 22 of the UN Charter. It is one of
two UN agencies that reports directly to the General Assembly. The scope and
renewal of UNRWA's mandate is determined primarily by resolutions of the
General Assembly; unlike other UN agencies, such as the World Health
Organization or the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, it lacks
a constitution or statute. The mandate may also be shaped by requests from
other UN organs, such as the Secretary-General. The General Assembly passes a
series of resolutions annually that address UNRWA's responsibilities,
functions, and budget. As it is technically a temporary organisation, the
agency's mandate is extended every three years.

UNRWA is led by a Commissioner-General—since 8 March 2020 Philippe Lazzarini
of Switzerland—an Under-Secretary-General of the UN responsible for managing
all of the agency's activities and personnel. The Commissioner-General selects
and appoints all the agency's staff, pursuant to internal rules and
regulations, and reports directly to the General Assembly. UNRWA's operations
are organised into five fields—Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, West Bank, and
Gaza—each led by a director who is in charge of distributing humanitarian aid
and overseeing general UNRWA operations. The agency's headquarters are divided
between the Gaza Strip and Amman, with the latter hosting the Deputy
Commissioner-General, currently Leni Stenseth of Norway, who administers
departmental activities such as education, healthcare, and finance. UNRWA is
the largest agency of the United Nations, employing over 30,000 staff, 99% of
which are locally recruited Palestinians. [_needs update_]

### Advisory Commission

Concurrent with the creation of UNRWA, the UN General Assembly established an
Advisory Commission (AdCom) to assist the Commissioner-General in carrying out
UNRWA's mandate. Created with four members, the AdCom currently has 28 members
and four observers. Membership is obtained via General Assembly resolutions,
with all host countries of Palestinian refugees (Jordan, Syria, Lebanon)
sitting on the commission followed by the 24 leading donors and supporters of
UNRWA. Palestine, the European Union, and the League of Arab States have had
observer status since 2005, with the Organisation for Islamic Cooperation
joining as an observer in 2019.

Members of the AdCom, including the year they joined, are: Australia (2005),
Belgium (1953), Brazil (2014), Canada (2005), Denmark (2005), Egypt (1949),
Finland (2008), France (1949), Germany (2005), Ireland (2008), Italy (2005),
Japan (1973), Jordan (1949), Kazakhstan (2013), Kuwait (2010), Lebanon (1953),
Luxembourg (2012), Netherlands (2005), Norway (2005), Qatar (2018), Saudi
Arabia (2005), Spain (2005), Sweden (2005), Switzerland (2005), Syria (1949),
Turkey (1949), United Arab Emirates (2014), the United Kingdom (1949), and the
United States (1949).

The Advisory Commission is led by a chair and a vice-chair, representing a
host country and a donor country, respectively. Each is appointed annually in
June from among the Commission members according to the alphabetical rotation,
serving for one year beginning 1 July. At each appointment, the chair will
alternate between a host and a donor country.

The AdCom meets twice a year, usually in June and November, to discuss
important issues of UNRWA and develop a consensus-based guidance for the
Commissioner-General. Additionally, members and observers convene more
regularly through sub-committee meetings. The AdCom also conducts periodic
field visits to UNRWA's area of operations.

### Areas of operation

UNRWA services are available to all registered Palestine refugees living in
its area of operations who need assistance. When UNRWA began operations in
1950, it was responding to the needs of about 700,000 Palestinian refugees. By
2023, some 5.9 million people were registered as eligible for UNRWA services.
UNRWA provides facilities in 59 recognized refugee camps in Jordan, Lebanon,
Syria, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip, and in other areas where large
numbers of registered Palestine refugees live outside of recognized camps.

For a camp to be recognized by UNRWA, there must be an agreement between the
host government and UNRWA governing the use of the camp. UNRWA does not itself
run camps, has no police powers or administrative role, but simply provides
services in the camp. Refugee camps, which developed from tent cities to dense
urban dwellings similar to their urban surroundings, house around one-third of
all registered Palestine refugees.[_citation needed_]

## Funding

2022 UNRWA funding by country in US dollars  Over $100,000,000 Over $50,000,000 Over $25,000,000 Over $10,000,000 |  Over $5,000,000 Over $1,000,000 Under $1,000,000 No donations  
---|---  
  
UNRWA's budget is set by the UN General Assembly and derives almost entirely
from voluntary contributions by UN member states. It also receives some
revenue from the regular UN budget, mostly for international staffing costs.
In addition to its regular budget, UNRWA receives funding for emergency
activities and special projects, such as in response to the Syrian civil war
and the COVID-19 pandemic.

Historically, most of the agency's funds came from the United States and the
European Commission; in 2019, close to 60 percent of its pledge of $1 billion
came from EU countries, with Germany being the largest individual donor. The
next largest donors were the EU, United Kingdom, Sweden, and the United Arab
Emirates, followed by Saudi Arabia, France, Japan, Qatar, and the Netherlands.
UNRWA also establishes partnerships with nongovernmental donors, including
nonprofit "national committees" based in donor countries.

The voluntary nature of UNRWA funding has led to budgetary problems due to
acute emergencies or political developments in donor countries. In 2009,
officials spoke of a "dire financial crisis", including a funding shortfall of
$200 million, in the wake of the Israeli offensive in Gaza. In August 2018,
the U.S. ceased its contributions, arguing that UNRWA's mandate should be
reduced to the few hundred thousand Palestinians alive when the agency was
created. The U.S. decision resulted in the loss of $300 million out of the
$1.2 billion budget, contributing to an overall deficit of $446 million. The
shortfall was covered with increased contributions from elsewhere.

UNRWA Commissioner-General Philippe Lazzarini with US Secretary Antony Blinken
in Amman, Jordan, 4 November 2023

In mid-2019, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Switzerland temporarily suspended
funding to UNRWA, citing ethics report that alleged mismanagement, corruption,
and discrimination among the agency's leadership. In December 2019, the
Netherlands restored its funding, increasing its donation by €6 million for
2019, to €19 million. The EU increased its contribution from €82 million
($92.2 million) by €21 million ($23.3 million), and Germany agreed to fund
four new UNRWA projects, totaling €59 million ($65.6 million). Qatar increased
its donation for Palestinians in Syria by $20.7 million, bringing the 2019
total to $40 million.

The funding situation for 2019 and beyond was discussed in April at a
"Ministerial Strategic Dialogue" attended by representatives from Egypt,
France, Germany, Japan, Kuwait, Norway, United Kingdom, the European External
Action Service, and the European Commission. At the annual meeting of the
General Assembly that year, a high-level ministerial meeting was held
regarding UNRWA funding. In July 2020 Commissioner-General Lazzarini warned
that UNRWA's budget was "not sustainable", with shortfalls in four out of the
five previous years, and funding at its lowest point since 2012. According to
the World Bank, for all countries receiving more than $2 billion in
international aid in 2012, Gaza and the West Bank received a per capita aid
budget over double the next largest recipient, at a rate of $495.

In January 2010, the Government of Canada announced that it was redirecting
aid previously earmarked to UNRWA to projects under the Palestinian Authority.
Previously, Canada provided UNRWA with 11 percent of its budget at $10 million
(Canadian) annually. The decision came despite positive internal evaluations
of the Agency by CIDA officials. The 2010 Canadian decision put it very much
at odds with the US and EU, which maintained or increased their levels of
funding. Some suggested that the decision also cost Canada international
support in its failed October 2010 effort to obtain a seat on the UN Security
Council. Documents obtained from CIDA revealed that even the government of
Israel opposed the Canadian move which had asked Canada to resume
contributions to UNRWA's General Fund.

EU suspended funding for UNRWA in January 2024 but reinstated the funding
later on March 1, 2024. In 2024, the Swiss National Council voted to cut
finding to UNWRA, citing concerns of antisemitism and connections to
terrorism; the legislation will need to pass Council of States to go into
effect.

## Operations

UNRWA provides a wide variety of social and humanitarian services, as
determined by resolutions of the UN General Assembly. Since its initial
establishment in 1949, its operations have expanded beyond immediate relief
and social services; as of 2019, the bulk of its budget is spent on education
(58 percent), followed by health care (15 percent), and general support
services (13 percent).

### Education programme

Education is UNRWA's largest area of activity, accounting for more than half
its regular budget and the majority of its staff. It operates one of the
largest school systems in the Middle East, spanning 711 elementary and
preparatory schools, eight vocational and technical schools, and two teacher
training institutes. It has been the main provider of basic education to
Palestinian refugee children since 1950. Free basic education is available to
all registered refugee children, currently numbering 526,000. In the 1960s,
UNRWA schools became the first in the region to achieve full gender equality,
and a slight majority of enrolled students are female.

Half the Palestine refugee population is under 25. Overcrowded classrooms
containing 40 or even 50 pupils are common. Almost three-quarters run on a
double-shift system, where two separate groups of pupils and teachers share
the same buildings, thus reducing teaching time. The school year is often
interrupted by conflicts, prompting UNRWA to develop a special programme that
provides education in emergency situations.

Per the longstanding agreement, UNRWA schools follow the curriculum of their
host countries. This allows UNRWA pupils to progress to further education or
employment holding locally recognised qualifications and complies with the
sovereignty requirements of countries hosting refugees. Wherever possible,
UNRWA students take national exams conducted by the host governments.

### Relief and social services programme

Women receiving bread from United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees
(UNRPR), 1948: photo from UNRWA Archive

UNRWA provides food aid, cash assistance, and help with shelter repairs to
these families. In addition, children from special hardship case families are
given preferential access to the Agency's vocational training centres, while
women in such families are encouraged to join UNRWA's women's programme
centres. In these centres, training, advice, and childcare are available to
encourage female refugees' social development. In Palestinian refugee society,
families without a male head of household are often vulnerable. Those headed
by a widow, a divorcee, or a disabled father often live in dire poverty. These
families are considered "hardship cases" and constitute less than 6% of UNRWA
beneficiaries.

UNRWA has created community-based organizations (CBOs) to target women,
refugees with disabilities, and to look after the needs of children. The CBOs
now have their own management committees staffed by volunteers from the
community. UNRWA provides them with technical and small sums of targeted
financial assistance, but many have formed links of their own with local and
international NGOs.

### Health program

Since 1950, UNRWA has been the main healthcare provider for Palestinian
refugees. Basic health needs are met through a network of primary care
clinics, providing access to secondary treatment in hospitals, food aid to
vulnerable groups, and environmental health in refugee camps.

Key figures for 2014 are:

  * 139 primary health facilities based in or near UNRWA settlements/camps
  * 3,107 health staff
  * 3,134,732 refugees accessing health services
  * 9,290,197 annual patient visits

The health of Palestine refugees has long resembled that of many populations
in the transition from developing world to developed world status. However,
there is now a demographic transition.

> People are living longer and developing different needs, particularly those
> related to non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and chronic conditions that
> require lifelong care, such as diabetes, hypertension, and cancer. A healthy
> life is a continuum of phases from infancy to old age, each of which has
> unique, specific needs, and our programme therefore takes a 'life-cycle
> approach' to providing its package of preventive and curative health
> services.
>
> To address the changing needs of Palestine refugees, we undertook a major
> reform initiative in 2011. We introduced the Family Health Team (FHT)
> approach, based on the World Health Organization-indicated values of primary
> health care, in our primary health facilities (PHFs).
>
> The FHT offers comprehensive primary health care services based on wholistic
> care of the entire family, emphasizing long-term provider-patient
> relationships and ensuring person-centeredness, comprehensiveness, and
> continuity. Moreover, the FHT helps address intersectional issues that
> impact health, such as diet and physical activity, education, gender-based
> violence, child protection, poverty, and community development.

Medical services include outpatient care, dental treatment, and rehabilitation
for the physically disabled. Maternal and child healthcare is a priority for
UNRWA's health program. School health teams and camp medical officers visit
UNRWA schools to examine new pupils to aid early detection of childhood
diseases. All UNRWA clinics offer family planning services with counselling
that emphasises the importance of birth spacing as a factor in maternal and
child health. Agency clinics also supervise the provision of food aid to
nursing and pregnant mothers who need it, and six clinics in the Gaza Strip
have their own maternity units. Infant mortality rates have for some time been
lower among refugees than the World Health Organization's benchmark for the
developing world.

UNRWA provides refugees with assistance in meeting the costs of
hospitalisation either by partially reimbursing them, or by negotiating
contracts with government, NGOs, and private hospitals. UNRWA's environmental
health services program "controls the quality of drinking water, provides
sanitation, and carries out vector and rodent control in refugee camps, thus
reducing the risk of epidemics."

### Microfinance Department

UNRWA's Microfinance Department (MD) aims to alleviate poverty and support
economic development in the refugee community by providing capital investment
and working capital loans at commercial rates. The programme seeks to be as
close to self-supporting as possible. It has a strong record of creating
employment, generating income, and empowering refugees.

The MD is an autonomous financial unit within UNRWA, established in 1991 to
provide microfinance services to Palestine refugees, as well as poor or
marginal groups living and working in close proximity to them. With operations
in three countries, the MD currently has the broadest regional coverage of any
microfinance institution in the Middle East. Having begun its operations in
the Palestinian territories, it remains the largest non-bank financial
intermediary in the West Bank and Gaza.

Key figures, cumulative as of 2023 are:

  * 29,000 number of loans awarded
  * US$531.41 million value of loans awarded
  * 25% youth outreach
  * 48% women outreach

### Emergency operations

| This section **does notcite any sources**. Please help improve this section
by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged
and removed. _( January 2024)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
UNRWA takes a wide variety of actions to mitigate the effects of emergencies
on the lives of Palestine refugees. Particularly in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip (occupied Palestinian territory) there has been ongoing intervention
made necessary by, e.g., the 1967 War as well as the first and second
intifadas, and the 2014 Gaza War. The reconstruction work at Nahr el-Bared
Palestine refugee camp in Lebanon has been the largest reconstruction project
ever undertaken by UNRWA. This work began in 2009 and was made necessary when
the camp was destroyed in the fighting between the Lebanese Armed Forces and
Fatah al-Islam in 2007.

Services range from supplying temporary shelter, water, food, clothing, and
blankets to temporary job-creation and help for rebuilding. There is extensive
cooperation with other international NGOs and local actors.

### Infrastructure and camp/settlement improvement

As of 2023, there are 58 official refugee camps for Palestinians, of which
nine are undergoing active improvement. 6 million refugees were registered
with UNRWA, with 1.37 million in Gaza using a UNRWA camp. The camps are
neither owned nor administered by the Agency; host governments are responsible
for allocating land (mostly of which is privately owned) and providing
security and order. Rather, UNRWA is responsible for operating education,
health, relief and social services, microfinance, and emergency assistance
programmes, some of which may be located outside the camps.

However, as the camps have gradually transformed from temporary "tent" cities
to semi-permanent and dense urban environments, UNRWA has characterized them
as "hyper-congested" and "overcrowded" with "critically substandard and in
many cases life-threatening" infrastructure. In response, in 2007 the Agency
launched the Infrastructure and Camp Improvement Programme (ICIP) to improve
spatial and environmental conditions through comprehensive urban planning
methods and community engagement. ICIP is implemented differently in each host
country based on local needs, resources, and priorities, albeit with a broader
focus on rehabilitating or reconstructing existing shelters, building new
housing or service centers, providing maintenance, and improving public
infrastructure such as sanitation and water drainage.

Following the destruction of much of the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp in
northern Lebanon in 2007, resulting from months of fighting between Fatah al-
Islam militants and the Lebanese Armed Forces, UNRWA led the initiative to
rebuild the camp, in what has become the largest project in its history. As of
April 2021, nearly two-thirds (72 percent) of the camp has been reconstructed,
including 386 shops and businesses, enabling 3,550 families to return. Special
funding has been provided by Saudi Arabia, Japan, the Netherlands, and the
United Arab Emirates.

### Photo and film archives

Men dig a mass grave for victims of the Sabra and Shatila massacre, 1982, from
the UNRWA Archive

Throughout its history, UNRWA has collected photographs and film to document
the lives of refugees as well as relief efforts. These materials are produced
by UNRWA staff or by external contractors, including photographers working for
other UN agencies. An initial batch of photographs were provided by staff of
the Red Cross, covering a period before UNRWA was active. As of 2008, the
collection had grown to around 10,000 photographs, 400,000 negatives, 15,000
colour slides, 75 films, and 400 videotapes. These are stored in UNRWA
facilities in Gaza and Amman. The images and films come from the five areas
where the agency is active: Gaza, Jerusalem, the West Bank, Lebanon, and
Syria. In 2009, UNESCO added this collection to its Memory of the World
International Register, recognising it as documentary heritage of global
importance. In 2012, UNRWA began digitising this archive and making images
available online.

## Assessment and praise

UNRWA has received praise from Nobel Peace laureates Mairéad Corrigan Maguire
and Kofi Annan, the president of the UN General Assembly, former UN Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, and representatives from the European Union, the United
States, the Netherlands, Japan, Bangladesh, Cyprus, Jordan, Ghana, and Norway,
among others. In 2007, the permanent representative of Norway to the United
Nations described his country as a "strong supporter" of UNRWA, which acts as
"a safety net" for the Palestine refugees, providing them with "immediate
relief, basic services and the possibility of a life in dignity". The same
day, the representative of Iceland praised the agency's ability to "deliver
substantial results" despite "often life-threatening conditions".

In 2007, Israel expressed its continued support for UNRWA, noting that despite
"concerns regarding the politicization" of the agency, the country supports
its humanitarian mission.

On 17 January 2024, US State Department spokesperson Matthew Miller rejected
calls to defund UNRWA, saying:

> UNRWA has done and continues to do invaluable work to address the
> humanitarian situation in Gaza at great personal risk to UNRWA members. I
> believe it’s over 100 UNRWA staff members have been killed doing this
> lifesaving work, and we continue to not only support it but we continue to
> commend them for the really heroic efforts that they make oftentimes while
> making the greatest sacrifice.

### Independent evaluations

In 2011, UNRWA agreed to be assessed by the Multilateral Organisation
Performance Assessment Network (MOPAN), a network of donor countries
established to determine the organisational effectiveness of multilateral
organisations. Based on four dimensions of organisational
effectiveness—strategic management, operational management, relationship
management, and knowledge management—MOPAN concluded that the agency performs
adequately or well in most key indicators, particularly within strategic
management. UNRWA responded to the result positively, noting that "many of the
challenges highlighted in the report reflect challenges within most, if not
all, multilateral organisations." In its most recent assessment in 2019, MOPAN
commended UNRWA for continuing to increase the efficiency of its programmes,
recognizing the agency as "competent, resilient and resolute".

## Criticism and issues

In 2004, Emanuel Marx and Nitza Nachmias pointed out that many criticisms of
the agency corresponded to its age, "including symptoms of inflexibility,
resistance to adjust to the changing political environment, and refusal to
phase out and transfer its responsibilities to the Palestinian Authority".

In 2007, UNRWA initiated a reform program to improve efficiency. However, an
internal ethics report leaked to _Al Jazeera_ in 2019 alleged that, since
2015, the agency's senior management have consolidated power at the expense of
efficiency, leading to widespread misconduct, nepotism, and other abuses of
power among high ranking personnel. Responding to the _Al Jazeera_ report,
UNRWA issued a statement that both internal and external assessments of its
management have been "positive":

> A recent report by an external group of experts (MOPAN) [Multilateral
> Organisation Performance Assessment Network] has just shown satisfactory
> (and at times very satisfactory) results of UNRWA's management and impact -
> which is particularly important for us during these times of intense
> political and financial pressure on the agency ... Similarly, the United
> Nations Board of Auditors recognized the quality of the management and
> leadership of UNRWA. Finally, the 2018 annual report recently presented by
> UNRWA's Department of Internal Oversight Services and Ethics Division - both
> independent bodies - to UNRWA's Advisory Commission (host countries and
> largest donors) confirmed these positive assessments. These reports testify
> to the strength of this Agency and are a matter of public record.

### Mandate

Some critics of UNRWA have argued that it serves to perpetuate the conflict.
Although UNRWA's mandate is only for relief works, _The Wall Street Journal
Europe_ , published an op-ed by Asaf Romirowsky and Alexander H. Joffe in
April 2011 saying that "it is hard to claim that the UNRWA has created any
Palestinian institutions that foster genuinely civil society. Ideally, the
UNRWA would be disbanded and Palestinians given the freedom – and the
responsibility – to build their own society."

The UNHCR is mandated to help refugees get on with their lives as quickly as
possible and works to settle them rapidly, most frequently in countries other
than those they fled. UNRWA policy, however, states that the Palestinian Arabs
who fled from Israel in the course of the 1948 war, plus all of their
descendants, are to be considered refugees until a just and durable solution
can be found by political actors. UNRWA was specifically designed not to
prescribe how the outcome of an agreement would take shape.

James G. Lindsay, a former UNRWA general counsel and fellow researcher for
Washington Institute for Near East Policy, published a report for in 2009 in
which he criticized UNRWA practices. One of his conclusions was that UNRWA's
failure to match the UNHCR's success in resettling refugees "obviously
represents a political decision on the part of the agency" and "seems to favor
the strain of Palestinian political thought espoused by those who are intent
on a 'return' to the land that is now Israel".

### Operations

#### Protection of Palestinian refugees

Asem Khalil, Associate Professor of Law at Birzeit University and dean of the
Faculty of Law and Public Administration, has focused on human rights issues
for Palestinians in host countries. After systematically documenting the human
rights situation for Palestinians in Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria, he
concludes:

> The point this approach is stresses, I believe, is not that UNRWA is not
> necessary or that Palestinian refugeehood is not unique and special, but
> rather that UNRWA is not currently capable of ensuring necessary protection
> for Palestinian refugees, and that host Arab states cannot use the
> uniqueness of Palestinian refugeehood to continue upholding discriminatory
> laws and policies towards Palestinian refugees. ...
>
> The global financial crisis may result in decreasing international funds to
> UNRWA, and UNRWA may be pushed towards reducing its services. Such a
> scenario will be felt by Palestinian refugees in particular ways, seeing the
> absence of alternative sources of income and the restrictive laws and
> policies that exist in some host countries. UNRWA is a main service provider
> for Palestinian refugees in host countries. It provides jobs for thousands
> of refugees, education, health care, and various other services that are
> extremely valuable and necessary.
>
> ... The issue at stake here is that UNRWA is not enough, but the alternative
> is not the replacement of UNRWA by UNHCR, rather the enhancement of the
> protection role of UNRWA, or the extension of protection mandate of UNHCR to
> Palestinian refugees besides (not instead) existing agencies dealing with
> Palestinian refugees ...

#### Textbook issues

In 2005 Nathan Brown, Professor of Political Science at George Washington
University, reviewed textbooks used by Palestinians, focusing especially on
changes starting in 1994.

> The Oslo agreements resulted in the dismantling of the Israeli office
> responsible for censorship of textbooks. Administration of the education
> system for all Palestinian students in the West Bank and Gaza was taken over
> by the Palestinian Authority. Other Palestinian schools administered by
> UNRWA in neighboring countries were unaffected. With the end of UNESCO
> monitoring of the books, UNRWA moved to develop supplementary materials to
> teach tolerance in the schools it administered.

It is the PA textbooks used in UNRWA schools in the West Bank, Gaza, and East
Jerusalem that have been most extensively studied. In the beginning, the PA
used books from Jordan and Egypt. In 2000 it started issuing its own books.
Brown has pointed out that research into Palestinian textbooks conducted by
the Centre for Monitoring the Impact of Peace in 1998 is misleading because it
evaluates the old books; and in 2000, its research mixed old and new books.
Brown investigated the differences between the new PA books and the ones being
replaced.

Regarding the Palestinian Authority's new textbooks, he states:

> The new books have removed the anti-Semitism present in the older books
> while they tell history from a Palestinian point of view, they do not seek
> to erase Israel, delegitimize, it or replace it with the "State of
> Palestine"; each book contains a foreword describing the West Bank and Gaza
> as "the two parts of the homeland"; the maps show some awkwardness but do
> sometimes indicate the 1967 line and take some other measures to avoid
> indicating borders; in this respect they are actually more forthcoming than
> Israeli maps; the books avoid treating Israel at length but do indeed
> mention it by name; the new books must be seen as a tremendous improvement
> from a Jewish, Israeli, and humanitarian view; they do not compare
> unfavorably to the material my son was given as a fourth-grade student in a
> school in Tel Aviv".

In 2002, the United States Congress requested the United States Department of
State to commission a reputable NGO to conduct a review of the new Palestinian
curriculum. The Israel/Palestine Center for Research and Information (IPCRI)
was thereby commissioned by the US Embassy in Tel Aviv and the US Consul
General in Jerusalem to review the textbooks. Its report was completed in
March 2003 and delivered to the State Department for submission to Congress.
Its executive summary states: "The overall orientation of the curriculum is
peaceful despite the harsh and violent realities on the ground. It does not
openly incite against Israel and the Jews. It does not openly incite hatred
and violence. Religious and political tolerance is emphasized in a good number
of textbooks and in multiple contexts."

IPCRI's June 2004 follow-up report notes that "except for calls for resisting
occupation and oppression, no signs were detected of outright promotion of
hatred towards Israel, Judaism, or Zionism" and that "tolerance, as a concept,
runs across the new textbooks". The report also stated that "textbooks
revealed numerous instances that introduce and promote the universal and
religious values and concepts of respect of other cultures, religions, and
ethnic groups, peace, human rights, freedom of speech, justice, compassion,
diversity, plurality, tolerance, respect of law, and environmental awareness".

However, the IPCRI noted a number of deficiencies in the curriculum.

> The practice of 'appropriating' sites, areas, localities, geographic
> regions, etc. inside the territory of the State of Israel as
> Palestine/Palestinian observed in our previous review, remains a feature of
> the newly published textbooks (4th and 9th Grade) laying substantive grounds
> to the contention that the Palestinian Authority did not in fact recognize
> Israel as the State of the Jewish people. ...

The summary also states that the curriculum asserts a historical Arab presence
in the region, while:

> The Jewish connection to the region, in general, and the Holy Land, in
> particular, is virtually missing. This lack of reference is perceived as
> tantamount to a denial of such a connection, although no direct evidence is
> found for such a denial." It also notes that "terms and passages used to
> describe some historical events are sometimes offensive in nature and could
> be construed as reflecting hatred of and discrimination against Jews and
> Judaism."

The US State Department has similarly raised concerns about the content of
textbooks used in PA schools. In its 2009 Human Rights report, the US
Department of State wrote that after a 2006 revision of textbooks by the PA
Ministry of Education and Higher Education, international academics concluded
that books did not incite violence against Jews but showed imbalance, bias,
and inaccuracy. The examples given were similar to those given by IPCRI.

In 2013 the results of a rigorous study, which also compared Israeli textbooks
to PA textbooks, came out. The study was launched by the Council for Religious
Institutions in the Holy Land, an interfaith association of Jewish, Christian,
and Muslim leaders in Israel and the Occupied Territories. The study was
overseen by an international Scientific Advisory Panel and funded by the US
State Department The Council published a report "Victims of Our Own
Narratives? Portrayal of the 'Other' in Israeli and Palestinian School Books".
Most books were found to be factually accurate except, for example, through
presenting maps that present the area from the river to the sea as either
Palestine or Israel. Israeli schoolbooks were deemed superior to Palestinian
ones with regard to preparing children for peace, although various depictions
of the "other" as enemy occurred in 75% of Israeli, and in 81% of Palestinian
textbooks. The study praised both Israel and the Palestinian Authority for
producing textbooks almost completely unblemished by "dehumanizing and
demonizing characterizations of the other". Yet many troubling examples were
given of both sides failing to represent each other in a positive or even
adequate way. And the problem was more pronounced in PA textbooks.

  * Neutral depictions of "the other" were found in 4% of Israeli, and 15% of Palestinian textbooks.
  * Overall negative or very negative representations of Palestinians occurred 49% of the time in Israeli state school books (73% in Haredi school books) and in 84% of Palestinian textbooks.
  * Highly negative characterizations were discerned in 26% of Israeli state school books and 50% of the Palestinian ones.

In response to a critical report[_citation needed_] written in 2009 by former
UNRWA general counsel James G. Lindsay, fellow researcher for Washington
Institute for Near East Policy John Ging, head of UNRWA Gaza, said: "As for
our schools, we use textbooks of the Palestinian Authority. Are they perfect?
No, they're not. I can't defend the indefensible."

UNRWA has taken many steps since 2000 to supplement the PA curriculum with
concepts of human rights, nonviolent conflict resolution, and tolerance.
According to the UNRWA website:[_non-primary source needed_]

> We have been delivering human rights education in our schools since 2000 to
> promote non-violence, healthy communication skills, peaceful conflict
> resolution, human rights, tolerance, and good citizenship. In May 2012, the
> Agency endorsed its new Human Rights, Conflict Resolution and Tolerance
> (HRCRT) Policy to further strengthen human rights education in UNRWA. This
> policy builds upon past successes, but also draws from international best
> practices and paves the way to better integrate human rights education in
> all our schools. The HRCRT Policy reflects the UNRWA mandate of quality
> education for Palestine refugees and sets out a common approach among all
> UNRWA schools for the teaching and learning of human rights, conflict
> resolution and tolerance. The vision of the policy is to "provide human
> rights education that empowers Palestine refugee students to enjoy and
> exercise their rights, uphold human rights values, be proud of their
> Palestinian identity, and contribute positively to their society and the
> global community."

In 2021, the Australian and Canadian governments started investigating UNRWA,
and the British government found that UNRWA had produced and disseminated
textbooks inciting violence. UNRWA blocked public access to its website
contents in response. Phillipe Lazzarini admitted to the European Parliament
that the study materials in UNRWA's schools featured incitement to violence,
glorification of acts of terror, and antisemitism, but insisted that the
agency takes steps to prevent the material from being taught.

A review performed in 2024 names using "host-country textbooks with
problematic content" as one of the issues with UNRWA's neutrality. The review
states "Three international assessments of PA textbooks in recent years have
provided a nuanced picture,..Two identified presence of bias and antagonistic
content, but did not provide evidence of antisemitic content. The third
assessment, by the [German-based] Georg Eckert Institute, studied 156 PA
textbooks and identified two examples that it found to display antisemitic
motifs but noted that one of them had already been removed, the other has been
altered."

#### Relationship with Hamas

In October 2004 UNRWA Commissioner-General Peter Hansen caused controversy in
Canada when he said in an interview with CBC TV:

> Oh I am sure that there are Hamas members on the UNRWA payroll and I don't
> see that as a crime. Hamas as a political organization does not mean that
> every member is a militant and we do not do political vetting and exclude
> people from one persuasion as against another. We demand of our staff,
> whatever their political persuasion is, that they behave in accordance with
> UN standards and norms for neutrality.

Hansen later specified that he had been referring not to active Hamas members,
but to Hamas sympathizers within UNRWA. In a letter to the Agency's major
donors, he said he was attempting to be honest because UNRWA has over 8,200
employees in the Gaza Strip. Given that opinion polls show 30% support of
Hamas in Gaza at the time, and UNRWA's workforce of 11,000 Palestinians, at
least some Hamas sympathizers were likely to be among UNRWA's employees. The
important thing, he wrote, was that UNRWA's strict rules and regulations
ensured that its staff remained impartial UN servants. Hansen was retired from
United Nations service against his will on 31 March 2005 after the United
States blocked his reappointment.

UNRWA has come under criticism from Hamas for teaching Palestinian students
Western values. According to Hazem Balousha, some Hamas officials objected to
UNRWA organized trips for Palestinian students to visit Holocaust remembrance
sites. Hamas officials also opposed other UNRWA organized trips for
Palestinian students to the US and Europe. According to _The Guardian_ , Hamas
has in some cases threatened UN staff in Gaza. James G. Lindsay, a former
UNRWA general counsel and affiliated with the pro-Israel Washington Institute
for Near East Policy published a report for WINEP in 2009 in which he said
UNRWA did not take enough steps to detect and prevent members of Hamas from
joining the organization.

According to _The Jerusalem Post_ , Hamas won a teachers union election for UN
schools in Gaza in 2009. UNRWA has strongly denied this and pointed out that
"Staff elections are conducted on an individual – not party list – basis for
unions that handle normal labour relations – not political – issues." In
addition, John Ging, the Gaza head of operations, said in a letter dated 29
March 2009 that employees must not "be under the influence of any political
party in the conduct of their work."

Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth stated in 2012 that a staff union election
resulted in 25 of the 27 seats going to Palestinians who were either Islamist
or sympathetic towards Hamas. More than 9,500 UNRWA employees in the Gaza
Strip participated; this represented more than 80% turnout. The professional
list won three UNRWA workers groups: the employees', teachers', and services'
unions. According to the Israeli government , UNRWA employed at least 24
members of Hamas or Islamic Jihad in 24 of its schools; the majority were
principals or deputy principals, and several were fighters in the Qassam
Brigades. Also, Israel provided intelligence about 18 UNRWA workers it accused
of participating in the October 7, 2023, attacks.

On September 30, 2024, UNRWA confirmed that Fatah Sharif, a top Hamas
commander killed in an Israeli airstrike in Lebanon, had formerly been on its
payroll as a school principal and head of the teachers' union in Lebanon.
UNRWA said it had suspended Sharif and started an investigation in March when
it learned of the allegation that Sharif was a member of the political wing of
Hamas. It was not aware that he was a Hamas commander. Hamas praised him
posthumously for his "educational and jihadist work." In February 2025, former
hostage Emily Damari alleged she was held in a UNRWA facility for some of her
15-month captivity by Hamas. UNRWA said there were times when it did not have
access to its facilities and that most were converted to shelters. It called
for an independent investigation into the misuse of its facilities.

#### Hamas interference

It has been reported that Hamas has interfered with curriculum and textbooks
in UNRWA schools. For example, in 2009 it caused UNRWA to suspend a decision
to introduce Holocaust studies in its schools. One of UNRWA's flagships has
been gender-equality and integration. But Hamas militants have firebombed
UNRWA mixed-gender summer camps, and in 2013 Hamas passed a law requiring
gender segregation in schools for all pupils nine years of age and older in
Gaza. The law does not apply to UNRWA schools.

Elhanen Miller, the Arab affairs reporter for _The Times of Israel_ , wrote in
February 2014 that Hamas was "bashing" UNRWA's human rights curriculum, saying
that it included too many examples and values foreign to Palestinian culture
and had too much emphasis on peaceful resistance rather than armed resistance.
In this case UNRWA refused to be swayed. Spokesman Chris Gunness said:

> UNRWA has no plans to change its education programs in Gaza ... human rights
> are taught in all UNRWA schools from grades 1 through 9, discussing the
> Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
>
> UNRWA's education system takes as its basis the curriculum taught by the PA
> and so we use PA textbooks in preparing children in Gaza for public
> examinations. ... In addition, we enrich our education programs in Gaza with
> an agreed human rights curriculum which has been developed with the
> communities we serve: with educationalists, parents groups, teachers
> associations, staff members and others. We have done our utmost in
> developing these materials to be sensitive to local values while also being
> true to the universal values that underpin the work of the United Nations.

However, after a few days, UNRWA consented to temporarily suspending the use
of only the books used in grades 7–9 (continuing to use the books used in
grades 1–6) pending further discussions.

#### Operation of summer camps

Hamas has denounced UNRWA and Ging, accusing them of using their summer camps
to corrupt the morals of Palestinian youth. Hamas also advised UNRWA to re-
examine its curriculum to ensure its suitability for Palestinian society, due
to the mixing of genders at the camps. In September 2011 it was reported that,
under pressure from Hamas, UNRWA has made all its summer camps single-sex.
Hamas has its own network of summer camps and the two organizations are
regarded to be vying for influence with Gazan youth. Islamic Jihad has also
run summer camps since 2013. UNRWA did not operate its summer camps for summer
2012 and summer 2014 due to a lack of available funding. Hamas has filled this
void and now is the direct provider of summer activities for about 100,000
children and youths. In 2013, UNRWA canceled its planned marathon in Gaza
after Hamas rulers prohibited women from participating in the race.

In 2013, Israeli media outlets aired a video documenting UNRWA-funded summer
camps where children are being taught to engage in violence with Israelis. The
video airs speakers telling campers "With God's help and our own strength we
will wage war. And with education and Jihad we will return to our homes!" A
student is also shown on camera describing that "the summer camp teaches us
that we have to liberate Palestine." UNRWA denies that the video shows UNRWA
summer camps and instead shows footage of camps that were not operated by
UNRWA, and stated that the film was "grossly misleading" and that "the film-
maker concerned has a history of making baseless claims about UNRWA, all of
which we have investigated and demonstrated to be patently false." It stated
that the 'summer camp' shown in the West Bank was not affiliated with or
organized by UNRWA, and that footage from the camp in Gaza "revealed that
absolutely nothing anti-Semitic or inflammatory was done or said".

## Investigations and calls for accountability and reform

Many critics of UNRWA, while generally recognizing the importance of its work
and the infeasibility of disbanding it, believe it requires more transparency,
oversight, and support. Writing in the _Middle East Monitor_ in April 2012,
Karen Koning AbuZayd, a former Commissioner-General of the UNRWA (2005–2009),
argued that "UNRWA needs support not brickbats". She concluded that:

> ... even those who scrutinise [UNRWA] most closely and challenge it most
> severely are those who also ensure that its programmes receive adequate
> funding. They, like others who view the agency more positively, realise that
> UNRWA makes a major contribution to stability in the Middle East.

Writing in the _Times of Israel_ on 31 July 2014, David Horovitz argued that
Israel had many legitimate complaints against UNRWA, including that its
definition of "refugee" included the descendants of the original Palestinian
refugees, that it was "closely watched by Hamas for signs that it is not
sufficiently critical of Israel", and that its facilities frequently harbored
Hamas operatives and their weaponry. But, he noted, while Israeli officials
privately argued for its abolishment, with no other credible party able to
take over the agency's duties, including administering the more than 200,000
Gazans internally displaced during the then-ongoing 2014 Gaza War, Israel had
never "launched a no-holds-barred effort to bring UNRWA down". That changed
after the October 7, 2023 attack on Israel, as Horovitz described in a January
2025 piece titled "Gaza after UNRWA". In addition to cataloguing ties between
UNRWA and Hamas, including revelations of its staff's "complicity in the mass
murder in Israel that caused the war and devastation in Gaza", Horovitz
excoriated the agency for having "perpetuated a fundamental intolerance for
the simple fact of Israel’s existence" and having "helped Hamas and by
extension doomed Gaza".

### Repeated calls for investigation by the United States

The United States government financed a programme of "Operations Support
Officers" whose responsibilities including undertaking random and unannounced
inspections of UNRWA facilities to ensure their sanctity from militant
operations. In 2004, the U.S. Congress asked the General Accounting Office
(GAO) to investigate media claims that government funding given to UNRWA had
been used to support individuals involved in militant activities. During its
investigation, the GAO discovered several irregularities in its processing and
employment history.

In August 2014, several US Senators demanded an impartial investigation into
UNRWA's alleged participation in the 2014 Gaza-Israel conflict, accusing UNRWA
of being complicit with Hamas.

> ... While the letter does not call on the State Department to cut aid, the
> senators write that the American taxpayers "deserve to know if UNRWA is
> fulfilling its mission or taking sides in this tragic conflict."
>
> ... Responding to the letter, a State Department spokesman said that the UN
> is taking "proactive steps to address this problem," including deploying
> munitions experts to the strip in search of more weapons caches. "The
> international community cannot accept a situation where the United Nations –
> its facilities, staff, and those it is protecting – are used as shields for
> militants and terrorist groups," State Department spokesone Edgar Vasquez
> told _The Jerusalem Post_. "We remain in intensive consultations with UN
> leadership about the UN's response." ...
>
> "There are few good solutions given the exceptionally difficult situation in
> Gaza," Vasquez continued, "but nonetheless we are in contact with the United
> Nations, other UNRWA donors, and concerned parties – including Israel – on
> identifying better options for protecting the neutrality of UN facilities
> and ensuring that weapons discovered are handled appropriately and do not
> find their way back to Hamas or other terrorist groups."

In 2018, citing a "failure to mobilize adequate and appropriate burden
sharing," the Trump administration stopped funding UNRWA, calling its
fundamental business model and fiscal practices "simply unsustainable".
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo maintained that "most Palestinians under
UNRWA's jurisdiction aren't refugees, and UNRWA is a hurdle to peace." The
Biden administration restarted funding in April 2021 and as of 2024 provided
almost $1 billion to UNRWA. In 2024, during the Gaza war, the Biden
administration halted funding for UNRWA after the Israeli government alleged
that some UNRWA staffers took part in the October 7 attacks.

### James G. Lindsay

On the basis of his 2009 analyses for WINEP, referred to in previous sections,
former UNRWA general-counsel James G. Lindsay and fellow researcher for
Washington Institute for Near East Policy[_citation needed_] made the
following suggestions for improvement:[_citation needed_]

> UNRWA should make the following operational changes: halt its one-sided
> political statements and limit itself to comments on humanitarian issues;
> take additional steps to ensure the agency is not employing or providing
> benefits to terrorists and criminals; and allow the UN Educational,
> Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), or some other neutral entity,
> to provide balanced and discrimination-free textbooks for UNRWA schools.

Andrew Whitley, director of the UNRWA representative office at UN headquarters
in New York, criticized the report as biased and relying on limited sources.
Additionally, he noted: "Someone reading this paper with no background would
assume that the Israeli government was a benign actor. No mention is made of
the occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip."

UNRWA's Jerusalem spokesperson Chris Gunness stated that UNRWA rejects
Lindsay's report and its findings and said that the study was inaccurate and
misleading, since it "makes selective use of source material and fails to
paint a truthful portrait of UNRWA and its operations today".

In response to the criticism of his report from UNRWA, Lindsay writes:

> Despite repeated requests from the author, the agency declined to identify
> the alleged weaknesses on the grounds that "our views—and understanding—of
> UNRWA's role, the refugees and even U.S. policy are too far apart for us to
> take time (time that we do not have) to enter into an exchange with little
> likelihood of influencing a narrative which so substantially differs from
> our own." Thus, the paper has not benefited from any input by UNRWA, whether
> a discussion of policy or even correction of alleged errors.

### Reform initiative

An initiative to reform UNRWA was announced by the Center for Near East Policy
Research in March 2014. The center carries out research and (through its
"Israel Resource News Agency") investigative journalism and research in
cooperation with a wide variety of organisations and researchers, such as The
Middle East Forum, which has published an entire issue of Middle East
Quarterly discussing the challenges facing UNRWA.

The main thrust of the UNRWA Reform Initiative is to present documentation of
problems with UNRWA to sponsor nations and organisations with the aim of
increasing sponsor demands for accountability. UNRWA has stated on multiple
occasions that the head of this initiative, David Bedein, fabricates the
information he publishes.

### EU conditions funding 2021

In September 2021, the European Parliament's Budgetary Control Committee
approved withholding 20 million Euros in aid to UNRWA if immediate changes to
UNRWA's education curriculum are not made. According to the resolution, the
Parliament "is concerned about the hate speech and violence taught in
Palestinian school textbooks and used in schools by UNRWA... [and] insists
that UNRWA acts in full transparency... to ensure that content adheres to UN
values and does not encourage hatred."

Funding for UNRWA was reinstated by the EU on March 1, 2024.

## Relations with Israel

After Israel captured the West Bank and Gaza in the Six-Day War, it requested
that the UNRWA continue its operations there, which it would facilitate. Since
then the relationship has been characterized by two-state advocate Baruch
Spiegel, as "an uneasy marriage of convenience between two unlikely bedfellows
that have helped perpetuate the problem both have allegedly sought to
resolve."

Immediately following the Six-Day War, on 14 June UNRWA Commissioner-General
Dr. Laurence Michelmore and political advisor to the Israeli Foreign Minister
Michael Comay exchanged letters that has since served as much of the basis for
the relationship between Israel and UNRWA. Commonly referred to the Comay-
Michelmore Exchange of Letters, the initial letter from Michelmore reiterates
a verbal conversation between the two, stating that:

> at the request of the Israel Government, UNRWA would continue its assistance
> to the Palestine refugees, with the full co-operation of the Israel
> authorities, in the West Bank and Gaza Strip areas. For its part, the Israel
> Government will facilitate the task of UNRWA to the best of its ability,
> subject only to regulations or arrangements which may be necessitated by
> considerations of military security.

In his responding letter, Comay wrote:

> I agree that your letter and this reply constitute a provisional agreement
> between UNRWA and the Government of Israel, to remain in force until
> replaced or cancelled.

UNRWA has been criticised by the Israeli government and politicians for
alleged involvement with Palestinian militant groups, such as Hamas. Israeli
media organizations have claimed that Peter Hansen, UNRWA's former
Commissioner-General (1996–2005) "consistently adopted a trenchant anti-Israel
line" which resulted in biased and exaggerated reports against Israel.

### Israeli ban and ICJ case

On 28 October 2024, the Knesset passed legislation that orders UNRWA to cease
"any activity" in territories claimed by Israel within 90 days. The Israeli
government, for its part, declared that it will terminate all collaboration,
communication and contact with UNRWA beginning on January 30, 2025. On 30
January, Israel's UNRWA ban went into effect.

As a result of the ban on UNRWA, the UN General Assembly voted to request an
advisory opinion from the ICJ regarding "Obligations of Israel in relation to
the Presence and Activities of the United Nations, Other International
Organizations and Third States in and in relation to the Occupied Palestinian
Territory" in December 2024. Israel’s foreign minister, Gideon Sa'ar,
criticized the decision saying that "it is not Israel that should be on trial.
It is the UN and Unrwa".