Intergovernmental trade organization

The **World Trade Organization** (**WTO**) is an intergovernmental
organization that regulates and facilitates international trade. Established
on 1 January 1995, pursuant to the 1994 Marrakesh Agreement, it succeeded the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which was created in 1948. As
the world's largest international economic organization, the WTO has 166
members, representing over 98% of global trade and global GDP. It is
headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland.

The WTO's primary functions are to provide a framework for negotiating trade
agreements and to resolve trade disputes among its members. Its agreements,
which are negotiated and signed by the majority of the world's trading nations
and ratified in their parliaments, cover trade in goods, services, and
intellectual property. The organization operates on the principle of non-
discrimination—enshrined in the most-favoured-nation and national treatment
provisions—but allows for exceptions for environmental protection, national
security, and other objectives.

The WTO's highest decision-making body is the Ministerial Conference, which
convenes biennially and makes decisions by consensus. Day-to-day business is
managed by the General Council, composed of representatives from all member
states. The organization is administered by a Secretariat led by the Director-
General; since 2021, this position has been held by Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of
Nigeria. The WTO's annual budget is approximately 200 million USD, contributed
by members based on their share of international trade.

Economic studies generally find that the WTO has boosted trade and reduced
trade barriers. However, it has faced significant criticism. Critics argue
that the benefits of WTO-facilitated free trade are not shared equally, that
its agreements may disadvantage developing countries, and that commercial
interests have been prioritised over environmental and labour concerns. The
organization has also been central to major trade disputes and stalled
negotiations, such as the Doha Development Round and the paralysis of its
Appellate Body, which have raised questions about its future efficacy.

## History

The economists Harry Dexter White (left) and John Maynard Keynes (right) at
the Bretton Woods Conference in New Hampshire

The WTO precursor, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), was
established by a multilateral treaty of 23 countries in 1947 after the end of
World War II, in the wake of other new multilateral institutions dedicated to
international economic cooperation—such as the World Bank (founded 1944) and
the International Monetary Fund (founded 1944–1945). A comparable
international institution for trade, named the International Trade
Organization (ITO), never started, since the United States and other
signatories did not ratify the establishment treaty, and so the GATT slowly
became a _de facto_ international organization.

### GATT negotiations before Uruguay

Seven rounds of negotiations occurred under the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (1949 to 1979). The first real[_citation needed_] GATT trade rounds
(1947 to 1960) concentrated on further reducing tariffs. Then the Kennedy
Round in the mid-sixties brought about a GATT anti-dumping agreement and a
section on development. The Tokyo Round during the seventies represented the
first major attempt to tackle trade barriers that do not take the form of
tariffs, and to improve the system, adopting a series of agreements on non-
tariff barriers, which in some cases interpreted existing GATT rules, and in
others broke entirely new ground. Because not all GATT members accepted these
plurilateral agreements, they were often informally called "codes". (The
Uruguay Round amended several of these codes and turned them into multilateral
commitments accepted by all WTO members. Only four remained plurilateral
(those on government procurement, bovine meat, civil aircraft, and dairy
products), but in 1997 WTO members agreed to terminate the bovine meat and
dairy agreements, leaving only two.) Despite attempts in the mid-1950s and
1960s to establish some form of institutional mechanism for international
trade, the GATT continued to operate for almost half a century as a semi-
institutionalized multilateral treaty régime on a provisional basis.

### Uruguay Round: 1986–1994

Well before GATT's 40th anniversary (due in 1987–1988), GATT members concluded
that the GATT system was straining to adapt to a globalizing world economy. In
response to problems identified in the 1982 Ministerial Declaration
(structural deficiencies, spill-over impacts of certain countries' policies on
world trade which GATT could not manage, etc.), a meeting in Punta del Este,
Uruguay, launched the eighth GATT round—known as the "Uruguay Round"—in
September 1986.

In the biggest negotiating mandate on trade ever agreed, the Uruguay Round
talks aimed to extend the trading system into several new areas, notably trade
in services and intellectual property, and to reform trade in the sensitive
sectors of agriculture and textiles; all the original GATT articles were up
for review. The Final Act concluding the Uruguay Round and officially
establishing the WTO regime was signed on 15 April 1994, during the
ministerial meeting at Marrakesh, Morocco—hence known as the Marrakesh
Agreement.

The GATT still exists as the WTO's umbrella treaty for trade in goods, updated
as a result of the Uruguay Round negotiations (a distinction is made between
_GATT 1994_ , the updated parts of GATT, and _GATT 1947_ , the original
agreement which is still the heart of GATT 1994). GATT 1994 is not, however,
the only legally binding agreement included via the Final Act at Marrakesh; a
long list of about 60 agreements, annexes, decisions, and understandings was
adopted. The agreements fall into six main parts:

  * the Agreement Establishing the WTO
  * the Multilateral Agreements on Trade in Goods, including the GATT 1994 and the Trade Related Investment Measures (TRIMS)
  * the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS)
  * the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
  * dispute settlement
  * reviews of governments' trade policies

In terms of the WTO's principle relating to tariff "ceiling-binding" (No. 3),
the Uruguay Round has been successful in increasing binding commitments by
both developed and developing countries, as may be seen in the percentages of
tariffs bound before and after the 1986–1994 talks.

### Ministerial conferences

The World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 1998, in the Palace of
Nations (Geneva, Switzerland)

The highest decision-making body of the WTO, the Ministerial Conference,
usually meets every two years. It brings together all members of the WTO, all
of which are countries or customs unions. The Ministerial Conference can take
decisions on all matters under any of the multilateral trade agreements. Some
meetings, such as the inaugural ministerial conference in Singapore (1996) and
the inaugural ministerial conference in Cancún, Mexico (2003) involved
arguments between developed nations and low-income and lower-middle income
countries, referred to as the "Singapore issues", such as agricultural
subsidies; while others such as the Seattle conference in 1999 provoked large
demonstrations. The fourth ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar in 2001
approved China's entry to the WTO and launched the Doha Development Round
which was supplemented by the sixth WTO ministerial conference in Hong Kong,
which agreed to phase out agricultural export subsidies and to adopt the
European Union's Everything but Arms initiative to phase out tariffs for goods
from the least developed countries. At the sixth WTO Ministerial Conference of
2005 in December, WTO launched the Aid for Trade initiative and it is
specifically to assist developing countries in trade as included in the
Sustainable Development Goal 8 which is to increase aid for trade support and
economic growth.

The Twelfth Ministerial Conference (MC12) was due to be held in Nur-Sultan,
Kazakhstan, in June 2020 but was canceled because of the COVID-19 pandemic. It
was later held in Geneva, Switzerland from 12–17 June 2022. The Thirteenth
Ministerial Conference (MC13) was held in Abu Dhabi, UAE on 26–29 February
2024, and extended to Friday 1 March 2024 to complete deliberations.

### Doha Round (Doha Agenda): 2001–present

The WTO launched the current round of negotiations, the Doha Development
Round, at the fourth ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar in November 2001.
This was to be an ambitious effort to make globalization more inclusive and
help the world's poor, particularly by slashing barriers and subsidies in
farming. The initial agenda comprised both further trade liberalization and
new rule-making, underpinned by commitments to strengthen substantial
assistance to developing countries.

Progress stalled over differences between developed nations and the major low-
income and lower-middle income countries on issues such as industrial tariffs
and non-tariff barriers to trade particularly against and between the EU and
the US over their maintenance of agricultural subsidies—seen to operate
effectively as trade barriers. Repeated attempts to revive the talks proved
unsuccessful, though the adoption of the Bali Ministerial Declaration in 2013
addressed bureaucratic barriers to commerce.

As of June 2012[update], the future of the Doha Round remained uncertain: the
work programme lists 21 subjects in which the original deadline of 1 January
2005 was missed, and the round remains incomplete. The conflict between free
trade on industrial goods and services but retention of protectionism on farm
subsidies to domestic agricultural sectors (requested by developed countries)
and the substantiation[_jargon_] of fair trade on agricultural products
(requested by developing countries) remain the major obstacles. This impasse
has made it impossible to launch new WTO negotiations beyond the Doha
Development Round. As a result, there have been an increasing number of
bilateral free trade agreements between governments. As of July 2012[update]
there were various negotiation groups in the WTO system for the current
stalemated agricultural trade negotiation.

## Functions

Promotion of growth by facilitating trade is the most important function of
WTO. Other important functions include:

  * It oversees the implementation, administration and operation of the covered agreements (with the exception that it does not enforce any agreements when China came into the WTO in December 2001)
  * It provides a forum for negotiations and for settling disputes.

_Aid for Trade_ is one way the organization functions to help countries that
are developing economically.

Additionally, it is WTO's duty to review and propagate the national trade
policies and to ensure the coherence and transparency of trade policies
through surveillance in global economic policy-making. Another priority of the
WTO is the assistance of developing, least-developed and low-income countries
in transition to adjust to WTO rules and disciplines through technical
cooperation and training:

  1. The WTO shall facilitate the implementation, administration, and operation and further the objectives of this Agreement and the Multilateral Trade Agreements, and shall also provide the framework for the implementation, administration, and operation of the multilateral Trade Agreements.
  2. The WTO shall provide the forum for negotiations among its members concerning their multilateral trade relations in matters dealt with under the Agreement in the Annexes to this Agreement.
  3. The WTO shall administer the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes.
  4. The WTO shall administer a Trade Policy Review Mechanism.
  5. to achieve greater coherence in global economic policymaking, the WTO shall cooperate, as appropriate, with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and its affiliated agencies.

The above five listings are the additional functions of the World Trade
Organization. As globalization proceeds in today's society, the necessity of
an International Organization to manage the trading systems has been of vital
importance. As the trade volume increases, issues such as protectionism, trade
barriers, subsidies, violation of intellectual property arise due to the
differences in the trading rules of every nation. The World Trade Organization
serves as the mediator between the nations when such problems arise. WTO could
be referred to as the product of globalization and also as one of the most
important organizations in today's globalized society.

The WTO is also a center of economic research and analysis: regular
assessments of the global trade picture in its annual publications and
research reports on specific topics are produced by the organization. Finally,
the WTO cooperates closely with the two other components of the Bretton Woods
system, the IMF and the World Bank.

## Key Publications

The WTO is recognized for producing authoritative annual reports that provide
clarity on the complexities of global trade. These documents are essential for
anyone involved with or interested in trade policies and trends.

### World Trade Report

Public forum where the recently published _World Trade Report_ was discussed.

The World Trade Report stands as a key publication from the WTO. It delves
into the current trade trends and policy challenges, offering comprehensive
insights into the evolving dynamics of the global multilateral trading system
and its socioeconomic implications.

### WTO Annual Report

The WTO Annual Report compiles a complete overview of the organization's
activities, operations, and progress over the year. Detailed reports on the
WTO's budget and staffing highlight its commitment to transparency and
accountability within the realm of global trade management.

### World Trade Statistical Review

The World Trade Statistical Review has taken the place of the previously
issued _International Trade Statistics_. As the WTO's premier source for
annual trade data, it provides thorough analysis and statistics on the latest
developments in world trade, proving to be an indispensable resource for
global trade information.

## Principles of the trading system

The WTO establishes a framework for trade policies; it does not define or
specify outcomes. That is, it is concerned with setting the rules of "trade
policy". Five principles are of particular importance in understanding both
the pre-1994 GATT and the WTO:

  1. **Non-discrimination**. It has two major components: the most favored nation (MFN) treatment and the national treatment. Both are embedded in the main WTO agreements on goods, services, and intellectual property, but their precise scope and nature differ across these areas. The MFN rule requires that a WTO member must apply the same conditions on all trade with other WTO members, i.e., a WTO member has to grant the most favorable conditions under which it allows trade in a certain product type to all other WTO members. "Grant someone a special favor and you have to do the same for all other WTO members." Some exceptions exist, such as when states participate in a free trade agreement or for preferential treatment given to developing countries. National treatment means that imported goods should be treated no less favorably than domestically produced goods (at least after the foreign goods have entered the market) and was introduced to tackle non-tariff barriers to trade (e.g. technical standards, security standards et al. discriminating against imported goods).
  2. **Reciprocity**. It reflects both a desire to limit the scope of free-riding that may arise because of the MFN rule and a desire to obtain better access to foreign markets. A related point is that for a nation to negotiate, it is necessary that the gain from doing so be greater than the gain available from unilateral liberalization; reciprocal concessions intend to ensure that such gains will materialize.
  3. **Binding and enforceable commitments**. The tariff commitments made by WTO members in multilateral trade negotiation and on accession are enumerated in a legal instrument known as a schedule (list) of concessions. These schedules establish "ceiling bindings": a country can change its bindings, but only after negotiating with its trading partners, which could mean compensating them for loss of trade. If satisfaction is not obtained, the complaining country may invoke the WTO dispute settlement procedures.
  4. **Transparency**. The WTO members are required to publish their trade regulations, to maintain institutions allowing for the review of administrative decisions affecting trade, to respond to requests for information by other members, and to notify changes in trade policies to the WTO. These internal transparency requirements are supplemented and facilitated by periodic country-specific reports (trade policy reviews) through the Trade Policy Review Mechanism (TPRM). The WTO system also tries to improve predictability and stability, discouraging the use of quotas and other measures used to set limits on quantities of imports.
  5. **Safety values**. In specific circumstances, governments are able to restrict trade. The WTO's agreements permit members to take measures to protect not only the environment but also public health, animal health and plant health.

There are three types of provision in this direction:

  1. Articles allowing for the use of trade measures to attain non-economic objectives.
  2. Articles aimed at ensuring "fair competition"; members must not use environmental protection measures as a means of disguising protectionist policies.
  3. Provisions permitting intervention in trade for economic reasons.

Exceptions to the MFN principle also allow for preferential treatment of
developing countries, regional free trade areas and customs unions.

## NGO and CSO Participation

The **World Trade Organization (WTO)** hosts an annual **Public Forum** ,
which serves as an inclusive platform for global dialogue on international
trade. The forum brings together a wide range of stakeholders—including
representatives from governments, academia, business, and **non-governmental
organizations (NGOs)** and **civil society organizations (CSOs)** —to exchange
perspectives on the multilateral trading system and its impact on development,
equity, and sustainability.

NGOs and CSOs are eligible to participate in the WTO Public Forum either as
observers or as active contributors to the panel discussions. The Forum
provides a venue for civil society to share policy insights, raise concerns,
and propose alternatives regarding trade-related issues. Participation is open
to organizations with demonstrable expertise and relevance to the WTO’s
mandate.

## Accreditation Process

Organizations wishing to attend the Forum must undergo an **accreditation
process** , which includes the following steps:

**Submission of Application** – Interested organizations are required to
submit a set of documents, including their official statutes, recent annual
reports, and a description of their mission and ongoing activities. Preference
is given to organizations with substantial experience and demonstrated
engagement in trade-related matters.

**Review and Assessment** – The WTO Secretariat examines the submitted
materials to assess the organization’s alignment with the objectives and
criteria of the WTO. Based on this evaluation, organizations are either
granted or denied accreditation.

Once accredited, NGOs and CSOs are allowed to participate in the Forum as
observers or contributors. They may also propose and organize panel sessions,
roundtables, or workshops to present their perspectives and expertise on
global trade challenges.

## Organizational structure

The biennial _Ministerial Conference_ , which is the highest authority of the
WTO, brings people together to discuss ideas and concerns, which can lead to
new policies or agreements.

The highest authority of the WTO is the Ministerial Conference, which must
meet at least every two years. The Ministerial Conference met most recently in
June 2022 in Geneva.

In between each Ministerial Conference, the daily work is handled by three
bodies whose membership is the same; they only differ by the terms of
reference under which each body is constituted:

  * The General Council
  * The Dispute Settlement Body
  * The Trade Policy Review Body

The General Council, whose Chair as of 2020 is David Walker of New Zealand,
has the following subsidiary bodies which oversee committees in different
areas:

Council for Trade in Goods

    There are 11 committees under the jurisdiction of the Goods Council each with a specific task. All members of the WTO participate in the committees. The Textiles Monitoring Body is separate from the other committees but still under the jurisdiction of the Goods Council. The body has its chairman and only 10 members. The body also has several groups relating to textiles.

Council for Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights

    Information on intellectual property in the WTO, news and official records of the activities of the TRIPS Council, and details of the WTO's work with other international organizations in the field.

Council for Trade in Services

    The Council for Trade in Services operates under the guidance of the General Council and is responsible for overseeing the functioning of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). It is open to all WTO members and can create subsidiary bodies as required.

Trade Negotiations Committee

    The Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) is the committee that deals with the current trade talks round. The chair is WTO's director-general. As of June 2012[update] the committee was tasked with the Doha Development Round.

The Service Council has three subsidiary bodies: financial services, domestic
regulations, GATS rules, and specific commitments. The council has several
different committees, working groups, and working parties. There are
committees on the following: Trade and Environment; Trade and Development
(Subcommittee on Least-Developed Countries); Regional Trade Agreements;
Balance of Payments Restrictions; and Budget, Finance and Administration.
There are working parties on the following: Accession. There are working
groups on the following: Trade, debt and finance; and Trade and technology
transfer.

As of 31 December 2022, the number of WTO staff on a regular budget is 340
women and 283 men.

## Decision-making

The WTO describes itself as "a rules-based, member-driven organization—all
decisions are made by the member governments, and the rules are the outcome of
negotiations among members". The WTO Agreement foresees votes where consensus
cannot be reached, but the practice of consensus dominates the process of
decision-making.

Richard Harold Steinberg (2002) argues that although the WTO's consensus
governance model provides law-based initial bargaining, trading rounds close
through power-based bargaining favoring Europe and the U.S., and may not lead
to Pareto improvement.

## Dispute settlement

The WTO's dispute-settlement system "is the result of the evolution of rules,
procedures and practices developed over almost half a century under the GATT
1947". In 1994, the WTO members agreed on the Understanding on Rules and
Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes (DSU) annexed to the "Final
Act" signed in Marrakesh in 1994. Dispute settlement is regarded by the WTO as
the central pillar of the multilateral trading system, and as a "unique
contribution to the stability of the global economy". WTO members have agreed
that, if they believe fellow-members are violating trade rules, they will use
the multilateral system of settling disputes instead of taking action
unilaterally.

The operation of the WTO dispute settlement process involves case-specific
panels appointed by the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), the Appellate Body, the
Director-General and the WTO Secretariat, arbitrators, and advisory experts.

The priority is to settle disputes, preferably through a mutually agreed
solution, and provision has been made for the process to be conducted in an
efficient and timely manner so that "If a case is adjudicated, it should
normally take no more than one year for a panel ruling and no more than 16
months if the case is appealed... If the complainant deems the case urgent,
consideration of the case should take even less time. WTO member nations are
obliged to accept the process as exclusive and compulsory.

According to a 2018 study in the _Journal of Politics_ , states are less
likely and slower to enforce WTO violations when the violations affect states
in a diffuse manner. This is because states face collective action problems
with pursuing litigation: they all expect other states to carry the costs of
litigation. A 2016 study in _International Studies Quarterly_ challenges that
the WTO dispute settlement system leads to greater increases in trade.

However, the dispute settlement system cannot be used to resolve trade
disputes that arise from political disagreements. When Qatar requested the
establishment of a dispute panel concerning measures imposed by the UAE, other
GCC countries and the US were quick to dismiss its request as a political
matter, stating that national security issues were political and not
appropriate for the WTO dispute system.

Since 2019, when the Donald Trump administration blocked appointments to the
body, the Appellate Body has been unable to enforce WTO rules and punish
violators of WTO rules. In March 2020, the European Union and 15 other WTO
members agreed to a _Multiparty Interim Appeal Arbitration Arrangement_
(MPIA). This gave access to an alternative appellate mechanism (arbitration as
an appellate mechanism) while the Appellate Body is not functional.

## Accession and membership

The process of becoming a WTO member is unique to each applicant country, and
the terms of accession are dependent upon the country's stage of economic
development and the current trade regime. The process takes about five years,
on average, but it can last longer if the country is less than fully committed
to the process or if political issues interfere. The shortest accession
negotiation was that of the Kyrgyz Republic, while the longest was that of
Russia, which, having first applied to join GATT in 1993, was approved for
membership in December 2011 and became a WTO member on 22 August 2012.
Kazakhstan also had a long accession negotiation process. The Working Party on
the Accession of Kazakhstan was established in 1996 and was approved for
membership in 2015. The second longest was that of Vanuatu, whose Working
Party on the Accession of Vanuatu was established on 11 July 1995. After a
final meeting of the Working Party in October 2001, Vanuatu requested more
time to consider its accession terms. In 2008, it indicated its interest to
resume and conclude its WTO accession. The Working Party on the Accession of
Vanuatu was reconvened informally on 4 April 2011 to discuss Vanuatu's future
WTO membership. The re-convened Working Party completed its mandate on 2 May
2011. The General Council formally approved the Accession Package of Vanuatu
on 26 October 2011. On 24 August 2012, the WTO welcomed Vanuatu as its 157th
member. An offer of accession is only given once consensus is reached among
interested parties.

A 2017 study argues that "political ties rather than issue-area functional
gains determine who joins" and shows "how geopolitical alignment shapes the
demand and supply sides of membership". The "findings challenge the view that
states first liberalize trade to join the GATT/WTO. Instead, democracy and
foreign policy similarity encourage states to join."

### Accession process

WTO accession progress:

Draft Working Party Report or Factual Summary adopted

Goods or Services offers submitted

Working party meetings

Memorandum on Foreign Trade Regime submitted

Working party established

The accession process can take several years before a country becomes an
official member of the organization.

A country wishing to accede to the WTO submits an application to the General
Council, and has to describe all aspects of its trade and economic policies
that have a bearing on WTO agreements. The application is submitted to the WTO
in a memorandum which is examined by a working party open to all interested
WTO Members.

After all necessary background information has been acquired, the working
party focuses on issues of discrepancy between the WTO rules and the
applicant's international and domestic trade policies and laws. The working
party determines the terms and conditions of entry into the WTO for the
applicant nation and may consider transitional periods to allow countries some
leeway in complying with the WTO rules.

The final phase of accession involves bilateral negotiations between the
applicant nation and other working party members regarding the concessions and
commitments on tariff levels and market access for goods and services. The new
member's commitments are to apply equally to all WTO members under normal non-
discrimination rules, even though they are negotiated bilaterally. For
instance, as a result of joining the WTO, Armenia offered a 15 per cent
ceiling bound tariff rate on accessing its market for goods. Together with the
tariff bindings being ad valorem there are no specific or compound rates.
Moreover, there are no tariff-rate quotas on both industrial and agricultural
products. Armenia's economic and trade performance growth was noted since its
first review in 2010, especially its revival from the 2008 financial crisis,
with an average annual 4% GDP growth rate, despite some fluctuations.
Armenia's economy was marked by low inflation, diminishing poverty, and
essential progress in enhancing its macroeconomic steadiness in which trade in
goods and services, which is the equivalent of 87% of GDP, played a growing
role.

When the bilateral talks conclude, the working party sends to the general
council or ministerial conference an accession package, which includes a
summary of all the working party meetings, the Protocol of Accession (a draft
membership treaty), and lists ("schedules") of the member to be commitments.
Once the general council or ministerial conference approves of the terms of
accession, the applicant's parliament must ratify the Protocol of Accession
before it can become a member. Some countries may have faced tougher and a
much longer accession process due to challenges during negotiations with other
WTO members, such as Vietnam, whose negotiations took more than 11 years
before it became an official member in January 2007.

### Members and observers

The WTO has 166 members and 23 observer governments. Most recently, on 26
February 2024 at the 13th Ministerial Conference in Abu Dhabi, Comoros and
Timor Leste were approved to became the 165th and 166th members. In addition
to states, the European Union, and each EU country in its own right, is a
member. WTO members do not have to be fully independent states; they need only
be a customs territory with full autonomy in the conduct of their external
commercial relations. Thus Hong Kong has been a member since 1995 (as "Hong
Kong, China" since 1997) predating the People's Republic of China, which
joined in 2001 after 15 years of negotiations. Taiwan acceded to the WTO in
2002 as the "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu."
The WTO Secretariat omits the official titles (such as Counsellor, First
Secretary, Second Secretary and Third Secretary) of the members of Taiwan's
Permanent Mission to the WTO, except for the titles of the Permanent
Representative and the Deputy Permanent Representative.

As of 2007, WTO members represented 96.4% of global trade and 96.7% of global
GDP. Iran, followed by Algeria, are the economies with the largest GDP and
trade outside the WTO, using 2005 data. With the exception of the Holy See,
observers must start accession negotiations within five years of becoming
observers. A number of international intergovernmental organizations have also
been granted observer status to WTO bodies. Ten UN members have no affiliation
with the WTO.

## Agreements

The WTO oversees about 60 different agreements which have the status of
international legal texts. Member countries must sign and ratify all WTO
agreements on accession. A discussion of some of the most important agreements
follows.

The Agreement on Agriculture came into effect with the establishment of the
WTO at the beginning of 1995. The AoA has three central concepts, or
"pillars": domestic support, market access and export subsidies.

The General Agreement on Trade in Services was created to extend the
multilateral trading system to service sector, in the same way as the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) provided such a system for merchandise
trade. The agreement entered into force in January 1995.

The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights sets
down minimum standards for many forms of intellectual property (IP)
regulation. It was negotiated at the end of the Uruguay Round of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994.

The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures—also
known as the SPS Agreement—was negotiated during the Uruguay Round of GATT,
and entered into force with the establishment of the WTO at the beginning of
1995. Under the SPS agreement, the WTO sets constraints on members' policies
relating to food safety (bacterial contaminants, pesticides, inspection, and
labeling) as well as animal and plant health (imported pests and diseases).

The Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade is an international treaty of the
World Trade Organization. It was negotiated during the Uruguay Round of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and entered into force with the
establishment of the WTO at the end of 1994. The object ensures that technical
negotiations and standards, as well as testing and certification procedures,
do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade".

The Agreement on Customs Valuation, formally known as the Agreement on
Implementation of Article VII of GATT, prescribes methods of customs valuation
that Members are to follow. Chiefly, it adopts the "transaction value"
approach.

In December 2013, the biggest agreement within the WTO was signed and known as
the Bali Package.

## Office of director-general

The headquarters of the World Trade Organization in Geneva, Switzerland

The procedures for the appointment of the WTO director-general were updated in
January 2003, and include quadrennial terms. Additionally, there are four
deputy directors-general. As of 13 June 2018[update] under director-general
Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the four deputy directors-general are:

  * Angela Ellard of the United States (as of 4 May 2021)
  * Anabel González of Costa Rica (as of 4 May 2021)
  * Ambassador Jean-Marie Paugam of France (as of 4 May 2021)
  * Ambassador Xiangchen Zhang of China (as of 4 May 2021)

### List of directors-general

Source: Official website

Portrait  | Name  | Country  | Term   
---|---|---|---  
| Peter Sutherland |  Ireland | 1995   
| Renato Ruggiero |  Italy | 1995–1999   
| Mike Moore |  New Zealand | 1999–2002   
| Supachai Panitchpakdi |  Thailand | 2002–2005   
| Pascal Lamy |  France | 2005–2013   
| Roberto Azevêdo |  Brazil | 2013–2021   
| Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala |  Nigeria | 2021–   
  
### 2020 Director-General selection

In May 2020, Director-General Roberto Azevedo announced that he would step
down on 31 August 2020. As of October 2020[update], a nomination and selection
process is currently under way with eight candidates and the final selection
is expected on 7 November 2020 with the consensus of 164 member countries. A
strong consensus had formed around the candidacy of Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala but on
28 October it emerged that the US representative was opposed to her
appointment.

WTO members made history on 15 February 2021 when the General Council agreed
by consensus to select Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of Nigeria as the organization's
seventh Director-General.

Okonjo-Iweala became the first woman and the first African to be chosen as
Director-General. Her term, renewable, will expire on 31 August 2025.

## Budget

The WTO derives most of the income for its annual budget from contributions by
its Members. These are established according to a formula based on their share
of international trade.

2023 Top 10 Members' contributions to the consolidated budget of the WTO  Rank | Country | CHF | Percentage   
---|---|---|---  
1 |  United States | 22,808,985 | 11.667%   
2 |  China | 21,031,890 | 10.758%   
3 |  Germany | 14,058,405 | 7.191%   
4 |  Japan | 7,411,405 | 3.791%   
5 |  France | 7,387,945 | 3.779%   
6 |  United Kingdom | 7,274,555 | 3.721%   
7 |  Netherlands | 5,778,980 | 2.956%   
8 |  Hong Kong | 5,501,370 | 2.814%   
9 |  South Korea | 5,350,835 | 2.737%   
10 |  Italy | 4,940,285 | 2.527%   
Others | 93,955,345 | 48.059%   
TOTAL | 195,500,000 | 100%   
  
## Criticism

Although tariffs and other trade barriers have been significantly reduced
thanks to GATT and WTO, the promise that free trade will accelerate economic
growth, reduce poverty, and increase people's incomes has been questioned by
many critics.

Economist Ha-Joon Chang argues that there is a "paradox" in neo-liberal
beliefs regarding free trade because the economic growth of developing
countries was higher in the 1960–1980 period compared to the 1980–2000 period
even though its trade policies are now far more liberal than before. Also,
there are results of research that show that new countries actively reduce
trade barriers only after becoming significantly rich. From the results of the
study, WTO critics argue that trade liberalization does not guarantee economic
growth and certainly not poverty alleviation. He also cites the example of El
Salvador; in the early 1990s, El Salvador removed all quantitative barriers to
imports and also cut tariffs. However, the country's economic growth remained
weak. On the other hand, Vietnam, which only began reforming its economy in
the late 1980s, saw a great deal of success by deciding to follow China's
economic model and liberalizing slowly along with implementing safeguards for
domestic commerce. Vietnam has largely succeeded in accelerating economic
growth and reducing poverty without immediately removing substantial trade
barriers.

Critics also put forward the view that the benefits derived from WTO
facilitated free trade are not shared equally. This criticism is usually
supported by historical accounts of the outcomes of negotiations and/or data
showing that the gap between the rich and the poor continues to widen,
especially in China and India, where economic inequality was growing at the
time even though economic growth is very high. In addition, WTO approaches
aiming to reduce trade barriers can harm developing countries. Trade
liberalization that is too early without any prominent domestic barriers is
feared to trap the developing economies in the primary sector, which often
does not require skilled labor. And when these developing countries decide to
advance their economy utilizing industrialization, the premature domestic
industry cannot immediately skyrocket as expected, making it difficult to
compete with other countries whose industries are more advanced.

## Impact

Studies show that the WTO boosted trade. Research shows that in the absence of
the WTO, the average country would face an increase in tariffs on their
exports by 32 percentage points. The dispute settlement mechanism in the WTO
is one way in which trade is increased. A 2023 study suggests that WTO
membership has not enhanced trade for the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) countries.

According to a 2017 study in the _Journal of International Economic Law_ ,
"nearly all recent preferential trade agreements (PTAs) reference the WTO
explicitly, often dozens of times across multiple chapters. Likewise, in many
of these same PTAs we find that substantial portions of treaty
language—sometime the majority of a chapter—is copied verbatim from a WTO
agreement... the presence of the WTO in PTAs has increased over time."