Group making loans to developing countries

The **World Bank Group** (**WBG**) is a family of five international
organizations that make leveraged loans to developing countries. It is the
largest and best-known development bank in the world and an observer at the
United Nations Development Group. The bank is headquartered in Washington,
D.C., in the United States. It provided around $98.83 billion in loans and
assistance to "developing" and transition countries in the 2021 fiscal year.
The bank's stated mission is to achieve the twin goals of ending extreme
poverty and building shared prosperity. Total lending as of 2015 for the last
10 years through Development Policy Financing was approximately $117 billion.
Its five organizations have been established over time:

  * International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 1944
  * International Development Association (IDA), 1960
  * International Finance Corporation (IFC), 1956
  * International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), 1965
  * Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), 1988

The first two are sometimes collectively referred to as the **World Bank**.
They provide loans and grants to the governments of low- and middle-income
countries for the purpose of pursuing economic development. These activities
include fields such as human development (e.g. education, health), agriculture
and rural development (e.g. irrigation and rural services), environmental
protection (e.g. pollution reduction, establishing and enforcing regulations),
infrastructure (e.g. roads, urban regeneration, and electricity), large
industrial construction projects, and governance (e.g. anti-corruption, legal
institutions development). The IBRD and IDA provide loans at preferential
rates to member countries, as well as grants to the poorest countries. Loans
or grants for specific projects are often linked to wider policy changes in
the sector or the country's economy as a whole. For example, a loan to improve
coastal environmental management may be linked to the development of new
environmental institutions at national and local levels and the implementation
of new regulations to limit pollution. Furthermore, the World Bank Group is
recognized as a leading funder of climate investments in developing countries.

The World Bank was established along with the International Monetary Fund at
the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference. Initially, its loans helped rebuild
countries devastated by World War II. Over time, it has shifted its focus to
development, with a stated mission of eradicating extreme poverty and boosting
shared prosperity.

The World Bank is a member of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Group. It is governed by its 189 member countries, though the United States,
as its largest shareholder, has traditionally appointed its president. The
current president is Ajay Banga, appointed in June 2023. The Bank's lending
and operational decisions are made by a president and a board of 25 executive
directors. The largest voting powers are held by the U.S. (15.85%), Japan
(6.84%), China (4.42%), Germany (4.00%), and the United Kingdom (3.75%).

The Bank's activities span all sectors of development. It provides financing,
policy advice, and technical assistance to governments, and also focuses on
private sector development through its sister organizations. The Bank's work
is guided by environmental and social safeguards to mitigate harm to people
and the environment. In addition to its lending operations, it serves as one
of the world's largest centers of development research and knowledge,
publishing numerous reports and hosting an Open Knowledge Repository. Current
priorities include financing for climate action and responding to global
crises like the COVID-19 pandemic.

The World Bank has been criticized for the harmful effects of its policies and
for its governance structure. Critics argue that the loan conditions attached
to its structural adjustment programs in the 1980s and 1990s were detrimental
to the social welfare of developing nations. The Bank has also been criticized
for being dominated by wealthy countries, and for its environmental record on
certain projects.

## History

Harry Dexter White (left) and John Maynard Keynes, the "founding fathers" of
both the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)

The World Bank was created at the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference (1–22 July
1944), along with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The president of the
World Bank is traditionally an American. The World Bank and the IMF are both
based in Washington, D.C., and work closely with each other.

The Gold Room at the Mount Washington Hotel where the International Monetary
Fund and World Bank were established

Although many countries were represented at the Bretton Woods Conference, the
United States and United Kingdom were the most powerful in attendance and
dominated the negotiations. The intention behind the founding of the World
Bank was to provide temporary loans to low-income countries that could not
obtain loans commercially. The bank may also make loans and demand policy
reforms from recipients.

The World Bank Group came into formal existence on 27 December 1946, following
international ratification of the Bretton Woods agreements. The Conference
also provided the foundation of the Osiander Committee in 1951, responsible
for the preparation and evaluation of the World Development Report. Commencing
operations on 25 June 1946, the bank approved its first loan on 9 May 1947
(US$250 million to France for postwar reconstruction - in real terms, the
largest loan the bank has issued to date).

In its early years, the bank made a slow start for two reasons: it was
underfunded, and there were leadership struggles between the US executive
director and the president of the organization. When the Marshall Plan went
into effect in 1947, many European countries began receiving aid from other
sources. Faced with this competition, the World Bank shifted its focus to non-
European allies. Until 1968, its loans were earmarked for the construction of
infrastructure works, such as seaports, highway systems, and power plants,
that would generate enough income to enable a borrower country to repay the
loan. In 1960, the International Development Association was formed (as
opposed to a UN fund named SUNFED), providing soft loans to developing
countries.

Before 1974, the reconstruction and development loans the World Bank made were
relatively small. Its staff was aware of the need to instill confidence in the
bank. Fiscal conservatism ruled, and loan applications had to meet strict
criteria.

The first country to receive a World Bank loan was France in 1947. The bank's
president at the time, John McCloy, chose France over two other applicants,
Poland and Chile. The loan was for US$250 million, half the amount requested,
and came with strict conditions. France had to agree to produce a balanced
budget and give priority of debt repayment to the World Bank over other
governments. World Bank staff closely monitored the use of the funds to ensure
that the French government met the conditions. In addition, before the loan
was approved, the United States Department of State told the French government
that its members associated with the Communist Party would first have to be
removed. The French government complied and removed the Communist coalition
government—the so-called tripartite. Within hours, the loan to France was
approved.

From 1974 to 1980, the bank concentrated on meeting the basic needs of people
in the developing world. The size and number of loans to borrowers greatly
increased, as loan targets expanded from infrastructure into social services
and other sectors.

These changes can be attributed to Robert McNamara, who was appointed to the
presidency in 1968 by Lyndon B. Johnson. McNamara implored bank treasurer
Eugene Rotberg to seek out new sources of capital outside of the northern
banks that had been the primary sources of funding. Rotberg used the global
bond market to increase the capital available to the bank. One consequence of
the period of poverty alleviation lending was the rapid rise of debt of
developing countries. From 1976 to 1980, developing world debt rose at an
average annual rate of 20%.

The World Bank Administrative Tribunal was established in 1980, to decide on
disputes between the World Bank Group and its staff where allegation of non-
observance of contracts of employment or terms of appointment had not been
honored.

McNamara was succeeded by U.S. President Jimmy Carter's nominee, Alden W.
Clausen, in 1980. Clausen replaced many members of McNamara's staff and
crafted a different mission emphasis. His 1982 decision to replace the bank's
Chief Economist, Hollis B. Chenery, with Anne Krueger was an example of this
new focus. Krueger was known for her criticism of development funding and for
describing developing countries' governments as "rent-seeking states".

During the 1980s, the bank emphasized lending to service debt of developing
countries, and structural adjustment policies designed to streamline the
economies of developing nations. UNICEF reported in the late 1980s that the
structural adjustment programs of the World Bank had been responsible for
"reduced health, nutritional and educational levels for tens of millions of
children in Asia, Latin America, and Africa".

## Membership

World Bank Group:

Member states of all five WBG organizations

Member states of four WBG organizations

Member states of three WBG organizations

Member states of two WBG organizations

Member states only of the IBRD

The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) has 189
member countries, while the International Development Association (IDA) has
174. Each member state of IBRD should also be a member of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and only members of IBRD are allowed to join other
institutions within the bank (such as IDA). The five United Nations member
states that are not members of the World Bank are Andorra, Cuba,
Liechtenstein, Monaco, and North Korea. Kosovo is not a member of the UN, but
is a member of the IMF and the World Bank Group, including the IBRD and IDA.
Other non-members are Palestine, the Holy See (Vatican City), Taiwan, and the
following de facto states: Abkhazia, Northern Cyprus, the Sahrawi Arab
Democratic Republic, Somaliland, South Ossetia, and Transnistria.

The Republic of China joined the World Bank on December 27, 1945. After the
Chinese Civil War, the government fled to Taiwan and continued its membership
in the WBG until April 16, 1980, when the People's Republic of China replaced
the ROC. Since then, it uses the name "Taiwan, China".

All of the 188 UN members and Kosovo that are WBG members participate at a
minimum in the IBRD. As of May 2016, all of them also participate in some of
the other four organizations (IDA, IFC, MIGA, and ICSID).

WBG members by the number of organizations in which they participate:

  1. Only in the IBRD:
  2. The IBRD and one other organization: San Marino, Nauru, Tuvalu, Brunei
  3. The IBRD and two other organizations: Antigua and Barbuda, Suriname, Venezuela, Namibia, Marshall Islands, Kiribati
  4. The IBRD and three other organizations: India, Mexico, Belize, Jamaica, Dominican Republic, Brazil, Bolivia, Uruguay, Ecuador, Dominica, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea, Angola, South Africa, Seychelles, Libya, Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti, Bahrain, Qatar, Iran, Malta, Bulgaria, Poland, Russia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, Palau, Tonga, Vanuatu, Maldives, Bhutan, Myanmar
  5. All five WBG organizations: the rest of the 138 WBG members

### Voting power

In 2010, voting powers at the World Bank were revised to increase the voice of
developing countries, notably China. The countries with most voting power are
now the United States (15.85%), Japan (6.84%), China (4.42%), Germany (4.00%),
the United Kingdom (3.75%), France (3.75%), India (2.91%), Russia (2.77%),
Saudi Arabia (2.77%) and Italy (2.64%). Under the changes, known as 'Voice
Reform – Phase 2', countries other than China that saw significant gains
included South Korea, Turkey, Mexico, Singapore, Greece, Czech Republic,
Hungary, Brazil, India, and Spain. Most developed countries' voting power was
reduced, along with a few developing countries such as Nigeria. The voting
powers of the United States, Russia and Saudi Arabia remained unchanged.

The changes were brought about to make voting more universal in regards to
standards, rule-based objective indicators, and transparency among other
things. Now, developing countries have an increased voice in the "Pool Model",
backed especially by Europe. Additionally, voting power is based on economic
size in addition to the International Development Association contributions.

### List of 20 largest countries by voting power in each World Bank
institution

The following table shows the subscriptions of the top 20 member countries of
the World Bank by voting power in the following World Bank institutions as of
December 2014 or March 2015: the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the
International Development Association (IDA), and the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA). Member countries are allocated votes at the time of
membership and subsequently for additional subscriptions to capital (one vote
for each share of capital stock held by the member).

The 20 Largest Countries by Voting Power (Number of Votes)  Rank | Country | IBRD | Country | IFC | Country | IDA | Country | MIGA  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
| _**World**_ | 2,201,754 | _**World**_ | 2,653,476 | _**World**_ | 24,682,951 | _**World**_ | 218,237   
1 |  United States | 358,498 |  United States | 570,179 |  United States | 2,546,503 |  United States | 32,790   
2 |  Japan | 166,094 |  Japan | 163,334 |  Japan | 2,112,243 |  Japan | 9,205   
3 |  China | 107,244 |  Germany | 129,708 |  United Kingdom | 1,510,934 |  Germany | 9,162   
4 |  Germany | 97,224 |  France | 121,815 |  Germany | 1,368,001 |  France | 8,791   
5 |  France | 87,241 |  United Kingdom | 121,815 |  France | 908,843 |  United Kingdom | 8,791   
6 |  United Kingdom | 87,241 |  India | 103,747 |  Saudi Arabia | 810,293 |  China | 5,756   
7 |  India | 67,690 |  Russia | 103,653 |  India | 661,909 |  Russia | 5,754   
8 |  Saudi Arabia | 67,155 |  Canada | 82,142 |  Canada | 629,658 |  Saudi Arabia | 5,754   
9 |  Canada | 59,004 |  Italy | 82,142 |  Italy | 573,858 |  India | 5,597   
10 |  Italy | 54,877 |  China | 62,392 |  China | 521,830 |  Canada | 5,451   
11 |  Russia | 54,651 |  Netherlands | 56,931 |  Poland | 498,102 |  Italy | 5,196   
12 |  Spain | 42,948 |  Belgium | 51,410 |  Sweden | 494,360 |  Netherlands | 4,048   
13 |  Brazil | 42,613 |  Australia | 48,129 |  Netherlands | 488,209 |  Belgium | 3,803   
14 |  Netherlands | 42,348 |  Switzerland | 44,863 |  Brazil | 412,322 |  Australia | 3,245   
15 |  South Korea | 36,591 |  Brazil | 40,279 |  Australia | 312,566 |  Switzerland | 2,869   
16 |  Belgium | 36,463 |  Mexico | 38,929 |  Switzerland | 275,755 |  Brazil | 2,832   
17 |  Iran | 34,718 |  Spain | 37,826 |  Belgium | 275,474 |  Spain | 2,491   
18 |  Switzerland | 33,296 |  Indonesia | 32,402 |  Norway | 258,209 |  Argentina | 2,436   
19 |  Australia | 30,910 |  Saudi Arabia | 30,862 |  Denmark | 231,685 |  Indonesia | 2,075   
20 |  Turkey | 26,293 |  South Korea | 28,895 |  Pakistan | 218,506 |  Sweden | 2,075   
  
## Organizational structure

The World Bank Group Building in Washington, D.C. The World Bank Sign on the
building

Together with four affiliated agencies created between 1957 and 1988, the IBRD
is part of the World Bank Group. The group's headquarters are in Washington,
D.C. It is an international organization owned by member governments; although
it makes profits, they are used to support continued efforts in poverty
reduction.

Technically the World Bank is part of the United Nations system, but its
governance structure is different: each institution in the World Bank Group is
owned by its member governments, which subscribe to its basic share capital,
with votes proportional to shareholding. Membership gives certain voting
rights that are the same for all countries but there are also additional votes
that depend on financial contributions to the organization. The president of
the World Bank is nominated by the president of the United States and elected
by the bank's Board of Governors. As of 15 November 2009, the United States
held 16.4% of total votes, Japan 7.9%, Germany 4.5%, the United Kingdom 4.3%,
and France 4.3%. As changes to the bank's Charter require an 85%
supermajority, the U.S. can block any major change in the bank's governing
structure. Because the U.S. exerts formal and informal influence over the bank
as a result of its vote share, control over the presidency, and the bank's
headquarters location in Washington, D.C., friends and allies of the U.S.
receive more projects with more lenient terms.

### World Bank Group agencies

The World Bank Group consists of

  * the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), established in 1944, which provides debt financing based on sovereign guarantees;
  * the International Finance Corporation (IFC), established in 1956, which provides various forms of financing without sovereign guarantees, primarily to the private sector;
  * the International Development Association (IDA), established in 1960, which provides concessional financing (interest-free loans or grants), usually with sovereign guarantees;
  * the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), established in 1965, which works with governments to reduce investment risk;
  * the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), established in 1988, which provides insurance against certain types of risk, including political risk, primarily to the private sector.

The term "World Bank" generally refers to just the IBRD and IDA, whereas the
term "World Bank Group" or "WBG" is used to refer to all five institutions
collectively.

The World Bank Institute is the capacity development branch of the World Bank,
providing learning and other capacity-building programs to member countries.

The IBRD has 189 member governments, and the other institutions have between
153 and 184. The institutions of the World Bank Group are all run by a board
of governors meeting once a year. Each member country appoints a governor,
generally its minister of finance. Daily, the World Bank Group is run by a
board of 25 executive directors to whom the governors have delegated certain
powers. Each director represents either one country (for the largest
countries), or a group of countries. Executive directors are appointed by
their respective governments or the constituencies.

The agencies of the World Bank are each governed by their Articles of
Agreement that serves as the legal and institutional foundation for all their
work.

The activities of the IFC and MIGA include investment in the private sector
and providing insurance, respectively.

### Presidency

Traditionally, the bank president has been a U.S. citizen nominated by the
president of the United States, the bank's largest shareholder. The nominee is
subject to confirmation by the executive directors, to serve a five-year,
renewable term.

#### Current president

Ajay Banga is the current and 14th president of the World Bank Group.

### Managing director

The managing director of the World Bank is responsible for organizational
strategy; budget and strategic planning; information technology; shared
services; Corporate Procurement; General Services and Corporate Security; the
Sanctions System; and the Conflict Resolution and Internal Justice System. The
present managing director, Shaolin Yang, assumed the office after Sri Mulyani
resigned to become finance minister of Indonesia. The managing director and
World Bank Group chief financial officer is Anshula Kant since 7 October 2019.

### Extractive Industries Review

After longstanding criticisms from civil society of the bank's involvement in
the oil, gas, and mining sectors, the World Bank in July 2001 launched an
independent review called the _Extractive Industries Review_ (EIR—not to be
confused with Environmental Impact Report). The review was headed by an
"Eminent Person", Emil Salim (former Environment Minister of Indonesia). Salim
held consultations with a wide range of stakeholders in 2002 and 2003. The EIR
recommendations were published in January 2004 in a final report, "Striking a
Better Balance". The report concluded that fossil fuel and mining projects do
not alleviate poverty, and recommended that World Bank involvement with these
sectors be phased out by 2008 to be replaced by investment in renewable energy
and clean energy. The World Bank published its Management Response to the EIR
in September 2004 after extensive discussions with the board of directors. The
Management Response did not accept many of the EIR report's conclusions, but
the EIR served to alter the World Bank's policies on oil, gas, and mining in
important ways, as the World Bank documented in a recent follow-up report. One
area of particular controversy concerned the rights of indigenous peoples.
Critics point out that the Management Response weakened a key recommendation
that indigenous peoples and affected communities should have to provide
'consent for projects to proceed; instead, there would be 'consultation'.
Following the EIR process, the World Bank issued a revised Policy on
Indigenous Peoples.

## Methods

The World Bank plays a significant role in global economic governance due to
its broad mandate, its vast resource base, its frequent and regular
interactions with governments as clients, and its many publications and
databases. In 2020, the World Bank's total commitments amounted to USD 77.1
billion and it operated in 145 countries. World Bank projects cover a range of
areas from building schools to fighting disease, providing water and
electricity, and environmental protection.

As a guideline to the World Bank's operations in any particular country, a
Country Assistance Strategy is produced in cooperation with the local
government and any interested stakeholders and may rely on analytical work
performed by the bank or other parties.

The World Bank's negative pledge clause prohibits its debtor countries from
using public assets to repay other creditors before they repay the World Bank.

### Environmental and social safeguards

To ensure that World Bank-financed operations do not compromise these goals
but instead add to their realisation, the following environmental, social, and
legal safeguards were defined: Environmental Assessment, Indigenous Peoples,
Involuntary Resettlement, Physical Cultural Resources, Forests, Natural
Habitats, Pest Management, Safety of Dams, Projects in Disputed Areas,
Projects on International Waterways, and Performance Standards for Private
Sector Activities.

At the World Bank's 2012 annual meeting in Tokyo, a review of these safeguards
was initiated, which was welcomed by several civil society organisations. As a
result, the World Bank developed a new Environmental and Social Framework,
which has been in implementation since 1 October 2018.

The World Bank or the World Bank Group is also a sitting observer in the
United Nations Sustainable Development Group.

### Loans for environmental protection

Beginning in 1989, in response to harsh criticism from many groups, the bank
began including environmental groups and NGOs in its loans to mitigate the
past effects of its development policies that had prompted the criticism. It
also formed an implementing agency, in accordance with the Montreal Protocols,
to stop ozone-depletion damage to the Earth's atmosphere by phasing out the
use of 95% of ozone-depleting chemicals, with a target date of 2015. Since
then, in accordance with its so-called "Six Strategic Themes", the bank has
put various additional policies into effect to preserve the environment while
promoting development. For example, in 1991, the bank announced that to
protect against deforestation, especially in the Amazon, it would not finance
any commercial logging or infrastructure projects that harm the environment.

### Poverty reduction strategies

For the poorest developing countries in the world, the bank's assistance plans
are based on poverty reduction strategies; by combining an analysis of local
groups with an analysis of the country's financial and economic situation the
World Bank develops a plan pertaining to the country in question. The
government then identifies the country's priorities and targets for the
reduction of poverty, and the World Bank instigates its aid efforts
correspondingly.[_citation needed_]

Forty-five countries pledged US$25.1 billion in "aid for the world's poorest
countries", aid that goes to the World Bank International Development
Association (IDA), which distributes the loans to eighty poorer countries.
Wealthier nations sometimes fund their own aid projects, including those for
diseases. Robert B. Zoellick, the former president of the World Bank, said
when the loans were announced on 15 December 2007, that IDA money "is the core
funding that the poorest developing countries rely on".

World Bank organizes the Development Marketplace Awards, a grant program that
surfaces and funds development projects with potential for development impact
that are scalable or replicable. The grant beneficiaries are social
enterprises with projects that aim to deliver social and public services to
groups with the lowest incomes.[_citation needed_]

### Efforts to reduce inequality

In 2013 the bank adopted the concept of s _hared prosperity_ as one of the
World Bank's "Twin Goals" for that year, with the other one focusing on
poverty reduction, aiming to reduce the share of people in extreme poverty to
3 percent of the global population by 2030. The bank defined _shared
prosperity_ as increasing the income of the bottom 40 percent of the
population in each country. As a result, reducing inequality, in this
definition, had become an integral part of the World Bank's objectives.

The World Bank has been criticized for not embracing the reduction of
inequality (be it economic inequality within a country, or international
inequality between countries) as a goal. Instead, the bank has taken an
instrumental approach to the issue, in which inequality policies were seen as
useful as long as they contributed to reducing (extreme) poverty or promoting
average economic growth.

As part of the _2030 Agenda_ , Sustainable Development Goal 10 (SDG 10) aim to
reduce inequalities within countries and among countries. World Bank officials
participated in the negotiations for SDG 10 in the years prior to 2015. They
advocated for the adoption of the bank's own preferred benchmarks. The World
Bank is also one of nine custodian agencies for SDG 10.

The bank has stated its ambition to help catalyze the SDGs through "thought
leadership, global convening, and country-level uptake". However, scholars
have stated that the World Bank strategically uses the power of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in its favor to reinforce its own
policies or interests while minimizing the chance of being itself reshaped or
transformed by these goals.

### United Nations Department of Global Communications

Based on an agreement between the United Nations and the World Bank in 1981,
_Development Business_ became the official source for World Bank Procurement
Notices, Contract Awards, and Project Approvals.

In 1998, the agreement was renegotiated, and included in this agreement was a
joint venture to create an online version of the publication. Today,
_Development Business_ is the primary publication for all major multilateral
development banks, U.N. agencies, and several national governments, many of
which have made the publication of their tenders and contracts in _Development
Business_ a mandatory requirement.

### Open data and open knowledge repository

The World Bank collects and processes large amounts of data and generates them
on the basis of economic models. These data and models have gradually been
made available to the public in a way that encourages reuse, whereas the
recent publications describing them are available as open access under a
Creative Commons Attribution License, for which the bank received the SPARC
Innovator 2012 award.

The World Bank hosts the Open Knowledge Repository as an official open access
repository for its research outputs and knowledge products. The World Bank's
repository is listed in the Registry of Research Data Repositories
re3data.org.

The World Bank also endorses the Principles for Digital Development.

### International Health Partnership

Together with the World Health Organization, the World Bank administers the
International Health Partnership (IHP+). IHP+ is a group of partners committed
to improving the health of citizens in developing countries. Partners work
together to put international principles for aid effectiveness and development
cooperation into practice in the health sector. IHP+ mobilizes national
governments, development agencies, civil society, and others to support a
single, country-led national health strategy in a well-coordinated way.

### COVID-19 pandemic

In September 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the World Bank announced a
$12 billion plan to supply "low and middle income countries" with a vaccine
once it was approved. In June 2022, the bank reported that $10.1 billion had
been allocated to supply 78 countries with the vaccine

The US Treasury has committed $667 million for the World Bank's global
Pandemic Fund, a third of the $2 billion the fund hopes to raise. The Pandemic
Fund, established in September 2022, is a collaborative initiative among
countries, implementing partners, philanthropies, and civil society
organizations. It aims to fund investments that address critical gaps in
pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response capacities at national,
regional, and global levels, with a particular focus on low- and middle-income
countries.

The World Bank has been criticized for the slow response of its Pandemic
Emergency Financing Facility (PEF), a fund that was created to provide money
to help manage pandemic outbreaks. The terms of the PEF, which is financed by
bonds sold to private investors, prevent any money from being released from
the fund until 12 weeks after the outbreak was initially detected (23 March).
The COVID-19 pandemic met all other requirements for the funding to be
released in January 2020.

## Response to climate change

World Bank President Jim Yong Kim said in 2012:

> A 4-degree warmer world can, and must be, avoided—we need to hold warming
> below 2 degrees ... Lack of action on climate change threatens to make the
> world our children inherit a completely different world than we are living
> in today. Climate change is one of the single biggest challenges facing
> development, and we need to assume the moral responsibility to take action
> on behalf of future generations, especially the poorest.

A World Bank report into climate change in 2012 noted that (p. xiii) "even
with the current mitigation commitments and pledges fully implemented, there
is roughly a 20 percent likelihood of exceeding 4 °C by 2100." This is despite
the fact that the "global community has committed itself to holding warming
below 2 °C to prevent 'dangerous' climate change". Furthermore, "a series of
recent extreme events worldwide highlight the vulnerability of all countries
... No nation will be immune to the impacts of climate change."

The World Bank doubled its aid for climate change adaptation from $2.3bn
(£1.47bn) in 2011 to $4.6bn in 2012. The planet is now 0.8 °C warmer than in
pre-industrial times. It says that 2 °C warming will be reached in 20 to 30
years.

The World Bank has been assigned temporary management responsibility of the
Clean Technology Fund (CTF), focused on making renewable energy cost-
competitive with coal-fired power as quickly as possible, but this may not
continue after UN's Copenhagen climate change conference in December 2009,
because of the bank's continued investment in coal-fired power plants.

In December 2017, Kim announced the World Bank would no longer finance fossil
fuel development, but a 2019 International Consortium of Investigative
Journalists article found that the bank continues "to finance oil and gas
exploration, pipelines and refineries," that "these fossil fuel investments
make up a greater share of the bank's current energy lending portfolio than
renewable projects," and that the bank "has yet to meaningfully shift away
from fossil fuels."

EU finance ministers joined civil sector groups, including Extinction
Rebellion, in November 2019 in calling for an end to World Bank funding of
fossil fuels.

In 2021, the World Bank offered support to Kazakhstan to help the country in
its mission for decarbonization and carbon neutrality.

In 2023 a new president was appointed: Ajay Banga. He was supported by the
American president Joe Biden partly because he supports climate action. The
former president David Malpass faced criticism as he challenged the scientific
consensus on climate change.

In May 2024, the board of the Fund for Responding to Loss and Damage held its
first historic meeting abroad in Abu Dhabi. This important UN Climate Change
initiative was operationalized during the COP28 UN Climate Change Conference
in December 2023. During the three-day meeting, the board elected Jean-
Christophe Donnellier of France and Richard Sherman of South Africa as co-
chairs. Furthermore, initiating a process to select an executive director, the
board started working on access modalities, financial instruments, facilities,
arrangements, and ensuring observer participation in the board meetings and
related proceedings. An essential part of the meeting was the discussion
between the board and the World Bank on establishing the fund as a World Bank-
hosted financial intermediary fund (FIF), specifically focusing on ensuring
that the most vulnerable frontline communities can access the fund's resources
directly.

## Grants table

The following table lists the top 15 DAC 5 Digit Sectors to which the World
Bank has committed funding, as recorded in its International Aid Transparency
Initiative (IATI) publications. The World Bank states on the IATI Registry
website that the amounts "will cover 100% of IBRD and IDA development flows"
but will not cover other development flows.

| Committed funding (US$ millions)  
---|---  
Sector | Before 2007 | 2007 | 2008 | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 | Sum   
Road transport | 4,654.2  | 1,993.5  | 1,501.8  | 5,550.3  | 4,032.3  | 2,603.7  | 3,852.5  | 2,883.6  | 3,081.7  | 3,922.6  | 723.7  | 34,799.8   
Social/ welfare services  | 613.1  | 208.1  | 185.5  | 2,878.4  | 1,477.4  | 1,493.2  | 1,498.5  | 2,592.6  | 2,745.4  | 1,537.7  | 73.6  | 15,303.5   
Electrical transmission/ distribution  | 1,292.5  | 862.1  | 1,740.2  | 2,435.4  | 1,465.1  | 907.7  | 1,614.9  | 395.7  | 2,457.1  | 1,632.2  | 374.8  | 15,177.8   
Public finance management  | 334.2  | 223.1  | 499.7  | 129.0  | 455.3  | 346.6  | 3,156.8  | 2,724.0  | 3,160.5  | 2,438.9  | 690.5  | 14,158.6   
Rail transport | 279.3  | 284.4  | 1,289.0  | 912.2  | 892.5  | 1,487.4  | 841.8  | 740.6  | 1,964.9  | 1,172.2  | −1.6  | 9,862.5   
Rural development | 335.4  | 237.5  | 382.8  | 616.7  | 2,317.4  | 972.0  | 944.0  | 177.8  | 380.9  | 1,090.3  | −2.5  | 7,452.4   
Urban development and management  | 261.2  | 375.9  | 733.3  | 739.6  | 542.1  | 1,308.1  | 914.3  | 258.9  | 747.3  | 1,122.1  | 212.2  | 7,214.9   
Business support services and institutions  | 113.3  | 20.8  | 721.7  | 181.4  | 363.3  | 514.0  | 310.0  | 760.1  | 1,281.9  | 1,996.0  | 491.3  | 6,753.7   
Energy policy and administrative management  | 102.5  | 243.0  | 324.9  | 234.2  | 762.0  | 654.9  | 902.1  | 480.5  | 1,594.2  | 1,001.8  | 347.9  | 6,648.0   
Agricultural water resources | 733.2  | 749.5  | 84.6  | 251.8  | 780.6  | 819.5  | 618.3  | 1,040.3  | 1,214.8  | 824.0  | −105.8  | 7,011.0   
Decentralisation and support to subnational government  | 904.5  | 107.9  | 176.1  | 206.7  | 331.2  | 852.8  | 880.6  | 466.8  | 1,417.0  | 432.5  | 821.3  | 6,597.3   
Disaster prevention and preparedness | 66.9  | 2.7  | 260.0  | 9.0  | 417.2  | 609.5  | 852.9  | 373.5  | 1,267.8  | 1,759.7  | 114.2  | 5,733.5   
Sanitation \- large systems  | 441.9  | 679.7  | 521.6  | 422.0  | 613.1  | 1,209.4  | 268.0  | 55.4  | 890.6  | 900.8  | 93.9  | 6,096.3   
Water supply \- large systems  | 646.5  | 438.1  | 298.3  | 486.5  | 845.1  | 640.2  | 469.0  | 250.5  | 1,332.4  | 609.9  | 224.7  | 6,241.3   
Health policy and administrative management  | 661.3  | 54.8  | 285.8  | 673.8  | 1,581.4  | 799.3  | 251.5  | 426.3  | 154.8  | 368.1  | 496.0  | 5,753.1   
Other  | 13,162.7  | 6,588.3  | 8,707.1  | 11,425.7  | 17,099.5  | 11,096.6  | 16,873.4  | 13,967.1  | 20,057.6  | 21,096.5  | 3,070.3  | 140,074.5   
Total  | 24,602.6  | 13,069.4  | 17,712.6  | 27,152.6  | 33,975.6  | 26,314.8  | 34,248.6  | 27,593.9  | 43,748.8  | 41,905.2  | 7,624.5  | 297,948.5   
  
## Criticisms and controversy

A young World Bank protester in Jakarta, Indonesia World Bank/IMF protesters
smashed the windows of this PNC Bank branch located in the Logan Circle
neighbourhood of Washington, D.C.

The World Bank has long been criticized by non-governmental organizations,
such as the indigenous rights group Survival International, and academics,
including Henry Hazlitt, Ludwig Von Mises, and its former Chief Economist
Joseph Stiglitz. Stiglitz is equally critical of the International Monetary
Fund, the US Treasury Department, and the US and other developed country trade
negotiators. Hazlitt argued that the World Bank along with the monetary system
it was designed within would promote world inflation and "a world in which
international trade is State-dominated" when they were being advocated.
Stiglitz argued that the free market reform policies that the bank advocates
are often harmful to economic development if implemented badly, too quickly
("shock therapy"), in the wrong sequence or in weak, uncompetitive economies.

Critics argue that the so-called free market reform policies—which the bank
advocates in many cases—in practice are often harmful to economic development
if implemented badly, too quickly ("shock therapy"), in the wrong sequence, or
in very weak, uncompetitive economies. World Bank loan agreements can also
force procurements of goods and services at uncompetitive, non-free-market,
prices. Other critical writers, such as John Perkins, label the international
financial institutions as 'illegal and illegitimate and a cog of coercive
American diplomacy in carrying out financial terrorism.

Defenders of the World Bank contend that no country is forced to borrow its
money. The bank provides both loans and grants. Even the loans are
concessional since they are given to countries that have no access to
international capital markets. Furthermore, the loans, both to poor and
middle-income countries, are below market-value interest rates. The World Bank
argues that it can help development more through loans than grants because
money repaid on the loans can then be lent for other projects.

The IFC and MIGA and their way of evaluating the social and environmental
impact of their projects has also been criticized. Critics state that even
though IFC and MIGA have more of these standards than the World Bank, they
mostly rely on private-sector clients to monitor their implementation and miss
an independent monitoring institution in this context. This is why an
extensive review of the institutions' implementation strategy of social and
environmental standards is demanded.

One of the most common criticisms of the World Bank has been the way it is
governed. While the World Bank represents 188 countries, it is run by a small
number of economically powerful countries. These countries (which also provide
most of the institution's funding) choose the bank's leadership and senior
management, and their interests dominate. Titus Alexander argues that the
unequal voting power of western countries and the World Bank's role in
developing countries makes it similar to the South African Development Bank
under apartheid, and therefore a pillar of global apartheid.

In the 1990s, the World Bank and the IMF forged the Washington Consensus,
policies that included deregulation and liberalization of markets,
privatization and the downscaling of government. Though the Washington
Consensus was conceived as a policy that would best promote development, it
was criticized for ignoring equity, employment, and how reforms like
privatization were carried out. Stiglitz argued that the Washington Consensus
placed too much emphasis on GDP growth and not enough on the permanence of
growth or on whether growth contributed to better living standards.

The United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations report criticized the
World Bank and other international financial institutions for focusing too
much "on issuing loans rather than on achieving concrete development results
within a finite period of time" and called on the institution to "strengthen
anti-corruption efforts".

James Ferguson has argued that the main effect of many development projects
carried out by the World Bank and similar organizations is not the alleviation
of poverty. Instead, the projects often serve to expand the exercise of
bureaucratic state power. His case studies of development projects in Thaba-
Tseka show that the World Bank's characterization of the economic conditions
in Lesotho was flawed, and the bank ignored the political and cultural
character of the state in crafting its projects. As a result, the projects
failed to help the poor but succeeded in expanding the government bureaucracy.

Criticism of the World Bank and other organizations often takes the form of
protesting, such as the World Bank Oslo 2002 Protests, the 2007 October
Rebellion, and the 1999 Battle of Seattle. Such demonstrations have occurred
all over the world, even among the Brazilian Kayapo people.

Another source of criticism has been the tradition of having an American head
the bank, implemented because the United States provides the majority of World
Bank funding. "When economists from the World Bank visit poor countries to
dispense cash and advice," observed _The Economist_ in 2012, "they routinely
tell governments to reject cronyism and fill each important job with the best
candidate available. It is good advice. The World Bank should take it."

In 2021, an independent inquiry of the World Bank's _Doing Business_ reports
by the law firm WilmerHale found that World Bank leaders, including then-Chief
Executive Kristalina Georgieva and then-President Jim Yong Kim, pressured
staff members of the bank to alter data to inflate the rankings for China,
Saudi Arabia, Azerbaijan and the United Arab Emirates.

In September 2023, it was revealed that the World Bank had poured billions of
dollars into fossil fuel projects in 2022. Campaigners estimated that about
$3.7bn in trade finance was supplied to oil and gas projects despite the World
Bank's green pledges.

### Allegations of corruption

The World Bank's Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) is charged with the
investigation of internal fraud and corruption, including complaint intake,
investigation, and investigation reports.

### Structural adjustment

The effect of structural adjustment policies on poor countries has been one of
the most significant criticisms of the World Bank. The 1979 energy crisis
plunged many countries into economic crisis. The World Bank responded with
structural adjustment loans, which distributed aid to struggling countries
while enforcing policy changes in order to reduce inflation and fiscal
imbalance. Some of these policies included encouraging production, investment
and labour-intensive manufacturing, changing real exchange rates, and altering
the distribution of government resources. Structural adjustment policies were
most effective in countries with an institutional framework that allowed these
policies to be implemented easily. For some countries, particularly in Sub-
Saharan Africa, economic growth regressed and inflation worsened.

By the late 1980s, some international organizations began to believe that
structural adjustment policies were worsening life for the world's poor, due
to a reduction in social spending and an increase in the price of food, as
subsidies were lifted. It also have been criticized for being Debt-trap
diplomacy. The World Bank changed structural adjustment loans, allowing for
social spending to be maintained, and encouraging a slower change to policies
such as transfer of subsidies and price rises. In 1999, the World Bank and the
IMF introduced the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper approach to replace
structural adjustment loans.

### Fairness of assistance conditions

Some critics, most prominently the author Naomi Klein, are of the opinion that
the World Bank Group's loans and aid have unfair conditions attached to them
that reflect the interests, financial power and political doctrines (notably
the Washington Consensus) of the bank and the countries that are most
influential within it. Among other allegations, Klein says the Group's
credibility was damaged "when it forced school fees on students in Ghana in
exchange for a loan; when it demanded that Tanzania privatise its water
system; when it made telecom privatisation a condition of aid for Hurricane
Mitch; when it demanded labour 'flexibility' in Sri Lanka in the aftermath of
the Asian tsunami; when it pushed for eliminating food subsidies in post-
invasion Iraq".

A study of the period 1970–2004 found that a less-developed country would on
average receive more World Bank projects during any period when it occupied
one of the rotating seats on the UN Security Council.

### Sovereign immunity

The World Bank requires sovereign immunity from countries it deals with.
Sovereign immunity waives a holder from all legal liability for their actions.
It is proposed that this immunity from responsibility is a "shield which The
World Bank wants to resort to, for escaping accountability and security by the
people". As the United States has veto power, it can prevent the World Bank
from taking action against its interests.

### Cronyism and Elite Capture

Criticism was also leveled under the presidency of Jim Yong Kim, particularly
regarding financial management and staff morale. Reports of a controversial
$94,000 bonus awarded to the Bank's CFO, Bertrand Badré (2013–2016), at his
request on top of a tax-free salary of $379,000, while significant staff cuts
and austerity measures were being implemented, drew criticism from within and
outside the organization. This bonus, revealed by Senior Country Officer
Fabrice Houdart amidst a broader effort by Kim to implement cost-cutting
reforms, sparked debates over transparency, ethics, and the organization's
commitment to its own principles, further exacerbating concerns about trust
and leadership within the World Bank. Badré renounced the bonus and left the
Bank shortly after.

The World Bank was the subject of a scandal with its then-president Paul
Wolfowitz and his aide, Shaha Riza, in 2007.

According to reports citing a recording of a 2018 staff meeting shared by a
whistleblower, World Bank staff were informed Robert Malpass, a recent
economics graduate of Cornell University and the son of David Malpass, then US
Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs and later President
of the World Bank Group, would be hired as an analyst in July of that year. On
the recording, staff were reportedly told Robert Malpass was a "prince" and an
"important little fellow" who could go "running to daddy." Bank officials also
believed David Malpass was more influential than then-US Treasury Secretary
Steven Mnuchin, who they said "has little or no clue on things." In April
2018, the US Treasury had changed its position to back a $13 billion capital
infusion for the bank.

Malpass served as undersecretary of the US Treasury in the Trump
administration before being appointed by Trump in February 2019 to be World
Bank's president. Before Malpass became president, his son Robert had joined
the International Finance Corporation (IFC), a branch of the World Bank Group
that lends money to private sector businesses and whose USD 5.5 billion
funding from a USD 13 billion World Bank capital increase was secured by the
US Treasury at the time that David Malpass was the Treasury's undersecretary.

### Criticism of specific loans and programs in Africa

On 9 August 2023, the World Bank announced it was suspending new loans to
Uganda because it claims that a new anti-homosexuality act, enacted in May
2023, contradicts its core values on human rights. The World Bank joined the
United States in imposing sanctions against Uganda over the anti-homosexuality
law. Uganda dismissed the move by the World Bank as unjust and hypocritical.

The World Bank funded a program in Tanzania supposed to help nature
conservation. The program was criticized because it led to severe violation of
human rights toward the Maasai people.

### Investments

The World Bank Group has also been criticized for investing in projects with
human rights issues.

The Compliance Advisor/Ombudsman (CAO) criticized a loan the bank made to the
palm oil company Dinant after the 2009 Honduran coup d'état. There have been
numerous killings of Campesinos in the region where Dinant was operating.

Other controversial investments include loans to the Chixoy Hydroelectric Dam
in Guatemala while it was under military dictatorship, and to Goldcorp (then
Glamis Gold) for the construction of the Marlin Mine.

In 2019, the Congressional-Executive Commission on China questioned the World
Bank about a loan in Xinjiang, China, that was used to buy high-end security
gear, including surveillance equipment. The bank launched an internal
investigation in response to the allegation. In August 2020, U.S. lawmakers
questioned the continued disbursement of the loan.

## People

### Presidents

The president of the bank is the president of the entire World Bank Group. The
president is responsible for chairing meetings of the boards of directors and
for overall management of the bank.

Traditionally, based on a tacit understanding between the United States and
Europe, the president of the World Bank has been selected from candidates
nominated by the United States, the largest shareholder in the bank. The World
Bank tends to lend more readily to countries that are friendly with the United
States, not because of direct U.S. influence but because of the employees of
the World Bank. The nominee is subject to confirmation by the board of
executive directors to serve a five-year, renewable term. While most World
Bank presidents have had banking experience, some have not.

On 23 March 2012, U.S. president Barack Obama announced that the United States
would nominate Jim Yong Kim as the next president of the bank. Jim Yong Kim
was elected on 27 April 2012 and reelected to a second five-year term in 2017.
He announced his resignation effective 1 February 2019 and was replaced on an
interim basis by now-former World Bank CEO Kristalina Georgieva, then by David
Malpass on 9 April 2019. Malpass faced criticism in 2023 as he had "sparked
outcry by appearing to question the role of humans in climate change".

In 2023, a new president was appointed: Ajay Banga. His term began on 2 June
2023. He was supported by the American president Joe Biden partly because he
supports climate action. He is also expected to help low-income countries deal
with debts. He is the first Indian American to lead the bank.

Presidents of the World Bank  Name  | Dates  | Nationality  | Previous work   
---|---|---|---  
Eugene Meyer | 1946–1946  |  United States | Newspaper publisher and Chairman of the Federal Reserve  
John J. McCloy | 1947–1949  |  United States | Lawyer and United States Assistant Secretary of War  
Eugene R. Black, Sr. | 1949–1963  |  United States | Bank executive with Chase Bank and executive director with the World Bank   
George Woods | 1963–1968  |  United States | Bank executive with First Boston  
Robert McNamara | 1968–1981  |  United States | President of the Ford Motor Company, United States Secretary of Defense under presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson  
Alden W. Clausen | 1981–1986  |  United States | Lawyer, bank executive with Bank of America  
Barber Conable | 1986–1991  |  United States | New York State Senator and US Congressman   
Lewis T. Preston | 1991–1995  |  United States | Bank executive with J.P. Morgan & Co.  
James Wolfensohn | 1995–2005  |  United States and  Australia | Wolfensohn was a naturalised American citizen before taking office. Corporate lawyer and banker   
Paul Wolfowitz | 2005–2007  |  United States | US Ambassador to Indonesia, US Deputy Secretary of Defense, dean of the School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) at Johns Hopkins University, a prominent architect of 2003 invasion of Iraq, resigned World Bank post due to ethics scandal   
Robert Zoellick | 2007–2012  |  United States | United States Deputy Secretary of State and US Trade Representative  
Jim Yong Kim | 2012–2019  |  United States | Former Chair of the Department of Global Health and Social Medicine at Harvard, president of Dartmouth College, naturalized American citizen   
Kristalina Georgieva (acting)  | 2019  |  Bulgaria | Former European Commissioner for the Budget and Human Resources and 2010's "European of the Year"   
David Malpass | 2019–2023  |  United States | Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs  
Ajay Banga | 2023–present  |  United States | Former head of Mastercard  
  
### Vice presidents and boards of directors

The vice presidents of the bank are its principal managers, in charge of
regions, sectors, networks and functions. There are two executive vice
presidents, three senior vice presidents, and 24 vice presidents.

The boards of directors consist of the World Bank Group president and 25
executive directors. The president is the presiding officer, and ordinarily
has no vote except to break a tie. The executive directors as individuals
cannot exercise any power or commit or represent the bank unless the boards
specifically authorized them to do so. With the term beginning 1 November
2010, the number of executive directors increased by one, to 25.

### Chief economists

World Bank chief economists  Name  | Dates  | Nationality   
---|---|---  
Hollis B. Chenery | 1972–1982  |  United States  
Anne Osborn Krueger | 1982–1986   
Stanley Fischer | 1988–1990  |  United States and  Israel  
Lawrence Summers | 1991–1993  |  United States  
Michael Bruno | 1993–1996  |  Israel  
Joseph E. Stiglitz | 1997–2000  |  United States  
Nicholas Stern | 2000–2003  |  United Kingdom  
François Bourguignon | 2003–2007  |  France  
Justin Yifu Lin | 2008–2012  |  China  
Kaushik Basu | 2012–2016  |  India  
Paul Romer | 2016–2018  |  United States  
Shanta Devarajan (Acting) | 2018–2018   
Penny Goldberg | 2018–2020   
Aart Kraay (Acting) | 2020–2020  |   
Carmen Reinhart | 2020–2022  |  United States  
Indermit Gill | 2022–present  |  India  
  
### Staff

In 2020, the World Bank had 12,300 full-time staff, and it operated in 145
countries.

### Politicians who were World Bank employees

Some notable politicians who worked for the World Bank include:

  * Ashraf Ghani, was Lead Anthropologist at the World Bank and President of Afghanistan (2014–2021).
  * Fakhruddin Ahmed was the chief adviser of the interim Government of Bangladesh during the political crisis of 2006–2008.
  * Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, former World Bank Managing Director who held several posts in the government of Nigeria, including Minister of Finance.
  * Sri Mulyani Indrawati, former World Bank Managing Director and current Minister of Finance of Indonesia (2005–2010 & 2016–)
  * Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, World Bank Director for West Africa and President of Liberia (2006–2018).

### List of World Bank Directors-General of Evaluation

  * Christopher Willoughby, Successively Unit Chief, Division Chief, and Department Director for Operations Evaluation (1970–1976)
  * Mervyn L. Weiner, First Director-General, Operations Evaluation (1975–1984)
  * Yves Rovani, Director-General, Operations Evaluation (1986–1992)
  * Robert Picciotto, Director-General, Operations Evaluation (1992–2002)
  * Gregory K. Ingram, Director-General, Operations Evaluation (2002–2005)
  * Vinod Thomas, Director-General, Evaluation (2005–2011)
  * Caroline Heider, Director-General, Evaluation (2011–present)