Organization

| **This article has multiple issues.** Please help **improve it** or discuss these issues on the **talk page**. _(Learn how and when to remove these messages)_ | | This article **containspromotional content**. Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links, and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view. _( May 2015)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| The topic of this article **may not meet Wikipedia'snotability guidelines
for companies and organizations**. Please help to demonstrate the notability
of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the
topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If
notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged, redirected, or
deleted.  
_Find sources:_ "WorldFish" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar
**·** JSTOR _( November 2023)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
| This article **relies excessively onreferences to primary sources**. Please
improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.  
_Find sources:_ "WorldFish" – news **·** newspapers **·** books **·** scholar
**·** JSTOR _( November 2023)__(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
---|---  
  
_(Learn how and when to remove this message)_  
  
The **International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management**
(**ICLARM**), also known as **WorldFish** , is an international organization
working to transform aquatic food systems to reduce hunger, malnutrition, and
poverty.

Based in Penang, Malaysia, WorldFish is a member of CGIAR, which unites
international organizations engaged in research about food security and has a
presence in 20 countries throughout Africa, Asia and the Pacific Region.

WorldFish has introduced technologies to ramp up local aquatic food production
through a network of partners. Such innovations include the development of
"genetically improved farmed tilapia" (GIFT) and an enhanced strain of Nile
tilapia, in support of smallhold aquaculture farmers in the Global South.

## WorldFish research

In 2020, WorldFish began to transition from fisheries and aquaculture to a
more holistic aquatic foods system approach. The institution shifted towards
food systems management to focus on aquatic food value chains from production
through consumption, with focuses on climate resilience and environmental
sustainability.

## Recognition

WorldFish has been recognized for its work in Nile tilapia. WorldFish
fisheries scientist Modadugu Vijay Gupta was awarded the World Food Prize for
his research on genetically improved farmed tilapia (GIFT) in support of food
and nutrition security in food-insecure regions.

Shakuntala Haraksingh Thilsted, a food nutritionist with WorldFish, received
the 2021 World Food Prize for her groundbreaking research, critical insights,
and landmark innovations in developing holistic, nutrition-sensitive
approaches to aquaculture and food systems.

## Impact

WorldFish has worked to breed genetically enhanced fast-growing tilapia (GIFT)
varieties to raise the productivity and incomes of low-income smallholder
farmers. It also works to improve the production of key inputs for
aquaculture, specifically fish feed and fingerlings, and links small-scale
aquatic food producers with input and output markets.