# 17

# **State Party Systems**

## Himanshu Roy

his paper analyses the nature of the contemporary party systems in different states of India, which have been inadequately discussed in the academic discourse. The focus of the study is on broad patterns of electoral and political processes rather than on the specificity of political configurations in each province. It argues that among the different factors (regionalism, religion and liberalization) that influence the voting behaviour of the electorate, the most important is the rise of Other Backward Castes [OBCs] who have facilitated the demise of the one-party dominant system and have helped in the growth of alternative party systems in different states. In other words, the states which witnessed the early emergence of the OBCs or the regions which had the *Ryotwari* system also witnessed the early demise of the Congress system and the regions which had the Zamindari system or late awakening among the OBCs witnessed the late demise of the Congress system. The paper arrives at the conclusion that there are three kinds of party systems operational in Indian states at this juncture that may further decline to two namely bi-party and bi-coalitional systems.

In the electoral history of independent India 1967, 1977 and 1989 are turning points that facilitated the growth of alternative party systems in different states and at the Centre. In 1967, the Congress system faced its first major crisis particularly in States. It lost in eight of the then sixteen States, but retained the Centre with a reduced majority. Since then the Congress began to gradually lose its electoral base in the States to be replaced by the non-Congress parties either purely regional in character or nominally national. In 1977, the Congress lost power even at the Centre [gaining only 154 seats] and in many states of North India. However, it retained power or won the elections in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala [where it leads a coalition of different political parties known as United Democratic Front (UDF), Punjab, Tamil Nadu [under the leadership of All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Khazhagam (AIADMK)], etc., when assembly elections were conducted in 1977-78. In 1989, it once again it lost power at the Centre and in many states. This incremental change of ringing out the old and ringing in the new still continues. But these developments were not unilinear. There were ups and downs.

In the last twenty-eight years [1989 and after] in the electoral war of position, the BJP has acquired a vantage position *vis-a-vis* the Congress. From being confined to few pockets of North India, in the aftermath of Gandhi's assassination, it expanded organizationally into most States of India, though it did not win seats in every legislative assembly or in Lok Sabha from every state. Further, in coalition with other non-Congress parties or without it, BJP has managed to form governments in several States, and at federal level in New Delhi.

In the three decades from 1967, changes in the party systems, both at the Centre and in the States, may be described as a part of resolutivecompositive process. The old party system got dissolved and on its ruins emerged a new one. Of the old system, certain elements of the Nehruvian project like greater democratization of social structure, unity in diversity, focus on universalization of health and education, etc., were retained. The discrepancies that had crept into the old body-politic during the Indira-Rajiv regimes are being discarded either as part of self-purificatory measures or under the pressure of competitive politics. Issues like marginalization of party leaders and cadres *vis-a-vis* the minister of the same party in the government, concentration of administrative power into the hands of the ministers in the federal government vis-a-vis the ministers of the same party in the provincial governments, or the monopolization of power by top leaders vis-a-vis cadres and grassroots workers at party level are now on active political agenda for reforms. In fact, there is a pressure from below for greater decentralization of power both, in the provincial government and on the party units in their routine functioning. The local leaders and cadres in the parties and in the provincial governments are now vociferous in seeking autonomy in policy formulations, which concern local governance both at administrative and party levels. Thus, democracy within parties is an issue which is being discussed and demanded including transparency in party funding, its accounting and auditing and the likes. The directives from the Election Commission have played an affirmative role in such developments. And the parties, which are not adapting to the changing situation are breaking up. As a result, the resolutive-compositive process has led to three types of party systems in the States that may be described as follows: (1) Bi-party system, (2) Bi-coalitional system, and (3) multiple coalitional system.

In the bi-party system as it is operational in States like Gujarat, Delhi, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Orissa, Karnataka, Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab etc., its mainly the two parties which dominate the political and electoral proceedings and form the government. One of them is the Congress. The second party in the first five States is Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP). In the subsequent states, the other parties are Telugu Desham Party (TDP), Asom Gana Parishad (AGP), Janata Dal (JD), Biju Janata Dal (BJD), National Conference (NC) and Akali Dal respectively. The dominance of two parties in different States as stated above, however, does not preclude the existence of other parties, either in the legislative assemblies or as electoral contestants. In short term, they may influence/facilitate the formation of the local governments or may be partners in it in exceptional cases. But, in the long run, they play only marginal roles. In Himachal Pradesh, for example, the Himachal Vikas Congress (HVC) in the last election formed a pre-poll alliance with the BJP 'and was partner in the government. It was a small provincial party with a limited influence in the province that facilitated the formation of the government at the time. But when it attempted to play larger role in recent election, the electorate rejected it. In Madhya Pradesh, similarly, the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) had pre-poll alliance/'friendly' contests/electoral understanding without any formal declaration, either with the BJP or with the Congress and won few seats in the legislative assembly. But it remains only a marginal party till date in Madhya Pradesh. Thus, in both the States, the HVC and the BSP are only fringe parties either as electoral partners or as partners in the government. Similarly, Peoples' Democratic Party (PDP) in Jammu and Kashmir, as the electoral history of Jammu and Kashmir, may remain a minor player in long run despite heading the government in partnership with the Congress which commands more legislative members than the PDP in the local assembly. There, it is the Congress and the National Conference who have the predominant political existence. The acquisition of pre-dominance by the PDP can only be possible when the Congress or the National Conference is marginalized. In Gujarat, the formation of Janata Party by Shankar Singh Baghela, after he broke away from the BJP, aimed as a third political force failed. Thus, in brief, smaller parties in these States who have influence only in few constituencies of their States in which they are located do not play any significant role. Only those local parties play predominant roles who command decisive influence all over the states in which they are located. In Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Orissa and Assam, for example, it is the one local party out of many in each State, mainly confined to their States, which play the dominant role, along with the Congress as the other second party in the bi-party system. In recent years, the BJP has attempted to enter into these states' assemblies mainly riding piggy back on the State-based parties but it has not yet succeeded in displacing the Congress or the predominant local party. In such states, a marked feature of the party system is the electoral, organizational and political stability of the two predominant parties either as the ruling or the main opposition party, irrespective of revolts, factional quarrels and break-ups. The change in the nomenclature of the local unit of the predominant parties does not essentially change the character of the party system as it happened, for example, during Chief Minister Chimanbhai Patel's tenure in Gujarat. He broke away from the parent party [Janata Dal], changed the name of the State unit and converted it into a new party, Gujarat Janata Dal, mainly on the strength of the MLAs of Gujarat unit of Janata Dal. In Orissa and Karnataka, the local Janata Dal units acted almost similarly. Thus in spite of such problems and uniqueness in each State the States referred to above have bi-party system in governance.

In the second kind of party system operational in the States like Kerala, West Bengal, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, etc., a bi-coalitional pattern may be observed. The essential features of it are the existence of (1) two polarized political formations, each being led by two different parties, (2) constituents of each political formations have electoral understanding among themselves for jointly contesting elections or sharing seats and forming coalition government, when voted into power, and (3) each of the two coalition groups work on the basis of common minimum programme (CMP) irrespective of different ideological strands. In Kerala, for example, Left Democratic Front (LDF) and United Democratic Front (UDF) are led and dominated by the Communist party of India (Marxist) and the Congress respectively. In Tamil Nadu, it is the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) and the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK), which lead their coalition partners. In Maharashtra, the Shiv Sena-BJP coalition and the Congress-Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) coalition have dominated the political proceedings in past years. Both the coalitions have been led by the major parties-Shiv Sena and the Congress, who command largest numbers of legislators in the legislative assembly in their coalitions or are in prominent positions in the State either in terms of percentage of votes or in terms of their organizational strengths. In Bengal, it is the CPI(M) and the Trinamool Congress, which lead their respective political coalitions. But for all of these practical purposes, it is the one-party dominant system, which still prevails. The Congress, which dominated till 1960s, has been substituted by the CPI(M), which has the legislative strength to form the government at its own without the support of coalition partners in the Left Front (LF) who has run the government for more than 34 years since 1977. Technically, however, Bengal may be called as one-coalition dominant system. Here, Congress has been reduced to a minor party with no phoenixian quality. In recent years, nonetheless, both in parliamentary and assembly elections the coalition of Trinamool Congress along with the BJP, or the Congress and other smaller parties attempted to pose a serious electoral challenge to the Left Front (LF). The Trinamool Congress proposed a *mahajot,* (a grand electoral coalition) of non-LF parties, which the local unit of the Congress supported. But the opposition of the Central leadership of the Congress to this programme of *mahajot* checked the formation of a grand coalition of the opposition that provided a needed breather to the LF. It is believed that if the *mahajot* becomes operational, the LF, which wins because of the fragmented votes of the opposition, may lose elections. However, unless the *mahajot* becomes feasible and wins alternative space for itself, which remains vacant, Bengal today cannot be called a State where real bi-coalitional system exists as in the last 20 years no alternative coalition has occupied the governmental power.

#### **316** ✽ CHAPTER 17

One of the features of this (bi-coalitional) system is that smaller parties may shift their allegiance from one coalition to another but this does not affect the functioning of the system. A recent case in point (around 1999 Lok Sabha polls) was of Tamil Nadu, where the BJP, Tamil Rajiv Congress, etc., which were earlier in the coalition led by the AIADMK, shifted to the coalition led by the DMK. Or, in Bengal around the 2001, during Assembly election, the Trinamool Congress formed an alliance with the Congress and dumped the BJP with which it had earlier formed an alliance for the parliamentary elections. Governance in such system is smoothened through a coordination committee of the coalition partners, which resolves the internal contradictions among the parties that arise despite a common minimum programme. Later, Trinamool congress deserted the congress-led coalition as well.

A third category of the party system operational in States like Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Bihar, and Uttar Pradesh (UP), is multiple coalitions of parties, which exist along with many other major parties contesting the elections independent of any coalitions. The parties outside the coalitions may enter into limited electoral adjustments, 'friendly' contests or constituency specific understandings with one another. In this system, there are more than two important power contenders aiming to form the government but not powerful enough to do it at their own or dictate terms to smaller parties; neither powerful enough to electorally wipe them out as it happens in bi-party/coalitional systems. On the contrary, here the smaller parties are powerful enough to challenge the dominant contenders through their own coalitions. Or within a coalition if there exists a large party, they extract more number of constituencies in their favour for contest. The polarization of forces does take place and it primarily veers around/against the ruling coalition or with/against the dominant contestant. Yet, the forces are not so tightly polarized or there is no sharp division among them as it takes place in the bi-coalitional system. That is, in this system, once the election ends and result is declared reflecting hung assembly or simple majority for any coalition, reconfiguration of political forces begins afresh breaking all the preceding alignments that existed during the election period. In fact, even if a electoral coalition is placed in governmental power by the voters, the government may collapse within short duration far ahead of its scheduled term under different pulls and pressure leading to the beginning of another political! electoral permutation and combination. Only in rare cases, an electoral coalition or a coalition formed after election or a single party placed in power by voters have completed their tenure. In brief, in this system political forces are always in flux and every possible gamesmanship occurs except for dominant contestants forming coalitions among themselves. A brief presentation of the electoral contests of recent years may illustrate the point. To begin with, in Manipur, for the Assembly election 2000 there were three alliances: (1) United Front consisting of Mainpur State Congress Party and Federal Party, (2) Secular Democratic Front consisting of Congress, Mainpur People's Party, CPI, CPI(M), JD(S), Revolutionary Socialist Party; (3) Manipur Democratic Alliance consisting of BJP, Samata Party, Kuki National Assembly. Besides these three alliances, there were parties like Nationalist Congress Party (NCP), which contested the elections on its own. Similarly, in Bihar Assembly election 2005 there were four alliances: (1) RJD-led alliance of CPI and CPI(M), (2) NDA alliance of BJP and JD (U), (3) Congress and LJP alliance, and (4) CPI (ML) alliance. Earlier, in 2000, there were three alliances: (1) RJD-Ied alliance consisting of CPI(M), JD(S), Samajwadi Janata Party (SJP), (2) alliances of CPI and CPI(ML), and (3) BJP-Ied National Democratic Alliance (NDA) of JD(U) and Samata Party. Further, there were other parties like Congress, which contested the election alone. In 1995, JD and CPI were part of one alliance whereas BJP and Samata Party had contested the election separately independent of any alliance. However, in 1990, JD and BJP were part of one alliance. In Uttar Pradesh, in 1993, Samajwadi Party (SP) and BSP had formed an alliance whereas BJP, Congress and JD had contested the assembly election independently. Subsequently, BJP and BSP had formed alliance, and again parted ways and contested the last election independently. In Mizoram, in the last election, in 1998, there were two coalitions that contested the assembly election, namely, (1) Mizo National Front + Mizo People's Conference, and (2) Mizo National Front (Nationalist) + Citizens Common Forum. Besides, the Congress contested alone. Subsequently, in the recent election with slight modification the electoral/political polarization continued. Thus, due to electoral compulsion the parties keep on forming different number of coalitions with partners changing. Even electoral opponents may join hands in government formation. (A case in point is the role of the Congress and Rashtriya Janata Dal in Bihar who contested the Bihar Assembly election in 2000 as opponents but joined together to run the government). Or the parties split with a faction joining the government against the electoral stand of their parent parties. Splits in the BSP and Congress in UP are cases in point. The breakaway factions joined the BJP-Ied government. In Bihar, there are numerous such cases. But even in such political flux one characteristic can be noted, *i.e.,* irrespective of changing number of coalitions and number of parties contesting the elections, there are broad but sharp polarizations either in favour of or against the single largest party (in terms of organizational strength, mass support and spatial reach). In UP for example there is polarization in favour of or against the BJP. In Bihar, similarly, the polarization is either in favour of or against the RJD. And, in Meghalaya, Mizoram and Manipur it is the Congress which propels other parties for polarization. In such system, the parties/coalitions are evenly balanced and no political formation is in a decisively dominant position. Capture of governmental power, anyhow, is the guiding principle of praxis resulting in to opportunistic alliances, splits in parties, etc. The struggle for political survival is so intense that even in the matter of routine, everyday administrative functioning there are frequent bickerings among the alliance partners in the government that affects their overall governance adversely. Since there does not exist any Coordination Committee of parties in power which can smoothen their frictions the contentious issues are resolved through ad hoc decisions taken by the top leadership of the largest parties in power in consultation with the leadership of the smaller parties sharing power.

Both in the bi-party system and in the coalitional systems-bi-coalitional and multiple coalitional-electoral adjustments with minor parties are agreed upon to check splitting of votes and to create an impression in the public that the parties or coalitions are omni-sized and have omni presence in their concerned states with sure winnability in the elections. Splitting of votes among parties having common electoral base usually mars their chances of winning more number of seats. Even in electoral propaganda, they lost out as it. reflects lack of unity among their electoral base. An alliance of parties having common electoral base projects large size of the political formations representing diverse regions and sections of society, which provide benefit to the image making. It also projects the welfare of diverse kinds of people. To take benefit of such a situation, parties even in states like Assam, Orissa, Karnataka, and Andhra Pradesh where there is essentially a bi-party system, both the Congress and the major regional parties (AGP, BJD, JD and TDP) in the respective states form alliances with parties, which have marginal electoral support base. A closer look of the marginal partners, for example, the BJP in Andhra, Karnataka and Orissa or that of the CPI+CPM+UPP in Assam brings forth such facts as enumerated above. They have only minor political presence in such states and the alliances with bigger parties are intended to piggy ride in assemblies/ government or to expand their electoral organizational bases by projecting themselves as extension of larger parties, taking benefits of their networks, contacts, resources or manpower. On the other hand, larger parties like JP/ JD/BJD in Orissa, TDP in Andhra, AGP in Assam or JP/JD/Lok Shakti in Karnataka along with Congress in these states are formidable enough to form governments on their own strength. They form alliance to check the splitting of votes that may benefit their chief political rivals. In this system, the alliance partners may not necessarily join the government, they may not share each other's ideologies but work together on the basis of a Common Minimum Programme. The formation of alliance does not alter the nature of the bi-party system in these states or in Assam, Andhra, Orissa, Karnataka, etc. Even in other states where there are bi-or multi-coalitional systems the purpose of electoral alliance is the same.

Overall, this survey of the party systems in different states of India points out that there is a development towards political polarization that may turn the third category of party system, *i.e.,* multiple coalition, as discussed above, vacuous. Moreover, in the age of globalization and growing centralization of capital the party system, cannot remain undented. The mounting electoral expenses with only a few seats won by a party may not be viable in future. With the scale of economics tilting against such parties, they may become politically obsolete in course of time. And, in the changed social context and competitive political milieu where accountability and auditing by the people are in vogue, only the fittest may survive on the electoral firmament. Thus except for an aberration in Arunachal Pradesh, which still clings to the one-party dominant system with all its features, except for the caste being replaced by the tribe, the party systems in different States may have either bi-coalitional or bi-party system in future. Or, at least, irrespective of number of parties polarization among them may become sharper.

It is difficult to explain as to why some States have bi-party or bi-coalitional systems while others have other kinds of party systems. There are no definite reasons in such diverse society and for such systemic variations. Only some plausible arguments may be posited. One such important factor may be the political emergence of the OBCs as a force to be reckoned with, who have been generally considered as hostile to Congress. In the *ryotwari*  areas of mainly South India, *e.g.,* Tamil Nadu, Kerala, etc., the OBCs arrived on the political horizon relatively earlier. Their individual political mobility was propelled by capitalism from below in agriculture, which was brought about by new revenue settlement in the early years of the nineteenth century in colonial India, (which was a caricature of the 1789 French model of development). It may be noted here that in France during the bourgeois revolutionary period of 1789 the peasants had seized the lands of the estates and appropriated them as their private property that was later on legalized. The landed intermediary strata of zamindars existing between the State and the peasants ceased to exist thenceforth. It was a self emancipatory process. The peasants were brought into direct relation with the state. In colonial South India, neither the British as the lead bourgeois party nor the peasantry as the revolutionary force played the same stellar roles as it had happened in France. Nonetheless, the new land settlement initiated a limited break from the past. Modern education further helped the peasants to compete for new spaces provided by colonial capitalism. In the zamindari areas of mainly North India, *e.g.,* in Bihar, UP, etc., the emergence of OBCs was facilitated by the land reform measures initiated in 1950s, which were formulated in instalments and implemented after years of courts' anglings and administrative circumvention.

Actually, it was the sheer raw power that decided the fate of land reforms in villages, at least, in the initial years. Later on, the economics of market and numerical power of the OBCs tilted the possession of land in their favour. Being in majority as OBCs, but not cohesive and united, they supported a number of parties that challenged the Congress in the electoral fray, but could not keep it out of power for long. The lack of opposition unity factor brought the Congress back into power. The OBCs, therefore, took many years to dethrone the Congress through painful forging of opposition unity. The rise of the OBCs in the *ryotwari* areas in combination with the power of their brethren in the post-zamindari areas led to the undermining of the electoral base of the Congress. In other words, Madras and Bombay Presidencies or the areas in the Calcutta presidency witnessing effective land reforms (West Bengal) were the weakest links in the chain of Congress system where it was broken first, giving rise to alternative party systems.

Further, with the expansion of industrial economy to hinterland, mechanization of agriculture and growth of agro-based industries there is an increasing differentiation among the peasantry. And more the differentiation, which was/has been facilitated by gradual economic liberalization over the year particularly beginning in small measures during Rajiv Gandhi's premiership, greater is the desperation among the peasantry to cling to old system and values. BJP and other non-Congress parties used this opportunity to catapult themselves to power.

'From all these developments, Muslims did not remain aloof. Majority of them spread over in rural areas, particularly in rice growing belts which are situated in river basins.' Some of them were benefitted from the commodification process but a large section was displaced and has been marginalized. Still having mired in poverty (the benefit of green revolution, which had occurred in wheat growing areas first, did not percolate to them much) and illiteracy (Muslim women are much below the Dalits in literacy), the Muslims are electorally appropriated by different parties in different States. Though not voting *en bloc*, they do influence considerable number of seats by their religious perceptions. Lack of modem education and rural economic development has placed them in a blind alley. Majority of Muslims being converts from the poor economic and caste strata, they perform mainly their traditional professional chores, which have been hit hardest by economic liberalization. In the economic milieu of searching for alternative livelihood, a section of them are attracted towards religious revivalism and fundamentalism.

Such social transformation particularly in the States undergoing postzamindari transition felt the change in the nature of party system. The change being gradual and the zamindari areas, comprising approximately 60 per cent of the territory in the country, being too vast, it took almost two to three decades, depending upon the regions, for the OBCs to catapult not only the non-Congress parties in to power on a sustained basis but also their caste brethren in the hierarchies of these parties. Such socio-political transition however, as per the history of India's growth rate was relatively fast. Indira Gandhi, and for a brief period Rajiv Gandhi, had temporarily stalled the undermining of the Congress power through their deft electoral handling; but the gradual demise of the traditional landlords, particularly of the absentee variety, and the rise of "bullock capitalists" at the grassroots level along with growth of the rich farmers at the upper echelon of rural hierarchy disjointed the class coalition of the bourgeoisie and the landlords that was reflected in the nature of the state during the Nehruvian period which was subsequently replaced by the absolute' dominance of the bourgeoisie, lacking till 1960s, under Indira's authoritarianism which was the measure required for facilitating the absolute dominance of the bourgeoisie. Her economic policy, like nationalization of major banks, was to facilitate the availability of large amount of capital, using the resources of the State, at the disposal of a weak bourgeoisie that was devoid of such benefit in the absence of big banks. Indira-Rajiv charisma and their deft electoral handling could not withhold the social transformation underway for long. Once the splitting of the OBCs votes was checked through some semblance of opposition unity in plurality of the first-past-the post system of election the Congress system, which was already undermined, collapsed. More or less, the Congress had never commanded the majority percentage of votes, with the voter turnout itself restricted to around 60 per cent on an average. The weakening of the Congress system also led to another interesting change. The legal demise of the zamindari system, already corroded by the market and electoral system, also led to the change in the roles of the political parties, which they had, hitherto, played. Now onwards, they confined themselves, gradually, to contesting the elections and forming the governments. Their commitment and roles in radical social transformation atrophied, which was subsequently taken care of by Non-Government Organizations (NGOs).

Apart from these socio-economic factors, the role of contemporary problems like river water disputes, religion, language, region-specific problems, caste-cultural identities, etc., did play important roles in electoral and party politics. During last ten years, their importance has increased. Further, the constituency-specific problems and the number of candidates contesting in a particular constituency ultimately decide the victory of a candidate. Growth in the percentage of vote of a candidate may not be the winning factor. A candidate with a less percentage of vote may win the election, depending upon the split in the opponents' votes. Thus, there are innumerable factors responsible for the victory of candidates of different political parties that determined the nature of party systems in Indian states.

It is believed that there has been growth of regionalism in the past forty years, which has moved in fast track in the last decade. Arguments are posited, to substantiate it, that State-based parties have recently proliferated in large numbers and they have successfully positioned themselves in governmental power replacing national parties, mainly the Congress. Even the BJP, which has emerged as a national party in the twenty years eclipsing the Congress, has been halted by the phenomenon of regionalism, which focuses on sons of the soil, local issues, and greater autonomy to the States. At surface, such arguments may seem plausible. But a deeper probe makes them untenable. A brief explanation to refute such beliefs is required here.

With the expansion of capitalism in agriculture and benefits of land reforms reaching out to the OBCs, SCs and STs, and their realization that the electoral politics can be commanded or influenced by their numerical strength, the pre-capitalist dominance of the upper castes, which had lingered on till 1960s, gradually declined. It was substituted by the new sets of political power holders (now known as Mandal elites along with dalits), backed by their constituencies, that dismantled the Congress system which was dominated by the upper castes. The fallout of the zamindari abolition combined with the benefits of *ryotwari* system hastened its decline. The neglect of emerging social aspirations of the OBCs, in particular by the Congress, played an equally important role in its gradual demise. The new rulers' political survival depended on nurturing local/rural aspirations. Their new political formations away from Congress, survived mainly at regional levels essentially as (1) an electoral protest of new social forces, mainly or OBCs, against the Congress system for its failure to cater to their local requirements, and (2) for decentralization of power and its accessibility at district and *talook* levels catering to their local needs. The grassroots perception never differentiated the 'regional' or 'national' parties. But people definitely vote for the parties that perform. Mainly belonging to the profession of cultivation and possessing traditional rural outlook, these castes, now dominant, required parties that were locally rooted like them and work for them. Unconscious of or indifferent to the image of regionalism, as created and sustained by the parties and leaders for their own political ambitions, the local population faces similar problems that are encountered by the populace of other constituencies all over India. They, simultaneously, face problems that are region, and constituency-specific as well. Solution of their problems, and not the dominance over others, is the need of the people: Behind voting regional parties into power, the intention is not exclusion from India but the solution of their problems of everyday existence*.* Recognition of identity was sought for self-governed development. It meant a desire to participate in their development in democratic governance. Separation just for its sake and false prestige has not been the part of their psyche. They have voted Congress or other 'national' parties back into power time and again. And they have rejected their 'regional' parties when the parties of the regions have failed to perform. Regionalism, thus in contemporary period, is only an electoral verbiage for the State-based parties and leaders bereft of any serious popular support for the separatist agenda. Or such leaders and parties use the verbiage of separation/regionalism to keep their electoral support intact or conceal their bad governance or attempt to cover up their failure of performance by blaming others. Growth of state-based parties reflects only the existence of unsolved problems. Indirectly, it creates pressure on the 'national' parties to take into account, seriously, the local needs of the people and solve their problems. In an economy, which has still to acquire developed capitalist structure, the competition for appropriating resources among different regions and segments of society is reflected in different images. Many of such images are false and are deliberately created to pressurize the resource distributing agencies. Regionalism is one such false image used for appropriating resources from the distributing agencies by a regional party from among the competing sections. The desire of a State government for an autonomous administrative functioning, away from the clutches of the Central government, need not be confused for regionalism. The proliferation of contemporary state-based parties contesting elections has no serious link with regionalism or separatist agenda. It is only a desire for autonomous administrative functioning. The growth of regionalism takes place when democratic governance and welfare measures elude a society. In India, flexible constitution, liberal democracy arid expanding capitalism provide enough space for social mobility that acts as countervailing force to regionalism. The demand for separation from India is sought by only those political organizations, which do not contest election, or by those who exist at political fringe at that point of time and use the verbiage of separation just to remain in existence.

The incremental change in the nature of party system in different states of India in the last forty years have resulted into coalition politics at the Centre and in States. The years 1977 and 1989 are marked as watersheds in such developments that heralded and culminated respectively into breaking the hegemony of the Congress and one-party dominant system, and substituted it with either bi-party system, bi-coalitional system, or polarized pluralism. There were many factors responsible for such changes. Growth of OBCs as "bullock capitalists" in the post-zamindari period, breakdown of the class coalition between bourgeoisie and landlords and its replacement by absolute dominance of the bourgeoisie, expansion of civil society, etc., were factors that affected the process of change. More importantly, the Congress represented a period of transition from political dominance of upper castes to their decline, from their land dominance in rural India to their urban-migration. It was the dominance, both actual and residual, that had lingered on from the days of pre-capitalist society. The beginning of the end of Congress system was also the end of vestiges of feudalism and expansion of rural capitalism at a faster pace. *Ryotwari* area had witnessed such socio-economic changes earlier hence, anti-Congress ideology in such States in the South India arrived earlier. When the benefits of Zamindari abolition coalesced with the benefits of the *ryotwari* system the Congress system was dismantled forever. It heralded the arrival of rural capitalism all over India at grassroots level, which politically energized the majority of rural population against Congress system.

The dismantling of the Congress system affected different regions and segments of population in different proportions. The non-fulfilment of the aspirations of the people under the Congress system threw up many local parties and leaders who promised a better life to their constituencies in the post-Congress system. It resulted in open display of caste, communal and regional cards for vote mobilization. Suiting to the local requirements of the rural population, who felt the sense of power, it became a necessity for the non-Congress parties to identify with the idioms of the rural world and, competitively, prove themselves, in verbiage, more faithful to the sons of the soil. But most of the parties got trapped in such political cocoons of being regional and local, which was a creation of their own, and could not expand

#### **324** ✽ CHAPTER 17

beyond a limited vote bank, which proved detrimental to their expansion and graduating to governance on their own steam. They were consequently compelled to form coalition for governance or form alliances for electoral contest resulting into coalition politics of the day and polarization of political forces. Apart from acquiring the images of being regional, secular, religious or caste-oriented that suited these parties in the initial stage, in the aftermath of the Congress system, such labels are now turning into their fetters. Economic liberalization has posed another problem for their survival. It has hastened the process of differentiation among and uprooting of the rural population, thereby, eroding and changing the vote banks of different parties. It has also extended the law of market to the realm of political competition with more intensity. With large number of competitors for votes targeting same voters and the voters migrating to towns every year in a different socio-economic milieu, a number of parties may become extinct or get marginalized as the victory of candidates would become elusive due to splitting of votes among large number of candidates. The electoral expenses with lesser probability of electoral success shall deter a party from making bad ventures. Thus, the economy, acting as catalyst may, in future, help in further polarizing the political forces into limited number of blocks.

More or less, the diverse factors acting against a number of political parties, and the contemporary political trend already existing towards polarized formations, the nature of party systems in different States of India, where multiple coalitions exists today, may move towards bi-coalition or bi-party systems.

### **Notes and References**

- The data presented in this paper about the election results have been compiled from Butler, David, *et.al. India Decides:* New Delhi: Books & Things; Election Commission of India (2000). *Election in India: Major Events: New Initiatives 1996-2000.* New Delhi: Rana, M.S. (2000) *India Votes.* Delhi: B.R. Publishing Corporation.
- Roy, Himanshu (1997), "Mandal Elite vs. Indian Democracy" in Singh, M.P. and Saxena, Rekha (eds.) *Political Science Annua11997,* New Delhi: Deep and Deep Publication.
- This information was given by Professor Imtiaj Ahmed in a lecture at Academic Staff College, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi in 1999.
- For the economic and political emergence of OBCs, see Rudolph, L.I. and Rudolph, S.H. (1987) *In Pursuit of Lakshmi*: *Political Economy of the Indian State,* New Delhi: Orient Longman.
- For such view see Yadav, Yogendra, Kumar, Sanjay and Heath, Oliver (2000) "Regional Parties to the Fore", *Frontline,* March 17: 127-130.
- See Balveer Arora's arguments in Frankel, Francine, Hasan, Zoya, Bhargava, Rajeev and Arora, Balveer (eds.) (2000) *Transforming India: Social and Political Dynamics of Democracy,* New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- For arguments on increasing federalization of India democracy mainly in matters of administrative governance, see Singh, Mahendra Prasad (1994) "Political Parties and Political Economy of Federalism: A Paradigm shift in Indian Politics", *Indian Journal of Social Science,* Vol. 7, New Delhi.