# **Navajo**

#### **Joanne McCloskey**

### **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Diné, means "The People" in Navajo, and is often preferred throughout the Navajo Nation.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Located in the Four Corners area of the Southwestern United States, the Navajo Nation occupies 26,649 m<sup>2</sup> on the Colorado Plateau in portions of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. The language spoken is Navajo, an Athapaskan language.

### **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Relative to the Pueblo Indians, the Navajo were latecomers, arriving in the Southwest sometime before or around 1500 ad (Brugge, 1983). Originally hunter–gatherers, they adopted agriculture from the Pueblos and sheep and horses from the Spanish. The Navajos thrived as pastoralists and agriculturists, moving their sheep with the changing seasons between winter camp and summer camp where they raised corn, squash, beans, and melons.

After their release from imprisonment at Bosque Redondo in Ft Sumner, New Mexico in 1868, the Navajo continued their reliance on livestock and crops until the 1930s. The initiation of livestock reduction by the commissioner of Indian Affairs, John Collier, in 1933 sounded the death knell for the land-based economy. Unable to support themselves with the drastically reduced herds, Navajos had no alternative but to seek work in the labor force. At first Navajo men worked, often at off-reservation jobs on the railroad, ranches, in construction and mining, and as migrant field hands. Women stayed at home to maintain the fields and reduced herds, while weaving rugs to sell at trading posts. With the increase in reservation schools, hospitals, agencies, and stores after mid-century came expanded opportunities for Navajo women to enter the labor force.

The foundation of Navajo social organization rests on the matrilineal kinship system. The basic principle of k'é, meaning relationships comprised of kindness, love, cooperation, thoughtfulness, friendliness, and peacefulness (Morgan, F., 2002; Witherspoon, 1983), guides interactions among family members in the extended matrilineal kinship network and among clan members. Besides the primary affiliation with his mother's clan, a Navajo also identifies with his father's clan as his "born for" clan and with the clans of his maternal and paternal grandfathers. Egalitarian relationships exist between Navajo men and women, a reflection of the premise that all entities and aspects of life consist of male and female components.

Fundamental to Navajo philosophy and religion is the concept of hózhó˛. Not easily translated from Navajo, hózhó˛ involves everything that a Navajo thinks is good or favorable in the world (Morgan, F., 2002; Wyman, 1983). Hózhó˛ means goodness everywhere and beauty in the sense of harmony and balance (Morgan, F., 2002). The fundamental purpose of Navajo traditional ceremonies is to restore a state of hózhó˛ to the individual through songs, prayers, and ritual activities. Navajo ceremonies focus on healing the patient, "the one sung over," who may have a physical illness, a mental ailment, or distress brought about by improper contact with the natural or spiritual world.

Formerly, traditional leaders, naat'áanii, were selected on the basis of their wisdom, traditional knowledge, community citizenship, membership in a respected family, and the ability to successfully live in harmony and to conduct at least one ceremony (Office of Navajo Government Development, 1998). Replacing the traditional political system, the election of a tribal council began in 1923 as a way to authorize oil leases to extract oil discovered on Navajo lands. The Navajo Nation consists of 110 grassroots organizations known as chapters, which elect representatives to the tribal council.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Three distinct climatic environments contribute to the striking beauty of the Navajo landscape: humid, steppe, and desert. Mountains rising between 7,500 and 10,416 ft characterize the high elevations of the relatively small humid area, including the Chuska and Carrizo mountains, the Fort Defiance Plateau, the highest ridges of Black Mesa, and Navajo mountain. At the intermediate elevations between 6,000 and 8,000 ft, the pinon and junipercovered mesas and high plains dominate the steppe area, which makes up about one third of the total land area. Over half of the Navajo Nation lies between 4,500 and 7,000 ft, where sagebrush and grasses grow in a desert climate (Linford, 2000; Young, 1961).

The abundant energy resources on Navajo land—oil, natural gas, coal, and uranium—constitute a doubleedged sword for the Diné. Although the extraction of energy resources provide an important source of tribal revenue and employment (Choudhary, 2001), major profits benefit large corporations, which operate under leases negotiated with the Navajo Nation. "In sum, Navajos have no control over their nonrenewable energy resources; profits from extracting and processing them flow elsewhere" (Aberle, 1983a, p. 651).

The 2000 U.S. census counted 173,987 Navajos residing within the Navajo Reservation (Choudhary, 2003), making the Navajos the largest reservation-based tribe in the United States. The Navajo population is young, with a median age of 24.0 years. Despite significant recent gains in educational attainment, unemployment and poverty plague the Diné. The 2000 census reported that 54.22% of the Navajo Nation population 25 years or older had a high school degree yet 42.90% of persons live below the poverty level (Choudhary, 2003). The unemployment rate for the Navajo Nation in the year 2000 was 43.4% (Choudhary, 2001). The annual per capita income for 1999 was \$6,217 compared with \$28,542 for the entire United States (Choudhary, 2001).

In 1990 most Navajos, 82%, spoke their native language at home. Also in 1990, 51.6% of housing units lacked complete plumbing, and 77.5% of occupied housing units were without a telephone. The average life expectancy at birth is 72.7 years compared with 75.8 years for the entire U.S. population (Navajo Area Indian Health Service, 2002).

### **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Navajo medical practitioners include diagnosticians, healers, and herbalists. Three types of traditional diagnosticians are stargazers, listeners, and hand tremblers, of which hand tremblers are by far the most common. After praying to Gila Monster, one of the Holy People, a hand trembler goes into a mild trance (Milne & Howard, 2000). Hand tremblers may be either male or female, with a predominance of females among practitioners who function only as diagnosticians (Adair, Deuschle, & Barnett, 1988). In addition, road men in the Native American Church also act as diagnosticians. Although not all road men diagnose, many use charcoal gazing, the second most common method of diagnosis (Milne & Howard, 2000).

Three primary types of Navajo healers are medicine men, or singers, who conduct traditional ceremonies; road men who lead Native American Church meetings; and pastors of fundamentalist Christian churches who perform faith healing. In addition, western biomedical practitioners may be used alone or in combination with religious forms of healing. Similar to the many years of education required to prepare medical doctors, medicine men undergo many years of apprenticeship to learn a single ceremony. Depending upon the apprentice's other activities and the ability to memorize hundreds of songs, prayers, and rituals, the learning period may last as long as 15 years (Morgan, W., 1977).

Herbalists, who use their vast knowledge of local flora for medicinal as well as ceremonial purposes, are usually elders. They may use their herbal remedies only for members of their extended families or their cures may be in demand for a wider group. As an example, an herbalist from the Crownpoint area on the eastern portion of the reservation uses her knowledge of plants to prevent births, to facilitate an easy childbirth, and to treat sores, bruises, the common cold, and broken bones.

Some Navajos seek cures from healers belonging to other tribes. For example, on the western portion of the reservation, Navajos may travel to Hopi Indian villages for treatment to extract objects from the patient's body that cause illness and problems (Levy, 1983; Morgan, F., 2002).

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

### **Classification of Illness**

Etiologic agents believed to cause disease include animals, insects, natural phenomena, mistakes made during healing ceremonies, contact with ghosts of deceased humans, and contact with living or dead foreigners, particularly enemies (Wyman & Kluckhohn, 1938). Among the animals and insects that cause illness, the most frequently identified are the bear, coyote, porcupine, snake, eagle, moth, ant, long-horned grasshopper, and camel cricket. The most commonly named natural phenomena responsible for illness are lightning and whirlwinds (Levy, 1983). Failure to observe the taboo regarding abstinence from sex during or four days after a ceremony can cause illness. Illness can result from contact with the dead or from the location where a person died. Because pregnant women and their husbands are particularly vulnerable, they cannot attend funerals.

These etiologic factors may lead to a variety of symptoms and illnesses. There is no direct correlation between a causative agent and a disease process. "A single cause may produce any of several symptoms and conversely, a single symptom may be caused by any of several etiologic agents." Likewise, "No Navajo disease is known by the symptoms it produces, or by the part of the body it is thought to affect" (Levy, 1983, p. 132). For instance, bear sickness and porcupine sickness have been caused by contact with these animals. The time frame for symptoms to appear after exposure may loosely be sooner or later. For example, a diagnostician may find that an adult's health problem originated during gestation because either parent came in contact with lightning or a dead person.

### **Theories of Illness**

The ultimate source of illness is a lack of harmony between an individual and the natural or supernatural world. To restore health, evil must be driven out and replaced with good (Adair, Deuschle, & Barnett, 1988; Reichard, 1974). Rather than treating the physical symptoms of an illness, a ceremony focuses on exorcising the intrusive factors (Wyman, 1983). Purification rites, such as cleansing, sweating, taking an emetic, and brushing, remove the evil from the patient's body (Reichard, 1974). Also, the unraveling portion of a ceremony symbolizes a patient's release from evil and danger (Wyman, 1983). The removal of evil from the patient and the depiction of deities in a sandpainting attract the deities, the Holy People, to help the patient.

If a singer recites prayers, sings songs, and performs rituals according to the dictates of the Holy People, "the Holy People are compelled to participate and restore the one-sung-over to hózhó˛" (Frisbie, 1987, p. 6). Each ceremony recounts the story of the exploits of one or more of the many Holy People who acquire the specific ceremony from the supernaturals and then make it available to the earth people (Spencer, 1957). These powerful stories guide and empower the patient as he or she identifies with the deities in the stories.

### **Treatment of Illness**

Three types of Navajo healing, traditional ceremonies, Native American Church, and Christian faith healing, together with western biomedicine make up the contemporary Navajo health care system (Csordas, 2000). Traditional Navajo healing employs a didactic approach through rituals, songs based on stories of obstacles overcome by the Holy People, and prayer that immerses the patient in "the contextualization of life experience within a cosmological and physical 'home,' the Navajo land and people" (Csordas, 2002, p. 167). Crucial to the successful performance of ceremonies is the perfect recitation of prayers. Themes found in prayers, songs, and sandpaintings include the directions, colors, jewels, and simple numbers like four and its multiples (Reichard, 1944). Besides reciting prayers and songs and performing or directing the ceremonial rituals, medicine men talk to patients, emphasizing the positive (Carrese & Rhodes, 2000). As one man told how a medicine man had helped him, "They don't just sing. They also talk to you" (McCloskey, 1998b, p. 22). All participants in the hogan pray with corn pollen by taking a pinch, then putting some in their mouths, some on top of their head, and trailing the remainder in an upward gesture. Knowledge of the Navajo language is pivotal to understand and appreciate the progression of events during an all-night ceremony. One participant stated that he was "too absorbed in the beauty of what's going on even to think about sleep" (Csordas, 2002, p. 168).

Navajo ceremonies may be divided into two major groups, chantways, in which the singing is accompanied by a rattle, and all others, which are rites. Three kinds of chantways are Holyway, Evilway, and Lifeway ceremonies. While Holyway ceremonies are concerned with the attraction of good, Evilway ceremonies must first expel evil influences before invoking the good. Lifeway ceremonies treat injuries suffered from accidents (Wyman, 1983). Although the Blessingway and Enemyway are grouped together as rites, these two ceremonies are distinct from each other. In the Blessingway rite is found the backbone of Navajo philosophy, and from the Navajo perspective it is identical with Navajo culture (Farella, 1984). The purpose of a Blessingway rite is to promote the positive blessings of life, while an Enemyway rite exorcises alien ghosts (Wyman, 1983).

The Navajo pantheon of supernatural beings, the Holy People, Diyin Dine'é, are the protagonists of stories on which ceremonies are based, and they figure prominently in the songs and prayers of all ceremonies. Changing Woman, unlike other Holy People who have good and bad qualities and must be persuaded to help restore the patient to a state of good health, epitomizes goodness exclusively. Blessingway recounts the story of Changing Woman's discovery by First Man, her puberty ceremony, and the adventures of her twin sons, Born-For-Water and Monster Slayer, who were fathered by the Sun. During the Blessingway ceremony, the patient holds the mountain soil bundle, a medicine bundle containing stones and soil from each of the four sacred Navajo mountains.

The second major Navajo healing tradition is the Native American Church (NAC), also known as the peyote religion because of the sacramental use of peyote, a cactus that contains mescaline. The NAC employs the therapeutic principle of confession and seeks to build patients' self-esteem (Csordas, 2002). NAC road men work with patients in the same manner as do medicine men, talking to them in a positive, supportive way.

The NAC combines elements of Christianity with aspects of Plains Indian religions. Not until the 1930s did Navajos begin embracing the NAC, when Shiprock area Navajos were exposed to NAC meetings held by Ute Indians. The new religion appealed to the Navajo after the trauma of livestock reduction. The early Navajo NAC faced opposition from the Tribal Council, which made the NAC illegal in 1940, a statute that was not overturned until 1967 (Aberle, 1983b). However, "By the 1970s, the Native American Church was seen by most Navajo people as simply another chantway, 'azee'jí or Medicine Way" (Wyman, 1983, p. 536). By the 1980s, estimates of the number of Navajos participating in the NAC were as high as 40–50% of the population (Quintero, 1995). Although some conservative traditionalists do not participate, many traditional Navajos attend both ceremonies and NAC meetings.

A peyote meeting may be held in a specially constructed teepee or in a hogan also used for ceremonies. Aided by the power of peyote, participants communicate with God, the supreme being said to be the same God worshipped everywhere. A meeting may be held to cure a sick patient or to solve an economic, social, or legal problem, but also meetings are held to assure success in school, to marry a couple, or to celebrate birthdays and holidays.

Beginning in the late evening and lasting until morning, an NAC meeting consists of four segments: the opening, the midnight water ceremony, the morning water ceremony, and the peyote breakfast. Besides the road man in charge of the meeting, other officiants are the fireman, the drummerman, and the cedarman. Events throughout the night include prayers, songs, ritual smoking, and ingestion of peyote in the form of a tea, whole, dried, or powdered. The early portion of the meeting focuses on sin, suffering, and shortcomings, which later shifts in the early morning hours to an emphasis on hopes for the future and the right way to live (Aberle, 1983b).

The pairing of male and female pervades all aspects of Navajo life and thought.

In brief, the male aspect of men, women, mountains, storms, or just about anything else is considered to be "powerful" and in need of restraint. As a corollary, the female aspect of everything in the universe is characterized as restraint. A balance may be achieved by the proper coupling of these two essences. (Quintero, 1995, p. 79)

An NAC meeting, likewise, incorporates male and female elements. The early part of the ceremony, when the focus is on the patient's problems, is the male part of the ceremony, while the latter female portion shifts emphasis to renewal and healing. Consistent with this symbolic division, the male fireman conducts the midnight water ceremony whereas a woman brings in the water for the morning water ceremony (Quintero, 1995).

Christian faith healing by Navajo practitioners is a significant presence on the Navajo Nation. At fundamentalist churches and in revival meetings held in tents during the summer months, Navajo pastors lead services that incorporate faith healing. The congregation becomes the family that helps to effect a cure through spontaneous prayers to God. Besides prayer, healing techniques include the laying on of hands, anointing with oil, reading from the Bible, and counseling (Lewton & Bydone, 2000). Fundamentalist healers demand that Navajo members give up sinful traditional and NAC practices, even requiring that participants destroy their jish, or medicine bundles (Csordas, 2002).

Common elements in all three types of Navajo healing and practitioners' approaches are the goal of helping the patient to achieve a culturally shared way of understanding, the lack of division between physical and mental problems, and the emphasis on the family. Navajo practitioners work to achieve success with patients by talking to them so they understand in the sense of incorporating a Navajo specific view of life experiences. Instead of sharp distinctions between physical and mental afflictions, Navajo illness may arise from a single source that may be expressed either physically or mentally. The participation and support of family members are extremely important in ceremonies and NAC meetings.

Before 1955, when the United States Public Health Service (USPHS) took over the responsibility for American Indian health care throughout the United States, the Bureau of Indian Affairs faced barriers to their efforts to provide western biomedical care to Navajos due to limited facilities, inadequate funding, and early resistance from Navajo patients. After the transition to care by the Indian Health Service, the most significant result has been the reduction of morbidity and mortality rates (Trennert, 1998). Replacing the threat of infectious diseases, contemporary health care challenges include cancer, accidents, diabetes, and alcoholism (Davies, 2001). Most medicine men recognize the value of western medicine and distinguish between diseases best treated by medical doctors such as gall bladder disease, appendicitis, and tuberculosis and those best treated by Navajo ceremonies such as lizard sickness (Adair, Deuschle, & Barnett, 1988). Western medical practitioners today recognize the need to take the time with Navajo patients to communicate effectively, particularly when discussing negative information (Carrese & Rhodes, 2000). Increasingly, medical personnel incorporate culturally appropriate elements into western medical practices. For example, both Navajo and Anglo personnel in a mental health clinic integrate the principle of k'é in treatment to relate more effectively to patients (Willging, 2002).

### **Theories of Efficacy**

From a western perspective, three main theories of efficacy attempt to explain the success of Navajo healing. These theories interpret Navajo healing as psychotherapy, as social acts, or as cultural performances. As a form of native psychotherapy, Navajo healing relies on a powerful practitioner. A medicine man is an imposing figure who "becomes the epitome of success, spiritual harmony, and culturally appropriate behavior" (Topper, 1987, p. 221). He is respected as someone who, like a grandparent, can resolve conflict. Psychotherapeutic elements of healing such as confession, therapeutic alliance, transference, suggestion, and the manipulation of symbols unite to effect a cure (Topper, 1987).

The social dimension of Navajo healing offers a second explanation of efficacy. The presence and support of extended family, clan members, and friends act as powerful affirmation of belonging in a support network, identifying the patient as a significant link in a web of relationships. When an individual suffers a crisis that indicates a disruption of harmony, the family rallies to make arrangements for a ceremony. Enlisting aid from family and friends acknowledges the patient's importance to the group. The patient becomes the center of supportive attention (Spickard, 1991, p. 201). The Navajo educator, Ruth Roessel (1981), also emphasizes the social support integral to a ceremony in her discussion of the Kinaaldá, the Navajo girls' puberty ceremony. The planning, gathering of items to be used such as the grass brush and cornmeal, cooking meals for guests, tending the fire while the corncake cooks, and participating in the allnight ceremony require the cooperation of many helping hands.

The third explanation for the efficacy of Navajo ceremonies is that they are cultural performances, a reenaction of cultural values and beliefs. The role of sandpaintings in ceremonies dramatically portrays their performative nature. A ceremony tells the story of a specific adventure of the Holy People, which is retold in the songs and prayers as well as in the sandpaintings. When a patient sits on a sandpainting, he or she identifies with the Holy People who have been attracted by their likenesses in colored sands. "It is too little to say that for the person, this identification must be a very significant event" (Gill, 1987, p. 55). The healing power of the supernaturals absorbs the sickness and restores the health of the patient seated on the sandpainting (Griffin-Pierce, 1992).

### **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Accompanying the dramatic changes in Navajo lifestyle during the 20th century are changes in sexual attitudes and practices as well as ideas about reproduction. The former admonition to girls to stay away from boys and men was relatively easy to enforce when children and adolescents herded sheep in a rural environment. After an arranged marriage, women began giving birth to children until they reached menopause. A pronatal ideology favored large families that were considered a gift from the Holy People (McCloskey, 1998a). Since the 1960s, when 90% of Navajo children were enrolled in school (Bailey & Bailey, 1986), boys and girls have been in daily contact. During the middle decades of the 20th century, arranged marriages disappeared and women accepted the educational messages about the benefits of family planning, limiting their family size to three or four children.

The limitation of family size signaled an abrupt change from former fertility patterns when women had large families, often ranging between 5 and 11 children with a mean of seven children (McCloskey, 1998a). Contemporary birth rates continue to decline, from 55.4 births per 1,000 in 1965 (Broudy & May, 1983), to 34.4 per 1,000 in 1988, and 21.7 per 1,000 in 1997 (Navajo Area Indian Health Service, 2002).

Respect for Changing Woman, the beloved deity who celebrated her ability to bear children with the first Kinaaldá, and veneration of the earth's capacity to sustain life and growth promote a pronatal ideology. At the same time, women bestow matrilineal clan membership at birth. In a society that reveres motherhood, infertility is a burden, but frequently women who cannot bear children will raise a sister's child or children, who, in any case, refer to their aunt as shimá, or mother.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

In the past Navajo men and women observed an array of pregnancy taboos to ensure an easy birth and a healthy baby (Bailey, 1950). The most commonly mentioned contemporary taboo is the proscription against tying knots, which can contribute to a difficult birth or having the umbilical cord wrapped around the baby's neck. A variant of this belief is that weaving a rug or crocheting during pregnancy can prolong labor (Milligan, 1984). Another current taboo prohibits parents from coming into contact with the dead, even at funerals.

Although Navajo women have accepted birth control as an effective way to plan their families, they remain strongly opposed to abortion. With few exceptions, women, regardless of age and marital status, bring a child to term. If a woman does not feel that she can raise a child, a preferred option is to give the child to a sister or another close female relative. Matrilineal clan membership for all children contributes to the assertion that "No such thing as a bastard or illegitimate child exists in traditional Navajo society" (Roessel, 1981, p. 38).

In the past, Navajo women had a Blessingway ceremony toward the end of pregnancy. In effect, prenatal care at the Indian Health Service has replaced ceremonies during pregnancy (Hartle-Schutte, 1988). However, if a woman has problems during her pregnancy, she will arrange to have a ceremony performed by a medicine man. Traditional births took place at home where Navajo women kneeled on a bed of sand while holding on to a woven belt looped over a roof beam. The initial resistance to hospital births (Bailey, 1948) gave way to acceptance as a safer and more comfortable way to give birth. By the 1980s, 99% of women gave birth in the hospital (Boyce et al., 1986).

### **Infancy**

When an infant's umbilical cord dries and falls off, parents save it for burial in a nearby location related to traditional economic pursuits and appropriate to the sex of the child. A boy's umbilical cord is buried near a corral to promote his successful work with livestock while a girl's umbilical cord is buried close to a loom to assure her future success as a weaver.

A baby's first laugh marks him or her as a social being and is celebrated with a gathering of family and friends. The person who made the baby laugh provides the sheep to be butchered. The baby, sitting on the mother's lap, "hands out" small gifts to guests, including salt. Distributing these gifts assures that a child will grow up to be a generous adult.

Many infants spend much of their first year of life in the protective and comforting environment of a cradleboard, which in Navajo means "baby diaper." In his study of Navajo infancy, Chisholm (1983) found that infants are quieter and less irritable at birth than white babies. Parents use cradleboards as a soothing, quieting device until their behavior indicated that they no longer wanted to be there. He observed that mother–infant interaction was slower and less intense than that of white mothers, a pattern of behavior adaptive to the relatively dense and crowded environment of extended family residence groups.

Contemporary mothers' patterns of breast-feeding differ markedly from those of grandmothers who used breast-milk as the sole source of nutrition for a young infant. The majority of Navajo mothers now use a "combination feeding" pattern in which they feed the infant both breast-milk and formula. Mothers breast-feed their infants as a way to promote the baby's growth and to protect it against illness while enhancing a sense of security and closeness between mother and child. More traditional beliefs expressed were that breast-feeding makes a child well behaved and that mother's milk transmits the mother's values and attitudes (Wright, Bauer, Clark, Morgan, & Begishe, 1993).

### **Childhood**

The traditional attitude toward children equated them with wealth. Not only were children important sources of labor in the land-based economy, but also they were looked to as companions and sources of help in old age. Although children now spend their childhood years in school, they nevertheless are viewed as blessings and as evidence of the sacred process of increase (Farella, 1984). Despite the trend toward nuclear family households, children often benefit from the influence of grandparents, who may care for children for extended periods during childhood while parents complete their education or work in an urban area. Approaches to discipline vary, but the ideal continues to be talking to children, calmly explaining the difference between right and wrong.

A major health concern among Navajo children is the increasing tendency toward obesity. This secular trend is a culmination of changes in diet and activity level, with traditional foods and high levels of physical activity replaced with foods high in fat and calories and a sedentary lifestyle. The trend toward obesity constitutes a risk factor for future health problems. Findings from a nutritional survey carried out in 1989 (Sugarman, White, & Gilbert, 1990) contrasts markedly with earlier studies. Earlier studies in 1955 and 1968 found some cases of malnutrition among Navajo children but few cases of obesity. In the 1989 study, among Navajo children between 5 and 17 years of age, twice as many children exceeded the 95th percentile of weight-for-age as among other U.S. children. Among all age groups, mean weight had increased 28.8% among boys and 18.7% among girls.

Disabled Navajo children are likely to be accepted and integrated into the family without great disruption of the family's lifestyle and alteration of parents' roles (Joe, 1982). Respecting their individuality, parents saw children's limitations as an indication of personal distinctiveness rather than as a deviation from normal. Regardless of chronological age, children with disabilities were "perceived as 'becoming persons' in the process of defining their own identities" (Conners & Donnellan, 1998, p. 175).

A study of Navajo middle school students conducted in 2000 found that the percentage of students who had ever used cigarettes, alcohol, and marijuana sharply increased between the sixth and eighth grade years. Among sixth graders, 43.9% had tried cigarette smoking compared with 73.8% of eighth graders. Of Navajo area sixth graders, 34.2% had had a drink of alcohol compared with 63.7% of eighth graders. Of sixth graders, 28.4% had ever used marijuana compared with 58.1% of eighth graders. (Navajo Area Indian Health Service, 2000, pp. 13, 18, 20).

### **Adolescence**

For Navajo girls menarche is a notable event, celebrated by family, kin, clan relatives, and friends with a Kinaaldá, the Navajo puberty ceremony. Acknowledging her ability to bear children and ushering in her status as a woman, a girl's Kinaaldá is a 4-day event. Major events are running to the east at dawn; grinding corn for the alkaan, or corncake, to be distributed to guests; and participating in the all-night ceremony conducted by a medicine man. In the words of Mary Shepardson, "One cannot overestimate the importance of this rite in creating a positive selfimage in a young girl" (1995, p. 164). The Kinaaldá reenacts the first Kinaaldá held for Changing Woman, the beloved Navajo deity and model for Navajo womanhood (Frisbie, 1993). The ceremony continues to thrive today, sometimes being arranged by mothers who themselves did not have one when they were students away from home at boarding school (Frisbie, 1993; McCloskey, 1998a). Compared to the Kinaaldá held for Navajo girls, the performance of a ceremony for boys at puberty is rare. **880 Navajo**

Harry Walters described a ceremony held for boys when their voices change, consisting of a sweat bath that may be followed by a Blessingway ceremony. Some activities, such as running to the east, are similar in the boys' and girls' ceremonies (Schwarz, 1997).

Overweight and obesity continue to be prevalent among Navajo adolescents, and risk factors for coronary heart disease and diabetes mellitus appear in this age group. In the Navajo Health and Nutrition Survey, among 160 adolescents (between 12 and 19 years) about 35% of boys and 40% of girls were overweight as defined by having a body mass index (BMI) exceeding the 85th percentile for their sex and age. They also found that these adolescents had low median HDL cholesterol levels, high median triglyceride levels, and a high prevalence of impaired glucose tolerance (Freedman, Serdula, Percy, Ballew, & White, 1997). Eight percent of the adolescents had either impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes. In another study of 234 Navajo high school students, 24% were overweight as defined by having a BMI exceeding the 95th percentile for their sex and age. However, only one (0.4%) had diabetes mellitus, and eight (3%) had impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose (Kim, McHugh, Kwok, & Smith, 1999).

In a study of Navajo alcohol abuse, most men and women reported that they first started drinking during their adolescent years. However, only Navajo men who met the American Psychological Association criteria for alcohol dependence began drinking regularly when they were adolescents, while women and alcohol nondependent men did not begin drinking regularly until they were in their 20s (Kunitz & Levy, 2000).

### **Adulthood**

The transition from a physically demanding lifestyle while caring for livestock and crops and a diet based on corn to a sedentary lifestyle and high fat diet has affected the health of the Navajo people. Findings from the 1991–92 Navajo Health and Nutrition Survey of a representative sample found a high prevalence of coronary heart disease risk factors, particularly overweight, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus (Mendlein et al., 1997). Among persons aged 20 years and older, there was an agestandardized prevalence of diabetes mellitus of 22.9% (Will et al., 1997). A high proportion of Navajo women who experience gestational diabetes mellitus later develop impaired glucose tolerance or non-insulin dependent diabetes (Steinhart, Sugarman, & Connell, 1997). The age-standardized prevalence of hypertension was 19% (Percy et al., 1997). Among Navajo adults, major illnesses leading to Indian Health Service hospitalizations are respiratory infections, digestive system disease (gallbladder), and genitourinary system diseases (NAIHS, 2002). Dietary analysis suggests that "much of the increase in chronic diseases among the Navajo is due to nutritional factors" (Byers & Hubbard, 1997, p. 2075S). Common foods include fry bread and tortillas, home-fried potatoes, mutton, bacon and sausage, soft drinks, and coffee and tea, which provided 41% of the energy and 15 to 46% of the macronutrients in the diet. Dairy products, fruits, and vegetables were each consumed less than once per day per person (Ballew et al., 1997).

A random sample of the adult Navajo population indicates that alcohol dependence constitutes a major health and social problem. Among men, 70.4% have a lifetime history of alcohol dependence, and 29.6% of women have such a history. The consequences of alcohol misuse include domestic violence and other family problems, health problems, alcohol-related deaths, and legal and economic problems (Kunitz & Levy, 2000).

Traditional Navajo women, like newly immigrated Latina, experienced fewer negative associations and physical complaints about natural menopause (Mingo, Herman, & Jasperse, 2000). Overshadowing menopause as a life event, the achievement of the status of grandmother, a venerated role in matrilineal society, assumes greater importance.

### **The Aged**

In Navajo society elders enjoy high status, respected for their knowledge of ceremonies, traditional foods and clothing, livestock, clan relationships, and many customs such as the shoe game, the first laugh celebration, and burying the baby's umbilical cord. Navajo elders actively participate in ceremonies, in family activities and decisions, and often continue to make an economic contribution with their traditional activities such as weaving or by working in programs such as Foster Grandparents.

Chronic diseases increasingly affect Navajo elders. The rapid rise of the incidence of diabetes and its serious complications constitute a serious health problem for Navajo elders. Among Navajos 65 years of age and older, 41.3% had diabetes (Will et al., 1997). Among those 60 years or older, 44% of men and 28% of women had

#### **References 881**

hypertension (Percy et al., 1997). Both diabetes and hypertension constitute risk factors for coronary heart disease (Mendlein et al., 1997).

A retrospective study of 28 Navajo uranium miners with a mean age of 66 years found that these men were adversely affected by chronic illness. Despite historically low rates of lung cancer for Navajos, former uranium miners have abnormally high rates of lung cancer. Other health problems include eye disease, hearing loss, and psychological trauma (Servilla, 1997). "A lower healthrelated quality of life was related to more years worked as an underground miner" (Servilla, 1997, p. 193).

For many Navajo elders, the expectation that children will care for them in old age may not be fulfilled. Kunitz and Levy (1991) documented the transition from family to institutional support on the Navajo Reservation. Although many elders live with family members, social service programs contribute by serving meals at the local Senior Citizens Centers and by visits from Indian Health Service Community Health Representatives. Because the Navajo Nation has limited on-reservation nursing care facilities, the majority of elders in need of nursing home care must go off-reservation. Elders at an on-reservation nursing home appeared content with culturally sensitive care in contrast with elder Navajos in off-reservation homes who reported loneliness, depression, and isolation (Mercer, 1996).

### **Dying and Death**

According to the Navajo Area Indian Health Service (2002), the five leading causes of death in 1998 were accidents, heart disease, cancer, influenza/pneumonia, and diabetes. Of these, only accidents disproportionately affect young people. Death rates for accidents involving motor vehicle, diabetes, and pneumonia are many times higher than rates for the United States as a whole (Navajo Area Indian Health Service, 2002).

The traditional fear of death dictated that a person close to death be moved to a shelter apart from the family hogan (Mitchell, 2001). If a person died while in the family hogan, family members abandoned the home and moved elsewhere. After a death, family members did not eat or wash for four days. If these patterns of showing respect for the dead are not adhered to, the dead can become angry and cause ghost sickness (Mitchell, 2001).

In accordance with traditional burial practices, family members buried the dead as soon as possible and without any public ceremony. Those who prepared and buried the deceased participated in a purification ritual and a four-day mourning period before resuming normal activities. With many Navajos more recently converting to Christianity, funerals and burials in local cemeteries have become commonplace (Levy, 1978; Shepardson, 1978).

## **REFERENCES**

- Aberle, D. F. (1983a). Navajo Economic Development. In Alfonso Ortiz (Ed.), *Southwest* (pp. 641–658). Vol. 10, *Handbook of North American Indians*. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
- Aberle, D. F. (1983b). Peyote Religion among the Navajo. In Alfonso Ortiz (Ed.), *Southwest* (pp. 558–569). Vol. 10, *Handbook of North American Indians*. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
- Adair, J., Deuschle, K. W., & Barnett, C. R. (1988). *The people's health: Anthropology and medicine in a Navajo community*. Revised and Expanded Edition. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Bailey, F. L. (1948). Suggested techniques for inducing Navaho women to accept hospitalization during childbirth and for implementing health education. *American Journal of Public Health*, *38*, 1418–1423.
- Bailey, F. L. (1950). *Some sex beliefs and practices in a Navaho community with comparative material from other Navaho areas*. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, Vol. XL, No. 2. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Peabody Museum.
- Bailey, G., & Bailey, R. G. (1986). *A history of the Navajos: The reservation years*. Santa Fe, New Mexico: School of American Research Press.
- Ballew, C., White, L. L., Strauss, K. F., Benson, L. J., Mendlein, J. M., & Mokdad, A. H. (1997). Intake of nutrients and food sources of nutrients among the Navajo: Findings from the Navajo health and nutrition survey. *The Journal of Nutrition, 127*, 2085S–2093S.
- Boyce, W. T., Schaefer, C., Harrison, H. R., Haffner, W. J. H., Lewis, M., & Wright, A. L. (1986). Social and cultural factors in pregnancy complications among Navajo women. *American Journal of Epidemiology, 124*, 242–253.
- Broudy, D. W., & May, P. A. (1983). Demographic and epidemiologic transition among the Navajo Indians. *Social Biology, 30*, 1–16.
- Brugge, D. M. (1983). Navajo prehistory and history to 1850. In Alfonso Ortiz (Ed.), *Southwest* (pp. 489–501). Vol. 10, *Handbook of North American Indians*. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
- Byers, T., & Hubbard, J. (1997). The Navajo health and nutrition survey: Research that can make a difference. *The Journal of Nutrition, 127*, 2075S–2077S.
- Carrese, J. A., & Rhodes, L. A. (2000). Bridging cultural differences in medical practice: The case of discussing negative information with Navajo patients. *Journal of General Internal Medicine, 15*, 92–96.
- Chisholm, J. S. (1983). *Navajo infancy:An ethological study of child development*. NY: Aldine Publishing Company.
- Choudhary, T. (2001). *2000–2001 Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy*. Support Services Department, Division of Economic Development, The Navajo Nation. Window Rock, AZ: Navajo Nation.

- Choudhary, T. (2003). *Data from Census 2000*. Support Sciences Department, The Navajo Nation. Window Rock, AZ: Navajo Nation.
- Conners, J. L., & Donnellan, A. M. (1998). Walk in beauty: Western perspectives on disability and Navajo family/cultural resilience. In H. I. McCubbin, E. A. Thompson, A. I. Thompson, & J. E. Fromer (Eds.), *Resiliency in Native American and immigrant families* (pp. 159–182). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
- Csordas, T. J. (2002). *Body/Meaning/Healing*. NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Csordas, T. J. (2000). The Navajo healing project. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly*, *14*, 463–475.
- Davies, Wade. (2001). *Healing ways: Navajo health care in the twentieth century*. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Farella, J. R. (1984). *The main stalk: A synthesis of Navajo philosophy*. Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press.
- Freedman, D. S., Serdula, M. K., Percy, C. A., Ballew, C., & White, L. (1997). Obesity, levels of lipids and glucose, and smoking among Navajo adolescents. *The Journal of Nutrition, 127*, 2120S–2127S.
- Frisbie, C. J. (1987). *Navajo medicine bundles or Jish:Acquisition, transmission, and disposition in the past and present*. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Frisbie, C. J. (1993). *Kinaaldá: A study of the Navaho girl's puberty ceremony*. Salt Lake City:University of Utah Press.
- Gill, S. (1987). *Native American religious action: A performance approach to religion*. Columbia, South Carolina:University of South Carolina Press.
- Griffin-Pierce, T. (1992). *Earth is my mother, sky is my father: Space, time, and astronomy in Navajo sandpainting*. Albuquerque:University of New Mexico Press.
- Hartle-Schutte, M. (1988). *Contemporary usage of the Blessingway ceremony for Navajo births* (Master of Arts thesis, University of Arizona, 1988). Ann Arbor, Michigan: University Microfilms International.
- Joe, J. (1982). Cultural influences on Navajo mothers with disabled children. *American Indian Quarterly, 6*, 170–190.
- Kim, C., McHugh, C., Kwok, Y., & Smith, A. (1999). Type 2 Diabetes mellitus in Navajo adolescents. *The Western Journal of Medicine, 170*, 210–213.
- Kunitz, S. J., & Levy, J. E. (2000). *Drinking, conduct disorder, and social change: Navajo experiences*. NY: Oxford University Press.
- Kunitz, S. J., & Levy, J. E. (1991). *Navajo aging: The transition from family to institutional support*. Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press.
- Levy, J. E. (1978). Changing burial practices of the western Navajo: A consideration of the relationship between attitudes and behavior. *American Indian Quarterly, 4*, 397–405.
- Levy, J. E. (1983). Traditional Navajo health beliefs and practices. In S. J. Kunitz (Ed.), *Disease change and the role of medicine: The Navajo experience* (pp. 118–145). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
- Lewton, E. L., & Bydone, V. (2000). Identity and healing in three Navajo religious traditions: Sa'ah Naagháí Bik'eh Hózh. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 14*, 476–497.
- Linford, L. D. (2000). *Navajo places: History, legend, landscape*. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
- McCloskey, J. (1998a). Three generations of Navajo women: Negotiating life course strategies in the eastern Navajo agency. *American Indian Culture and Research Journal, 22*, 103–129.

- McCloskey, J. E. (1998b). Traditional components of treatment for Navajo alcohol abusers: Ethnographic case studies. Report for the Diné Center for Substance Abuse Treatment and the Navajo Nation. Center for Alcoholism, Substance Abuse, and Addictions, University of New Mexico.
- Mendlein, J. M., Freedman, D. S., Peter, D. G., Allen, B., Percy, C. A., Ballew, C. et al. (1997). Risk factors for coronary heart disease among Navajo Indians: Findings from the Navajo health and nutrition survey. *The Journal of Nutrition, 127*, 2099S–2105S.
- Mercer, S. O. (1996). Navajo elderly people in a reservation nursing home: Admission predictors and culture care practices. *Social Work, 41*, 181–189.
- Milligan, B. C. (1984). Nursing care and beliefs of expectant Navajo women (Part 1). *American Indian Quarterly, 8*, 83–102.
- Milne, D., & Howard, W. (2000). Rethinking the role of diagnosis in Navajo religious healing. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 14*, 543–570.
- Mingo, C., Herman, C. J., & Jasperse, M. (2000). Women's stories: Ethnic variations in women's attitudes and experiences of menopause, hysterectomy, and Hormone Replacement Therapy. *Journal of Women's Health & Gender-Based Medicine, 9*, S27–S38.
- Mitchell, R. (2001). *Tall woman: The life story of Rose Mitchell, A Navajo woman, c. 1874–1977*. C. J. Frisbie (Ed.). Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Morgan, F. (2002). Personal Communication. December 28, 2002.
- Morgan, W. (1977). Navajo treatment of sickness: Diagnosticians. In David Landy (Ed.), *Culture, disease, and healing: Studies in medical anthropology* (pp. 163–169). NY: Macmillan Publishing Co.
- Navajo Area Indian Health Service. (2000). *2000 Navajo Middle School Youth Risk Behavior Survey*. Shiprock, New Mexico: Navajo Area Indian Health Service.
- Navajo Area Indian Health Service. (2002). *Health Profile*. Office of Program Planning and Evaluation. Window Rock: AZ.
- Office of Navajo Government Development. (1998). *Navajo Nation Government* (4th ed.). Window Rock, Arizona: Navajo Nation.
- Percy, C., Freedman, D. S., Gilbert, T. J., White, L., Ballew, C., & Mokdad, A. (1997). Prevalence of hypertension among Navajo Indians: Findings from the Navajo health and nutrition survey. *The Journal of Nutrition, 127*, 2114S–2119S.
- Quintero, G. A. (1995). Gender, discord, and illness: Navajo philosophy and healing in the Native American Church. *Journal of Anthropological Research, 51*, 69–89.
- Reichard, G. A. (1944). *Prayer: The compulsive word*. American Ethnological Society Monograph, 7. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- Reichard, G. A. (1974). *Navaho religion: A study of symbolism*. NY: Bollingen Foundation Inc., 1950. Reprint, NY: Bollingen Series XVIII, Princeton University Press.
- Roessel, R. (1981). *Women in Navajo society*. Rough Rock, AZ: Navajo Resource Center, Rough Rock Demonstration School.
- Schwarz, M. T. (1997). *Molded in the image of Changing Woman: Navajo views on the human body and personhood*. Tucson, AZ: The University of Arizona Press.
- Servilla, M. J. (1997). *Describing the health-related quality of life of former Navajo uranium miners with spirometry abnormalities*. Masters of Science thesis, University of New Mexico.
- Shepardson, M. (1978). Changes in Navajo mortuary practices and beliefs. *American Indian Quarterly, 4*, 383–395.
- Shepardson, M. (1995). The Gender Status of Navajo Women. In L. F. Klein & L. A. Ackerman (Eds.), *Women and Power in Native*