# **Bangladeshis**

**Darryl J. Holman and Kathleen A. O'Connor**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAME**

Bangladeshis are often called Bengalis.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Bangladeshis make up the largest ethnic group of The People's Republic of Bangladesh, located in Southern Asia. Most Bangladeshis live in the Bengal Basin, an alluvial plain of the Jamuna River, the Padma River, and the Meghna River. Bangladesh shares borders with India to the west, north, and east, and a small southeastern border with Myanmar (Burma); the southern border is the Bay of Bengal.

The term *Bangladeshi* refers to both a national identity (a citizen of Bangladesh), and a member of the Bengali-speaking majority of Bangladesh. The latter use excludes about 250,000 Biharis and about a million tribal people located in hilly regions along the eastern borders of Bangladesh (Bertocci, 1984). A defining characteristic of Bengali culture is the language Bangla (or Bengali), so that a *Greater Bengal culture* (Basu & Amin, 2000) includes West Bengal, India, and parts of Assam, India.

Bangla is the second largest language spoken in South Asia, after Hindi-Urdu. The language falls on the Indo-Aryan branch of the Indo-European family of languages. Bangla is closely related to other South Asian languages such as Assamese, Hindi, and Nepali. Written Bangla is derived from Sanskrit (Maloney, 1974).

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The Bangla-speaking majority of Bangladesh numbered about 126 million in 1999. About 87% of Bangladeshis are Sunni Muslims, 12% Hindu, and 1% Christian, Buddhist, and animists (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001).

Bangladeshis share deep cultural roots with many other people in South Asia. These shared ideas and traditions transcend the major religions that have swept through the Bengal Basin, including Hinduism in the first millennium BC, followed by Buddhism, and finally Islam beginning about the 12th century (Maloney, 1974).

European trade with the region began at the end of the 17th century. By the mid-18th century, the British had taken political control of the region, and a period of colonial rule began that lasted through the mid-20th century. Colonial rule brought about large-scale political and economic reorganization. The region changed from being a producer of export goods to a producer of raw materials used by the industries of Great Britain. The transportation infrastructure underwent substantial development, but political changes, agricultural policies, and land reforms drained the region of much of its prosperity (Bose, 1967).

British political rule ended in 1947, when India and Pakistan attained independence. Pakistan was formed as a single Islamic nation that included present-day Pakistan and present-day Bangladesh (formerly, East Pakistan). The 2,000 km separation between the two regions, along with linguistic and sociocultural differences, led to political tensions, and finally secession of East Pakistan in March 1971. A brutal war between the two regions followed that led to the formation of Bangladesh (Islam, 1978). The new country was under military rule from 1975 to 1990, and has been under civilian rule, with considerable political unrest, since.

A male-headed family is the basic social unit for Bangladeshis. Patrilineally related households are grouped into a common homestead called a *bari*. The extended family that makes up the *bari* functions as a single economic unit, headed by a senior couple, their sons, daughter-in-laws, and unmarried daughters. The senior male has authority over members of the *bari*, and his wife maintains authority over her son's wives. Newly married couples usually establish a new household within the male's father's *bari* (Maloney, Aziz, & Sarker, 1981; Rob & Cernada, 1992).

Muslim Bangladeshis practice *purdah* (literally, veil or curtain), including the seclusion of women from public observation, wearing of concealing clothing, and use of screens or curtains to hide women within the *bari*.

The degree of observance varies widely by region, education, and socioeconomic condition. The practice of *purdah* is believed to protect women from evil and maintains family respectability. Some adherents see *purdah* as a symbol of piety and purity, that provides religious fulfillment. On the other hand, *purdah* can severely restrict women's mobility, and limits access to education, occupational opportunity, and health care (Maloney et al., 1981).

Bangladeshi Muslim society is not highly stratified, in accordance with the egalitarian principles of Islam. The Hindu caste system, while present, does not figure prominently in Hindu communities because most Bangladeshi Hindus belong to lower castes or outcaste groups. Additionally, the generally low socioeconomic conditions in rural areas have led to a reduction in caste consciousness (Maloney et al., 1981).

The country of Bangladesh ranks 73 out of 90 in the United Nations Human Poverty Index (UNDP, 2001). The population density of the region was 900 people per km2 in 2001, making it the most densely populated non-island area of the world. Economic development over the last 50 years has been hampered by frequent natural disasters and political turmoil (Begum, 2001). Roughly, 7% of the urban population lives in slums; 79% of Bangladeshis live in a rural setting (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001), where most households have small plots of land or are landless (Turner & Ali, 1996).

People in rural areas typically are involved in agriculture through sharecropping or wage-labor on larger farms. The primary crop is rice (77% of cultivated land), wheat (6%), and jute (4%). Agriculture makes up about one third of the employment; about 8% are employed in manufacturing, 9% are employed in the business sales sector, and 20% are employed in other service industries. Something over one third of Bangladeshis are unemployed. Children from ages 10–14 make up 12% of the total labor force. Government statistics indicate that almost half of Bangladeshis were below the poverty line in 1996 (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001). Independent estimates suggest a figure closer to 87% (Turner & Ali, 1996).

Six years of primary education is compulsory for Bangladeshi children. Even so, economic need results in many children dropping out of school early. Recent government-sponsored Food for Education programs raised primary school retention rates to 70% (Mputu, 2001). Government statistics place literacy at 68% for males and 51% for females. Begum (2001) places literacy at 32%, and suggests the proportion functionally literate is probably lower. A study that tested people for basic skills found 28% could read, 13% could write, and 37% had oral mathematical skills (Greaney, Khandker, & Alam, 1998). Literacy among people living in slums was less than 15% in 1997 (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001).

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

An important consideration in understanding the health literature for Bangladeshis is that a single organization, the International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR, B), produces most of the healthrelated research from Bangladesh (Rahman, Laz, & Fukui, 1999). The ICDDR, B has been conducting intensive demographic and medical research since the early 1960s. Most of the research has taken place within Matlab *thana*, a rural administrative unit located about 55 km southeast of Dhaka, with a population of about 210,000 people. A continuous demographic surveillance has recorded all demographic events (births, deaths, marriages, divorces, and migrations) within Matlab since the late 1960s (van Ginneken, Bairagi, de Francisco, Sarder, & Vaughn, 1998). The area is subdivided into two regions for research purposes. The first is a Maternal, Child Health, and Family Planning (MCHFP) area in which numerous health, nutrition, disease, and family planning interventions have been implemented, beginning in 1977. Many of the interventions have had significant effects on health, fertility, and mortality, so that statistics from the MCHFP area cannot be considered representative of rural Bangladeshis. The second region within Matlab is a comparison area where individuals receive limited diarrhea-related health services but otherwise are not part of the health intervention studies. Findings from the comparison region are more representative of rural Bangladeshis, although they may be affected by diffusion of ideas and knowledge from the MCHFP area.

Bangladeshis have been a high-fertility, high mortality population for at least the last 50 years. The annual growth rate was 2.0% from 1978 to 1998 (WHO, 1999); in 1998, the growth rate was 1.5%, reflecting a recent dramatic decline in fertility (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001). The total fertility rate in 1999 was 3.0 children compared with 6.7 children in 1978 (WHO, 1999).

#### **Medical Practitioners**

The life expectancy at birth was 60 years (rural) and 62 years (urban) in 1998. By contrast, life expectancy was 51 years in 1966 (Strong, 1992). In both urban and rural settings, males had a slightly greater life expectancy than females. The infant mortality rate in 1998 was among the highest in the world at  $6.6\%$  (rural) and  $4.7\%$ (urban). Twenty one percent of Bangladeshis do not survive to the age of 40 (UNDP, 2001).

The alluvial ecosystem of the Bengal Basin provides both moisture and rich soil necessary for intensive agriculture. The ecosystem may have ample capacity to support the population, and some suggest that the widespread poverty largely results from sociopolitical conditions (Hartmann & Boyce, 1979). The wet, tropical conditions, as well as frequent natural disasters, contribute to high rates of infectious diseases such as cholera and shigella (Siddique et al., 1992). Cholera is endemic and is the leading single cause of mortality in Bangladesh, accounting for about 11% of deaths annually. Untreated surface water has traditionally been used for all household functions. Since the 1970s, major efforts have been undertaken to install tubewells to provide safe drinking water. By 2000, an estimated 80% of people had access to non-surface sources of drinking water. By 1998, 40% of rural households had installed sanitary toilets, compared with only 6% in 1991 (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001).

Bangladeshis have endured repeated natural disasters over the last 50 years. Most of the deadliest cyclones in history have affected Bangladesh (Frank & Hussain, 1971), including a single cyclone in 1970 that killed half a million Bangladeshis (Chacko, 1991) and one in 1991 that killed 130,000 Bangladeshis. Flooding occurs annually in Bangladesh during the rainy season, causing property damage from erosion (Haque, 1988), an increase in diarrheal disease, respiratory infections, and deaths (Siddique, Baqui, Eusof, & Zaman, 1991).

The primary health infrastructure in rural areas consists of traditional medical practitioners with little formal training. Access to allopathic physicians is limited. One registered physician for every 8,600 people was reported in 1981 (Bhardwaj & Paul, 1986), and one physician for every 5,000 people in 1996 (Begum, 2001). The entire country had 91 general patient hospitals in 1997 (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001). The overall health system ranking for Bangladesh in 1997 was 131 out of 191 (WHO, 2000).

The health-care system has improved since the 1970s, but overall health remains poor (Vaughan, Karim, & Buse, 2000). The present poor health conditions seem to result from a complex of factors including high population density, poor sanitation infrastructure, inadequate health care, inadequate education, multiple natural disasters, the war with Pakistan, and political instability since 1971. Military spending by the government of Bangladesh, until recently, exceeded health sector spending (Begum, 2001; UNDP, 2001). The government has recently reorganized the health care system and prioritized health (Vaughan et al., 2000).

## MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS

Medicine is practiced at many levels in Bangladesh, including self-care, care from a non-practitioner who has gained some medical knowledge, care from paid and unpaid practitioners without licenses, and licensed professionals. A number of specialties exist, such as midwives, bone-setters, and dental practitioners (Ashraf, Chowdhury, & Streefland, 1982). Additionally, health advice and remedies are available at local "chemists" (pharmacists).

Practitioners of a number of medical traditions coexist in Bangladeshi society. Traditions are sometimes combined so that a practitioner may draw from elements of indigenous traditions and particular religious practices. Frequently, allopathic treatment is used simultaneously with traditional cures (Stewart, Parker, Chakraborty, & Begum, 1994).

A study of health practitioners in Matlab thana in the late 1970s enumerated 1,300 nongovernmental health practitioners, 1,500 traditional midwives, and three physicians in a government hospital (Sarder & Chen, 1981). Kobiraj practitioners accounted for 15% of health practitioners. These practitioners follow Ayurvedic medical tradition based on Sanskrit texts belonging to Hindu scriptures dating to before the second century AD (Basham, 1976; Gupta, 1976). Kobiraj are unlicensed and trained by apprenticeship. Combinations of herbal medicines, minerals, and dietary restrictions are used to cure disease and for such things as preventing conception (Aziz & Maloney, 1985). Just over half of the practitioners are men; over half have no formal education. Only 10% practice full time (Sarder & Chen, 1981).

Allopathic practitioners made up about 15% of practitioners in the Sarder and Chen (1981) study. Only one in ten allopathic practitioner was licensed after formal training in medical school. Unlicensed practitioners usually acquired their skills by apprenticeship. Most allopathic practitioners were men, and about half practice full time.

Homeopathic practitioners made up 3% of the health practitioners. This system is based on an 18th-century German medical tradition, but is often viewed as an indigenous medical system because of spiritual elements and concepts that are analogous to some indigenous systems (Leslie, 1978). In the Sarder and Chen (1981) study, one in five practitioners was registered, all were male, about half practiced full time, and most had formal education. Practitioners were typically trained by apprenticeship, although some registered practitioners had attended medical school. Homeopathic practitioners have increasingly been prescribing antibiotics and other Western medicines (Maloney et al., 1981).

A small percentage of practitioners follow the Yunani (or Unani) system (Sarder & Chen, 1981). The Yunani system is based on Aristotelian medicine, codified in Arabic and Persian texts, and was brought into the culture by Islam (Leslie, 1978). The practitioners are called *hakim* which is Arabic for "a learned man" (Basham, 1976). Hakim usually are men.

The most abundantly practiced system of medicine (61% of all practitioners in Sarder & Chen, 1981) was totka. This system is a mixture of Ayurvedic, Yunani, and shamanistic schools with no single uniform concept of illness, although supernatural causes are common. The practitioners (totkas) are not licensed and have no registration requirements; they train through an apprenticeship system. Two thirds have no formal education, and most practitioners are women. A practitioner specializes in one or two types of illness, and only a small percentage practice full time (Sarder & Chen, 1981).

There are other more specialized medical practitioners in Bangladeshi society. A tradition called boneji is practiced by elderly women as an art of concocting medicines from herbs and other substances such as honey and fruit juice (Mushtaque, Chowdhury, & Kabir, 1991). The Badhi are a low-caste Hindu people who sell herbal medicines out of boats. A  $h\bar{a}z\bar{a}m$  specializes in performing circumcisions on boys. Hazurs are ritual healers associated with Mosques (Zeitlyn & Rowshan, 1997). Hindus may consult an ascetic saint (*saādhu*) for health problems. Muslims and Hindus may make use of mystic healers ( $fak\bar{i}r$ ) or magic healers (*ōjhā*) (Maloney et al., 1981).

Traditional birth attendants (*dhorunis* or *dais*) make up one of the largest groups of "health specialists," outnumbering all other health practitioners enumerated in the Sarder and Chen (1981) study. The traditional dai is an older women in the community, often a widow, with little formal education (Croley, Haider, Begum, & Gustafson, 1966). The term dai is sometimes used to denote a midwife that is associated with government family planning efforts (Islam, 1982). Rozario (1995) argues that the role of the traditional birth attendant is not one of a medical practitioner. Rather than managing and facilitating a birth, the birth attendant's role is limited to the removal of pollution associated with the placenta and blood of childbirth.

In addition to assisting with births, dais may also provide abortion services, provide contraceptive services, and assist women with fertility problems. Indigenous abortion practices are well known in Bangladesh. Most traditional practitioners are dais with no allopathic training (Bhuiya, Aziz, & Chowdhury, 2001; Rozario, 1995).

In the absence of a practitioner, medical services may be sought from any person who has some knowledge of healing skills. Aziz (1977) reports that a medical specialist was not consulted prior to death in Matlab 35% of the time.

# CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS

Nearly all Bangladeshis, regardless of religion, believe that disease occurs according to the will of a God or gods (Ashraf et al., 1982). Additional awareness of illness involves elements of pathogenicity, evil supernatural forces, environmental exposures, personal behavior, and, to some extent, heredity.

Some diseases are thought to be caused by exposure to "cold" in the environment. One source of respiratory illnesses, for example, is exposure to cold temperatures, prolonged exposure to cold water, or even cold mud (Stewart et al., 1994). Bangladeshis classify food as being intrinsically hot (e.g., meat, fish, eggs) or intrinsically cold (e.g., rice, many vegetables) (Maloney et al., 1981; Sarkar, 1982). Additionally, foods can turn cold when they become stale or are leftover. Some foods are believed to play a role in disease promotion, particularly cold foods, which are considered to cause respiratory disease (Stewart et al., 1994). Hot foods are often associated with health, vitality, and sexuality (Maloney et al., 1981).

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction**

The concept of a disease pathogen is not widely recognized by Bangladeshis without formal education. Some traditional explanations for disease approximate a pathogenic explanation. For example, some forms of diarrhea are believed to be caused by eating inappropriate substances (e.g., mud) or rotten food. Breast milk is recognized as a disease vector. A mother who is exposed to "cold" can pass the disease on to a breastfeeding child (Stewart et al., 1994). "Polluted" breast milk is understood to be the cause of diarrhea in breastfeeding children (Mushtaque et al., 1991; Zeitlyn & Rowshan, 1997).

Bangladeshis recognize heredity as playing a role in some illnesses such as asthma (Stewart et al., 1994). An important category of hereditary effects is the behaviors of a child's parents. Behavior of both parents can influence a child's health prior to conception, during conception, and throughout pregnancy. Parents' behavior can result in illness of the child, overall bad health, or a defective personality. The moral behavior of a mother, for example, is a common explanation for a child's respiratory illness (Stewart et al., 1994).

Evil influences are a common source of illness for rural Bangladeshis. The sources include *bhut* (ghosts), the "evil eye," and "bad spirits (or winds)" (batash). These influences are held responsible for many maladies such as tetanus, preeclampsia, and spontaneous abortion (Ashraf et al., 1982). Daily life includes numerous ritual practices designed to prevent attacks of *bhut* (Stewart et al., 1994). Zeitlyn and Rowshan (1997) provide several examples of rituals that protect a mother or her child from evil spirits. Mothers may express a few drops of breast milk before the baby suckles. A box of matches or the bone of an animal sacrificed in a Muslim festival may be placed underneath the bedding of an infant. Another treatment involves a healer cutting a mother's arm in several places and then "sweeping" a mother and her child from head to toe. Amulets (tabij) are widely used by both men and women as a means to improve bad health, preserve good health, influence fertility, or ward off evil influences. The practice transcends religions and is probably of ancient origin. An amulet requires a religious functionary to initially empower it; Muslims can recite verses to temporarily bolster the amulet's effectiveness (Maloney et al., 1981).

## SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION

Bangladeshi beliefs about sexuality and reproduction reflect ancient cultural traditions that precede the major religions of the area. These include proscriptions and prescriptions for pregnant mothers, beliefs about colostrum, and rituals for newborn babies. Additional beliefs and practices shared with groups in South Asia are based on Ayurvedic texts including ideas about sexuality and ritual pollution (Maloney, 1977; Maloney et al., 1981).

The blood of menstruation is considered polluting, and is believed to negatively affect crops, animals, and the health of individuals. Hindu women are barred from the kitchen, their husband's bed, and religious performance while menstruating (Sarkar, 1982). Muslim women will not enter the fields, come near farm animals, visit the sick, serve food, or participate in religious activities while menstruating (Aziz & Maloney, 1985). Following menstruation, a woman must bath before resuming religious activities. We found in 1993 that some women utilized injectable contraceptives at the start of Ramadan as a means to prevent menstruation during the holy month (unpublished data).

Semen is believed to be made of blood (Muslim) or cerebral tissue (Hindu), so that it should not be wasted. Excessive intercourse is discouraged; masturbation is considered unnatural and believed to damage physical and mental health. Excessive depletion of semen (including female "semen") is believed to have negative consequences such as impotence, weakness, loss of sexual drive, and to cause venereal diseases (Maloney et al., 1981; Sarkar, 1982).

Coital frequency shows a strong age-related pattern from about 11 episodes per month for married individuals less than 18 years old to five episodes after age 40 (Ruzicka & Bhatia, 1982). Couples will not engage in sexual intercourse during menstruation. Coitus is also taboo throughout the third trimester of pregnancy. Following a delivery, couples are expected to practice abstinence for 40 days (Muslim) or a number of days based on caste (Hindu) (Hadi, 2000; Sarkar, 1982). Breastfeeding does not seem to limit coital frequency to the extent seen in other cultures (Ruzicka & Bhatia, 1982). Both Hindu and Muslim Bangladeshis are expected to abstain from coitus on certain religious holidays. Bathing is a requirement following coitus for both religions (Sarkar, 1982).

Premarital sexual activity is prohibited by social ideals and religious beliefs. Even so, Aziz and Maloney (1985) estimate that half of all youths have premarital sexual intercourse. These activities must be hidden from others, as Islamic law provides for severe punishments for couples that are caught. Likewise, sexual relations outside marriage are not permissible in Bangladeshi society (Sarkar, 1982). The frequency of the practice is difficult to determine, but males apparently have more opportunity than females for such activities. Punishment for individuals discovered having an illicit relationship is more severe for women (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

Bangladeshi culture is strongly pronatal. Children are essential for continuing a patrilineal descent group, and required as part of religious duty. For Bangladeshi men and woman, parenthood is a fundamental part of marital life (Sarker, Rahman, Chowdhury, Nasrin, & Tariq, 1996). Traditionally, fate or "dependence on God" was invoked in response to questions about the ideal number of children. The increased use of contraception and the lower total fertility rates seen through the late 1990s suggest that this cultural ideal has been undergoing significant change.

The birth of at least one son is important to Bangladeshis. Son preference arises from the patrilineal social organization and patrilocal household structure. Sons perpetuate the lineage, maintain an economically viable bari, provide for their parents in old age, and arrange for funerals and spiritual welfare of the parents after their death (Aziz & Maloney, 1985). Son preference shows in the pattern of child mortality, which deviates from most other societies in that boys have slightly lower mortality rates than girls. Son preference is clearly observed in fertility differences and contraceptive practices that change according to the sex composition of the offspring (Chowdhury & Bairagi, 1990). Infanticide does not appear to be commonly used as a means of ensuring the birth of a son (Maloney et al., 1981).

At least through the last half of the 20th century, Bangladeshis have had high fertility. The total fertility rates (TFRs—estimates of average family size for women who survive to menopause) were 8.6 children for 1960-62, and 6.9 children for 1966-68 (Sirageldin, Norris, & Ahmad, 1975). The trend continued as TFRs dropped from 6.3 children in 1975 to 5.1 children in 1989. Beginning in the 1990s fertility declined sharply, reaching 3.3 children by 1997 (Basu & Amin, 2000). The causes of this decline are manifold, and include health improvements, improvements in education, and the success of family planning programs. Basu and Amin (2000) argue that the sharp fertility declines seen through the 1990s can be understood as a series of historical, cultural, and political circumstances in Greater Bengal that left the region amenable to such change.

#### Bangladeshis

Bangladeshis have long known about and used various contraceptive methods, although the extent to which traditional methods have been used in the past is not known. Maloney et al. (1981) provide a list of 23 herbs and substances recommended as contraceptives by indigenous medical practitioners. By 1981, more women were using modern contraceptive methods than traditional methods (including rhythm and withdrawal) (Kabir, Uddin, Chowdhury, & Ahmed, 1986). Bangladeshis use contraception to space births as well as to stop reproduction (Khan, Smith, Akbar, & Koenig, 1989).

Induced abortion is well known in Bangladeshi society. One estimate is that 800,000 induced abortions were performed in 1978, about one in eight pregnancies (Measham et al., 1981); another study found that induced abortion was used to terminate one in 20 pregnancies (Maloney et al., 1981). Some forms of induced abortion are illegal in Bangladesh. Early menstrual regulation, defined as any chemical or mechanical process used to induce menstruation within a few weeks of a missed period, was decriminalized and condoned as an acceptable practice by the Bangladesh government in 1979 (Dixon-Mueller, 1988). Most Bangladeshis consider induced abortion morally and socially wrong; many Muslims believe it to be contrary to Islamic principles (Maloney et al., 1981). Menstrual regulation has wider acceptance, and may not always be considered abortion; rather, it ensures "non-pregnancy" by inducing menses (Dixon-Mueller, 1988). Additionally, menstrual regulation is consistent with some Islamic interpretations that fetal life begins after the fourth month (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

Traditional methods of induced abortion involve insertion of plant material, usually a root, into the uterus (Islam, 1982). Bhuiya et al. (2001) observed this for 85% of traditional abortions; the remainder were homeopathic remedies. Maloney et al. (1981) list 44 plants, drugs, and other materials used by homeopathic, Ayurvedic, and kobiraj practitioners to induce abortions. Allopathic abortion practitioners have become more common in recent years. Bhuiya et al. (2001) found that 44% of all induced abortions were performed by menstrual regulation and 27.5% by other allopathic procedures.

## HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE

Stages of the Bangladeshi life cycle can be classified under a number of schema, reflecting different cultural

#### **Health through the Life Cycle**

and religious traditions that have been practiced in the region. Aziz and Maloney (1985) documented nine stages in the Bengali life cycle. Stages are largely determined by an individual's age, although behavior and physical characteristics may play a role in defining an individual's stage. Except for a few stages, rituals of passage are not commonly used to denote or celebrate a transition from one stage to another. Alternative systems of life stages come from Bengali religious traditions. Islamic stages of life that pertain to ideals of training, religious duty, and spiritual well-being are recognized by Muslims. Likewise, stages of life based on ancient Sanskrit texts are part of the Hindu tradition.

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Pregnancy is viewed as a natural state, rather than a medical condition. Fetal life is recognized as a formal stage by Islamic tradition and the Ayurvedic texts. The life of the fetus begins at 4 months, corresponding to the time when the fetus begins movement (Aziz & Maloney, 1985). This stage is understood to be a period of high vulnerability. The nature and future health of a newly conceived individual is closely tied to the behavior of parents prior to, during, and after coitus. Children conceived on certain days, during certain times of the day, or phases of the moon are believed to take on particular (usually negative) personality traits, deformities, or blindness (Maloney et al., 1981).

Bangladeshi women experience food aversions, smell aversions, and cravings during pregnancy. Pregnancyrelated nausea and vomiting occur in about half of all pregnancies. Rates are highest (62%) among young women and lowest (36%) among older women. Symptoms occur any time of the day, but are most frequent in the morning and least frequent in the evening. The most common food aversions during pregnancy are fish, rice, and goat (O'Connor & Holman, unpublished data).

A number of foods are prohibited or avoided during pregnancy because of possible health effects on the fetus. Some fish are believed to cause epilepsy or malformation in a child. Pineapples are avoided because they are considered an abortifacient. Excessive salt, ginger, and chilies are believed by some to be unhealthy for the fetus. The most common cravings are sour foods such as unripe mango or lemon (Maloney et al., 1981), which by Ayurvedic tradition also eliminate toxic substances and the unwanted heat of pregnancy (Nichter, 1989).

About 12% of recognized pregnancies terminate spontaneously prior to birth (Ruzicka & Chowdhury, 1987). This rate is higher than those in well-nourished populations, and depends on a woman's age, nutritional status, and the season of conception (Mostafa, Wojtyniak, Fauveau, & Bhuiyan, 1991; Pebley, Huffman, Chowdhury, & Stupp, 1985).

#### Infancy

Bangladeshis recognize infancy as a life stage from birth to roughly 5 years of age. Infancy is a dangerous phase of life. In 1978, nearly 14% of Bangladeshi infants died in infancy compared with 1.4% in the United States. By 1998, the proportion had dropped to 8% of Bangladeshi infants dying in infancy, compared with  $0.7\%$  in the United States (WHO, 1999). The most common causes of death for infants (Matlab comparison area from 1995 to 1999, ICDDR, B 1996a, 1996b, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001) were neonatal complications (other than tetanus), respiratory infections, and diarrheal disease. Factors associated with elevated postneonatal mortality (deaths from 4 to 54 weeks of age) are households that do not use a latrine and households with more than 10 individuals (Rahman, Rahman, Wojtyniak, & Aziz, 1985). Infants born to teenage mothers, mothers of low socioeconomic status, mothers with low education, and first-born infants experience higher neonatal and postneonatal mortality (Alam, 2000). Mortality by age 5 is 11.2% (rural) and 6.2% (urban) (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001).

Breastfeeding is almost universal in rural Bangladesh, but following birth, an infant may not breastfeed for several days. During this spell, the infant is given prelacteal foods such as rice water and honey (Rizvi, 1993). In the past, delayed initiation of breastfeeding came out of the belief, found throughout South Asia, that colostrum is harmful to the infant. Recent public health programs have promoted early breastfeeding out of concern over disease transmission from contaminated prelacteal foods and to ensure infants receive the health benefits of colostrum. These programs may be responsible for recent decreases in the time to initiation of breastfeeding (Holman & Grimes, 2001).

Nearly all Bangladeshi infants are breastfed (Holman & Grimes, 2001; Huffman, Chowdhury, Chakraborty, & Simpson, 1980; Khan, 1980). The duration of breastfeeding exceeds an average of two years (Ahmed, 1986; Huffman et al., 1980; Mannan & Islam, 1995; Mulder-Sibanda & Sibanda-Mulder, 1999). Urban women,

women with higher education, women whose husbands have higher education, and younger women tend to have a slightly shorter duration of breastfeeding (Huffman et al., 1980; Mannan & Islam, 1995). Most studies find no gender differences in breastfeeding patterns (Greiner, 1997). In Bangladesh, an important consequence of breastfeeding is reduced morbidity and mortality from diarrheal disease (Mulder-Sibanda & Sibanda-Mulder, 1999); this is particularly so for unsupplemented breastfeeding (Shahidullah, 1994).

## **Childhood**

Childhood is recognized as a life stage that begins about the time a child starts school (age 6) and continues through about 10 years of age. Aside from a ceremony for the child's first school attendance, there are few rituals associated with the transition to childhood. Boys are usually circumcized during early childhood. The occasion is marked by a feast; the boy's status changes to that of a "senior" child. Most girls have an ear pierced between the ages of 1 and 9 (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

The overall effects of poverty and malnutrition are reflected in 1996 statistics on stunting showing that 56% (rural) and 39% (urban) of children are more than two standard deviations below height-for-age standards. Likewise, 58% (rural) and 42% (urban) of children are more than two standard deviations below weight-for-age standards (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 2001).

## **Adolescence**

Adolescence encompasses three Bengali stages of life: *pre-adolescence, early adolescence*, and *late adolescence*. The pre-adolescence stage begins with the growth spurt around age 9–11. The stage ends around menarche in girls, but is less demarcated for boys. During this stage, a girl begins to adopt the dress of adult women. Both boys and girls start taking on gender-specific adult roles within the family. Individuals are expected to take on more responsibility for their behavior, especially in limiting their contact with individuals of the opposite sex. Preadolescent individuals are expected to sleep with samesex kin (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

The early adolescence stage begins around puberty or near the peak of the growth spurt. Boys remain in this stage until their facial hair begins to grow, and their voice changes. Menarche is considered private; it entails no

#### **586 Bangladeshis**

rites or ceremony, although a girl will begin wearing a *sari* all the time. Girls will begin shaving pubic and underarm hair. Late adolescence begins around age 16 and continues through the early 20s or until marriage. During this time, males will either continue in their schooling or begin to work for the family. Females who are not in school will spend most of their time in the *bari*. Muslims believe that an individual has become morally mature at this stage (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

Age at menarche was examined in a 1976 study that found a median age of just less than 16 years. The study was on the heels of the 1971 war and a famine in 1974, which may have delayed menarche on average. Heavier girls at a given age were more likely to have reached menarche (Chowdhury, Huffman, & Curlin, 1977). The girls were shorter and weighed less than same-aged U.S. girls, in part reflecting a later growth spurt (Riley, 1990).

Mortality is at its lowest during adolescence. Records from 1994 to 1999 in the Matlab intervention and comparison areas (ICDDR, B, 1996a, 1996b, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001) show that only 2 per 1,000 individuals die between 10 and 20 years of age. For males, the leading causes of death are accidents (other than drowning, 25%), infections (other than tetanus or diarrheal disease, 9%), suicide (7%), gastro-intestinal disease, and cancer (5% each). For females, leading causes of death are suicide (14%), accidents (other than drowning, 13%), obstetric-related (10%), diarrheal disease (6%), and cancer (5%).

## **Adulthood**

Bangladeshis recognize two stages of pre-senescent adult life: *young adulthood* and *middle age*. Young adulthood begins with marriage and lasts until the late 30s or early 40s, when one's children have grown. Following marriage, a woman moves into the household of her husband's family. Her role in young adulthood is to bear and raise children, and she helps maintain the household (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

Middle age begins with maturation of one's children and continues into the 50s. At this stage, males may assume a leadership role in the community, and some women work outside the *bari*. Couples will avoid bearing children during this period, as it is considered embarrassing or shameful to reproduce when one's children are reproducing (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

Adult mortality is highly gender-specific. About 24% of deaths to women aged 15–45 are from obstetric

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 587**

causes (Matlab comparison area, 1994–1999, ICDDR, B, 1996a, 1996b, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001). The second leading cause of death is suicide (8%). Next are chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (6.5%), cancer (6%), TB (5.6%), and cardiovascular disease (5.6%). The leading cause of death in adult men is gastro-intestinal disease (14.0%), followed by accidents and drowning (12%), TB (8.5%), cancer (6.2%), and suicide (5.8%).

The ill health of adults can have significant consequences for their children. Deaths of rural adults put their dependent children at significantly increased risk of death, particularly girls (Strong, 1992). The effects of a mother dying are more severe than for a father dying. Older children are likely to have their education interrupted, girls are likely to leave the household earlier, and marry earlier (Roy, Kane, & Barkat-e-Khuda, 2001).

Women have traditionally had little say or control over reproductive decisions. Repeated cycles of reproduction followed by intensive breastfeeding combined with poor nutrition and bouts of diarrheal disease result in declining health with age for rural Bangladeshi women (Ahmed, Adams, Chowdhury, & Bhuiya, 1998).

A Bangladeshi woman usually gives birth in her husband's home or her natal home. Births are rarely attended by trained medical practitioners. Instead, they are attended by female family members, neighbors, or by traditional birth attendants (*dais* or *dhorunis*). Nearly one third of births are delivered by the mother alone (Croley et al., 1966). Social norms associated with *purdah*, shame, and family honor usually prevent male medical practitioners from performing gynecological examinations, even during obstetric emergencies (Rozario, 1995).

Maternal mortality, defined as deaths resulting from pregnancy or childbirth, occurs in about 5–6 out of every 1,000 live births. Increased risk of maternal mortality is associated with higher parity and mothers over 35 years (Alauddin, 1986; Khan, Jahan, & Begum, 1986; Koenig, Fauveau, Chowdhury, Chakraborty, & Khan, 1988; Rochat et al., 1981). About one quarter of all maternal deaths result from complications of induced abortion (Rochat et al., 1981).

Sexual violence occurs within and outside of marriage. In rural settings, women infrequently leave their homesteads, and ethnographic accounts suggest that rapists are likely to be known by the victim. Marital rape is tolerated in Bangladeshi society as a part of a husband's rights to his wife, even though the topic itself is taboo, making it difficult to study (Yasmin, 2000).

One study found that 27% of Bangladeshi women reported at least one instance of marital rape over a one-year period of recall. Marital rape most frequently occurred during taboo times (postpartum, third trimester of pregnancy, and menstruation). Prevalence was lower at older ages, for more educated women, and for women with an independent source of household income (Hadi, 2000).

Another form of sexual violence that has received widespread attention in the international media is the practice of "acid throwing," where men throw sulfuric acid on women. The crime is usually associated with refusals of sexual or romantic advances. Victims are permanently disfigured, and some are blinded, disabled, or die from their wounds. About 100 cases are believed to occur each year (Faga, Scevola, Mezzetti, & Scevola, 2000; Yasmin, 2000).

### **The Aged**

Old age is recognized as a stage of life that begins in the mid to late 50s. Elderly parents are cared for by their sons, usually the oldest, although in urban settings elderly women may live with a daughter (Kabir et al., 1998). Care for the elderly is considered a beneficial responsibility, rather than a burden. The elderly are respected for their wisdom; they command a near religious reverence (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

In the late 1990s, there were about 7 million elderly Bangladeshis; about 17.5 million elderly are projected for the year 2025 (Kabir et al., 1998). Men tend to live longer than women, but because of the age difference at marriage, women tend to outlive their husbands (Ellickson, 1988). Mortality risk for elderly men and women is lower while their spouse is alive. Mortality risk is also reduced while living with a son (Rahman, 1999, 2000). Older women report significantly more limitations in their daily activities, and have more physical performance limitations than do their male counterparts (Rahman & Liu, 2000).

### **Dying and Death**

The final stage of life (*acal* or *maranka– l*) begins as an elderly person becomes disabled and is reliant on caregivers for basic needs. Care-giving is intensified as an individual becomes progressively more disabled. All attempts are made to fulfill the wishes and needs of the individual. The oldest old are believed to recapture the mental disposition of children (Aziz & Maloney, 1985).

Funeral rites are important to both Muslim and Hindu Bangladeshis. A Muslim corpse is ritually bathed before burial and wrapped in a shroud. The body is placed in a plain wooden box and carried to the burial place by male family members. Women do not attend funerals (Gatrad, 1994). Hindu funerals involve elaborate ceremonies, including the cremation of the body (Maloney et al., 1981).

# **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

Efforts to reduce diarrheal disease by establishing widespread tube-well sources has had unintended health consequences. In the mid-1990s, high concentrations of naturally occurring arsenic were discovered in the ground water in many regions of Bangladesh and West Bengal. Arsenic-related health conditions include skin lesions, skin cancers, cancers of internal organs, and neurological disorders, but the onset of many conditions has a 10-year latency period, so it is still too early to evaluate the longterm health effects. Because of the enormity of the problem—areas with high-concentration wells may include half of the population of Bangladesh—arsenic poisoning is being treated as a public health emergency (Smith, Lingas, & Rahman, 2000).

Another public health crisis is the re-emergence of malaria in recent years. Malaria had been almost eliminated from the region in the mid-1960s, primarily through heavy use of DDT. The practice was halted during the war of independence from Pakistan. Since the mid-1970s, cases of malaria have increased steadily, and reached a peak of nearly a million cases by 1997. Additionally, a higher fraction of cases involves the more severe and deadly falciparum malaria. The most heavily infected areas are difficult to access and lack surveillance infrastructure (Bangali, Mahmood, & Rahman, 2000).

HIV has not been a serious problem for Bangladeshis, although there is growing concern over the potential for a serious epidemic. As of 1999, about 13,000 individuals are believed to be HIV positive (UNAID, 2001); but only 17 cases of AIDS have been reported (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2002). The infection has only recently made in-roads into vulnerable groups. Prevalence among sex workers is under 1%, but there is a low frequency of condom use among commercial sex workers. Female sex workers have an average of two to five clients a day and the number of clients is estimated to be half a million men daily. The high rate of other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) in sex workers suggests that HIV could spread rapidly. The rate of HIV infection is about 2.5% among the relatively small injecting drug community. Needle-sharing is widespread in this group (World Bank, 2000). Blood screening in Bangladesh was initiated in 2000 (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2002).

# **REFERENCES**

- Ahmed, M. M. (1986). Breastfeeding in Bangladesh. *Journal of Biosocial Science, 18*, 425–434.
- Ahmed, S. M., Adams, A., Chowdhury, A. M. R., & Bhuiya A. (1998). Chronic energy deficiency in women from rural Bangladesh: Some socioeconomic determinants. *Journal of Biosocial Science, 30*, 349–358.
- Alam, N. (2000). Teenage motherhood and infant mortality in Bangladesh: Maternal age-dependent effects of parity one. *Journal of Biosocial Science, 32*, 229–236.
- Alauddin, M. (1986). Maternal mortality in rural Bangladesh: The Tangail District. *Studies in Family Planning, 17*, 13–21.
- Ashraf, A., Chowdhury, S., & Streefland, P. (1982). Health, disease and healthcare in rural Bangladesh. *Social Science & Medicine, 16*, 2041–2054.
- Aziz, K. M. A. (1977). Present trends in medical consultation prior to death in rural Bangladesh. *Bangladesh Medical Journal, 6*, 53–58.
- Aziz, K. M. A., & Maloney, C. (1985). *Life stages, gender and fertility in Bangladesh*. Dhaka, Bangladesh: International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research.
- Bangali, A. M., Mahmood, M. A. H., & Rahman, M. (2000). The malaria situation in Bangladesh. *Mekong Malaria Forum, 6*, 20–24.
- Basham, A. L. (1976). The practice of medicine in ancient and medieval India. In C. Leslie (Ed.), *Asian medical systems* (pp. 18–43). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (2001). *2001 statistical yearbook of Bangladesh, Dhaka*. Retrieved February 28, 2001, from http://www.bbsgov.org/
- Basu, A. M., & Amin, S. (2000). Conditioning factors for fertility decline in Bengal: History, language, identity, and openness to innovations. *Population Development and Review, 26*, 761–794.
- Begum, H. (2001). Poverty and health ethics in developing countries. *Bioethics, 15*, 50–56.
- Bertocci, P. J. (1984). Chittagong Hill tribes of Bangladesh. *Cultural Survival Quarterly, 8*, 86–87.
- Bhardwaj, S. M., & Paul, B. K. (1986). Medical pluralism and infant mortality in a rural area of Bangladesh. *Social Science & Medicine, 23*, 1003–1010.
- Bhuiya, A., Aziz, A., & Chowdhury, M. (2001). Ordeal of women for induced abortion in a rural area of Bangladesh. *Journal of Health, Population, and Nutrition, 19*, 281–290.
- Bose, N. K. (1967). *Culture and society in India*. New York: Asia.
- Chacko, A. (1991, May 31). Bangladesh convulsed by catastrophe. *India Today*, 70–75.
- Chowdhury, A. K. M. A., Huffman, S. L., & Curlin, G. T. (1977). Malnutrition, menarche, and marriage in rural Bangladesh. *Social Biology, 24*, 316–325.