12

# Governor: **Powers and Position**

Renu Sethi

The Governor plays the key role as a constitutional head of the state and a custodian of the constitution. This chapter examines the important constitutional provisions relating to the powers and functions of the Governor; how these powers have been exercised since the commencement of the constitution; how to safeguard and ensure the smooth working of parliamentary democracy in states even in the most difficult situations.

Each state in India has a Governor in whom, as per Article 154 of the constitution, all the executive powers of the state are vested. This power is to be exercised by him in the same fashion as the President in case of the executive powers of the Union "either directly or through the officers subordinate to him in accordance with this constitution." The pattern of governments in the states in the Indian Union is of the parliamentary type. The executive head designated as the Governor is a constitutional ruler and acts on the advice of the ministers who are responsible to the lower house of the state legislature. M.V. Pylee observes, "As in the union, the government in the states is also organized on the Parliamentary model. The head of the states is called the Governor; the head of the state government is called the Chief Minister who is counterpart in the State, of the Prime Minister of India." His office is not subordinate or subservient to the government of India, nor is he accountable to them for the manner in which he carries out his functions and duties. He holds an independent constitutional office which is not subject to the control of the government of India.

# APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR

Article 155 provides the "Governor of a state shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal." He is removable by the same authority. But, in actual practice, he is appointed by the Central government, which means by the party in power at the Centre [Prime Minister]. But two conventions have generally come to govern his nomination." One, the Central government ordinarily consults the state concerned before announcing the appointment so that he is acceptable to the concerned state ministry. It is a sound practice though it has been flouted on several occasions. For instance, the appointment of the West Bengal Governor Dharamvir against the wishes of the then chief minister. In Bihar, the controversy arose when M.P. Sinha, the then chief Minister, protested against the appointment of Nityanand Kanungo as the Governor. In the appointment of Sri Prakasa in Madras, and Kumaraswami Raja in Orissa, the respective Chief Ministers were not consulted. The Chief Ministers of Tripura and Uttar Pradesh protested when Romesh Bhandari was appointed Governor in those states. Jayalalitha strongly opposed the appointment of M. Chenna Reddy and S.S. Barnala as Governor of Tamil Nadu.

Before the fourth general elections of 1967, no importance was given to this convention, because in the Centre and in almost all the states, Congress was the ruling party. It assumed vital importance after 1967 when coalition governments came into being in different states. There arose a controversy between the Congress government at the Centre and the non-Congress governments in various states over the meaning of consultation. If it is consultation and not the consent of the Chief Minister or the state cabinet, there is no logic in it. Thus, in actual practice, Article 156 meant that the Governor was appointed by the Prime Minister in consultation with the Home minister.

 Another convention is that the incumbent of this office comes from outside the concerned state. This, again is a wholesome arrangement, because such an incumbent does not have his local political roots and affliations and would, thus, be free from state level party politics. But this convention has also been violated in some cases. For instance, Ujjal Singh, Punjab (1966), Karan Singh, Kashmir (1965), J.E. Wodeyar Bahadur, Mysore (1956), H.E. Mukherjee, West Bengal, and Vasantdada Patil in Maharashtra were appointed Governors.

National Commission to Review the working of the Indian constitution under the Chairmanship of Justice N.M. Venkatachalaiha recommended, a committee consisting of the Prime Minister, Home Minister, Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Chief Minister of the concerned State should select the Governor. Instead of confidential and informal consultation, it is better that the process of selection is transparent and unambiguous.

The executive powers of the state are vested in the Governor and all executive actions of the state have to be taken in the name of the Governor. Though the Governor holds office during the pleasure of the President [Art. 156], the period is limited to a term of five years. However, the person can be reappointed as the Governor of the same state or of some other state. His term can also come to an end by resignation or dismissal by the President. By the Seventh constitutional Amendment, 1956, it has been provided that the same person can be appointed Governor for more than one State.

Qualifications: Any citizen of India, who is 35 years of age or above, is eligible for the office of the Governor [Art. 157]. He is debarred from holding any other office of profit or being a Member of the Parliament or any State legislature [Art. 158].

The Governor is paid a monthly salary of `35,000 and is provided a rent-free official residence, Raj Nivas. He is entitled to all allowances and privileges as were enjoyed by the Provincial Governor at the commencement of the constitution. Parliament has the right to make laws relating the emoluments, allowances, and privileges of the Governor. However, the emoluments and privileges cannot be diminished during the term of office [Art. 158(3)], except during financial emergency under Article 360.

# ❑❑ **Constituent Assembly Debates**

When the Constituent Assembly discussed the question of the head of the State four alternative methods of selecting the Governor were suggested before the final decision was taken:

- 1. Election by adult suffrage.
- 2. Election by the members of the Legislative Assembly either by proportional representation, or otherwise.
- 3. Selection by the President out of a panel prepared by the Legislative Assembly.
- 4. Appointment by the President.

General discussion in the Constituent Assembly revealed that the election of the Governor on the basis of universal adult suffrage was incompatible with the parliamentary form of government as was adopted for states where head of the state has to be only a constitutional head. Several members of the Constituent Assembly criticized the direct election as inappropriate, an anomaly and absurd. B.R. Ambedker, on behalf of the Drafting Committee, made the position clear and stated, "We feel that the powers of the Governor were so limited, so nominal, his position so ornamental that probably very few would come forward for elections." Direct election of the Governor would have created constitutional crisis as it would have clashed with the directly elected Chief Minister. His election would also create problem of leadership at the time of general election. Apart from a possibility of clash between the Governor and the Council of Ministers, the direct election of the Governor creates serious problem of leadership at the time of a general election. During election, a political party will have to rally round a leader. Who will be the leader, a candidate for the Governor or for the office of the Chief Minister? Discussions on the floor of the Assembly revealed that the co-existence of a directly-elected Governor and directly-elected Chief Minister might lead to friction. Election by the Legislative Assembly would make the Governor a nominee of the ruling party, and he would always be trying to appease the Assembly, for his own election. Therefore, this was also not acceptable to many. H.V. Kamath opposed the panel system on the ground that if the President somehow did not choose the very first nominee and chose the third or fourth, the legislature of the state would certainly have grouse against the man chosen by the President, because he had been chosen in preference to the first man. After having discussed all the proposals, framers accepted Brajeshwar Prasad's amendment for the appointment of the Governor by the President "by warrant under his hand and seal," thinking it to be the "lesser most evil", an instrument of maintaining "common links" between the Centre and the states and a cogent factor establishing "harmony, good working, and balanced relations between the provincial cabinet and the Governor."

Experience of administration from 1947-49 had convinced the framers of the fact that the disintegrating forces were quite strong in India, preservation of country's unity, security, and solidarity was vital, therefore, the Governor should act as constitutional nexus between the Union and the states. It was Nehru's dream that only eminent, non-partisan, and non-political men could be selected for the dignified post the Governor. However, it has seldom come into operation. The Administrative Reforms Commission had recommended that a person, who can be trusted to rise above party prejudices and predilections should be considered for the post. But Governors have been unashamedly appointed in total disregard of these norms. Most of the appointees have been active politicians whose loyalty to their party often reflected in their actions and conduct. In some cases, the defeated candidates of the Congress party had been appointed governors. N. V. Gadgil, H. V. Pataskar, V. V. Giri, M. M. Jacob, the Governor of Meghalaya, Krishan Kant, Governor of Andhra Pradesh, K.V. Raghunatha Reddy, the Governor of West Bengal, Motilal Vora, Sudhakar Nayak, Shiv Shankar, Bali Ram Bhagat, Krishna Pal Singh, Sheila Kaul, and others, were in this category. Thus, one finds that those who were rejected by the electorate were rewarded with the Governorship as a consolation prize. Kailashpati Mishra, S.S. Bhandari, Kaidarnath Sahani, K.R. Malkani were rewarded by the NDA government. In the year 2004, R.L. Bhatia in Kerala, Buta Singh in Bihar, Naval Kishore Sharma in Gujarat, Balram Jhakar in Rajasthan and S.C. Jamir in Goa were appointed by the United Progressive Alliance led by Manmohan Singh. There are instances where Chief Minister of certain states were appointed Governors to make room for their successors. Arjun Singh, Moti Lal Vora, Chenna Reddy, Surjit Singh Barnala, S.M. Krishna, Sushil Kumar Shinde, Madanlal Khurana, S.C. Jamir fall in this category. It is often alleged that such Governors misuse their powers and act as tools in the hands of the Central government and destabilize the state governments of opposition parties. Accusations by the former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Mayawati against the Governor Romesh Bhandari on the law and order situation in the state are not totally baseless. Besides these, another category of governors is of retired civil servants who are considered "favourite boys" of the Central government, *e.g.,* Dharmvir, B.N. Chakravarty, Raghukul Tilak, Jagmohan, Vishnu Sahai, L.P. Singh, Govind Narayan, Romesh Bhandari, General K.V. Krishna Rao, Naresh Chandra, P.C Alexander, T.N. Chaturvedi, Rama Devi, Ved Marwaha, V.C. Pande, A. R. Kidwai, and other. In brief, we can say that mostly Governorship is reserved for the party men. Nath Pai rightly maintained that the office of the Governors was degraded by the Centre by making it a patronage and largesse. The fact that the standard of appointment of Governors is deteriorating day after day has forced persons, like E.M.S. Namboodiripad, Bhupesh Gupta, and C. Annadurai to ask for its abolition. Namboodiripad said that it had become a fifth wheel.'

Speaking in the Constituent Assembly on the choice of the Governor, Nehru observed: "I think it would be infinitely better if the Governor was not so intimately connected with the local politics of the province; and would it not be better to have a more detached figure, obviously—a figure that must be acceptable to the government of the province and yet he must not be a part of the party machine of that province. But, on the whole, it probably would be desirable to have people from outside, eminent people, sometimes people who have not taken too great a part in politics." Three decades later Sarkaria Commission on the Centre-State relations recommended the following: (1) It is desirable that a politician from the ruling party at the Union is not appointed as Governor of a State which is being run by some other party or a combination of other parties, (2) In order to ensure effective consultation with the State Chief Minister in the selection of a person to be appointed as Governor, the procedure of consultation should be prescribed in the constitution itself by suitably amending Article 155.

To sum up, we can safely say that to ensure efficient and impartial discharge of the limited discretionary powers by the Governor, it is a must that fair-minded men of high calibre and integrity are appointed.

#### **Powers and Functions of the Governor**

Executive Powers: Under Article 154 of the Indian constitution, the executive powers of the state are vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly, or through officers subordinate to him. The Governor appoints the Chief Minister of the state and other ministers are appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister. Ministers hold office during the pleasure of the Governor [Article 164]. The constitution provides that it is the duty of the Chief Minister to communicate to the Governor all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation [Article 167]. The Governor can ask the Chief Minister to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers, any matter on which decision has been taken by a minister, but which has not been considered by the Council. Article 165 empowers the Governor to appoint Advocate General of the state. He also appoints the members of the State Public Service Commission [Article 316].

As far as the states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and Orissa are concerned the constitution confers special responsibility on the Governor to see that a minister is placed in charge of tribal welfare [Article 371]. In Assam, also he enjoys certain special powers with respect to the administration of tribal areas [Sixth Schedule]. All executive actions of the government of the state shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor [Article 166].

Legislative Powers: Governor enjoys extensive legislative powers in the state. Article 168 makes the Governor a part of the state legislature. Governor may summon, address, prorogue, and dissolve the Legislative Assembly [Article 174]. The Governor can address and send messages either to the house or houses of the state legislature [Article 175]. Under Article 176, the Governor, at the commencement of the first session after each year, addresses the Legislative Assembly or in case of a state having a legislative Council, both houses assembled together, and inform the legislature of the causes of its summons.

President Shankar Dayal Sharma, inaugurating the Conference of Governors in June 1997, said: "In the ordinary course, an address under this [Article 176] represents the policies and programmes proposed to be implemented by the Council of Ministers and invites the attention and consideration of the legislature in this respect". However, it is argued that the circumstances are materially different when a government is asked first to seek a vote of confidence. In such a situation, the question arises whether the address under the above Article should not focus exclusively on the true cause of the summoning to the legislature, *i.e.*, to enable the Assembly to determine whether it has the confidence in the Council of Ministers. If the Council of Ministers succeeds in securing a vote of confidence, it remains open to them to advise the Governor to make an address under Article 175(1) of the constitution, whereby the policies and programmes of the Council of Ministers could be indicated. Alternatively, if the Council of Ministers fails to secure a vote of confidence and if another Council of Ministers is installed in its place, the successor Council of Ministers retains the option of advising the Governor to address the legislature under Article 175(1) of the constitution. All considered, would the foregoing approach not be desirable?

When a Bill has been passed by the state legislature, it has to be presented to the Governor. He shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds his assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President [Article 200]. The Governor may return a nonmoney Bill with a message for reconsideration of the whole Bill or parts of it. He may suggest amendments. The legislature must consider his suggestions without delay. If the Bill is again passed by the legislature or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the Governor shall not have the power to withhold assent any more. In other words, he shall be bound to give his assent. The Governor, under Article 213, can promulgate ordinance during the recess of the legislature if he is satisfied that there exist circumstances which make it necessary for him to take immediate action. Such an ordinance has the same force and effect as an Act of the state legislature. The ordinance ceases to operate at the expiry of six weeks from the reassembly of the legislature unless a resolution approving it is passed by the legislature.

The Governor can nominate a member of the Anglo-Indian community if they are not adequately represented in the legislative assembly [Article 333]. He can also nominate persons to the Legislative Council who have special knowledge or practical experience in the fields of literature, science, art, cooperative movement and social service [Article 171(5)].

## **Judicial Powers**

Article 161 says that the Governor of a state shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to suspend or remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the state extends. In case of A.M. Nanawati, the Governor of Maharashtra granted remission and ordered his release, four years after he was awarded life imprisonment. This order was issued by the Governor in consultation with the Chief Minister because of exceptionally good conduct of Nanawati in jail and a distinguished record of service in the Indian Navy.

The Governor is entitled to be consulted by the President of India in matters related to appointment of the judges of the State High Court [Article 217].

The Governor has the power to sanction prosecution of a minister or an MLA under the Prevention of Corruption Act. There has been considerable debate whether this power is to be exercised by the Governor on the advice of the Council of Ministers or in his discretion. After A.R. Antulay's case where Governor P.C. Alexander had accorded his permission to prosecute the former, a new controversy surfaced in the Fodder Scam case involving Bihar's former Chief Minister Laloo Prasad Yadav. The then Bihar Governor A.R. Kidwai had accorded sanction to the CBI to prosecute the Chief Minister. In Tamil Nadu, Jayalalitha had challenged in the Supreme Court of India the power of the Governor M. Chenna Reddy to sanction her prosecution.

The apex court said, "If the Governor cannot act in his own discretion, there would be a complete breakdown of the rule of law as much as it would be open for governments to refuse sanction in spite of overwhelming material showing that *prima facie* a case was made out."

## **Emergency Powers**

Article 356 empowers the Governor to send a report to the President that the constitutional machinery in a state has broken down or that the state cannot function in accordance with the provisions of the constitution. On receipt of the report, President may assume to himself all or any of the functions of the government of the state [President's rule]. Article 356 has been used more than hundred times to impose President's rule in different states.

## **Discretionary Powers**

To understand the discretionary powers of the Governor, let us once again read Article 163 of the constitution, which states: '(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions, except insofar as he is by or under this constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion. (2) If any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the Governor is by or under this constitution required to act in his discretion, the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion'. Article 163[2] confers on the Governor blanket discretion to decide, when they are required to act in discretion. There is no such mention of discretion in case of the President. The Governor can act in his discretion: while the President is bound by the advice of the Union Council of Ministers. The 42nd constitutional Amendment Act, 1976, makes it further clear that the president has no discretion under Article 74.

The survey of state politics reveals that the governors have exercised their discretion under certain circumstances on following matters:

Appointment of the Chief Minister; Dismissal of the Chief Minister and the Council of Ministers; Suspension of the Legislative Assembly; Dissolution of the Legislative Assembly; Recommending to the President to issue a proclamation of emergency; Seeking information from the Chief Minister relating to legislative and administrative matters; Directing the Chief Ministers to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by any individual minister; Returning a Bill passed by the state Legislature for reconsideration; Reserving a Bill passed by the state legislature for the assent of the President; Seeking instructions from the President before promulgating an ordinance on certain matters; Sanctioning the prosecution of the Chief Minister or other ministers under the Prevention of Corruption Act;

Recently the Supreme Court of India in a land mark judgement held that the Governor is not a mere titular head, he can accord sanction for the prosecution of a minister for an offence even after the council of ministers had refused such permission. A five-member bench of the constitution consisting of Justice Santosh Hegde, Justice S. N. Variava, Justice B. P. Singh, Justice H. K. Sema and Justice S. B. Sinha, said, "Democracy itself will be at stake if the government refuses to accord sanction for prosecution against ministers in matters where *prima facie* a clear case for prosecution was made out. It would then lead to a situation where people in power may break law with impunity safe in knowledge that they will not be prosecuted as requisite sanction will not be granted."

While exercising judicial powers, the Governor can act independently.

Special powers of Governor of Assam in matters relating to tribal areas are also discretionary.

Governors of Nagaland, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Meghalaya, and Tripura have also been given special powers where they can act in discretion.

How this discretion has been exercised by different Governors would also reveal what role they have played in state politics. Have they merely acted as the constitutional heads or as the agents of the Central government?

In matters relating to the appointment of Chief Minister the Governor has no discretion where the Chief Minister enjoys the absolute majority in the Legislative Assembly. Further, in cases, where the person is the leader of a coalition or united front formed before the election, the Governor has no choice but to invite that person to form the government. The question of discretion arises where no party gets absolute majority in the Legislative Assembly elections. In such situations, who should be invited to form the government?

After the 1952 elections in Madras, no party secured absolute majority in the Legislative Assembly. T. Prakasam formed the United Democratic Front and staked the claim before the Governor, Sri Prakasa, to form the government. But the Governor invited C. Rajagopalachari, leader of the single largest party, namely, the Congress, to form the government. In Rajasthan, after the 1967 elections, Congress could win only 89 seats in the Assembly of 184. Opposition parties forged a united front against the Congress and claimed the support of 92 MLAs under the leadership of Maharawal Luxman Singh. Two days later, the Governor Sampurnanand announced that he had decided to invite Mohan Lal Sukhadia, leader of the Congress Party, to form the government. This led to mass protests and the leader of the opposition paraded 93 members of the State Legislative Assembly before the President of India at the Rashtrapati Bhawan. In Haryana, after the 1982 elections, the Congress could muster the support of 42 MLAs in the House of 90. Devi Lal, leader of the combined opposition, with the strength of 45 MLAs staked his claim to form the government. Haryana Governor, G. D., Tapase invited him to the Raj Bhawan to prove his claim in two days, by 24th May 1982. Bhajan Lal, leader of Congress Party, claimed that he should be given the first chance to prove his majority as the Congress was the single largest party in the house. Surprisingly, Governor Tapase administered the oath of office to Bhajan Lal as the Chief Minister without even waiting for Devi Lal. The Governor also allowed one month time to Bhajan Lal to prove his majority.

Priority of single largest party over post-election alliance is a clear convention supported by the Sarkaria Commission and President R. Venkataraman, but it has often been disregarded. Most recently, Governor Krishna Pal Singh of Gujarat, who ignored Suresh Mehta's demonstration of his majority, dismissed the government and paved the way for Shanker Singh Vaghela. Likewise, after the 1996 elections, in Uttar Pradesh, no political party could secure clear majority in the 425 member assembly. BJP emerged as the single largest party with 176 seats. Romesh Bhandari, the Governor of *Uttar Pradesh,* refused to invite Kalyan Singh, the leader of the BJP, to form the government. The Governor wanted full satisfaction to the effect that a stable government could be formed in the State. It was only in March 1997, that Bhandari invited Mayawati, leader of the Bahujan Samaj Party and the BJP combine, to form the government. Discretion relating to the appointment of the Chief Minister is also exercised when there are defections from one party to the other.

The Sarkaria Commission has recommended that in states, where there is no clear majority with any single party, the Governor should invite leader of the alliance of parties that was formed before the elections. Thereafter, chance should be given to the single largest party staking claim to form the government with the support of other parties and independents. Next in order should be the leader of the post-election alliance of parties claiming support of other parties joining the government and some supporting it from outside without joining the government should be given the chance.

Another area, where governors exercise discretionary power is in dismissing a ministry. Where Governor is satisfied that the ministry has lost the confidence of the legislature, he may dismiss the government. This may be due to the split in the ruling party or on account of defections or withdrawal of any constituent party from the alliance/united front. Since it is the duty of the Governor to see that the government of the state is carried on in accordance with the provisions of the constitution, he is duty bound under his oath to exercise discretion. There are instances where ministries enjoyed the support of majority in the Legislative Assembly yet the governors felt that they should not continue in office.

In 1957, E.M.S. Namboodiripad was sworn in as the first Communist Chief Minister by Governor B. Ramkrishna Rao in the state of Kerala. The government decided to eliminate corruption, introduce land reforms, and make vital changes in the administration of the state by associating large number of people and the party workers. V.R. Krishna Iyer, who later became a judge of the Supreme Court of India, was the law minister in the Namboodiripad government. He streamlined the working of courts and withdrew frivolous cases against workers and introduced radical reforms in various departments. The opposition parties, namely, the Congress, P.S.P., and Muslim League, called for civil disobedience movement in June 1959, to bring down the first communist ministry. Roman Catholic Church and the Nair community which opposed the educational reforms of the communist government in the Kerala Education Act also engineered an agitation against the communists. The Governor of Kerala sent a report to the President stating that the law and order situation in the state was deteriorating and there was insecurity for the people, therefore, it was difficult to carry on the administration of the state in accordance with the provisions of the constitution. The Central government dismissed the Kerala government though it enjoyed the support of majority in the State Legislative Assembly. In 1976, Tamil Nadu Governor, K.K. Shah, recommended the dismissal of DMK government under Chief Minister M. Karunanidhi on the ground that the government had indulged in serious acts of maladministration, corruption, and misuse of power for partisan ends. It had failed, he alleged, to follow the instructions of the Central government in relation to the emergency. Karunanidhi's government had comfortable majority in the legislative assembly, but it was dismissed. In 1993, four state governments ruled by the Bharatiya Janata Party were dismissed after the demolition of the Babri Masjid on 6th December 1992.

At the 1995 Governors' conference, the President constituted a committee of governors on minorities under the chairmanship of Khurshid Alam Khan, Governor of Karnataka. Terms of reference for the committee included: to record such observations and reflections as might be of use to the Central and state governments in better securing the well being of minorities towards fulfilling the ideal enshrined in the preamble of the constitution. Other members of the committee were Mohammed Qureshi, Governor of Madhya Pradesh, Romesh Bhandari, Governor of Uttar Pradesh, M.M. Jacob, Governor of Meghalaya, Krishna Pal Singh, Governor of Gujarat, Justice (Rtd.) Fatima Beevi, Governor of Tamil Nadu, and Justice (Retd.) S.S. Kang, Governor of Kerala.

In 1997, a serious controversy arose relating to the law and order situation in the state of Uttar Pradesh. The Union Home Minister Indrajit Gupta said in a statement that there was state of anarchy in the state and law and order situation was going from bad to worse. Romesh Bhandari, the Governor of the state, denied the charge and gave facts and figures to show that the situation in Uttar Pradesh under the President's rule was better compared to earlier times and other States. BJP gave a notice of motion for Governor's recall in Lok Sabha, while Romesh Bhandari and Indrajit Gupta brought disrepute to their respective offices by publicly confronting each other on the law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh. Speaker P.A. Sangma, set a healthy precedent for parliamentary democracy in admitting the BJP's motion for debate. On the same issue, another controversy arose between the Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister, Mayawati, and the Union Defence Minister Mulayam Singh Yadav.

In West Bengal, after the 1967 elections, Left Wing parties won 151 seats in 280 member Legislative Assembly. Governor Dharmvir invited Ajoy Mukherjee, leader of the Front, to form the government. But, soon P.C. Ghosh, Food Minister in Ajoy Mukherjee's government withdrew support from the ministry and formed an independent Progressive Democratic Front. Ghosh met Governor Dharmvir and staked his claim to form the government with the support of the Congress Party. On 6th November 1967, the Governor asked the Chief Minister to convene the Legislative Assembly to prove his majority on the floor of the house before 23rd November 1967. Mukherjee's ministry rejected the date and suggested 18th December 1967, as the earliest convenient date for Assembly session. The Chief Minister said that since the legislators were involved in the paddy procurement drive of the government, it would be inconvenient to call them. Ajoy Mukherjee's government requested the President to seek advice of the Supreme Court on the discretionary powers of the Governor on the following issues:

- 1. Whether the Governor has authority to dismiss the Council of Ministers without taking the verdict of the legislature?
- 2. Can the Governor, on the basis of information available to him that the Council of Ministers does not enjoy the confidence of the legislature, in his individual discretion dismiss the ministry?
- 3. Is the Governor bound to act on the advice of the Council of Ministers in matters of summoning of legislature or can be disregard the advice of the Chief Minister on the date of summoning the Assembly and insist on a particular date?
- 4. If the Chief Minister fails to comply with the advice of the Governor, can the Governor dismiss the Chief Minister on the ground of non-compliance of the advice tantamount to violation of them constitution?

Governor Dharma Vira under his discretionary powers dismissed the Left Front government on 21st November 1967, and on the same day invited P.C. Ghosh to form the government. Interestingly, there have been many cases where Governors in different states did not even give three days time to the Chief Ministers to prove their majority on the floor of the house. On 2nd July 1984, when 12 legislators of the ruling National Conference in Jammu and Kashmir Assembly decided to withdraw their support to Farooq Abdullah ministry, Governor Jagmohan dismissed the ministry the same evening. Governor did not allow Abdullah even a single day to prove his majority on the floor of the house. Not only this, he also invited G.M. Shah to be the new Chief Minister of J&K. Similarly, in Andhra Pradesh, when N. Bhaskar Rao, Finance Minister in the N.T. Rama Rao's Telugu Desam ministry defected with some MLAs and resigned from the ministry on 12th August 1984, the Governor Ram Lal dismissed the N.T. Rama Rao ministry on 14th August 1984, and also appointed N. Bhaskar Rao as the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh. N.T. Rama Rao advised the Governor to summon the Assembly on 18th August, but the governor did not oblige. On the other hand, he allowed one month's time to N. Bhaskar Rao to prove his majority. Again in 1995, when Telugu Desam leader and Andhra Chief Minister N.T. Rama Rao was in hospital, his son-in-law Chandrababu Naidu arranged a coup and split the party. Governor Krishna Kant secured Rama Rao's resignation from the hospital bed. Krishna Pal Singh, Governor of Gujarat, did not give any time to Chief Minister Suresh Mehta and invited Shanker Singh Vaghela, in October 1996, to form the government. Illustrations of such nature are available in almost all states where governors have exercised discretion in dismissing the Chief Ministers. Recently Prakash Singh Badal, Chief Minister of Punjab, accused the Centre for dismissing all Akali governments before their full term.

The Supreme Court, in the Assembly dissolution case, felt that the majority of the Chief Minister should, generally, be tested on the floor of the house. Floor test was reasonable to avoid unnecessary political controversies about the misuse of power. The Sarkaria Commission has suggested that the Governor cannot dismiss the ministry so long it enjoys the majority in the Legislative Assembly. He must not allow them to remain in power if they lose the majority in the Assembly. But, if the Assembly is not in session or is prorogued he should advise the Chief Minister to summon the Assembly as early as possible, say between 30-60 days depending upon the circumstances and the exigencies.

The power to dissolve Legislative Assembly is vested with the Governor. Normally, the Assembly should not be dissolved before the period of five years, but the growing political instability due to defections or fast realignments in political groups makes it necessary to seek fresh mandate from the public. Interestingly, in Kerala after 1965 Assembly election no political party or group was in a position to form the government. Hence, the Governor had no choice, but to dissolve the house without even the first session. Similar situation had arisen in Uttar Pradesh after the 1996 elections. Governor Romesh Bhandari refused to call any party to form the government. The Assembly remained suspended till the BSP and BJP decided to form an alliance and form the government. It is interesting to note that BJP had opposed the BSP-Congress combine in the Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections. In March 1997, Atal Bihari Vajpayee said in Lucknow, "The BJP has decided to close the BSP chapter. The BSP should have allied with us in Punjab if it wanted our cooperation in Uttar Pradesh."

Punjab Chief Minister Gurnam Singh resigned in November 1967, and recommended to the Governor that Assembly may be dissolved. But the Governor did not accept the advice and installed another ministry. Similarly, in 1971, Hitendra Desai, Chief Minister of Gujarat, when he lost the majority recommended to the Governor to dissolve the Assembly. The Governor did not accept his advice; whereas in 1971, the Punjab Governor D.C. Pavate dissolved the Punjab Assembly on the advice of Chief Minister Prakash Singh Badal and in West Bengal the Governor dissolved the Assembly on the advice of Ajoy Mukherjee.

In a parliamentary model, the head of the state should accept the advice of the Chief Minister and order fresh elections. At the time of annual conference of Governors on 20th November 1970, President V.V. Giri had set up a committee of five governors under the chairmanship of Kashmir Governor Bhagwan Sahay to study the constitutional powers of the governors relating to the appointment of Council of Ministers, summoning and dissolving of Legislative Assemblies and failure of constitutional machinery in the state and to suggest guidelines for Governors to meet such problems other members of the committee were the Uttar Pradesh Governor B. Gopala Reddy, the Kerala Governor M.V. Vishwanathan, the Maharashtra Governor Ali Yavar Jung, and the former West Bengal Governor S.S. Dhawan. In October 1971, the committee submitted a 73 page report and disapproved the idea of laying down rigid guidelines for state governors, as doing so was considered unconstitutional, because under the constitution no authority was vested with the power to issue any directions to the Governor or lay down any rules for his guidance. The committee expressed the feeling that greater degree of political discipline on the part of legislators and parties, rather than strict observance of a set of rules by governors, would prevent erosion of democracy and ensure stability of administration. The committee suggested that in order to assist the governors in evolving healthy conventions with respect to all these issues a special wing in President's secretariat must be set up to collate and make available authentic information regarding political and constitutional developments in all states from time to time.

There has been some criticism of the power of Governor to reserve a Bill passed by the state legislature for President's assent under Articles 200 and 201. A study made by the Indian Law Institute reveals that in almost all cases the Governor reserved the State Bill for President's assent on the advice of the State cabinet. On the contrary, D.C. Gupta feels that Council of Ministers will not advise the Governor to reserve any Bill for the President's assent as the same is passed by the state legislature with its concurrence. If any Bill is so reserved, the decision is taken by the Governor in his discretion. Vinod Sethi still goes a step further when he says, "It is quite likely that Governor may reserve a particular Bill in his discretion contrary to the advice of State cabinet."

P.V. Rajamannar, Chairman of the Inquiry Committee on Union-State Relations, has severely criticized the manner in which the Governors have exercised their powers. Chapter VIII of the Report, from pages 119-31, provides a well documented case that the Governor, keeping in traditions with the British parliamentary system, should be bound by the advice of the council of ministers. In 1977, West Bengal government had also submitted a memorandum to the Prime Minister underlying *inter alia* the misuse of powers by the state governors. West Bengal government had witnessed a controversy even on omitting certain paragraphs from the Governor's address to the Assembly.

#### **Role of Governor**

The role of Governor has become one of the main issues in the Centre-State relations. While the office of the Governor remained free from public controversy during 1950-67, it became highly controversial after the fourth general elections of 1967 which ushered in an era of coalition politics. The thinking that the Governor was a mere constitutional figure had proved true and served the country well during 1950-67. This was mainly due to three reasons. First, after the promulgation of the new constitution when governments were formed in the states in the wake of first general election the top Congress leaders of the states took over as Chief Ministers and only second rank leaders were appointed as governors. For instance, G.B. Pant took over as the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, B.C. Roy of West Bengal, and Srikrishna Sinha of Bihar. Governors appointed in these States though illustrious persons, were not of comparable eminence. Second, the Indian political scene was dominated by a single party, namely, the Congress for a long period, 1950-56. During this period, the Congress party held sway at the Centre and in most of the states, and if and when there was a constitutional crisis in any state, which was resolved in the intra-party forum according to the directions of the Congress high command, and the Governor, had very little chance of using his discretionary powers. The office of the Governor remained non-controversial. In cases where one ministry went out of power the installation of another did not prove tumultuous. Except in states, like Kerala where President's rule was introduced thrice, i.e., 1957, 1959, and 1964; it was promulgated once in each of the following: Punjab in 1951, PEPSU in 1953, Andhra Pradesh in 1954, Travancore-Cochin in 1956, and Orissa in 1961. The third reason, why the Governor acted as figure head was that they took their cue from the President who acts according to the aid and advice of the Prime Minister and his cabinet. The governors were so powerless during this period that some of them lamented over their fate and wondered whether the office they held was of any consequence or significance at all. In his article, titled *The Governors at Work,* K.V. Rao has quoted Sarojini Naidu, one time Governor of UP, as "bird in a golden cage". Sarojini Naidu became the Governor of Uttar Pradesh immediately after independence. Patabhi Sitarammaya observed that he had no public function to perform except "making fortnightly reports to the President".

A major change occurred after the fourth general elections of 1967. The political situation changed when Congress party lost the majority support in some states and opposition parties, in some cases, as many as 12-13, formed united fronts to take control of the government machinery. The only uniting factors amongst these parties was opposition to the Congress and a desire to wrest power. All united fronts were a marriage of convenience and were the products of naked struggle for power and offices; and the moment hope of gaining something in the government was lost, the support to the government by some of the constituent units of the united front was withdrawn; the united front was wrecked and the ministry went out of office. From March 1967 to March 1972 governments in different states fell from power more than two dozen times, President's rule was introduced about fifteen times. On the eve of the fifth general election of the State Assemblies, seven states were under Central rule. Those states are, Bihar, Gujarat, Punjab, Mysore, Manipur, West Bengal, and Tripura. During that period, emergence of new regional parties and political defections were the order of the day, and MLAs changed their loyalties as often and as freely as a man would change dress in a day. These developments gave rise to chronic instability in several states; there could be no such thing as the "collective responsibility" of the Council of Ministers to the Legislative Assembly. As a consequence, the Governors were called upon to exercise their discretionary powers more frequently. Provisions of Article 163 [l], that the Governor would discharge his functions with the "aid and advice" of a Council of Ministers, became inoperative. A party or parties which benefited from the Governors' conduct in a particular situation appreciated his decision and the others which lost in the game of power-politics became his bitter critics, irrespective of the impartiality of his decision. Under such situation, it was difficult for the Governors to act impartially because the office they held has of a political nature. On certain occasions, they took different decisions in identical constitutional situations and this naturally led to the conclusion that they were acting under Central pressure to promote or protect the political interest of the ruling party, namely, the Congress. The period was popularly known as *'*Aaya Ram, Gaya Ram' period, the term which gained currency in Haryana due to frequent defections. As a result, the governors were called upon to exercise their discretionary power more frequently. In other words, they acted as agents of the Centre. The manner in which they exercised those powers has had direct impact on Union-State relations. After 1967, controversies regarding the role of Governor became alarming. In the states of Rajasthan, West Bengal, Punjab, M.P., Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Kerala role of governors in appointing chief ministers or suggesting for imposition of President's Rule or dissolution of Assemblies raised several questions about their position, partisan attitude, and constitutional status. Another interesting development regarding the role of Governor which deserves a mention is the manner in which Charan Singh, Union Home Minister in the Janata Party government in 1977, dismissed nine state governments ruled by the Congress party after the defeat of Congress party in the Lok Sabha elections. Three years later, on the same logic, Indira Gandhi dismissed nine state governments on the ground that the Janata Party had lost mandate to rule in the states due to defeat in the Lok Sabha elections.

Role of Governor as Chancellor had also attracted public debate in some states. In December 1995, Shankar Dayal Sharma, President of India, had constituted a committee under the chairmanship of P.C. Alexander, the Governor of Maharashtra and Goa, to examine the role of the Governor as Chancellor, keeping in view the experience obtained in various states, and record such observations and reflections as might make for more efficacious discharge of the functions of the Chancellor with a view to improving the standard of higher education in tune with the priorities and resources of state government; and to prepare a report for being placed before the President. Other members of the committee were Krishna Kant, Governor of Andhra Pradesh, K.V. Raghunatha Reddy, Governor of West Bengal, B.R. Bhagat, Governor of Rajasthan, and Mahabir Prasad, Governor of Haryana. The report of the committee was circulated in the 1997 governors' conference.

These developments were really unfortunate and eroded the credibility of our federal structure. It destroyed the very basis of two sets of government at the Centre and in the states. There is a need to develop our institutions so that the federal structure can be strengthened. There is a noticeable trend in favour of regional parties and coalition groups. If the Centre would misuse its power to dismiss democratically elected governments for partisan ends, the whole democratic fabric would be destroyed or would be in jeopardy.

At a National Debate on the Term of Governor, Justice Kuldip Singh, former Judge of the Supreme Court and the Chairman of Delimitation Commission of India, felt that in cases where the Central Government wants to remove the governors, natural justice demands that they should be told the grounds for their removal. Senior Advocate and Member of Parliament R.K. Anand speaking at the national debate said that RSS governors misused their office and brought shame to the high office. He said despite several *strictures* by the Supreme Court against Gujarat Government the Governor continued to shield the Chief Minister for political reasons. Senior Advocate and former President of the Supreme Court Bar Association K.K. Venugopal felt that the convention should be developed that the governors should tender their resignations whenever there is change of the Central Government as it is done by the Attorney General, Solicitor General, etc. They are men of integrity and independence. P.H. Parekh, President of the Supreme Court Bar association, questioned the utility of the Office of the Governor when politicians are appointed and they misuse their office. In fact, they serve no useful purpose and become a burden on the tax payers. Dr. Vinod Sethi felt that only men of integrity, independence and high qualifications should be appointed as governors.

National Commission to Review the working of the constitution under the Chairmanship of Chief Justice M. N. Venkatachaliah observed that a fixed tenure of five years should be introduced coupled with a provision for impeachment by the State Legislature as it is in case of the President. He stressed the suggestions were aimed at investing the office of the Governor with the requisite dignity and integrity and making the Governor an independent and fair arbiter of a dispute. The Panel felt that it was essential to retrieve and restore the glory and dignity of the office.

# ❑❑ **Conclusion**

The era of coalition politics in states expanded the scope of discretionary powers of the governors with regard to several matters. In June 1997, the focus of the Conference of governors and political leaders convened by the President was mainly on the theme: "The role of constitutional head when, following an election, no party or combination of parties appears to have secured a majority." The issue has relevance both at the Centre and in the States in the present era of coalition governments.

The President of India while inaugurating the governors' conference said that the outcome of the elections of the eleventh Lok Sabha and the Uttar Pradesh State Assembly in 1996 have led to conjectures that hung Assemblies and even Lok Sabha could be a recurrent feature in India's political life. This has a bearing on the image of our country. We have to bestir ourselves to prove that there are institutions and systems which can efficiently and confidently deal with the phenomenon of hung legislatures. This conference should signify the capability and determination of higher leadership to effectively manage any problem, however, intractable it may seem. This will be in keeping with our country's prestige as an advanced parliamentary democracy.

President Shankar Dayal Sharma said, "In my view it is of utmost importance that in the given situation the constitutional head functions with due impartiality, independence, constitutional propriety, transparency, and upholds national interest as paramount." Underlying the agenda of the Conference, he listed some questions that deserve answers. These are as follows:

- 1. Ought the leader of the government that has failed to secure a majority in general election be obliged to tender his resignation and that of the members of his Council of Ministers, and if so, when: (1) immediately on the outcome of the election being apparent, or (2) on the new house being notified as constituted, or (3) only on an indication from the constitutional head?
- 2. On the composition of the new house being clear, *i.e.,* the party position being known, should the constitutional head wait for some party or combination of parties to approach him with a claim to form a government. If so, for how long should he wait for such an initiative? In the interim period, *i.e.,* until the decision of formation of the new government is taken, should any restriction or restraint be observed by the caretaker government? If so, what should be the restrictions or restraints to be observed by the care-taker government?
- 3. Should the constitutional head himself take the initiative towards consulting political parties on their being in a position to form the government? If so, what may be the criteria on which the constitutional head should satisfy himself that the leader of any particular party or combination of parties qualifies for an invitations to form a government.
- 4. Should a leader so invited to form the government be asked to seek a vote of confidence in the relevant house? If so, should a period be stipulated for doing so, and, if so, what would be a reasonable period for this purpose?

- 5. In the period up to motion of confidence being voted either way, for or against, should the government be obliged to observe any restrictions or restraints, and, if so, what should these restrictions or restraints be.
- 6. When a government is formed on the basis of support from more than one party, and the support to the government is indicated to have been withdrawn by one or more of the parties, it being evident that viability of the government may have been materially impaired. Should the constitutional head: (1) take no immediate cognizance of the withdrawal of support, leaving it for concerned party to move a motion of confidence in due course, or (2) ask the Council of Ministers to seek a vote of confidence from the relevant house? If so, what would be the reasonable period to be stipulated for the purpose, or whether any restrictions or restraints would be advisable to be observed by the government for the interim period?
- 7. If a particular configuration of political parties forms a government, and, then, following the withdrawal of support by one or more of its supporting parties, that government suffers a defeat in the relevant house, but the same configuration of political parties re-forms and there is no alternative government possible, and it being evident that the reformed configuration enjoys a majority, what are the factors that need to be kept in mind for an appropriate decision in the matter?
- 8. What steps should be taken to safeguard and ensure that the institution of the constitutional head is enabled to function as an impartial and independent constitutional authority?

In the year 2004, some interesting developments took place in respect of the role of Governor. The UPA government of Dr. Manmohan Singh dismissed the four state governors for their RSS links, namely, Kedarnath Sahani [Goa]; Vishnukant Shastri [Uttar Pradesh]; BabuParmanand [Haryana] and Kailashpati Mishra [Cujarat]. The Centre has said before the SC that the President has unfettered powers to order the removal of governors and it cannot be questioned in any court.

### **Notes and References**

M.V. *Pylee, constitutional Government in India,* 1960, p. 457. *Hargobind Pant vs. Raghukul Tilak, AIR*, 1979, SC, p. 1109. S.R. Maheshwari, *State Governments in India*,1979, p.35. M.V. Pylee, *op. cit.,* p. 459. H.V. Kamath and K.Y. Munshi, *Constituent Assembly Debates (CAD)*, Vol. 1. p. 462. *CAD*, Vol. III, p. 468. M.V. Pylee, *op. cit.,* pp. 459–460. *CAD*, Vol. III, p. 429 H.V. Kamath, *Ibid*., p. 430. Jawaharlal Nehru, *Ibid.*, p. 455.