Marshall, M. (Ed.). (1979). *Beliefs, behaviors, and alcoholic beverages: A cross-cultural survey*. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Marshall, M., Ames, G., & Bennett, L. (Eds.). (2001). Anthropological perspectives on alcohol and drugs at the turn of the new millennium [Special issue]. *Social Science & Medicine, 53*(2), 153–263. Pittman, D. J., & White, H. R. (Eds.). (1991). *Society, culture, and drinking patterns reexamined*. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Center of Alcohol Studies.

# **Child Abuse and Neglect**

#### **Jill E. Korbin**

#### **INTRODUCTION**

Child abuse and neglect violate some of our most cherished views of human relationships. Parents are expected to nurture and care for their offspring, providing the foundation for families and societies. Nevertheless, child abuse and neglect have occurred throughout history and across cultures. Child maltreatment became a concerted field of inquiry and a matter of public and professional attention in the United States in the early 1960s (Kempe, Silverman, Droegmueller, & Silver, 1962). Many nations had similar experiences of first denying the existence of child maltreatment within their boundaries, only to later "discover" its existence. This stimulated interest in the broader cross-cultural record (Hrdy, 1999; Korbin, 1981; Levinson, 1989; Scheper-Hughes, 1987; Scheper-Hughes & Sargent, 1998).

#### **DEFINITIONS**

Definitional ambiguity has been a major stumbling block in child abuse and neglect research and practice. There has been considerable difficulty in formulating valid and reliable definitions of child maltreatment. Definitions are critical because they influence case identification and thereby knowledge about child maltreatment. Identification of child maltreatment relies on a complex interaction of (1) harm to the child; (2) caretaker behaviors that produced or contributed to that harm; and (3) societal or cultural assignment of responsibility or culpability.

Child maltreatment was initially defined in the medical and social welfare literature in the United States and Europe during the 1960s and 1970s. Definitions centered on physical harm resulting from acts of omission or commission by parents and other caretakers. Two diagnostic criteria were particularly important. First, child abuse was identified when children had injuries that did not match with their caretaker's explanations of how the injuries occurred. Second, because child abuse is rarely a one-time occurrence, an important diagnostic sign was the identification of multiple injuries in various stages of healing. The early work on child abuse and neglect focused on children who had been seriously harmed, either by being physically assaulted with resulting injuries or by being neglected with tangible evidence, such as severe malnutrition.

Over the next 40 years, definitions expanded in both the national and international literatures to encompass a broad range of harms to children. The four basic categories of child maltreatment are: *physical abuse, physical neglect, emotional maltreatment*, and *child sexual abuse*. Neglect may also include *medical neglect* or *educational neglect* if a parent or caretaker does not meet the child's basic needs in these two areas. Neglect may also include *non-organic failure to* thrive, which involves sustained subnormal growth in an infant that can be attributed to parental deprivation of the infant's nutritional and emotional needs. A type of child maltreatment that was identified primarily in medical settings, *Munchausen's Syndrome by Proxy*, is a facetious illness fabricated by a parent, usually a mother with previous medical knowledge and experience. The induced symptoms may be damaging, or even fatal, to the child. *Fatal maltreatment*, in which a child dies from a repetitive pattern of abuse and/or neglect, is often a separate category in the professional literature.

International child abuse efforts have resulted in additional definitional categories. Even though these problems exist in Euro-American nations, the international literature brought them more to the forefront. First, *child labor* is a matter of some controversy in that the anthropological literature has documented the positive effects of children socialized while working alongside their families in agricultural, gathering and hunting, or other subsistence activities. When children's labor becomes exploitive, however, most often with children laboring away from their families in factories or industries making exports, international advocacy groups may include this as a category of child maltreatment. Second, *child prostitution* has been included under the definitional category of child sexual abuse. And, third, *selective neglect*, or *underinvestment*, has been identified in international demographic data through patterns of differential mortality in which some categories of children are less likely to thrive or survive due to medical, nutritional, and other forms of inattention and neglect. One example would be female children in societies with high son preference (Scrimshaw, 1983).

Establishing cross-cultural definitions of child maltreatment has been complex. Just as there is no absolute standard for optimal child-rearing that would be considered valid cross-culturally, there has been difficulty in establishing a universal definition of abusive or neglectful child-rearing. Standards for child abuse and neglect originated in European and North American societies. A long history of anthropological research on cross-cultural childrearing patterns has shown that European and American cultures are often at odds with child-care practices and patterns in a broader sample of the world's cultures. Defining child maltreatment cross-culturally involves issues of human universals, cultural relativity, and human rights.

Three definitional levels have been suggested for culturally informed definitions of child maltreatment. First, cultural practices vary and what one group considers abusive, another group may consider well within the normative range of behavior. Differences in definitions of child maltreatment that can be ascribed to differences in normative cultural beliefs and practices are not, strictly speaking, abuse since they are not proscribed, at least by the group in question. This does not preclude discussions and evaluations of the relative harm and benefit of different practices, but acknowledges that there is not currently a universally accepted standard for optimal or for deficient child-rearing. Second, idiosyncratic departure from cultural standards and norms affords an intracultural view that highlights those individuals who violate the continuum of acceptable behavior. And third, societal-level maltreatment of children is sometimes confused with culturally acceptable behaviors. Societal neglect refers to the level of harm or deprivation that a larger political body (e.g., nation) is willing to tolerate for its children (Korbin, 1981, 1997). Because child maltreatment has not always been labeled as such in other cultures, some anthropological works have examined physical punishment (Levinson, 1989) or emotional climate as accepting or rejecting (Rohner, 1986).

#### **INCIDENCE AND DEMOGRAPHICS**

In the United States, between 800,000 and one million children are identified as abused or neglected each year as a result of reports to child protection agencies. Between three and five children die from fatal maltreatment each day, and homicide by parents is a leading cause of trauma-related death for children under four years of age. Between one half and two thirds of child maltreatment cases are neglect. Children under three years of age have the highest rates of victimization. Victimization rates are similar for males and females, with the exception of child sexual abuse, in which approximately three to four times more girls than boys are involved.

There is limited data on incidence and prevalence of child maltreatment cross-culturally. While the available evidence suggests that child maltreatment occurs, or has the potential to occur, in all societies, the differential distribution is difficult to estimate. Definitional issues discussed above increase the difficulties in making valid cross-cultural or cross-national comparisons. Despite increasing international awareness, child abuse and neglect are often difficult to recognize or make sense of in the small populations often studied by anthropologists. Because child maltreatment is a low base rate behavior, it may be rare in a small population during a single year of fieldwork. Rare cases that seem at odds with more general cultural patterns, then, may not find their way into the literature. Additionally, it often is difficult to estimate the incidence or prevalence of child maltreatment in societies with high infant and child mortality rates due to disease or malnutrition.

In the United States, there is controversy about whether there are differential rates of child maltreatment

#### **Breaking the Cycle of Child Abuse and Neglect 303**

across ethnically diverse populations. Questions remain as to whether a higher proportion of reports in poor ethnic minority populations is due to stresses associated with poverty leading to maltreatment or due to increased scrutiny by public welfare agencies leading to higher reports.

A major difficulty is that categories of "race" or ethnicity are not consistently disentangled from socioeconomic status. Both official report and self-report data indicate that impoverished families are at increased risk of child maltreatment. Because ethnic minority groups are at the greatest risk of poverty, they then appear to have a disproportionate incidence and prevalence of child maltreatment. Additionally, poor and ethnic minority families are more likely to be reported for child abuse and neglect than are European American families even if the severity of the incident is equivalent. Several studies have found that socioeconomic class and ethnicity are the best predictors of whether an incident is considered maltreatment and reported. This pattern has been found in New Zealand as well as in the United States.

#### **ETIOLOGY**

The etiology of child abuse and neglect is poorly understood, even within those nations that have the longest history of research and policy attention to the problem. More sophisticated etiological models stress the importance of an ecological framework, with risk and protective factors transacting across the ecological levels of individual factors, family factors, community factors, and factors in the larger sociocultural environment. These complex theoretical models, however, have rarely been adequately subjected to empirical testing and research (Cicchetti & Lynch, 1993; National Research Council, 1993).

A cross-cultural perspective has the potential to enhance understanding of the complex interaction of risk and protective factors that contribute to or prevent the occurrence of child maltreatment. It is not currently known whether common or divergent pathways lead to child maltreatment across diverse populations. For example, does the interaction of poverty and an individual history of child maltreatment have different consequences in different community contexts? Etiological factors should have explanatory power both within and between cultures.

The cross-cultural record sheds some light on categories of children at risk for maltreatment. Even in cultures in which children are highly valued and rarely punished, some children may receive a lesser standard of care than other children. These categories of children may be identifiable through demographic analyses that suggest differential survival by factors such as gender or birth order. Identification of categories of children at risk also requires knowledge of cultural values on specific child behaviors or traits (Korbin, 1987a).

Circumstances in which children have diminished social supports or in which social networks are lacking or deficient have also been suggested as increasing the risk of maltreatment. Social networks can act either to prevent child maltreatment or to exacerbate the risk of its occurrence. Social networks, on the one hand, provide the context for assistance with child care, for redistribution of children who may be at risk for maltreatment, and for the establishment, scrutiny, and enforcement of standards of child care and treatment. These functions of social networks should diminish the likelihood of child abuse and neglect. On the other hand, some abusive or neglectful families may be embedded in closely knit, but maladaptive networks (Korbin, 1998). Abusive parents may engage with others whose child-rearing attitudes and behaviors are similar to their own. Networks in which attitudes and behaviors toward children tend toward the aggressive or neglectful may provide precisely the kind of role models that facilitate abuse. Network members may be hesitant to intervene or to report maltreatment because their own behavior is similar. They may be fearful that if they report others, they risk report themselves. In addition, network members may be isolated from community facilities and supports and therefore may not know how to access supports or services for themselves or for an abusive parent in their midst. Inequality of power between parents has also been implicated in the etiology of child abuse (Handwerker, 2001).

## **BREAKING THE CYCLE OF CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT**

The most frequently cited risk factor in the child abuse and neglect literature is a childhood history of maltreatment. Adults who were abused as children are at increased risk of abusing their own children. However, this "cycle of violence" is not inevitable, and estimates vary as to the precise risk of repeating abuse with one's own children. Retrospective studies of abusive parents yield a much higher rate of a cycle of abuse than do prospective studies of abused children. As with other risk factors, abuse in childhood alone is not sufficient to predict problematic later behavior, including becoming an abusive parent. Research has suggested that protective factors, including an important significant other in childhood, good therapeutic intervention, and/or a supportive spouse can decrease the risk of repeating the cycle of abuse.

## **CONSEQUENCES OF CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT**

Child abuse and neglect has been associated with increased risk of adverse outcomes. Not all abused and neglected children suffer immediate or lasting consequences beyond their immediate injuries. Nevertheless, abused and neglected children are at increased risk for a range of physical, mental/emotional, and social/behavioral difficulties. The pathways to these outcomes are currently unclear, but involve a combination of compromised brain development and long-term psychological and emotional sequelae associated with their abuse and neglect. Abused and neglected children are at increased risk of schoolrelated difficulties resulting from cognitive and learning difficulties or from emotional adjustment problems. Abused and neglected children are at increased risk of relationship problems stemming from low-self esteem or aggressive tendencies. Abused children are also at increased risk of juvenile delinquency. Girls who have been sexually abused are at increased risk for violence in dating relationships, teen pregnancy, spousal violence, and abuse of their own children. Abused chidren, particularly sexually abused children, may exhibit symptoms of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Abuse in childhood has also been associated with a range of risky health behaviors and suicidal behavior. Cross-culturally, children who are treated with rejection rather than with warmth and acceptance by their parents and care-givers display negative psychological outcomes (Rohner, 1986).

While child abuse and neglect confers increased risk of a variety of problems, much less is known about those factors that promote a healthy or positive development despite the occurrence of abuse. Adults who experienced abuse as children may prefer the term "survivor" over "victim," particularly those who were sexually abused. The term survivor connotes a more active process of healing than does the term victim which is thought to convey helplessness.

#### **INTERVENTION AND PREVENTION**

Different nations have taken different approaches to child maltreatment. In some countries, the emphasis has been one of enhanced social services and resources for families experiencing difficulties. In others, child maltreatment is handled primarily through the health care system, such as the "confidential doctor" in the Netherlands. In the United States, all 50 states have mandatory reporting legislation that requires professionals working with children to report all cases of suspected abuse or neglect. The categories of professionals required to report varies across states. Child abuse and neglect is reported to child protection agencies who investigate. Depending on the judgment of the child protection agency, cases may or may not proceed to legal intervention and possible removal of the child to foster care. Treatment is not necessarily provided to children or to families through child protection service agencies. When treatment is provided, a variety of modalities have been employed.

In the United States and other Western nations, prevention programs have shown some success in reducing the occurrence of child abuse and neglect. Prevention programs have focused on providing support to new and at-risk parents, particularly through home visitation.

#### **REFERENCES**

- Cicchetti, D., & Lynch, M. (1993). Toward an ecological/transactional model of community violence and child maltreatment: Consequences for children's development. *Psychiatry, 56*, 96–118.
- Handwerker, H. P. (2001). Child abuse and the balance of power in parental relationships: An evolved domain-independent mental mechanism that accounts for behavioral variation. *American Journal of Human Biology, 13*, 679–689.
- Hrdy, S. B. (1999). *Mother nature. A history of mothers, infants, and natural selection*. New York: Pantheon Books.
- Kempe, C. H., Silverman, F. N., Droegmueller, W., & Silver, H. K. (1962). The battered child syndrome. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 181*, 17–24.
- Korbin, J. (Ed.) (1981). *Child abuse and neglect: Cross-cultural perspectives*. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Korbin, J. (1987a). Child maltreatment in cross-cultural perspective: Vulnerable children and circumstances. In R. Gelles & J. Lancaster (Eds.), *Child abuse and neglect: Biosocial dimensions* (pp. 31–55). Chicago: Aldine.