## **Maoism Redux**

13 February 1996 began as a fairly normal Tuesday throughout Nepal. No one, especially among the ruling circles in the capital Kathmandu, had expected that anything out of the ordinary would happen in any part of the kingdom. But, on that day, crowds armed with little more than daggers, old hunting rifles, and home-made bombs carried out simultaneous attacks on police stations in Rolpa and Rukum districts in the impoverished western part of the country, and in Sindhuli in the east. The stations were overrun and the attackers made off with guns, ammunition, and other equipment they had seized.

In Kavre, a local moneylender was captured and the attackers burned bond papers with the names of people who had borrowed money from him at extortionate rates. A similar event occurred in Gorkha district, where a local office of the Agriculture Development Bank was captured and its borrowers were declared free from debt. And in the Kathmandu Valley, Molotov cocktails were hurled at a Pepsi-Cola factory, partially damaging the building. Throughout the country, posters appeared and leaflets were distributed, urging people to support the uprising. Nepal's Maoists had launched their 'people's war' against the monarchy and for the establishment of a communist 'people's republic'.

But the uprising should not have come as a surprise. The year before, ultra-radicals led by Pushpa Kamal Dahal, alias Comrade 'Prachanda' (the fierce one) and Baburam Bhattarai had broken away from Nepal's mainstream communist parties and fronts, denouncing them as 'renegades' and 'revisionists' because of their participation in the parliamentary process. With the extreme left divided, and, its influence seemingly waning after the announcement of the results of an election in 1994, the authorities

launched a campaign to crush what they thought were scattered remnants of the movement. In November 1995, Operation Romeo was carried out against the radicals' main stronghold in Rolpa. In what was to become his last interview before going underground, Bhattarai told the weekly Nepalese newspaper *The Independent* in December,

Under this armed police operation around 1,500 policemen including a special trained commando force sent from Kathmandu have been deployed to let loose a reign of terror against the poor peasants of that rugged mountain district [Rolpa] in western Nepal. So far about 1,000 people have been arrested, of whom about 300 are kept in police custody or sent to jails under fictitious charges while the rest have been released on bail after severe torture.1

Shortly after the interview, Bhattarai left Kathmandu to link up with his friend Prachanda. The Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) (CPN-M) was born, although the exact date of its formation is still a bit of a mystery. It could have been set up as early as late 1994, before the police operations began in the west, and whatever the name of the organization, a wellorganized, underground Maoist movement was already in place well before the attacks of February 1996. Resorting to armed struggle was also, according to Prachanda, a 'decisive attack on revisionism which had been inflicting [the] Nepalese Communist movement. In other words, this great process started burning the heap of revisionist filth. The reaffirmation of the truth of the ideology of the international proletariat in the form of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism has been proved practically from February 13th.'<sup>2</sup>

It is clear that the actions taken on that day had been meticulously planned for maximum impact and symbolism. The local police were organs of the oppressive state, banks and moneylenders exploited the poor, and, in the words of Prachanda, the attack on the Pepsi-Cola factory symbolized the 'commitment to free the people from the exploitation of [the] comprador bourgeois class which directly represents the imperialists'.<sup>3</sup> The struggle, Prachanda stated, 'started spreading throughout the country from February 14th onwards … [and] actions against the feudals, goons in different parts of the country, especially against those from the rural areas started taking place continuously. The sky of Nepal reverberated with slogans such as "Long Live Maoism!", "Long live people's war!", "Long live New Democracy."'<sup>4</sup>

It became an extremely vicious civil war, with thousands of men and women fighting and dying for a cause that most people in the rest of the world would consider a total anachronism. Maoist-inspired uprisings in the Third World were not uncommon in the 1960s and 1970s—but in the late 1990s and the beginning of the twenty-first century? Even the turgid prose used by the Nepalese Maoists seemed to belong to a different era. But ultra-leftism and Maoism did have firm roots in Nepalese politics. The country's first communist party, called simply the Communist Party of Nepal (CPN), was formed when four young Nepalese intellectuals met in Kolkata on 22 April 1949. One of them, Pushpa Lal Shrestha, or Comrade PL, as he was known, became the party's first general secretary and is considered the father of Nepalese communism.

Nepal experienced a brief period of relative democracy during the first years of the reign of King Tribhuvan, who had ascended the throne as an eight-year-old boy in 1911. The Nepalese kings were at that time in any case powerless figureheads, as the country had been run by hereditary prime ministers from the Rana family, old allies of the British, since 1846. In later years, the king, with support from independent India, began to challenge the Ranas. A popular movement to end the oligarchy also broke out in 1950, and, in early 1951, a compromise was reached during a meeting in New Delhi between King Tribhuvan, who had been living in exile in India for a year and supported the movement, the Ranas, and representatives of the main opposition party, the Nepali Congress. The king would form a new government under his leadership, consisting of the Nepali Congress and the Ranas on an equal basis. The king returned to Kathmandu on 18 February, and, on the 21st, he declared an end to the rule of the Rana autocracy. Nepal had begun its first experiment with democracy.

The CPN, which had played an important role in the overthrow of the Ranas, became a legal political party. But when the Nepali Congress party's militia, called Raksha Dal, rose in revolt in 1952, and the uprising was crushed, the CPN, which had been sympathetic to the uprising, was also banned. It was only when the ban was lifted four years later that the CPN could openly hold its congress in Kathmandu, and adopted a revolutionary party programme that advocated an end to monarchy and the establishment of a republic. The period of political openness was brief: On 15 December 1960, the new king, Mahendra, staged a coup. He suspended

the elected parliament and dismissed the government. An entirely new system called 'panchayat' was introduced, based on a hierarchical system of village, district, and national councils, with the king at the top. The CPN was banned again, this time with all other political parties.

The 1960 royal coup, the ban, and especially the Sino-Soviet conflict in the 1960s, caused the first of many splits in Nepal's communist movement. Its general secretary, Keshar Jung Rayamajhi, who was attending a meeting of communist parties in Moscow at the time, actually supported the monarch. A CPN plenum held in Darbhanga in India removed Rayamajhi from his position in March 1961. The following year, he was expelled from the CPN, but, refusing to accept the party's decision, he formed his own communist party. At the same time, while the 'mainstream' CPN remained loyal to Moscow, Comrade PL and his more radical comrades sided with China in the Sino-Soviet conflict. Thus the Communist Party of Nepal (Pushpa Lal) was born, and Comrade PL was its leader until his death in 1978.

The Naxalite-inspired rebellion in Jhapa in the early 1970s gave birth to yet another party, the Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist-Leninist) (CPN-ML). Formed in 1978, it became active in the area around Biratnagar in the southeastern plains. In the same year, another similar faction of the pro-China movement in the southeast formed the Nepal Workers' and Peasants Organisation. Yet another communist faction emerged from the turbulent 1970s. It was modelled after India's 'independent' communist party, the Communist Party of India (Marxist), and led by Manmohan Adhikari, a former CPN general secretary and erstwhile follower of Comrade PL. It named itself the Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist).

The troubled kingdom was thrown into a new crisis in the spring of 1990, when a popular uprising, called 'Jan Andolan' or people's movement, forced King Birendra, Mahendra's eldest son and successor, to agree to abolish what amounted to an absolute monarchy. More than 500 demonstrators were killed in violent clashes with the police in Kathmandu before the king eventually gave in to popular demands for an end to the old system. A multiparty system was introduced and elections were held to form a parliament in May 1991. The communist parties returned from underground. At first, even the most radical of them participated in the democratic process. Their front organization, the Samyukta Jana Morcha (United People's Front, UPF) emerged as the third largest party in the 1991

election, winning nine seats in the 205-member lower house. Led by Baburam Bhattarai, then a young intellectual, the UPF's not-so-radical slogans like 'down with corruption' and 'distribute the wealth of the country among the poor', appealed to many young disgruntled Nepalese.

The already tangled situation was further aggravated when Nepal's first democratically elected government, formed by the Nepali Congress, dissolved the parliament in July 1994. The elections in November of the same year led to the formation of a minority government headed by the Communist Party of Nepal Unified Marxist-Leninists (CPN-UML), which was formed in 1991 by uniting CPN-ML and the CPN-Marxist. The CPN-UML leader, Manmohan Adhikari, became Nepal's new prime minister, making Nepal the first country where communists came to power through elections, save for the tiny republic of San Marino in Europe.

Yet even the new left-wing government failed to improve the lot of the poor and clean up corruption. It fell after only nine months in power and gave way to a series of fragile and implausible coalitions, where the politics of gain rather than common ideologies motivated new alliances between parties. Nepal's return to democracy turned chaotic and the expectations of those who had taken part in the 1990 movement turned into despair and frustration.

Despite its name, the CPN-UML was not radical enough for many. It resembled a European social democrat party rather than a militant organization prepared to introduce any radical political or economic changes. Throughout Nepal, revolutionary sentiments were still simmering, as they had done since the 1990 *Jan Andolan*. A clear indication of the direction in which Nepal's radicals were moving came in September 1992 when Abimael Guzmán, or Chairman Gonzalo, the leader of Peru's Shining Path guerrillas, an extreme Maoist group that had been engaged in a vicious armed struggle since 1980, was arrested in the capital Lima. The London staff of the International Emergency Committee to Defend the Life of Guzmán was astounded by the volume of mail they received from Nepal in his support.<sup>5</sup>

Nepal's Maoists were already tied to their Peruvian comrades through an obscure organization called the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement (RIM), which comprised Maoist groups from the United States, India, Iran, Turkey, Latin America, and Western Europe. RIM's periodical, *A World to Win*, a smart, glossy magazine that came out twice or thrice a

year, contained information about the armed and unarmed revolutionary struggle in various parts of the world, including Nepal.

According to Stephen I. Mikesell, a research scholar writing in Kathmandu's *Himal* magazine,

Appealing geo-cultural analogies can be drawn between Peru and Nepal. Both countries straddle mountain ranges of their respective continents, in which isolated valleys and high ridges have given way to a wide variety of cultural traditions. While neither country has a history of a recent foreign military conquest and occupation, as was the case in China in the 1930s, both have large rural indigenous populations subordinated to small ruling élites with whom they are divided by racism or casteism and regionalism.6

During the heydays of the Shining Path and the emergence of the militant Maoist movement in Nepal, Peru and Nepal both experienced sharp and growing divisions between the city and the countryside. In Nepal, despite the introduction of democracy and a more open economy since 1990, wages remained virtually stagnant, and GDP growth averaged an abysmal 2.3 per cent annually. This meant that the rapid annual increase in population of 2.4 per cent ate up all the achievements that the new governments brought in. According to a report by Kathmandu-based thinktank Nepal South Asia Centre, 71 per cent of wealth, even in the capital, was in the hands of 12 per cent of the households and only 3.7 per cent of the national income reached the poorest 20 per cent of the population.<sup>7</sup>

Regional disparities were also severe. The annual per capita income in Kathmandu averaged around 21,000 Nepalese Rupees (US\$312) in the 1990s, while it was as low as 5,000 Nepalese Rupees in the poorest districts in the northwest, an area which was served by neither roads nor development activities. The International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, a foreign-funded research institute, in its 1997 report, listed the western districts as 'the worst' in terms of literacy, child labour, landless households, and per capita food production.<sup>8</sup> Shyam Shrestha of the left-wing monthly magazine *Mulyankan* described Nepal's northwest as a 'poverty-stricken area … inhabited by Magars, a very "backward" ethnic group which continues to be sustained through migrant labour to India. A region ruled historically by feudal princelings, the area even today retains a medieval relationship between rich and poor—a classic setting for Maoist activity.'<sup>9</sup>

Shrestha hinted at a very important dimension to Nepal's 'people's war' apart from general disappointment at the widespread corruption, social and political instability, bickering politicians, and abuse of power instead of expected economic progress and greater equality that had come in the wake of the 1990 uprising: Nepal's intricate caste system and diverse ethnic composition. The vast majority of Maoist fighters came from the lower castes and the so-called 'backward' ethnic groups such as the hill-dwelling Mongol Magars and the Tharus in the narrow valleys closer to the lowlands. The arrival of the Maoists and their 'proletarian ideology' gave lower castes and tribes authority and power over the higher castes such as the *bahuns* (the local term for Brahmins), and the *chhetris* (Kshatriyas), the Indo-Aryan upper strata of society, which traditionally had treated them as second class citizens or worse. In the case of many of the Maoist foot soldiers, this explains why a seemingly anachronistic movement made such headway. The country needed a social revolution, and, for many, the CPN-M appealed as the only alternative to the old, repressive order.

Even Prachanda wrote in an assessment of the first two years of the war that

Along with the development of the People's War a new consciousness for fighting for their own rights is spreading amongst many oppressed nationalities of the country such as the Magars, Gurungs, Tamangs, Newars, Tharus, Rais, Limbus and Madhesis…Similarly…a wave of organisation and struggle has been created among *Dalit* castes [low caste people] at a greater speed and wider scale. The *Dalits* are today rebelling against inhuman tyranny perpetrated upon them by the feudal state of high caste Hindus.10

But many of the leaders of the CPN-M, including Prachanda and Bhattarai, were actually bahun intellectuals. This is again a striking parallel with the Shining Path, whose leader, Guzmán, was a well-educated former professor of philosophy, while his followers were mostly poor people belonging to indigenous tribes of non-European descent. In the same vein, the dreaded, and likewise Maoist, Khmer Rouge in Cambodia was led by French-educated intellectuals whose foot soldiers, poor peasants from the countryside, were motivated by hatred of the better-off people in the cities rather than by ideology.

Prachanda was born in a village in Kaski district in 1954, the son of a farmer, but still a bahun. The would-be revolutionary received a diploma in science in agriculture from the Institute of Agriculture and Animal Science in Rampur in southern Nepal. Ironically, he was once employed by the

United States Agency for International Development (USAID), at the project site in Jajarkot, which later became a Maoist stronghold.<sup>11</sup>

Bhattarai was also born in 1954, in Gorkha district in the hills, and, like Prachanda's parents, his parents also were bahun farmers. In 1970, he ranked first in the whole of Nepal in the School Leaving Certificate Exam of that year. He received further education in India, where he earned a Bachelors degree with honours in architecture from a university in Chandigarh and later a Ph.D. degree from the prestigious Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi. His dissertation was titled *The Nature of Underdevelopment and Regional Structure of Nepal: A Marxist Analysis*. 12 While in India, he became the founding chairman of the All India Nepalese Students' Association.<sup>13</sup>

The road to armed rebellion they were going to tread on began when the powerful UPF split on the eve of the 1994 election. The main group, led by Bhattarai, decided to boycott the election while a smaller faction under Niranjan Govinda Vaidya participated but did not win a single seat—hence the assumption on the part of the authorities that the left was weak and divided, which turned out to be a monumental mistake.

After the first attacks in February 1996, the armed insurrection quickly spread to the neighbouring districts of Salyan, Jajarkot, and Kalikot, and soon to other parts of Nepal. The new slogan was much more militant than the relatively moderate rhetoric of the UPF, or even the Jhapa movement of the 1970s: 'War, war, and war! From the beginning to the end!'<sup>14</sup>

But having Peru's Shining Path as a role model did not endear the Nepalese Maoists to the Chinese. In December 1980, early risers in Lima began to find dead dogs hung from traffic lights and lampposts in the Peruvian capital. They were adorned with signs that read, 'Deng Xiaoping, Son of a Bitch!'<sup>15</sup> On 25 October 1989, car bombs exploded outside the Soviet and Chinese embassies in Lima in attacks that were attributed to the Shining Path, which believed that communist leaders in Moscow and Beijing had betrayed Marxism-Leninism. On 28 December 1992, Shining Path guerrillas detonated two more car bombs, this time outside Lima's Japanese and Chinese embassies. China was an obvious target for the Peruvian Maoists, and Peru's president at the time, Alberto Fujimori, was of Japanese descent and as such seen as a puppet of Japan's multinational corporations.

Prachanda, summarizing the experiences of the CPN-M's 'people's war' in 1997, stated that the first year of the armed struggle had established a firm relationship 'between the revolutionaries of South Asia, including India … [the] Maoist people's war is getting support from tens of millions of people in India, who are waging national liberation struggles in various states … similarly the communist revolutionaries of Bangladesh and Sri Lanka are giving support to the Nepalese people's war.'<sup>16</sup>

Conspicuously absent among all those allegedly supporting the CPN-M's 'people's war' was China. The party sparingly accused the new Chinese leadership under Deng Xiaoping of being revisionist, but Prachanda stated in one of his writings,

For the masses there is no alternative to rebellion and revolution, given the objective background of exploitation, repression and poverty prevalent in the semi-feudal and semi-colonial countries of the Third World. In Nepal, our first effort was to correctly grasp the science of Marxism-Leninism-Maoism. For this, we strove to link ourselves with the arduous and challenging ideological struggle waged by the genuine communist revolutionaries of the world against the Chinese counter-revolution after the death of Comrade Mao Zedong. Taking the synthesis of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, the highest expression of conscious class struggle, as our starting point, we delved into serious study. 17

Li Onesto, an American supporter and writer for the Chicago-based *Revolutionary Worker* weekly, echoed the same views in her book about the war in Nepal. 'The Maoists in Nepal denounce the current Chinese regime for overthrowing and dismantling socialism after Mao's death. The Chinese government has made clear that it supports the efforts to crush the insurgency, but China would be extremely concerned if India invaded Nepal to prevent the Maoists from seizing power.'<sup>18</sup>

It was far-fetched to suggest that India would 'invade' Nepal. India had other means of influencing Nepalese politics, for instance, through its close relationship with the Nepali Congress and other aboveground politicians. The Chinese, on their part, accused the CPN-M of distorting Mao's ideology and 'besmirching the name of Mao by calling their indiscriminate killing of civilians a People's War … on February 3, 2005 Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Kong Quan expressed his indignation at foreign media who call Nepal's anti-government rebels "Maoists."'<sup>19</sup>

China's relationship with Nepal has always been motivated by geopolitical considerations rather than ideology, by the desire to build a strategic corridor in the Himalayas in order to counter India's influence in

the border regions. China and Nepal established diplomatic relations in 1955 and the first direct talks between representatives of the Chinese and Nepalese governments were held in Kathmandu in August and September 1956. Immediately after those talks, Tanka Prasad Acharya became the first Nepalese prime minister in the post-Rana era to visit China, where he held talks with his Chinese counterpart Zhou Enlai. China agreed to provide 60 million Indian Rupees (which was more readily accepted in Nepal than the non-convertible Chinese renminbi) to help implement Nepal's first fiveyear plan.<sup>20</sup> In the same year, Nepal recognized China's sovereignty over Tibet and, in January 1957, Zhou Enlai visited Nepal. Relations between the two countries were cordial, a fact that did not really bother New Delhi at the time, since Sino-Indian relations had not yet turned sour.

China's policy towards Nepal saw a shift when a border dispute in 1959 led to the movement of Chinese troops towards the Nepalese border. Chinese maps showed Nepalese territory as part of China, and the Chinese made claims to Mt Everest, which they call Chomolungma.<sup>21</sup> The Tibetan uprising in that year also saw an influx of refugees to Nepal. Over 20,000 Tibetans fled to Nepal, where most of them remained, even as a significant number continued to India, where they were more welcome and freer to carry out their political activities.

The border issue was resolved when Nepal's Prime Minister Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala visited Beijing in March 1960 and signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Chinese, which included a provision to locate and demarcate the common border. Then, in September–October 1961, after the royal coup and the introduction of the panchayat system, King Mahendra and his queen paid an official state visit to China, where they met President Liu Shaoqi and Premier Zhou Enlai. A Sino-Nepalese boundary treaty was signed on 5 October, under which 'the formal delimitation of the entire boundary between the two countries would be made on the basis of the traditional customary boundary line in accordance with the principles of equality, mutual benefit and mutual accommodation'.<sup>22</sup>

On the last day of the king's visit, 15 October, an agreement was signed to construct a highway from Tibet to Kathmandu. The two governments would be responsible for the construction of the sections of the highway within their respective territories, but China pledged to provide Nepal with a generous grant to build the highway on the Nepalese side of the border.

For several years, road construction crews blasted their way through the mountains. It was decided to name the highway after Araniko, a thirteenth century Nepalese who, according to legend, introduced Nepalese-style architecture to Tibet and China.

The road was officially opened in 1967, and although old yak tracks and caravan trails had followed approximately the same route for centuries, this was the first time a proper highway crossed the Himalayas. The newly built Chinese highway system in Tibet now extended not only down to the Indian border but also over the crest of the mountains. A bridge called the Sino-Nepal Friendship Bridge spanned the Sun Kosi border river, linking Kodari in Nepal's Sindhupalchok district with Zangmu in Tibet.

Before the road was built, in 1962, Nepal had withdrawn its ambassador from Tibet and substituted a consul general to please the Chinese and, on 22 January 1963, the border between the two countries was finally demarcated. During the 1962 War, Nepal had declared itself neutral although it had warned that it would not submit to aggression from any state. The message was directed to China, but Nepal continued to support China's application for membership in the United Nations and maintained contacts with Beijing.<sup>23</sup> In the wake of the 1962 War, India and Nepal concluded an Arms Assistance Agreement in which the Indians pledged to 'supply arms, ammunition and equipment for the entire Nepalese army [and to] replace existing Nepalese stock by modern weapons as soon as available and also to provide maintenance of and replacement for the equipment to be supplied by them.'<sup>24</sup>

By this time, however, Nepal had begun to play the China card to lessen its traditional dependence on India, which many Nepalese were acutely uncomfortable with, while China evidently saw Nepal as a weak link in India's northern defence that could be exploited to extend its influence over the Himalayas. Thus, as the highway to Tibet opened a new route for trade, India, to show its displeasure with the developments, responded by imposing a blockade on Nepal in 1970. It did not last long, but as a result economic growth in Nepal was limited to 1.7 per cent in the fiscal year 1970–1 from the previous year's 9.8 per cent.<sup>25</sup> After the blockade, much to the annoyance of India, relations between Nepal and China grew even closer.

Nepal was not Sikkim, which had no possibility of becoming more independent of India in how it conducted its foreign policy. Nor was it Bhutan, which played its cards more skilfully, managing to build its own identity without antagonizing its powerful southern neighbour. Nepal was beginning to become a pawn in the regional power struggle between India and China.

Not even the presence of Tibetan guerrillas, supported by the CIA, in Mustang seemed to have an adverse effect on the newly established friendly relations between the communist rulers in Beijing and the royal court in Kathmandu. King Birendra visited China in December 1973, and it was the cosy relationship that Nepal established with China in the 1960s and early 1970s that led its army to force out the Tibetan resistance from their Mustang sanctuaries in 1974. In the same year, Nepal fiercely criticized the Indian parliament's decision to make Sikkim an associate state, calling India 'an expansionist nation'.<sup>26</sup> The Chinese awarded Nepal with more road construction projects and, in April 1976, a trade agreement was made between Nepal and 'China's Tibet Autonomous Region'.<sup>27</sup>

China continued to have close relations with whoever was in power in Kathmandu, even during the upheavals of 1990 and the chaos that ensued after the abolishment of absolute monarchy. The situation in Nepal went from bad to worse when, on 1 June 2001, Crown Prince Dipendra stormed into the Narayanhiti palace in Kathmandu and opened fire on a monthly reunion dinner of the royal family. Nine members of the family were killed in the shooting, including Dipendra's parents, King Birendra and Queen Aishwarya, his brother Nirajan, his sister Shruti, and five other relatives. Dipendra then turned the gun on himself, survived and was king for a few days before he, comatose and in hospital, succumbed to his injuries on 4 June. Mahendra's son and Birendra's younger brother Gyanendra was proclaimed king.

Various conspiracy theories flourished in Kathmandu after the royal massacre, including fanciful accounts of Indian and even CIA involvement, but there is nothing to indicate that Dipendra was driven by anything but personal grudges against his family. <sup>28</sup> He was also heavily drunk and high on hashish when he grabbed a gun and killed those relatives. Dipendra had wanted to marry Devyani Rana, from the Rana family, who was also related to the Gwalior royal family in India, but his mother, Queen Aishwarya, disapproved of their relationship. Devyani Rana fled to India

after the massacre to escape media attention, and now works for the United Nations Development Programme.

Meanwhile, a string of bank robberies and the extensive enforcement of 'revolutionary tax' from people in the areas under its control as well as in all major towns and even overseas had made the CPN-M one of the wealthiest rebel movements in Asia. According to the Nepalese-language daily *Rajdhani* published from Kathmandu, not even the poorest of farmers were spared from paying taxes. 'The families are forced to pay based on the value of their homes—tiled and tin roofs are taxed more than thatched ones. The rebels have also ordered NGOs and community-based organizations not to start any projects without their written permission.'<sup>29</sup>

Considerable amounts also came from 'collections' from Nepalese abroad, particularly the several million Nepalese workers in India. The main organization among them, Akhil Bharatiya Nepali Ekta Samaj (the All-India Nepalese Unity Society), was banned in July 2002 for links to the CPN-M. Indian authorities arrested its secretary, Bamdev Chhetri, then thought to be the most important contact for Nepalese Maoists in India, on 7 September and extradited him to Nepal.

Poverty, along with social and political unrest at home, had forced tens of thousands of Nepalese to emigrate. Reports emerged of a small but very active Maoist cell among the approximately 20,000-strong Nepalese community in Hong Kong and of forced 'revolutionary tax' collection there. In a more novel way, the CPN-M issued and sold trekking permits to foreign tourists in Nepal, along with a statement explaining their struggle for a communist republic. In 2002, it was estimated that the CPN-M had netted altogether between five and ten billion Nepalese Rupees (US\$ 64– 128 million).<sup>30</sup>

But no foreign power ever supported the CPN-M with funds or weapons. Its arms came exclusively from raids on army depots and outposts and, to some extent, from clandestine gun factories in India's Bihar state. And by the early 2000s, Maoist-related violence had spread to all of Nepal's 75 districts. In the western districts, including Rukum, Rolpa, Salyan, and Jajarkot, the Maoist heartland in the hills, the government controlled little more than the district headquarters and strings of checkpoints on the roads leading down to the lowlands in the south. Even in Kalikot, Dailekh, Surkhet, Dang, and Pyuthan, adjacent to the Maoists'

main strongholds, the government's presence was negligible outside major towns.

A Maoist takeover of Nepal did not seem an entirely unrealistic scenario, but, much to the relief of especially the Chinese, the CPN-M's 'people's war' came to an abrupt end when a peace accord was signed on 21 November 2006.<sup>31</sup> The 10-year insurgency had seen 15,000 people killed, more than 100,000 internally displaced, and the country's infrastructure reduced to shambles. The accord came after three years of talks and strenuous efforts at mediation by internal peacemakers. The combatants of the CPN-M's 'people's army' were to be confined to seven cantonments supervised by the United Nations. Their guns would also be stored at those cantonments. The combatants would then be 'rehabilitated', while their leaders were to be given adequate protection.

In return, the agreement stated,

No state powers shall remain with the king. The properties owned by the late King Birendra, the late Queen Aishwarya and their family members shall be brought under the control of the Government of Nepal and used in the interest of the nation through a trust. All properties (such as palaces at various places, forests and National Parks, heritages of historical and archaeological significance etc.) acquired by King Gyanendra in his monarchical capacity shall be nationalised.32

## The agreement also stipulated that policies should be formulated to implement a land reform and

In order to end discriminations based on class, ethnicity, language, gender, culture, religion and region and to address the problems of women, Dalit, indigenous people, ethnic minorities (Janajatis), Terai communities (Madhesis), oppressed, neglected and minority communities and the backward areas by deconstructing the current centralised and unitary structure, the state shall be restructured in an inclusive, democratic and forward looking manner. 33

The agreement fell well short of establishing the communist 'people's republic' that the CPN-M had been fighting for, but the party could now operate openly and take part in general elections. There was peace at last in Nepal and elections were held on 10 April 2008. The CPN-M emerged as the largest party in the constituent assembly with 220 out of 575 contested seats. King Gyanendra was forced to abdicate on 28 May, marking the end of the Shah Dynasty, which had ruled the country since 1768. The Assembly decided that Nepal was going to become a federal republic and on 23 July, it elected the country's first president, Ram Baran Yadav, a politician and physician who belonged to the Nepali Congress. At the same

time as the monarchy was abolished, the last ruler of Mustang, Jigme Dorje Palbar Bista, also lost his royal titles, which he had held for half a century. As a young man, he had supported the CIA-funded guerrilla campaign to oust the Chinese from Tibet.

Prachanda, the revolutionary firebrand, was sworn in as Nepal's prime minister on 4 August 2008. His cabinet consisted of ministers from his own party as well as the CPN-UML, and the Madhesi Janadhikar Forum, a party representing the natives of the southern plains. Baburam Bhattarai became deputy prime minister and minister of Finance, while another deputy prime minister post was given to Bamdev Gautam from the CPN-UML. Somewhat alarmingly for the Nepalese military, Ram Bahadur Thapa Magar, a Maoist, was made minister of Defence. The former revolutionary assured the international community, especially India and China, that his party and government wanted to have good relations with everybody. He also pledged his commitment to elections and multi-party democracy. It seemed a complete turnaround from his earlier days and, not without reason, many of his comrades began to wonder if he also had joined those he himself had once termed 'revisionist filth'.

China began to re-evaluate its views of the CPN-M after the Maoists formed a new government. On 23 August 2008, Prachanda arrived in Beijing at the invitation of the Chinese government to attend the closing ceremony of the Beijing Olympics the following day. The minister for Information and Communications, CPN-M member Krishna Bahadur Mahara, and other government officials accompanied him to Beijing, where they remained for almost a week.

The leader of the Nepalese Maoists must have been impressed with China's economic progress. When he met Chinese Premier Wen Jinbao, he stated that

the friendship between China and Nepal [has] endured the test of time. Historical changes are taking place in Nepal's domestic situation. The Nepali government and people [are] striving for national stability and development, and [hope] to get support and cooperation from China. Nepal would, as always, support China's efforts to maintain national sovereignty and territorial integrity. 34

During a visit to New York in September 2008, Prachanda outlined his vision for Nepal's future in terms that were fundamentally different from his revolutionary rhetoric of the late 1990s: 'We are making a big experiment—not only for Nepal, not only for South Asia, but for the people

of the world. We communists are more flexible and dynamic. We try to develop our ideology according to new conditions. We understand the dynamic of change.'<sup>35</sup>

Dengism rather than Maoism became Prachanda's new ideology when he entered mainstream politics. He began to emphasize the importance of economic growth through capitalism instead of heaping praise on Chairman Mao's revolutionary vision and glorifying the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s. 'We are not fighting for socialism,' he said in an interview while he was in Kathmandu negotiating the 2006 peace accord with the government. 'We are just fighting against feudalism. We are fighting for a capitalist mode of production. We are trying to give more profit to the capitalists and industrialists.'<sup>36</sup>

China could not have been more pleased. Senior Chinese leader Jia Qinglin assured Prachanda that his 2008 visit would have a 'positive and far-reaching impact on relations between the two countries as well as relations between the two parties'.<sup>37</sup> Having condemned the Nepalese Maoists as 'fakes', China now wanted to develop party-to-party ties with the CPN-M. China's willingness to accept Nepal's Maoists, who once had had Peru's anti-Deng Shining Path as their role model, should not have come as a surprise. In the post-Mao era, China's foreign policy has been guided by geostrategic considerations rather than ideology, and a close relationship with Nepal is undoubtedly in China's interest. Therefore, it would also have been surprising if China had not had some contacts with the Nepalese Maoists even during the years of civil war. Pragmatism, not dogmatism, was Deng's guiding principle, and, in that regard, his successors have followed in his footsteps.

But given the fractured nature of Nepalese politics, it was hardly surprising that Prachanda's government did not last long. In May 2009, after less than a year in office, he resigned after his move to sack Rookmangud Katawai, chief of the Nepalese army, was opposed by President Yadav. Prachanda was succeeded by CPN-UML's Madhav Kumar Nepal, who had been deputy prime minister in Nepal's first, 1994–5 communist government.

By then, the CPN-M had merged with another Maoist faction, the Communist Party of Nepal (Unity Centre) and become the Unified CPN-Maoist (UCPN-M). Eager to maintain good relations with their Nepalese

comrades, the communist party leaders in Beijing invited Prachanda and other Maoist leaders to visit China in October 2009. Prachanda himself said before he and his delegation took off for Beijing, 'This will be one of the highest level meetings that has ever taken place between the two communist parties of Nepal and China. This visit will not only enhance ties between the two parties but will also contribute to strengthen Nepal's and China's age-old relationship.'<sup>38</sup>

Nepal's ambassador to China from 1998 to 2002, Rajeshwar Acharya said in an interview after the visit,

It is indeed already assuming palpable significance. After the monarchy, the Chinese appear to be looking for a dependable ally in Nepal, and the Maoists seem to be willing to take on this role. Chinese policy needs to be analysed also in the context of Beijing's transparent desire to expand its contacts and linkages across the South Asian region.39

A Maoist became Nepal's PM again in August 2011, when Baburam Bhattarai took over the post. If there was any doubt that the Nepalese Maoists had abandoned their revolutionary ideals, his new economic policies settled it. Playing on anti-Indian sentiment in Nepal, Bhattarai wrote in a booklet published in 1998 that Nepal was 'India-locked' and went on to state that 'the biggest direct manifestation of world imperialist oppression and exploitation in Nepal is Indian expansionist exploitation and oppression'.<sup>40</sup> The way forward, he stated, 'would be to confiscate the means of production that have been in the hands of the reactionary classes … and then hand them over to the progressive forces'.<sup>41</sup>

No such thing happened during his premiership. Now Bhattarai wanted to strengthen the economy and improve the living standards of the people and, like Prachanda, he emphasized the importance of having good relations with both neighbours, China and India. Prachanda's first foreign visit as prime minister was to India in September 2008, and Bhattarai said on his visit to New Delhi as Nepal's PM in December 2011,

We sincerely appreciate the Government and people of India for the continued cooperation in our development endeavors as a major development partner of Nepal…. we, in Nepal, have been keenly observing India's sustained and spectacular economic development in the midst of global economic stagnation. You have demonstrated by example that the leadership and determination backed with conducive policy environment stimulates economic development and prosperity which others too can emulate.42

In the same speech, Bhattarai mentioned the importance of having good relations with China as well:

On the other side of our border, the People's Republic of China has equally made great strides in economic development. We are conscious of increased economic and trade interactions taking place between our closest two neighbours, India and China. We believe the dividends of prosperity across our borders should benefit our own people and business as well. From this perspective, we see great economic value and opportunities in developing Nepal as a vibrant bridge between our two neighbours on the way to shared prosperity. 43

The new direction of Nepal's Maoist leaders did not, however, please everyone. In November 2012, Prachanda was slapped in the face and had his glasses smashed by one of his former guerrilla soldiers at a reception in Kathmandu. The attacker, 25-year-old Padam Kunwar, was whisked away by the police and was later seen drenched in blood after Prachanda's men had beaten him severely. After the incident, Kunwar said he had slapped Prachanda to show his hatred towards the leaders who had betrayed the ordinary guerrillas who had fought in the mountains for an entirely different cause than the new, liberal policies of the Maoist party. The leaders should be 'beware of public anger', he said.<sup>44</sup>

According to some reports, Prachanda had ended up outside the mountains and the jungle with a red-brick mansion complete with a swimming pool and a badminton court. 'Comrade Prachanda has a war chest of more than a billion rupees and has achieved his own proletarian dream. It is just too bad for the rest of his supporters,' Pashupati Shumsher Rana, a former minister and the head of the Rana family, said in an interview. 45

One of the key sticking points in the 2006 peace agreement was the rehabilitation of the approximately 19,000 men and women who had made up the CPN-M's 'people's army'—a task that had been neglected, perhaps because most of them, unlike some of their leaders, were low-caste people from the hills. The initial idea was to integrate them into the regular army, but Nepal's military commanders and the Nepali Congress were against it. As most of them were left to fend for themselves, it is hardly surprising that they felt abandoned and betrayed by their leaders. Prachanda became prime minister for the second time in August 2016, heading the 21st government since the 1990 uprising and the end of absolute monarchy.

Nepal's chronic political instability has put the country's two powerful neighbours, India and China, on a direct collision course with each other.

Neither India nor China wants an unstable Nepal, but their respective strategic interests could not be more different. India's relationship with Nepal is, of course, much older and more profound than China's and, as in Sikkim and Bhutan, it began with the British East India Company.

Before Prithvi Narayan Shah, the ruler of Gorkha, unified the country in 1768, Nepal was divided into many smaller monarchies. He subdued them, and also managed to avoid the East India Company, which had sent an expeditionary force of 2,400 men into the hills to aid the traditional rulers in the Kathmandu valley. Many of the British soldiers succumbed to malaria before they even reached the valley and had to withdraw. Taking advantage of a religious festival, Prithvi Narayan Shah marched unopposed into Kathmandu, crowned himself king of the entire country, and established the Shah Dynasty, which, at least on paper, was to rule Nepal until 2008.

As the kings of Nepal expanded their territories—they occupied Sikkim in 1788 and sent military expeditions into Tibet in the 1790s—they were forced to confront their more powerful neighbours. The Tibetans appealed for help from the Chinese emperor Qianlong, who sent his army into Tibet in 1792. The Nepalese then turned to the East India Company for assistance, but the British did not want to challenge China, a country with huge trading opportunities. The Chinese drove the Nepalese out of Tibet and came within striking distance of Kathmandu. The Nepalese were forced to sign a humiliating treaty that deprived them of all their trading privileges in Tibet.

Nepal came into conflict with the British again when Kathmandu began to conquer territories south of the mountains. After Nepalese forces attacked a police station in Butawal in the southern plains and killed 18 officers in April 1814, war broke out. It ended two years later with the Treaty of Sagauli46: Nepal lost Sikkim and several southern areas that it had conquered; the king in Kathmandu was also forced to accept a British resident in his capital, which made the Nepalese fear for their independence. The British, however, found some of the areas in the south too difficult to govern and therefore turned them over to Nepal, which ended up confined within approximately the same boundaries as it has today.

Even so, the country was far from stable. Frictions within the royal family in the 1840s led to a massacre at Kot, where the military

commander Jung Bahadur Rana killed about 40 men from the palace court —and subsequently introduced the hereditary premiership of the Rana family. The kings became mere figureheads.

In the following decade, China was weakened by a number of internal conflicts, the most serious of which was the Taiping rebellion in 1851–64. Kathmandu's already strained relations with Lhasa led to armed conflict with the Tibetans, and indirectly with the Chinese. In 1856, an agreement was negotiated with the Chinese resident in Lhasa under which Nepalese merchants were granted duty-free trade privileges in Tibet, while the Tibetans were forced to pay an annual tribute of 10,000 Nepalese Rupees to Kathmandu. A Nepalese resident was also allowed to stay in Lhasa. Nepal gave up its territorial claims in the north and agreed that it, as well as Tibet, would remain a tributary state subject to the emperor in Beijing, an agreement that did not please the Tibetans but which they grudgingly had to accept. But as China disintegrated further, Nepal, as well as Tibet, were able to shake off this subordination. And it was Britain rather than China that came to exert the most outside influence in Nepal and, to a lesser extent, on Tibet.<sup>47</sup>

As relations with the British improved—Nepalese troops had supported the British during the 1857–8 uprising, which the colonial power preferred to call 'the Sepoy rebellion'—the British came to accept the rule of the Ranas and the Nepalese were rewarded for their loyalty by being returned some territories in the southern plains. Nepal had built up a formidable military force centred on the Gorkha army of the first kings of the Shah Dynasty. Military techniques and technology were copied from British models, including an armaments industry. The British also discovered the fighting prowess of the Nepalese army and, after the British crown took over India from the East India Company after the rebellion, Nepal became an important source of recruits for the British military.

Although British influence remained strong, Nepal was able to preserve its national independence in a way Sikkim, and even Bhutan, could not. The country was bigger and more populous, and the Ranas were able to use their total control over domestic affairs to isolate Nepal from events in British India and the rest of the world. Political parties did appear in the country in the 1930s, but there were some based in exile in India where they could operate more freely. In Bihar, the exiles published a journal called *Janata* (the People), which advocated the overthrow of the Ranas in

favour of a multi-caste, democratic government. But the Ranas' police managed to infiltrate the movement. Five hundred people were arrested in Kathmandu, accused of collaborating with the exiles. Four of the leaders were executed while the rest received long prison sentences.

Many of the exiles in India worked closely with the Indian National Congress, and, at a meeting in Kolkata in January 1947, the Nepali National Congress, dedicated to toppling the Rana dictatorship, was formed. Of the Nepali Congress leaders, Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala was the most prominent, and he met Jawharlal Nehru as well as Mahatma Gandhi. India's independence in 1947 provided a boost for the Nepalese opposition, for India had no interest in preserving the old order. The days of the Ranas were numbered and ended with the king's return to prominence and the introduction of democratic rule in the wake of the 1950–1 uprising.

On 31 July 1950, when the Ranas were still nominally in power, though their grip over the nation was considerably weakened, India and Nepal signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship. The governments agreed

mutually to acknowledge and respect the complete sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of each other … [and that] each Government undertakes, in token of the neighbourly friendship between India and Nepal, to give to the nationals of the other, in its territory, national treatment with regard to participation in industrial and economic development of such territory and to the grant of concessions and contracts relating to such development.48

The agreement also stipulated that India and Nepal should award equal rights to citizens of the other country to reside in theirs. It went on to state that 'the Government of Nepal shall be free to import, from or through the territory of India, arms, ammunition or warlike material and equipment necessary for the security of Nepal. The procedure for giving effect to this arrangement shall be worked out by the two Governments acting in consultation.'<sup>49</sup>

India's influence increased during the 1950s. In 1952, an Indian military mission was established in Nepal and a memorandum signed two years later provided for the joint co-ordination of foreign policy, and outposts manned by Indian security personnel were established near the border with Tibet. Another agreement, which was concluded in 1952, amplified the privileges agreed upon in the 1950 agreement and gave Indian citizens the right to immigrate to Nepal and become Nepalese citizens and gave the

same right to Nepalese citizens as well. This agreement, though, caused resentment in Nepal where many did not want to see large-scale Indian immigration, while many Indians, too, were opposed to Nepalese coming to work in their country. Dissatisfaction with India's influence led to Nepal looking north for closer relations with China. New Delhi, however, continued to give a high level of economic assistance to Nepal at the same time as India provided a safe haven for the Nepali Congress, now operating almost exclusively in exile.

However, relations between Nepal and India were never going to be the same after the construction of the highway to Tibet and the 1970 blockade. New treaties for trade and transit rights were signed in 1978, but relations became even more strained when, in 1988, the Nepalese government signed an agreement with China to purchase weapons, including antiaircraft guns. A second road to Tibet was also going to be built west of the Araniko Highway.

According to US researcher Andrea M. Savada,

In retaliation for these developments, India put Nepal under a virtual trade siege. In March 1989, upon the expiration of the 1978 treaties on trade and transit rights, India insisted on negotiating a single unified treaty in addition to an agreement on unauthorised trade, which Nepal saw as a flagrant attempt to strangle its economy. On March 23, 1989, India declared that both treaties had expired and closed all but two border entry points.50

Also in 1989, Nepal decided to decouple its rupee from the Indian Rupee, which until then had circulated freely in Nepal. India retaliated by denying the Nepalese port facilities in Kolkata to Nepal, thus preventing the delivery of oil from Singapore and other countries.

Relations improved after the 1990 Jan Andolan, which saw the return to power of the Nepali Congress. A joint Indian-Nepalese communiqué was issued in June 1990 announcing the restoration of the status quo and the reopening of all border crossings. The Nepalese leadership also said that 'lower cost' was the reason they had bought weapons from China, and China was advised to withhold its last shipment to Nepal.<sup>51</sup>

Then came the Maoist insurgency, to which both India and China found it difficult to relate. For China, the problem was embarrassment over the Nepalese revolutionaries' use of the Chairman's ideology as their guiding principle. The Indians, troubled by their own Maoist insurgency which had taken roots in tribal areas in central India, did not want to see a linkup

between the revolutionaries of the two countries. The CPN-M already had close ties with the Communist Party of India-Marxist-Leninist (People's War Group), which merged with the Maoist Communist Centre of India to become the Communist Party of India (Maoist) in September 2004. Apart from acquiring weapons from factories in Bihar, the CPN-M also trained some of its troops in Maoist camps in India. An alliance called the Coordinating Committee of Maoist Parties and Organisations of South Asia had also been formed in July 2001, comprising Indian, Nepalese, Sri Lankan, and Bangladeshi Maoist parties with the Communist Party of Bhutan (Marxist-Leninist-Maoist) holding what was called 'observer status'.<sup>52</sup>

Post-2008 developments and the mellowing of the CPN-M have allayed those fears, but have also led to a more intense tug-of-war between India and China for power and influence in Nepal. India suffered a severe setback after Nepal was struck by a third blockade in 2015, for which India was blamed. After years of wrangling and political bickering, Nepal's constituent assembly approved a new constitution on 20 September 2015, turning the country into a federal state made up of seven unnamed states. This led to violent protests by Madhesis and Tharus, historically marginalized groups in the southern plains adjacent to India.

The International Crisis Group (ICG) summarized the problem in this manner:

There is disagreement over boundaries of the new states, electoral representation … and citizenshiprelated issues. Supporters of the new constitution … say an excessive focus on identity-based grievances threatens Nepal's unity, integrity and even sovereignty. The objections of those who demonstrated against it have their roots in long-running social disagreements on what it means to be Nepali and whether a homogenous conception of Nepaliness has led to structural discrimination against groups that do not conform to the behaviour and values of hill-origin, Nepali-speaking, upper caste Hindu communities.53

The 135-day blockade by Madhesi civil and political groups, which won sympathy from large segments of society in India, came five months after a devastating earthquake hit Nepal, killing nearly 9,000 people and injuring 22,000. Hundreds of thousands of people became homeless, entire villages were wiped out, and ancient temples in central Kathmandu were damaged. Both China and India, along with many other countries, provided assistance to the victims, but coupled with the blockade, 2015 was the worst year in

Nepal's modern history. As a result of the blockade, there was a shortage of daily commodities, including fuel, in an already ravaged country.

After many Nepalese had blamed the blockade on India, which had criticized the lack of inclusiveness in the new constitution, some politicians in Kathmandu now began to accuse India of fomenting the movement among the Madhesis. According to the ICG:

India's domestic policies were also a factor. When the blockade began, there was a common belief that the ruling BJP [Bharatiya Janata Party] was trying to win votes in Bihar state elections by appearing to project the interests of the Biharis' kin across the border. This fuelled the perception that Madhesi and Indian demands—and Madhesis and Biharis in India—were interchangeable.54

India denied the allegations, but that was to no avail. When the blockade ended on 8 February 2016, anti-Indian sentiment was running high in Nepal.

The Chinese, meanwhile, were pursuing a more subtle, behind-thescenes policy—and one of their main concerns was the presence in Nepal of 20,000 Tibetan refugees, some whom had fled in 1959. According to an article for *Jane's Intelligence Review* written by Stephan Blancke, a German political scientist specializing in intelligence and organized crime: 'Internally, Tibet remains a key operational theatre. In Nepal, where the Ministry of State Security has established various non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and language institutes, delegations of Chinese intelligence operatives regularly meet in order to co-ordinate operations against the Tibetan community.'<sup>55</sup> *Jane's Intelligence Review* went on to quote a 23 May 2013 press statement released by the Central Tibetan Administration's Department of Security which 'claimed that Li Yuquan, in his capacity as head of the Public Security Bureau of Nangchu Prefecture in the Tibet Autonomous Region, recruited a Tibetan for the purpose of spying on Tibetan NGOs, and later in order to carry out the attempted murder of two dissidents'.<sup>56</sup>

On an official level, China has provided assistance to Nepal for establishing the National Armed Police Force Academy and built a wellequipped China Information Centre in Tatopani in Sindhupalchok to keep track of anti-Chinese activities along the Araniko Highway. The Chinese have also provided Nepalese police with a sophisticated Digital Radio Trunking System to enhance their communication capabilities. Since 2002, China has sent military officers to participate in 'adventure training' in

Nepal and, from 2008, the Nepalese army has sent officers and soldiers for training at educational institutions in China.<sup>57</sup> As early as 1999, a China Studies Centre was set up in Kathmandu, with assistance from the Chinese embassy, to promote Chinese language and culture, a place where Nepalese can learn Chinese free of charge. The Nepal-China Media Forum is another organization involved in fostering closer relations with the Nepalese.

The Chinese-supported NGOs mentioned by *Jane's Intelligence Review* appear to include an outfit founded by CPN-UML leader Madhav Kumar Nepal and called the International Association of Shakya Buddha Faithful. Another NGO called ATOM, led by Normal Mahara, the son of CPN-Maoist Centre leader Krishna Bahadur Mahara, is also thought to be receiving Chinese assistance, as are the Nepal-China Mutual Cooperation Society (NCMCS), the Nepal-China Friendship Society, and an NGO headed by the wife of CPN-ML Chairman Chandra Prakash Mainali. The NCMCS, in turn, has provided assistance to the Himani Trust, which takes part in various social welfare activities.<sup>58</sup> China has even encroached upon what has traditionally been India's turf by providing assistance to the G.P. Koirala Foundation's earthquake relief programme.

When it comes to Nepalese politics, the Chinese have been actively trying bring about unity among Nepal's many communist parties. While the CPN-M, now the CPN-UML, may be their main choice, a high-ranking official from the International Department of the Communist Party of China met CPN-UML leader Khadka Prasad Oli before he became prime minister in October 2015, promising him a substantial economic package to consolidate his position. In September, just before Oli took over the premiership, another CPN-UML leader, Ishwor Pokhrel, visited China to seek support for the government they were going to form. In May 2016, the Chinese ambassador to Nepal, Wu Chuntai, presided over a meeting in Kathmandu of Oli, Prachanda, and Narayan Kazi Shrestha from the CPN-Unity Centre. There was yet another cabinet crisis and Wu was reported to have told Prachanda that it would be inappropriate for the Oli government to fall immediately after he had paid a visit to China. A leftist government should be in office when Chinese President Xi Jinping was scheduled to visit Nepal in October.

Oli survived as prime minister until 4 August 2015. Xi's trip was not cancelled, as some Indian newspapers predicted at the time, but postponed because of the political crisis in Nepal. In October Xi attended a BRICS-

BIMSTEC (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa and the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation) meeting in Goa, India, where he shook hands with Oli's successor Prachanda and pledged that he would visit Nepal 'at an earliest convenient date'.<sup>59</sup>

Even the Madhesis, who were thought to be close to India, turned to the Chinese for help. On 18 March 2016, a delegation from the Samyukta Loktantrik Medhesi Morcha went to the Chinese embassy in Kathmandu to hand over a memorandum expressing their opposition to the new constitution and seeking Chinese support to help put pressure on the then Oli government to address their grievances. A Madhesi-dominated political party, the Federal Socialist Forum, Nepal, and a faction of the Madhesi Jana Adhikar Forum, have also received support from the Chinese embassy for their activities, underscoring the fact that the Chinese always hedge their bets and never put all their eggs in one basket.

Politics in Nepal remains as messy as ever and became messier still when Bhattarai split with Prachanda and launched a new political party called Naya Shakti (New Force) in July 2016. It had been known for some time that differences existed between the two Maoist leaders, with the more intellectual Bhattarai feeling uncomfortable with Prachanda's consolidation of power in his own hands. But the actual policies of Bhattarai's new party are not quite clear other than that it intends to have a directly elected presidential system to solve the problem of constant crises and political chaos. Bhattarai also opposes the new constitution and has expressed support for the Madhesis, a position welcomed by India.

Even if India remains Nepal's main foreign trade partner and continues to give substantial foreign aid to the country, there is no doubt that China has developed a very special relationship with successive Nepalese governments as well as civil society in all spheres, politically as well as economically. China is also moving closer to Nepal in other respects. In 2005, China finished building a railway from Xining, the capital of Qinghai province, to Lhasa. Xining was already in 1959 connected with China's main rail network. In August 2014, the line was extended to Shigatse in southern Tibet, not far from the Nepalese border. There have been speculations about the railway being extended even farther, down to Zhangmu on the border and perhaps even to Kathmandu, which would be highly controversial considering India's sensitivities. China has also been

increasingly involved in infrastructure projects inside Nepal such as in Lumbini, the birthplace of the Buddha right on the Indian border, and the construction of a road from Pokhara to Baglung, west of Kathmandu.

Nepal has sometimes been described as 'a jam between two boulders' and the Nepalese are without doubt looking to further strengthen their economic and other ties with China to fulfil the country's long-standing policy of being less dependent on India. But, as the French news agency Agence France-Presse (AFP) reported in August 2016, it will have a long way to go to accomplish that. 'Bilateral trade with India between July 2014 and June 2015 amounted to nearly US\$4.5 billion, dwarfing China's US\$882 million.'<sup>60</sup> But China's share is growing, and the AFP quoted Sujeev Shakya, chairman of the Nepal Economic Forum think tank as saying that 'the perception here is that the Chinese tend to deliver while India keeps talking. Over the years, China has gained more credibility in Nepal because of the pace at which they have put up infrastructure projects.'<sup>61</sup> But the problem for Nepal is that most of the labourers working on those projects are Chinese, and thus the projects have not created any job opportunities for the Nepalese.<sup>62</sup>

Nepal is likely to continue being the 'sick man of the Himalayas', with one political crisis after another and an economy that is heavily dependent on foreign aid. It is also likely to remain the country where India's geopolitical interests, more so than in any other neighbour, collide with those of an increasingly assertive China: India's seeking to protect its traditional influence in Nepal and to guard the crest of the Himalayas, and China looking to establish a string of 'friendly nations' in its periphery, a policy not unlike that of the old Chinese emperors who surrounded their realms with faithful satrapies and tributary states. But it is still in the east that India's and China's divergent interests could boil over into open conflict. And the tension is about much more than the border dispute. It is also about bilateral issues such as managing the water from the Brahmaputra, the wider geopolitical contest in the Indian Ocean—and, when it comes to armed conflicts, the presence of Chinese-allied insurgents from northeastern India in cross-border sanctuaries in Myanmar.

**8**

## **Borderlands and Oceans**

With a total length of nearly 3,000 kilometres, the Brahmaputra is one of the longest rivers of the world. It originates in the Angsi Glacier north of the Himalayas, and then flows for more than 1,620 kilometres through Tibet before it enters India and cascades down to the Assam plains. It then flows through Bangladesh, joins the Ganges and other rivers with which it forms a delta, and, finally, empties into the Bay of Bengal. The Brahmaputra, known as the Yarlung Tsangpo in Tibet and the Jamuna in Bangladesh, is the lifeline of tens of millions of people. There was, therefore, alarm in India when it became known in 2009 that China was building a 116-metretall and 389-metre-long dam to support a 540-megawatt power station at Zangmu in Tibet. The Chinese had until then denied that it had any plans to build a mega dam just north of India and Bhutan. In January 2013, the Chinese government approved the construction of three more dams on the river, at Dagu and Jiexu upstream and at Jiacha below Zangmu Dam. Altogether 28 dam projects in Tibet have been proposed.

Causing more alarm, Li Ling, a Chinese scientist, published a book called *Save China, Through Water From Tibet*<sup>1</sup> in November 2005 in which he mentioned that Chinese water experts had conducted a survey on the viability of transferring water from Tibet's rivers to central China to alleviate water shortage there.<sup>2</sup> Most of China's big rivers originate in the Tibetan highlands, and the idea to divert waters from the tributaries and actually reroute the Brahamputra to the Yangtze-Huang He, or the Yellow River, was not even new. The PLA had entertained such ideas at least since the 1980s.<sup>3</sup> Although 70 per cent of the waters of the Indian stretch of the Brahmaputra comes from direct rainwater collected south of the border and from tributaries from Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, and Bhutan, the fact that