# **Swap Market Models**

The Black formula [2], (see Caps and Floors) is popular among practitioners as a simple tool to price European options on Libor rates, that is, caplets and floorlets (see Caps and Floors), and on swap rates (*see* **LIBOR Rate**), that is, swaptions. More recently, Brace et al. [3], Miltersen et al. [12], and Jamshidian [11] provided a sound theoretical basis to this practice by introducing a general framework to consistently price interest rate options by no-arbitrage arguments. These works paved the way toward a broader acceptance of the so-called market models for interest-rate derivatives by the academic community since they can be recast within the general arbitrage-free framework discussed in [9] (see **Heath-Jarrow-Morton Approach**). These models have the advantage, over those based on the evolution of the spot interest rate, of concentrating on rates that are market observable.

The Libor market model [3, 12], (see LIBOR Market Model) and the co-terminal swap market *model* [11] are the two major representatives of this class. These models are built by assigning arbitragefree dynamics on a set of forward Libor rates and of co-terminal forward swap rates, respectively. The advent of new kinds of exotic (over-the-counter) derivatives in fixed income markets has recently inspired the introduction of "hybrid" or "generalized" market models where the underlying variables constitute a mixed set comprising both Libor and swap rates simultaneously. In this context, an extensive study is provided in Galluccio et al. [5, 6]. The availability of a general setup to build market models with mixed sets is of interest in applications, for example, to better capture the risk embedded in some complex financial derivatives.

#### **Tenor Structure and Forward Swap Rates**

We assume that we are given a prespecified collection of reset/settlement dates  $T = \{T_1, \ldots, T_M\}$ , referred to as the *tenor structure*, with  $T_i < T_k, 1 \le j < k$  $\leq M$ , and starting time  $T_0 < T_1$ . Let us denote the year fraction between any two consecutive dates by  $\delta_j = T_j - T_{j-1}$ , for  $j = 1, \ldots, M$ . We write  $P(t, T_j), j = 1, \ldots, M$ , to denote the price at time t of a *discount bond* that matures at time  $T_j > t$ . The forward swap rate  $S(t, T_i, T_k)$ , with j and k satisfying  $1 \leq j < k \leq M$ , is defined through  $S(t, T_i, T_k) =$  $(P(t,T_i)-P(t,T_k)/G(t,T_i,T_k))$  for all  $t \in [0,T_i]$ . Here,  $G(t, T_i, T_k)$  is the price of the *annuity* (or level) numéraire. Swap market models are based on the continuous time modeling of  $S(t, T_i, T_k)$  and, generally, assume that forward swap rates follow a multidimensional diffusion process. In particular,  $S(t, T_i, T_k)$  is a  $P^{T_j, T_k}$ -martingale so that, under  $\boldsymbol{P}^{T_j,T_k}$ 

$$\frac{\mathrm{d}S(t,\,T_j,\,T_k)}{S(t,\,T_j,\,T_k)} = \lambda(t,\,T_j,\,T_k)' \mathrm{d}W^{T_j,T_k}(t) \quad \forall t \in [0,\,T_j]$$
(1)

where  $\lambda(t, T_i, T_k)$  is a vector valued volatility function. The probability measure  $P^{T_j,T_k}$  is equivalent to the historical probability measure  $P$ , and is called the forward swap probability measure associated with the dates  $T_i$  and  $T_k$ , or simply the forward swap measure (see Forward and Swap Measures). For every  $i = 1, \ldots, M$ , the relative (or "deflated") bond  $P(t, T_i) / G(t, T_i, T_k)$ ,  $\forall t \in [0, \min(T_i, T_{i+1})]$ , follows a local martingale process under  $P^{T_j, \hat{T}_k}$ . We denote the corresponding Brownian motion under  $P^{T_j,T_k}$  by  $W^{T_j,T_k}$ . The forward Libor rate  $L(t,T_i)$ ,  $j = 1, \ldots, M-1$ , defined as

$$L(t,T_j) = \frac{P(t,T_j) - P(t,T_k)}{\delta_{j+1}P(t,T_{j+1})} \quad \forall t \in [0,T_j] \quad (2)$$

is itself a forward swap rate  $S(t, T_i, T_k)$  corresponding to  $k = j + 1$ ; its volatility function is denoted by  $\lambda(t, T_i)$ . Accordingly, we denote by  $P^{T_j}$  the corresponding forward probability measure associated to the discount bond price  $P(t, T_i)$ , and by  $W^{T_j}$  a Brownian motion under  $P^{T_j}$ . Then, for every  $i = 1, \ldots, M$ , the relative bond price  $P(t,T_j)/(\delta_{j+1}P(t,T_{j+1})), \ \forall t \in [0,\min(T_i,T_{j+1})],$ follows a local martingale under  $P^{T_{j+1}}$  (see **Forward** and Swap Measures). We refer to [13] (Chapters 12 and 13) for further material on the theoretical side.

In  $[5, 6]$ , the authors introduce the so-called *market model approach*, and investigate the weakest condition under which a general specification of a model for observable forward swap rates has a unique specification in all equivalent pricing measures. In this respect, the concept of *admissibility* of a set is introduced, and its theoretical and practical implications are discussed. Interestingly, the properties of these admissible sets can be best understood with the use of graph theory. This mapping allows to graphically characterize all admissible sets in a simple and intuitive way, so that model selection for a given tenor structure can be performed by visual inspection. Further, it is possible to prove that the class of admissible market models is very large: for a given tenor structure *T* = {*T*1*,...,TM* } comprising *M* dates, there exist *M<sup>M</sup>*−<sup>2</sup> admissible sets (and models). Admissible models comprise all "standard" market models [3, 11] as special cases. Three major subclasses denominated *co-initial, co-sliding*, and *coterminal* (according to the nature of the family of forward swap rates) can be identified. We hereby briefly discuss their respective features. Remarkably, the Libor market model is the only admissible model of the co-sliding type.

# **Co-terminal Swap Market Model**

The co-terminal swap market model dates back to [11], and is built from an admissible set of forward swap rates with different start dates {*T*1*,...,TM*<sup>−</sup>1} and equal maturity date *TM* , so that forward swap rates satisfy equation (1). The model is best suited to price *Bermudan swaptions* (and related derivatives; see [5, 6, 15]) where the holder has the right to enter at times *T*1*,...,TM*<sup>−</sup><sup>1</sup> into a plain-vanilla swap maturing at *TM* . In this case, the only relevant European swaptions from a pricing and hedging perspective are those expiring at *T*1*,...,TM*−1, and maturing at *TM* . Hence, it is natural to introduce a market model where the relevant underlying set coincides with the associated co-terminal forward swap rates. Other derivative securities with similar characteristics include callable cap and reverse floaters, ratchet cap floaters, and Libor knock-in/out swaps; all are good candidates for valuation in a co-terminal framework.

# **Co-initial Swap Market Model**

The co-initial swap market model [5–7] is built from an admissible set of forward swap rates with different end dates {*T*2*,...,TM* } and equal start date *T*1, so that forward swap rates satisfy equation (1). The model is best suited to price (complex) Europeanstyle derivatives, where the holder owns the right to exercise an option at a single future date *T* . In this case, the option payoff, no matter how complex, is measurable with respect to the information available at time *T* , by definition. Qualitatively speaking, a set of admissible forward swap rates sharing the same initial date *T* contains all the information needed to evaluate the payoff, the latter being a function of a set of admissible co-initial forward swap rates at that time. Hence, a model market approach based on a set of co-initial forward swap rates provides a powerful tool to price and hedge a large variety of Europeanstyle derivatives including forward-start, amortizing, and zero-coupon swaptions.

# **Co-sliding Swap Market Model**

In [5, 6], it is shown that there exists a unique admissible co-sliding swap market model and that it coincides with the Libor market model [3, 12]. The model is built from an admissible set of forward swap rates with start date *Tj* and end date *Tj*<sup>+</sup><sup>1</sup> *(j* = 1*,...,M* − 1*)*, so that forward swap rates satisfy equation (1). They are thus associated to swaps with the same time to maturity. It is easy to see that nonoverlapping forward swap rates of that form are indeed forward Libor rates. The co-sliding model is best suited to price structured constant-maturity swap (CMS)-linked derivatives (with possibly Bermudan features) whose payoff function depends on a set of fixed-maturity instruments (*see* **Bermudan Swaptions and Callable Libor Exotics**). More precisely, in a *CMS* (*see* **Constant Maturity Swap**), the variable coupon that settles at a generic time *Tj* is linked to the value of a swap rate prevailing at that time (the latter being associated to a swap of a given maturity). In this context, the Libor market model provides an optimal modeling framework since (sliding) CMS rates can be easily described in terms of linear combinations of forward Libor rates.

# **Numerical Implementation**

In the applications, one needs to calibrate a generic swap market model to the available prices of liquid vanilla derivatives to avoid potential arbitrage in the risk-management process. Implied model calibration is a reverse engineering procedure aimed at identifying the relevant model characteristics, such as volatility parameters, from such a set of instruments. In interest-rate derivatives markets, these instruments are plain-vanilla options written on forward swap and Libor rates, that is, swaptions and caplets, respectively. To achieve a fast and robust model calibration, one should ideally aim at closed or quasi-closed form formulae for plain-vanilla option prices. When these are not available, good analytical approximations are called for. The accuracy of these methods is studied in several papers. They rely on the so-called *freezing approach* [1, 10, 14] or, alternatively, on the *rank-one approximation* method [3]. In turn, the specification of the instantaneous volatility function *λ(t, Tj , Tk)* in equation (1) is sometimes done by introducing flexible functional forms [4, 15] that are meant to reproduce the observed shape of implied swaption and cap/floor volatility term structures through a low-dimensional parameterization. One of the most appreciated features of the instantaneous volatility function among practitioners is *time stationarity*. This is generally imposed to reproduce the analogous temporal evolution of the volatility term structure observed in the market. However, the constraint of perfect model stationarity is generally incompatible with the observed implied volatility market for a generic well-behaved instantaneous volatility function. This market feature forces practitioners to introduce explicit calendar–time dependent functions *λ(t, Tj , Tk)* to mimic a perturbation mode around the time-stationary solution. Efficient simulation algorithms are also available to price exotic interest-rate derivatives by Monte Carlo methods [8] (*see* **LIBOR Market Models: Simulation**).

# **Acknowledgments**

The author thanks the Swiss NSF for financial support through the NCCR Finrisk.

# **References**

[1] Andersen, L. & Andreasen, J. (2000). Volatility skews and extensions of the Libor market model, *Applied Mathematical Finance* **7**, 1–32.

- [2] Black, F. (1976). The pricing of commodity contracts, *Journal of Financial Economics* **3**, 167–179.
- [3] Brace, A., Gatarek, D. & Musiela, M. (1997). The market model of interest rate dynamics, *Mathematical Finance* **7**, 127–155.
- [4] Brigo, D. & Mercurio, M. (2001). *Interest Rates Models: Theory and Practice*, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
- [5] Galluccio, S., Huang, Z., Ly, J.-M. & Scaillet, O. (2007). Theory and calibration of swap market models, *Mathematical Finance* **17**, 111–141.
- [6] Galluccio, S. & Scaillet, O. (2007). *Constructive Theory of Market Models for Interest-Rate Derivatives*, BNP Paribas working paper.
- [7] Galluccio, S. & Hunter, C. (2004). The co-initial swap market model, *Economic Notes* **33**, 209–232.
- [8] Glasserman, P. & Zhao, X. (2000). Arbitrage-free discretization of lognormal forward Libor and swap rate models, *Finance and Stochastics* **4**, 35–68.
- [9] Heath, D., Jarrow, R. & Morton, A. (1992). Bond pricing and the term structure of interest rates: a new methodology for contingent claims valuation, *Econometrica* **60**, 77–105.
- [10] Hull, J. & White, A. (2000). Forward rate volatilities, swap rate volatilities and the implementation of the Libor market model, *Journal of Fixed Income* **10**, 46–62.
- [11] Jamshidian, F. (1997). Libor and swap market models and measures, *Finance and Stochastics* **1**, 293–330.
- [12] Miltersen, K., Sandmann, K. & Sondermann, D. (1997). Closed form solutions for term structure derivatives with lognormal interest rates, *Journal of Finance* **70**, 409–430.
- [13] Musiela, M. & Rutkowski, M. (2004). *Martingale Methods in Financial Modelling*, 2nd Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
- [14] Rebonato, R. (1998). *Interest Rate Option Models*, 2nd Edition, Wiley, Chichester.
- [15] Rebonato, R. (2003). *Modern Pricing of Interest-Rate Derivatives*. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

# **Related Articles**

**CMS Spread Products**; **Forward and Swap Measures**; **Constant Maturity Swap**; **LIBOR Market Model**.

STEFANO GALLUCCIO & OLIVIER SCAILLET