# **DUE PROCESS**

## ABHINAV CHANDRACHUD

## **I. INTRODUCTION**

IN 1947, Justice Felix Frankfurter of the US Supreme Court advised one of the chief architects of India's Constitution, Sir Benegal Narsing Rau,<sup>1</sup> to delete the phrase 'due process of law' from the draft constitution.<sup>2</sup> The Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the US Constitution provide that the government cannot deprive a person of 'life, liberty, or property, without due process of law …' After the American Civil War, the Due Process Clause of the newly enacted Fourteenth Amendment went on to acquire a complex meaning, and in the early twentieth century leading up to the Great Depression, American courts had used the clause to invalidate social welfare legislation.<sup>3</sup> Following Rau's meeting with Frankfurter, the term 'due process of law' was deleted from the text of India's draft constitution, and replaced with the words 'procedure established by law'. Article 21 of India's Constitution, which came into force in  $1950<sup>4</sup>$  reads, to this day: 'No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.'

Fast-forward sixty-two years. In a case decided in 2012, a bench of two judges of the Supreme Court of India opined that the term 'due process of law' was 'contained in Article 21 of the Constitution'.<sup>5</sup> Despite the conscious deletion of the phrase 'due process of law' from India's Constitution, the Supreme Court of India has, over the years, disregarded the original intent of the framers of the Constitution, and adopted some versions of the US doctrines of 'procedural due process' and 'substantive due process' into Indian constitutional law. Yet, the precise contours of these doctrines in India are unclear, and the phrase 'due process of law' in India is itself quite confusing.<sup>6</sup>

This chapter has two descriptive objectives: first, to briefly outline the history of how the term 'due process of law' was gradually read into India's Constitution, and secondly, to define the contours of doctrines like procedural due process and substantive due process under Indian constitutional law today. In the light of these descriptive findings, this chapter will then conclude by discussing what the Supreme Court's treatment of Article 21 of the Constitution says about the doctrine of original intent in Indian constitutional law.

It is one of the central arguments of this chapter that there are three kinds of due process presently seen in Indian constitutional law. The first kind, referred to here as 'pure form' due process, was what the framers of India's Constitution intended, namely, that a person's life and personal liberty *can* be deprived so long as the deprivation proceeds under a validly enacted law—a restraint on the executive, but not the legislative, branch of government. The second type, or 'procedural due process', was adopted in India in 1978, by arguably one of the best-known decisions of the Supreme Court, *Maneka Gandhi v Union of India*. <sup>7</sup> Procedural due process requires that a person's life and personal liberty *can* be deprived so long as the procedure by which the deprivation takes place is 'fair, just and reasonable'. The third type, or 'substantive due process', came into being in the 1980s,

and under it, Indian constitutional courts can examine whether substantive provisions of law are themselves 'fair, just and reasonable'. $\frac{8}{3}$ 

Consider the following hypothetical. Assume that India's Parliament enacts a law called the Criminal Laws Amendment Act 2014 (the 'Act'). The Act has two sections. Section 1 of the Act amends the Indian Penal Code, inserting a provision into it that makes it a crime to drink tea in the afternoon, punishable by a sentence of imprisonment.<sup>9</sup> Section 2 of the Act amends the Criminal Procedure Code and provides that anyone tried for the offence of drinking tea in the afternoon will be denied the right to be represented in court by legal counsel. In short, section 1 is a substantive law, while section 2 is a procedural law.  $\frac{10}{10}$  The question is: does this law violate the due process clause of India's Constitution?

This question has three different answers, which can be arrived at by asking three different questions. First, was the Act validly enacted? That is, were all the procedures prescribed by the Constitution for the enactment of a law followed? If so, the law is valid according to a pure textual reading of Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, which only requires that a procedure be 'established by law' in order for a person's life or personal liberty to be deprived. This will be referred to in this chapter as 'pure form' due process. Secondly, is the law procedurally fair? In other words, is section 2 of the Act, which deprives anyone who is being tried under section 1 of the Act of the right to be represented by legal counsel in court, fair? If not, the law is invalid. This is a 'procedural due process' question. Thirdly, is the substantive law—that is, section 1 of the Act, which makes it an offence to drink tea in the afternoon—itself fair? Even if the Act is validly enacted, and even if section 2 is fair, a court that asks itself whether section 1 of the Act is fair engages in a 'substantive due process' question.

Section II of this chapter briefly outlines the history of the enactment of Article 21 of the Constitution. Section III discusses how the doctrine of procedural due process became a part of Indian constitutional law, by discussing two seminal constitutional cases: the *Gopalan* case<sup>11</sup> and the *Maneka Gandhi* case.<sup>12</sup> Section IV discusses the doctrine of substantive due process under Indian constitutional law.

### **II. THE FRAMING OF INDIA'S CONSTITUTION**

The office of the Constituent Assembly of India was set up on 1 July 1946, over a year before India became independent, with Sir Benegal Rau in charge as constitutional advisor.<sup>13</sup> In notes written in September 1946 and April 1947, Rau expressed doubts about whether the American due process clause should be introduced into India's proposed constitution. His fear was that the clause had given American courts far too much discretion over legislation, and that it likewise might empower Indian courts to stand in the way of 'beneficient social legislation'.<sup>14</sup>

In March 1947, a draft constitution prepared by the chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly of India, Dr BR Ambedkar, contained a due process clause that was identical to the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution. It read: 'nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty and property without due process of law  $\ldots$ <sup>15</sup> In the US, the 'life, liberty and property' formulation owed its origins to the seventeenth-century British political philosopher John Locke, by whose teachings the framers of the US Constitution were deeply influenced.<sup>16</sup> However, at the time

India's Constitution was being drafted, the dreaded '*Lochner* era', where the US Supreme Court used the due process clause of the Constitution to invalidate social welfare legislation on a theory of the liberty of contract, had only recently come to an end. Over the coming months, three substantial changes were made to Ambedkar's clause, largely because the framers of India's Constitution were worried that the due process clause would give too much power to courts, especially to invalidate social welfare legislation.

First, in April 1947, the right to property was deleted from the due process clause of India's draft constitution.<sup>17</sup> This was done because the framers of the Constitution were planning a large-scale overhaul of the property regime in India, by redistributing land owned by colonial-era landlords to tenants. It was feared that the right to property in the due process clause would enable courts to interfere with this reform, in particular. $\frac{18}{18}$ 

Secondly, Sir Benegal Rau qualified the term 'liberty' in the due process clause of the draft constitution with the word 'personal'. He did this because he feared that courts would interpret the term 'liberty' too broadly. For example, he suggested that even price control legislation could be interpreted by a court as interfering with the liberty of contract between buyer and seller.<sup>19</sup> Once again, this fear sprung from the recently concluded '*Lochner* era' on the US Supreme Court. In the Court's most famous case during that time, *Lochner v New York*, 20 the Court invalidated a New York statute which prohibited bakers from making their employees work for more than sixty hours per week or more than ten hours in any one day, because the Court believed that the statute interfered with a person's liberty of contract.

Thirdly, the phrase 'due process of law' itself was deleted from the text of the draft constitution. Sometime between October and December 1947, BN Rau met Justice Felix Frankfurter in the US, among other judges. Frankfurter told Rau to delete the phrase 'due process of law' from India's draft constitution because it was 'undemocratic' ('because it gives a few judges the power of vetoing legislation enacted by the representatives of the nation'), and because it imposed an 'unfair burden' on the judiciary.<sup>21</sup> Frankfurter's advice probably merely served to reinforce Rau's pre-existing fears about the due process clause. Based on Rau's report upon his return, the Drafting Committee deleted the phrase 'due process of law' and replaced it with 'procedure established by law' borrowed from Article 31 of the Japanese Constitution.<sup>22</sup> In an article written in the Harvard Law Review a few years later, Frankfurter credited BN Rau with deleting the due process clause from India's Constitution.<sup>23</sup>

The deletion of the phrase 'due process of law' caused an uproar in the Constituent Assembly. Numerous amendments were moved by members to reintroduce it. Only Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar spoke strongly in favour of its deletion.<sup>24</sup> Ayyar argued that the words 'due process of law' would 'serve as a great handicap for all social legislation' and give too much discretion to courts, creating 'judicial vagaries in the moulding of law'.<sup>25</sup> Even Ambedkar was ambivalent about the deletion of the phrase 'due process of law'. Those who spoke in favour of reintroducing 'due process of law' into India's Constitution argued that the phrase 'procedure established by law' would only give courts the power to engage in what has been described above as 'pure form' due process, but not procedural or substantive due process. Kazi Syed Karimuddin, for example, said that the clause, as it presently stood, did not permit courts to look into 'the injustice of a law or into a capricious provision in a law'.<sup>26</sup> 'As soon as the procedure is complied with', he said, 'there will be an end to everything and the judges will be only spectators.<sup>27</sup> However, on 13 December 1948, all the proposed amendments

to the clause failed, and the phrase 'due process of law' was permanently deleted from the text of India's Constitution.<sup>28</sup>

As a consequence, Article 21 of the Constitution had three differences from the due process clause of the US Constitution: first, it did not contain the right to property; secondly, it protected 'personal liberty', not 'liberty' like the US Constitution; and thirdly, the phrase 'due process of law' was replaced with the phrase 'procedure established by law'.

However, as a concession to those who had argued in favour of due process, a new provision was inserted into the Constitution, which protected against arbitrary arrest and detention.<sup>29</sup> According to the framers, the new clause, which was to become Article 22 of the Constitution of India, instituted numerous safeguards which were akin to due process rights: for example, those arrested and detained had a right to be informed of the grounds of their arrest, to consult and be defended by a lawyer of their choice, and to be produced before a magistrate within twenty-four hours of the arrest.

## **III. PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS**

#### **1. The** *Gopalan* **Era**

In the first 'fundamental rights' <sup>30</sup> case which came to the Supreme Court of India, *AK Gopalan v State* of *Madras*,<sup>31</sup>, the petitioner argued that the Preventive Detention Act 1950 did not provide some of the most important procedural safeguards against arbitrary detention.<sup>32</sup> A majority of the judges of the Court rejected the petitioner's argument that 'procedure established by law' meant procedural due process.<sup>33</sup> Five of the Court's six judges discussed the due process clause in the US Constitution.<sup>34</sup> Kania CJ pointed out that Article 21 of the Indian Constitution had modified the American due process clause in the three ways discussed in the previous section.<sup>35</sup> Reading 'procedure established by law' to mean procedural due process or natural justice was therefore impermissible. Sastri J wrote that doing so would have the effect of making 'procedure established by law' resemble 'due process of law', and 'those "subtle and elusive criteria" implied in that phrase which it was the deliberate purpose of the framers of our Constitution to avoid'.<sup>36</sup> '[I]t is common knowledge', wrote Das J, 'that our Constitution-makers deliberately declined to adopt the uncertain and shifting American doctrine of due process of law  $\ldots$ <sup>37</sup> To try to bring in the American doctrine, in spite of this fact …', he continued, 'will be to stultify the intention of the Constitution as expressed in Article  $21.^{38}$ 

The majority therefore seemed willing to accept the contention that Article 21 did not impose a serious limitation on the legislative branch of the government.<sup>39</sup> Once a 'procedure' was 'established by law'—that is, once a law was validly enacted by the legislative branch—Article 21 could not be said to have been infringed. In short, the *Gopalan* Court found that Article 21 only imposed 'pure form' due process limitations on the other branches of government. $\frac{40}{2}$ 

Only one judge, Fazl Ali J, dissented on the question of whether 'procedure established by law' meant procedural due process.<sup>41</sup> Fazl Ali pointed out that the phrase 'procedure established by law' was borrowed from the Japanese Constitution, which had been drafted 'wholly under American influence'. Since the prevalent view in the US at the time, according to Fazl Ali was that the due process clause should be restricted to procedural due process, the words 'procedure established by law' in the Japanese Constitution might be said to have reflected that view.<sup>42</sup> He noticed that the word 'law' was common to both the phrases 'due process of law' and 'procedure established by law', and since, according to Fazl Ali, American courts had interpreted the term 'law' to mean procedural due process, the phrase 'procedure established by law' meant procedural due process. $\frac{43}{12}$  In conclusion, Fazl Ali found in his dissent that Article 21 of the Indian Constitution gave everyone a right to be heard before being condemned, and that deprivations of life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution could only proceed if the aggrieved person was given four procedural safeguards: $\frac{44}{3}$ (i) a notice; (ii) an opportunity to be heard; (iii) an impartial tribunal; and (iv) an orderly course of procedure.<sup>45</sup>

The majority of the judges in the *Gopalan* case held that Article 21 was both substantive and procedural in its content. $\frac{46}{5}$  However, by this the judges were not referring to the American doctrines of substantive or procedural due process. The holding was that in order for a person's life and personal liberty to be deprived by the State, there had to be a validly enacted substantive and procedural law; in other words, that Article 21 did not merely require a validly enacted procedural law. In short, even the substantive law (not merely the procedural law) that deprives a person of his life or personal liberty must be validly enacted according to Article 21 of the Constitution.

### **2. The** *Maneka Gandhi* **Case**

The *Gopalan* Court's interpretation of Article 21 of the Constitution was undone in one of the bestknown cases of India's constitutional history, *Maneka Gandhi v Union of India*, <sup>47</sup> decided in 1978. The case was decided by a bench of seven judges, over *Gopalan*'s six.

Like many of the Court's decisions at this time, the *Maneka Gandhi* case was decided by a Court that was desperately trying to regain some of the legitimacy it had lost during the political Emergency of the mid-1970s, when the Court had failed to prevent arbitrary arrests and detentions in the *Habeas* Corpus case.<sup>48</sup> The lesson the Court learned from that case was that the Constitution did not always have to be interpreted with strict fidelity to its text, or in a manner faithful to the intent of its framers. It was the Constitution itself, after all, drafted by India's founding fathers, which permitted Article 21 to be suspended during an Emergency. By refusing to ignore the text of India's Constitution, and by failing to permit arbitrarily detained prisoners to petition courts for the writ of *habeas corpus* during the Emergency, the Court had failed the country in a significant moment of crisis. In short, the influence of the original intent of the framers of India's Constitution began to erode in the 1970s, as a result of the lessons learned from the Emergency.

The passport of the petitioner in this case had been impounded in the 'public interest', without giving her any reasons. Among other grounds raised before the Court, the petitioner contended that the procedure prescribed by the act was arbitrary and unreasonable, and that the provision therefore fell foul of Article 21 of the Constitution. In the leading majority judgment, Bhagwati J asked a question which had been considered in the *Gopalan* case before:

Does Article 21 merely require that there must be some semblance of procedure, howsoever arbitrary or fanciful, prescribed by law before a person can be deprived of his personal liberty or that the procedure must satisfy certain requisites in the sense that it A majority of the judges of the Court found that a procedural law which deprived 'personal liberty' had to be 'fair, just and reasonable, not fanciful, oppressive or arbitrary'<sup>50</sup>—words remarkably reminiscent of the US Supreme Court's decision in the *Lochner* case. <sup>51</sup> The majority found that before (or after<sup>52</sup>) taking away a person's right to go abroad (which, according to the Court, was a part of the right to 'personal liberty'), a passport officer had to give the person a hearing.<sup>53</sup> The right to be heard before having one's passport impounded was read into the Passports Act, by implication.<sup>54</sup> In short, where the *Gopalan* Court had held that procedural due process was not included in Article 21, the Court in the *Maneka Gandhi* case held that it was. Since then, any law which deprives a person of her right to life or personal liberty has to comply with the requirements of 'natural justice', <sup>55</sup> the foremost of which is the requirement of a hearing. Importantly, even if a law meets the requirements of procedural due process, it is still open for a person to challenge it for violating other provisions of the Constitution—for example, Articles 14 or 19.<sup>56</sup>

The *Maneka Gandhi* case is therefore an authority for the proposition that procedural due process is a part of Article 21 of the Constitution.<sup>57</sup> We have seen in Section III.1 that a majority of the judges in the *Gopalan* case held that Article 21 applied to both procedural and substantive laws. However, the Court's holding in the *Maneka Gandhi* case seemed only to apply to procedural laws. In short, in the hypothetical set out in the introduction to this paper, the framework of the *Maneka Gandhi* case applies only to section 2 of the hypothetical Act, but not to section 1. In other words, it is only the procedural law that deprives the right to life or personal liberty, not the substantive law, which has to satisfy the requirement of being 'fair, just and reasonable'.

#### **IV. SUBSTANTIVE DUE PROCESS**

#### **1. Beyond Procedural Fairness**

In numerous instances after *Maneka Gandhi*'s case, the Supreme Court of India dealt with cases that could be considered procedural due process cases, involving either an issue of natural justice, or procedural fairness.<sup>58</sup> For example, in one case, the Court held that a person who was imprisoned, after being convicted of an offence, was entitled to get a copy of the judgment, so that he could file an appeal.<sup>59</sup> In another case, the Court held that those undergoing criminal trials had the right to a speedy trial;  $\frac{60}{10}$  in other words, that the 'procedure established by law' for the deprivation of life and personal liberty had to be speedy in order to be considered 'fair, just and reasonable'.

One of the most significant procedural due process cases was decided by the Court only a few months after the *Maneka Gandhi* case. <sup>61</sup> The case, *Sunil Batra v Delhi Administration*, 62 involved a challenge to section 30(2) of the Prisons Act 1894, which provided that a prisoner 'under sentence of death' was to be kept in 'in a cell apart from all other prisoners'. The question was whether this permitted jail authorities to keep death row prisoners in solitary confinement. This case is important because it brings out the distinction between the doctrines of procedural and substantive due process.

In criminal law, statutes that define offences and prescribe punishments are considered 'substantive', while others are typically considered 'procedural'.  $63$  Since section 30(2) of the Prisons Act did not impose a punishment, but only dealt with how a person sentenced to death was to be procedurally treated, it was a procedural law, not a substantive law. <sup>64</sup> As the Court in the *Sunil Batra* case repeatedly pointed out, sections 73 and 74 of the Indian Penal Code contain the substantive punishment of solitary confinement, and the Court in the *Sunil Batra* case was not examining the constitutional validity of these provisions.  $65$  Section 30(2) of the Prisons Act was challenged by a convict on death row. Using Article 21 of the Constitution, the Court 'read down' the provision. It was held that a prisoner was only 'under sentence of death' once the entire appellate process had been concluded and the clemency petition was denied.<sup>66</sup> It was also held that the words of the section —confinement 'in a cell apart from all other prisoners'—did not mean solitary confinement in the first place. <sup>67</sup> Since the *Sunil Batra* case dealt with a procedural law, not a substantive one, it was a procedural due process case, not a substantive due process case.

In a case decided a few years later, however, the Supreme Court applied a test of constitutional analysis that could be equated with the doctrine of substantive due process. This was in the case of *Bachan Singh v State of Punjab*, <sup>68</sup> where section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, a substantive provision of criminal law that permits a court to impose the sentence of death for the offence of murder, was challenged as being unconstitutional. Since section 302 of the Indian Penal Code was a substantive law, the Court could have held that since Article 21 only applied to procedural laws, the Court was precluded from scrutinising the constitutionality of the provision under Article 21 of the Constitution. That is not what happened. Instead, the majority of the judges of the Court tested section 302 of the Indian Penal Code on the touchstone of Article 21 of the Constitution,  $\frac{69}{2}$  and found that it was neither substantively nor procedurally unconstitutional—that is, that it was neither unconstitutional per se (substantively) nor because of the manner of its execution (procedurally):

In view of the aforesaid constitutional postulates, by no stretch of imagination can it be said that death penalty under Section 302, Penal Code, *either per se or because of its execution* by hanging, constitutes an unreasonable, cruel or unusual punishment. 70

Bhagwati J dissented from the majority in this case, and issued a separate opinion two years after the majority judgment had been delivered. <sup>71</sup> Bhagwati's dissent in the *Bachan Singh* case is particularly revealing because it was Bhagwati who also wrote the Court's majority opinion in the *Maneka Gandhi* case. It will be remembered that the Court, in the *Gopalan* case, had held that Article 21 applied to both procedural and substantive laws. Bhagwati J's dissenting judgment in the *Bachan Singh* case clarified that the framework of the *Maneka Gandhi* case (ie, that the 'procedure established by law' under Article 21 had to be 'fair, just and reasonable') likewise applied both to procedural and substantive laws. 'The word "procedure" in Article 21', wrote Bhagwati J, 'is wide enough to cover the entire process by which deprivation is effected and that would include not only the adjectival but also the substantive part of the law'.<sup>72</sup> Thus, the majority judges in the case and the dissenting judge all seemed to agree that substantive laws could be tested on the touchstone of Article 21.

To be sure, not every scrutiny of a substantive law under Article 21 of the Constitution can be termed 'substantive due process'. For example, in the case of *Mithu v State of Punjab*, 73 the Supreme Court was considering the constitutional validity of section 303 of the Indian Penal Code, a substantive law that imposed a mandatory death penalty on any person who committed murder while undergoing a sentence of life imprisonment. The Court held that the section was unconstitutional.
However, the mere fact that the Court struck down a substantive provision of law does not mean that this was necessarily a 'substantive due process' case. The reason the Court struck section 303 down in that case was because the section deprived a convict of his procedural rights under sections 235(2) and 354(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code. Under these provisions, a judge is required to hear the accused on the question of sentence, and to write 'special reasons' for passing the death sentence. Though section 303 of the Indian Penal Code was a substantive law, it excluded these 'fair, just and reasonable' procedural safeguards, and thereby violated the doctrine of procedural due process articulated in the *Maneka Gandhi* case. <sup>74</sup> The *Mithu* case is therefore an authority for procedural due process, not substantive due process, even though a substantive law was invalidated in that case.

However, in the *Mithu* case, the Court also made certain observations which point out that Indian constitutional law recognises the doctrine of substantive due process. The Court in that case observed that the legislature cannot impose a 'savage sentence' under the criminal law.<sup>75</sup> '[I]f a law were to provide', wrote the Chief Justice, 'that the offence of theft will be punishable with the penalty of the cutting of hands, the law will be bad as violating Article  $21.^{76}$  In other words, a 'savage' sentence imposed by a substantive criminal law could substantively be invalidated on the touchstone of Article 21 of the Constitution, not because the accused is not given procedural due process safeguards like a hearing, but because a savage sentence like the cutting of hands is substantively unfair. Wrote the Chief Justice, 'A savage sentence is anathema to the civilized jurisprudence of Article 21.<sup> $77$ </sup> In short, though the *Mithu* case was a procedural due process case where a substantive law was struck down, the Court's observations in that case point out that the substantive due process doctrine is also a part of Indian constitutional law.<sup>78</sup>

Another substantive due process case was that of *Saroj Rani v Sudarshan Kumar*, <sup>79</sup> decided by the Court in 1984. There, the Court examined the question of whether section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955<sup>80</sup> was unconstitutional. The section permits one spouse to sue the other for restitution of conjugal rights when the latter withdraws from the society of the former without reasonable excuse. The Court found that the provision was consistent with Article 21 of the Constitution, not merely because it contained 'sufficient safeguards' which prevented it from being used tyrannically, <sup>81</sup> but also because the provision had to be 'understood in its proper perspective' as serving the 'social purpose' of preventing 'the break-up of marriage'.<sup>82</sup> In short, the Court substantively scrutinised section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, a substantive law, and found it consistent with Article 21 of the Constitution.

The suicide cases of the Supreme Court had clear substantive due process implications. In the first case, decided in 1994, *P Rathinam v Union of India*, 83 the Court held that section 309 of the Indian Penal Code, which made it a criminal offence to attempt to commit suicide, violated Article 21 of the Constitution, because it was a 'cruel and irrational provision', which punished a person who was in agony.<sup>84</sup> The case was subsequently overruled by a constitutional bench of the Court, two years later, in *Gian Kaur v State of Punjab*. <sup>85</sup> There, the Court held that a legislative provision could only be invalidated if it fell foul of some provision of the Constitution, but not if it was merely considered undesirable by a court<sup>86</sup>—a holding which perhaps ignores the fact that even substantive laws have to be 'fair, just and reasonable' under Article 21 of the Constitution, and in essence, what is 'fair, just and reasonable' is rarely an objective standard, but a subjective one, which depends on the personal value choices of the judges deciding the case. In the *Gian Kaur* case, it was held that the *Rathinam* case was incorrectly decided because its central holding, namely, that the right to life did not include

the right to die, was incorrect.  $87$  However, the Court in that case also observed that it could be possible to interpret euthanasia for 'a dying man who is terminally ill or in a persistent vegetative state' consistently with the right to live with dignity under Article 21 of the Constitution.<sup>88</sup> This observation suggests that the Court even in the *Gian Kaur* case acknowledged that it had the power to use substantive due process doctrine, because it could interpretively limit the contours of section 309 of the Indian Penal Code to potentially exclude mercy killings under certain circumstances. That was exactly what eventually happened in a case decided in 2011, where the Court held that 'passive' euthanasia would be permitted under certain circumstances, notwithstanding the bar against abetting suicide under section 306 of the Indian Penal Code. In that case the Court also opined that the time had come for Parliament to delete section 309 of the Indian Penal Code as it had become 'anachronistic'.

In 2009, the Delhi High Court's holding in the case of *Naz Foundation v Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi <sup>89</sup>* was a clear substantive due process case. There, the petitioners challenged section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, a substantive law, which made it an offence to perform 'carnal intercourse against the order of nature', as it applied against the LGBT community. The Court held that the provision 'insofar as it criminalises consensual sexual acts of adults in private' violated Article 21 of the Constitution. **<sup>90</sup>** This was not a procedural law that was invalidated, but a substantive law, on substantive grounds. Though this decision was eventually reversed on appeal by the Supreme Court, the Supreme Court held that the 'requirement of substantive due process' had been 'read into the Indian Constitution through a combined reading of Articles 14, 21 and 19 …', that substantive due process was a constitutional law 'test' under which a law has to be 'just, fair and reasonable', which involves questions of 'legitimate State interest and the principle of proportionality'.<sup>91</sup>

## **2. Beyond Physical Restraint: Unenumerated Rights**

It has been seen in Section II that the constitutional advisor to the Constituent Assembly of India, BN Rau, deliberately inserted the word 'personal' before the word 'liberty' in what was to become Article 21 of the Constitution, in order to limit the definition of the term, and to prevent courts from interpreting it extensively.<sup>92</sup> However, in a series of decisions dating back to the 1960s,  $\frac{93}{5}$  the Supreme Court of India expanded the ambit of the terms 'life' and 'personal liberty' under Article 21, thereby diluting the intent of the framers of the Constitution to limit the ambit of the clause. In these decisions, the Court interpreted the terms 'life' and 'personal liberty' to include something more than mere freedom from physical restraint—that is, arrest and detention. For example, the Court held that the right to go abroad, to privacy, livelihood, shelter, education, health, even reputation, and to dignity generally, were all included within the meaning of the terms 'life' or 'personal liberty' under Article 21 of the Constitution.  $\frac{94}{1}$  In short, unenumerated rights—that is, rights not specifically written down in the text of India's Constitution—have been recognised and given the status of fundamental rights by the Supreme Court. This phenomenon resembles 'modern' substantive due process under US constitutional law, though unenumerated rights in India are not always subject to heightened scrutiny.<sup>95</sup> The doctrine of substantive due process seems to have been understood and used in this sense by the Supreme Court of India in at least one case, decided in 2010.<sup>96</sup>

The expansion of the terms 'life' and 'personal liberty' under Article 21 of the Constitution serves two purposes.

First, it brings within the purview of Article 21 government actions that do not have anything to do with arrest or detention. For example, this was what happened in the *Maneka Gandhi* case itself, seen in Section III of this chapter. There, though the petitioner's passport had been impounded, the petitioner was not physically restrained by the State in the conventional sense (ie, arrested or detained) <sup>97</sup>—in short, the petitioner in the *Maneka Gandhi* case had not been deprived of her right to 'life' or 'personal liberty' according to the plain, common-sense, and original meaning of those terms. However, in order to bring the passport officer's actions within the ambit of Article 21 of the Constitution, the Court held that the right to go abroad was a part of the right of 'personal liberty'. Similarly, in another case dating back to  $1967\frac{98}{98}$  the petitioner challenged an order of the passport officers of Delhi and Bombay, asking him to surrender his passport. Quite contrary to the intent of the framers of the Constitution, the Court held that the term 'liberty' under the Indian Constitution had to be interpreted as broadly as it was under the US Constitution, and that it included the right to go abroad.<sup>99</sup>

Another good example of this phenomenon was the case of *Olga Tellis v Bombay Municipal* Corporation.<sup>100</sup> There, the petitioners contended that the forcible eviction of pavement and slum dwellers, under section 314 of the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act 1888, without giving them alternative accommodation, violated their rights to life, because it deprived them of their livelihood. An eviction of a pavement dweller did not amount to arrest or detention, and so the case was not a traditional right-to-life case under Article 21. Even so, to bring the government action within the ambit of Article 21, the Court held that the right to livelihood was a part of the right to life under Article 21, and that section 314 of the statute was therefore subject to the requirements set under Article 21.

Secondly, the expanded definition of the terms 'life' and 'personal liberty' has been used by the Court to help it figure out whether a substantive law is substantively fair. For example, the *Naz* Foundation case, <sup>101</sup> decided by the Delhi High Court, was a physical restraint case—section 377 of the Indian Penal Code carried a punishment of imprisonment. As a consequence, the case already fell within the conventional boundaries of Article 21 of the Constitution, and did not need an expanded definition of the right to life to make it so. Yet, the Delhi High Court expanded the definition of the term 'life' under Article 21 of the Constitution to include sexual privacy and identity, in order to justify its decision to read down the provision. Similarly, the *Rathinam* case, <sup>102</sup> decided by the Supreme Court, was a physical restraint case—section 309 of the Indian Penal Code imposed a punishment of imprisonment. Yet, the Court expanded the definition of the right to life, making it include the right to die, in order to justify the substantive invalidation of the provision under Article 21 of the Constitution. Thus, the expansion of the right to 'life' and 'personal liberty' under the Constitution has not merely been used to bring cases not involving physical restraint under the purview of Article 21 of the Constitution, but also to justify the substantive invalidation of laws under a doctrine resembling substantive due process.

## **3. Arbitrariness/Reasonableness**

Though substantive due process became a part of Indian constitutional law in the 1980s, courts have been scrutinising substantive laws under Articles 14 (right to equality) and 19 (right to certain enumerated liberties) of the Constitution since the very beginning. Though doctrines for scrutinising substantive laws under Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution are not 'substantive due process', they still resemble substantive due process in that they may involve scrutiny of substantive legislation.

Article 14 of the Constitution contains the right to equality. State action can be substantively challenged under Article 14 on the ground of 'arbitrariness'. Prior to the 1970s, the Supreme Court utilised a test known as the 'classification test' to determine whether a law was discriminatory and fell foul of Article 14. <sup>103</sup> However, in a case decided in 1973, *EP Royappa v State of Tamil Nadu*, 104 the Court created a new doctrine under Article 14, the arbitrariness test. Stated simply, this new doctrine was that a law would be considered to have violated Article 14 of the Constitution if it was 'arbitrary'. The noted constitutional law scholar HM Seervai pointed out that this meant that a law that did not necessarily even discriminate between two people could also be found 'arbitrary' by a court.  $\frac{105}{5}$  For this reason, the arbitrariness doctrine is a very vague standard of constitutional analysis, and over the years, various attempts have been made to  $\lim_{t \to 0} t^{10/6}$  or exclude  $\frac{107}{t}$  it from Indian constitutional law altogether. Both the old classification test and the new arbitrariness test are substantive in nature, as they permit courts to look into the fairness of a substantive provision of law.

Article 19(1) of the Constitution contains six enumerated liberties: speech, assembly, association, locomotion, residence, and occupation. Articles 19(2)–(6) of the Constitution permit the State to impose 'reasonable restrictions' on these liberties. It is for a court to decide whether the restrictions imposed by the State are 'reasonable'—a form of scrutiny which, like the arbitrariness test under Article 14, is substantive in nature.

Neither the arbitrariness test under Article 14 nor the reasonableness test under Article 19 can strictly be considered 'substantive due process' under Article 21 of the Constitution. However, when Articles 14 and 19 are read together with Article 21, the effect is much the same. 'True, our Constitution has no "due process" clause', wrote Krishna Iyer J in his concurring opinion in the *Sunil Batra* case, 'but, in this branch of law, after *Cooper* and *Maneka Gandhi*, the consequence is the same.<sup>'</sup> 108 Krishna Iyer's holding in that case was that procedural law would be scrutinised under Article 21, while substantive law would be scrutinised under Articles 14 and 19: 'For what is punitively outrageous, scandalizingly unusual or cruel and rehabilitatively counterproductive, is unarguably unreasonable and arbitrary and is shot down by Articles 14 and 19 and if inflicted with procedural unfairness, falls foul of Article 21.<sup>'109</sup> In short, Articles 14, 19, and 21 of the Constitution work as a unit, and it is beyond dispute that courts can scrutinise the arbitrariness or reasonableness of substantive statutes under Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution, respectively.

## **V. DEFINING 'DUE PROCESS'**

The upshot of this chapter is that the Supreme Court of India has not defined the doctrines of substantive due process or procedural due process. The cases themselves do not tell us what these doctrines mean. Indeed, doctrines like substantive and procedural due process are considered, even in the US, to be elusive and hard to define. This chapter defines doctrines like substantive and procedural process by looking at whether the thing involved is substance or procedure. If a governmental action (be it a statute, government-enacted rule, or executive order) is invalidated by a

court because it conflicts with the court's substantive value judgments (eg, if it interferes with the right to sexual privacy), then the exercise of judicial power can be called 'substantive due process', but if it is invalidated by a court because it conflicts with a rule of procedure (eg, that a person must be given a hearing before any action is taken against him/her), then the exercise of judicial power can be termed 'procedural due process'.  $\frac{110}{110}$ 

However, there is an alternative definition of these doctrines out there (hereinafter the 'alternative definition'), according to which the difference between substantive and procedural due process is based on whether the thing being challenged is a legislative or non-legislative governmental action. According to the alternative definition, substantive due process involves any Article 21 investigation of legislation, while procedural due process involves any Article 21 investigation of anything apart from legislation. Thus, if the government decides to terminate the services of one of its employees because he/she is a homosexual, and a court invalidates the decision under Article 21, then the alternative definition contemplates that this is still 'procedural due process' because the thing being challenged is not legislation. Similarly, if a court invalidates a statute which provides that a person accused of a criminal offence will not have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses, the alternative definition contemplates that this is 'substantive due process'. This chapter does not subscribe to the alternative definition. However, again, there appears to be no Supreme Court decision to tell us which definition is correct.

How, then, does one identify what 'substantive due process' is and what its limits are? First, like all constitutional law cases, there must be a conflict between the State (or one of its Article 12 instrumentalities) and an individual. There can be no substantive due process in cases between private parties. Secondly, the person aggrieved by a governmental action must complain that his right to 'life' or 'personal liberty' under Article 21 has been violated. Thus, a court cannot apply the doctrine of substantive due process while examining the right to practise a religion under Article 25. Thirdly, the court must hold that the action of the government (whether contained in a statute, order or otherwise) is substantively wrong—that is, that it is wrong for reasons that have nothing to do with procedure. However, there appear to be no judicially defined limits as to which substantive values a court will apply in an exercise of substantive due process. Thus, substantive due process is a dangerous doctrine, because it involves a court imposing its own values on the other branches of government.

Pure form due process is the most deferential of the three doctrines, while substantive due process is the least deferential. For example, while applying the procedural process doctrine, when a court chooses to insist that governmental authorities adopt suitable procedures in arriving at a decision, the court tries to ensure that the substantive outcome arrived at by the governmental authority will be a fair one, without imposing the court's own values on the governmental authority. However, when a court chooses to apply the doctrine of substantive due process, it aggressively challenges the very value choices of the popular branches of India's government, which is a remarkably countermajoritarian and democratically illegitimate exercise. Bearing this in mind, perhaps the doctrine of substantive due process ought only to be applied by courts to protect 'discrete and insular minorities<sup>'</sup><sup>111</sup>—who are theoretically incapable of protecting their rights through the majoritarian process.

## **VI. CONCLUSION**

Can it be said that in adopting substantive and procedural due process, the Supreme Court has betrayed the framers of the Constitution? The answer to this question might be in the negative for several reasons.

First, we have seen that the framers of the Constitution were themselves very ambivalent about the deletion of the term 'due process of law' from India's Constitution, which caused an uproar in the Constituent Assembly. The architect of India's Constitution, BR Ambedkar, was himself unsure about whether the clause ought to have been deleted or retained. The ambivalence of the framers towards this clause suggests that the Court was not utterly disregarding their core original intent when it read the 'due process of law' into India's Constitution.

Secondly, we have seen that BN Rau and Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar were worried that the due process clause would be used by Indian courts to invalidate social welfare legislation, like price control laws. However, the Court has not used 'due process' to invalidate social welfare legislation. In fact, often, the Court has used due process doctrines to protect the interests of vulnerable sections of society such as pavement dwellers and prisoners. In short, a '*Lochner* era' has not been seen on the Supreme Court of India under the due process clause.

Thirdly, the original intent of the framers of India's Constitution is not as sacrosanct as it is elsewhere. In an article written for *The Hindu* in 1948, BN Rau questioned the legitimacy of the Constitution of India, among other reasons, because it was being enacted by a body that had not been elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage.<sup>112</sup> In other words, one of the chief architects of India's Constitution—the very man responsible for deleting the due process clause from the Constitution expressed doubts about the legitimacy of the framers of the Constitution. Further, the Emergency taught the Supreme Court of India that the Constitution did not always have to be interpreted faithfully to its text or to the intent of the framers.

<sup>2</sup> See Granville Austin, *The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation* (Oxford University Press 1996) 84–115; TR Andhyarujina, 'The Evolution of Due Process of Law by the Supreme Court' in BN Kirpal and others (eds) *Supreme but Not Infallible: Essays in Honour of the Supreme Court of India* (Oxford University Press 2000) 193–213; Manoj Mate, 'The Origins of Due Process in India: The Role of Borrowing in Personal Liberty and Preventive Detention Cases' (2010) 28 Berkeley Journal of International Law 216, 221; Abhinav Chandrachud, *Due Process of Law* (Eastern Book Company 2011).

<span id="page-12-0"></span><sup>3</sup> For a history of substantive due process in US constitutional law, see Richard H Fallon, Jr, 'Some Confusions About Due Process, Judicial Review, and Constitutional Remedies' (1993) 93 Columbia Law Review 309; John Harrison, 'Substantive Due Process and the Constitutional Text' (1997) 83 Virginia Law Review 493; Erwin Chemerinsky, 'Substantive Due Process' (1999) 15 Touro Law Review 1501; David E Bernstein, '*Lochner* Era Revisionism, Revised: *Lochner* and the Origins of Fundamental Rights Constitutionalism' (2003) 92 Georgetown Law Journal 1; Ryan C Williams, 'The One and Only Substantive Due Process Clause' (2010) 120 Yale Law Journal 408; Nathan S Chapman and Michael W McConnell, 'Due Process as Separation of Powers' (2012) 121 Yale Law Journal 1672.

 $4$  Constitution of India 1950, art 394. Some provisions of the Constitution, however, came into force on 26 November 1949.

<sup>5</sup> *Re Ramlila Maidan Incident* (2012) 5 SCC 1.

<sup>6</sup> See *Selvi v State of Karnataka* (2010) 7 SCC 263.

 $2(1978)$  1 SCC 248.

<sup>8</sup> For a concise distinction between 'procedural due process' and 'substantive due process' under the US [Constitution,](#page-12-0) see Williams ( $\frac{n}{2}$ ) 3) 419.

<sup>2</sup> This might sound frivolous at first, but consider that in September 2013 a man was arrested by the police in Maharashtra for drinking tea in a suspicious manner. See Swati Deshpande, 'Drinking tea can't be a crime: Bombay HC' *Times of India* (New Delhi, 16

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>1</sup> A graduate of Madras and Cambridge universities, Rau was a member of the Indian Civil Service, and a former judge of the Calcutta High Court. He was being considered for the post of judge on the Federal Court of India. He subsequently served as a judge on the International Court of Justice. Sir Benegal Rau, *India's Constitution in the Making* (Allied Publishers Private Limited 1963) v, xix. His brother, B Shiva Rao, was a noted scholar of early Indian constitutional law. See 'Late Mr. B.N. Rau' *Times of India* (New Delhi, 2 December 1953) 7.