#### **754 Jamaican Maroons**

- Wallace, A. F. C. (1951). Some psychological determinants of culture change in an Iroquoian community. *Smithsonian Institution. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin, 149*, 55–76. Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office.
- Wallace, A. F. C. (1952). The modal personality structure of the Tuscarora Indians as revealed by the Rorschach test. *Smithsonian Institution. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin, 150*. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- Wallace, A. F. C. (1958). Dreams and the wishes of the soul: A type of psychoanalytic theory among the seventeenth century Iroquois. *American Anthropologist, 60*, 234–248.
- Wallace, A. F. C. (1970). *The death and rebirth of the Seneca*. New York: Knopf.
- Wallace, A. F. C. (1971). Handsome Lake and the decline of the Iroquois matriarchate. In F. L. K. Hsu (Ed.), *Kinship and culture* (pp. 367–376). Chicago: Aldine

- Weaver, S. M. (1971). Smallpox or chickenpox: An Iroquoian community's reaction to crisis. *Ethnohistory, 18*, 361–378.
- Weaver, S. M. (1972). Medicine and politics among the Grand River Iroquois: A study of the non-conservatives. *National Museum of Man publications in ethnology 4*. Ottawa: National Museums of Canada.
- Wells, R. N. (1994). Mohawk. In M. B. Davis (Ed.), *Native America in the twentieth century: An encyclopedia* (pp. 353–354). New York: Garland.
- Wray, C. F., Sempowski, M. L., & Saunders, L. P. (1991). Tram and Cameron: Two early contact era Seneca sites. *Rochester Museum & Science Center research records, no. 21*.
- Wray, C. F., Sempowski, M. L., Saunders, L. P., & Cervone, G. C. (1987). The Adams and Culbertson sites. *Rochester Museum & Science Center research records, no. 19*.

# **Jamaican Maroons**

#### **George Brandon**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Windward Maroons, Leeward Maroons. Also call themselves Nyankimpong Pickibo ("children of the Creator" in Twi).

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

There are two major centers of Maroon life in Jamaica. The Leeward Maroons are centered in the mountainous Cockpit country of the Western half of Jamaica in the parishes of St. James, St. Elizabeth, and Trelawney. The spiritual and physical center of the Maroons in this area is the village of Accompong with significant Maroon populations in Aberdeen, Maroon Town, and Whitehall. On the eastern half of the island, in the Blue Mountains, is the other center of Maroon culture, the village of Moore town. Other Windward Maroon settlements in this area include Scots Hall and Charlestown. Most of the time Maroons speak a Jamaican patois that derives most of its vocabulary from English but often has syntactical and grammatical features more akin to those common in West African languages. Both Maroon groups also possess an archaic language they call Kromanti, an African-based tongue that nowadays has no consistent native speakers but survives in ritual songs and in old folktales. In Accompong there is a small but significant Rastafarian community that has added its own distinctive form of Rasta-talk to an already complex linguistic situation.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Maroon identity is based more on history, land and sacred charter, and the primacy of certain social values than on cultural or linguistic distinctiveness. Jamaica's Maroons trace their origins to explorers, livestock managers, and militia brought to Jamaica from Africa and the Iberian peninsula by the Spanish in the 1550s when various European colonizers contended for possession of the island. The Africans had been commissioned by Spain to raise livestock, intercede with the remaining Arawak Indians, and protect the island from other European powers should they attack. When slavery became the operative principle of colonization and the British contested Spanish possession of the island, this growing group who had already intermingled with the remaining

#### **Context of Health 755**

Arawaks to some extent—refused to align themselves with either the Spanish or the British; instead they grabbed their weapons and took to the hills to forge a new life for themselves on their own terms. It was because of this that they came to be referred to as Maroon, a term deriving from the Spanish *cimmaron*, meaning "wild" or "untamed" and referring especially to domesticated animals that escape and return to the wild.

By no means were the Maroons a homogeneous group. Their numbers included people from various ethnic groups of West and Central Africa, Spanish deserters, runaways who had found their way to Jamaica from Barbados, Africans mixed with Arawak, and refugees from shipwrecked slave ships including a few who were native to Madagascar. Out of this heterogeneous collection of peoples they forged a new group that fanned out across the island to form the Leeward Maroons centered in Accompong in the western mountains of Jamaica's Cockpit country, and the Windward Maroons in the Blue Mountain region on the eastern side of Jamaica. Despite the distance that separates the Leeward and Windward Maroons, the two groups are in contact and have long maintained relations with each other.

Jamaican Maroons possess an abstract conception of history focused on the military and political events of the Maroon Wars and on the 1738 and 1739 treaties that the Leeward and Windward Maroons concluded with the British government. In this conception of history the "first time Maroons"—that is, the original Maroons and those who waged the warfare that led to the treaty—achieve a mythic and heroic status. The "first time Maroons" and the next generation of "Old People" were venerated in rituals after they died and the most important war leaders such as Cudjoe, Nanny, and Accompong were promoted into a spiritual pantheon. Origin myths grew up around them and the oldest Maroon religion was essentially an ancestor cult devoted to the spirits of these people. The treaties ending more than 80 years of intermittent warfare with the British have also achieved a sacred status. The 1738 and 1739 treaties ceded land to each of the Maroon groups as a whole rather than to individual Maroons and the communal ownership of these lands has remained an important anchor of Maroon identity among both Leeward and Windward Maroons up to the present day.

Today Maroons are a part of Jamaica's rural peasantry and share much of its culture. Most rural Jamaican communities have populations of less than 4,000 and Accompong and Mooretown are probably at the midrange with populations of about 2,500 to 3,000 each if you include their environs. Men and women both farm but housework is performed mainly by women and children. The influence of orthodox Protestant religious denominations, various heterodox Afro-Jamaican forms such as Revival and Rastafarianism, and survivals of Myal, an early creolized version of African ancestor veneration, are as evident in Maroon communities as they are throughout the rest of rural Jamaica. Maroon family and household structure exhibit the same extreme variability of form, frequent dispersal of children across households, multiple forms of mating, late marriage, and female-headed households that we find all across the rural areas. Still Maroons' history as rebels against slavery and their self-image as fighters are keys to many of their social and communal values.

Independence, communalism, and self-sufficiency are important Maroon values stemming from their warrior heritage. The peasant's attachment to land has been given a particular valence by the sacred status of the Maroon treaties and because Maroons anchor their conception of history and some important social and cultural values to specific geographical sites. Maroons have a reputation throughout Jamaica as skillful practitioners of the Jamaican magic tradition of Obeah and as makers of powerful traditional medicines. While Maroons are apt to protest to outsiders that they do not practice Obeah, in fact some of them do. No such stigma or denial attaches to Maroon traditional medicine, though. Traditional medicine is now being seen as an anchor of contemporary Maroon identity and non-Maroon entrepreneurs have appropriated this connection between Maroons and associate it with their own commercial preparations to increase customer appeal. A ceremonial and ritual figure unique to the Jamaican Maroons is the Maroon abeng player. The abeng, a side-blown animal horn producing a narrow range of pitches, once communicated messages across the distances separating Maroon groups. When the first time Maroons were alive the abeng conveyed important military information between camps in coded messages that reflected the tonal features of some African languages. Nowadays, the abeng summons the community to town meetings, announces difficulties and deaths, and plays an important symbolic role in funerals and holidays.

## **CONTEXT OF HEALTH**

Maroons are politically, socially, and economically marginalized within Jamaica. The 1738/39 treaties gave the colonial government the right to appoint Maroon chiefs (called "Colonels") and also created a position for "Whites" who fulfilled the twin functions of representing the Maroons to the central government and also representing the interests of the central government to the Maroons. In effect the Colonel became a middleman to a middleman and the colonial government refused to meet with or recognize Maroons. The political situation did not improve substantially after Jamaica gained independence from England in 1962. Both the Peoples' National Party and the Jamaica Labor Party have attempted to cultivate a broad base of support among Jamaican Maroons from time to time because of the party loyalties of their large extended families. Partisan politics, however, has brought few tangible rewards to Maroons and has even fomented serious divisions within the communities.

Because of the 1738/39 treaties Maroons pay no taxes to the national government and so get little in the way of services in return. Their roads are badly maintained—even by Jamaican standards—and the government contributes meagerly to Maroon educational and health services. Maroon involvement in government-sponsored agricultural initiatives has been a roller coaster affair subject to dramatic market fluctuations, expensive chemical inputs to agriculture, and high transportation costs. At the same time as traditional farming methods are waning and cooperative labor arrangements supplanted by wages, Maroons find themselves vulnerable and dependent upon an external economic system over which they have no control.

All in all, an estimated 100,000 people in Jamaica regard themselves as Maroons or Maroon descendants. Not all of them live in the traditional Maroon areas. Many Maroons now live in nearby cities such as Montego Bay or Port Antonio, or they move to Kingston in search of work and shuttle back and forth between urban life and the rural environment of the Maroon settlements. In the late 1950s, just before Jamaica's independence, a significant number of Maroons left for England and a steady stream of migration there has continued ever since. This overseas Maroon population sends remittances home and continues to have rights to land in the settlements. More recently a new stream of migration has begun, this time it is elderly and retired Maroons who are returning from England to the communities in which they were born.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

There are no full-time Maroon healers. Every healer practices their particular form of medicine part-time, alongside farming and sometimes even a third occupation or trade. There are five types of Maroon healers: herbalists, midwives, bonesetters, dancers, and science men.

**Herbalists.** The training of Maroon herbalists frequently combines apprenticeship and family tradition with self-teaching. Everyone begins learning about the healing properties of plants from an early age but only a few pursue it conscientiously. There is often a religious component in the herbalist's practice and orientation; many of them use the Christian Bible and see no opposition between prayer and healing by faith, and healing through herbal medicine. Some are community workers with high standing and live in the towns; a few spend much of their time in the forest and are marginal to the community but bring in plants that are difficult to find in the settlements or the fields. A few herbalists have established reputations wide enough to bring in clients from the towns and coastal cities or even overseas. In recent years some herbalists have formed groups to share knowledge, promote their craft, and mount small-scale economic ventures.

**Midwives.** Midwives are trained by older women through observing and assisting them in births. Midwives form a loose network of cooperation and work as teams with shifting membership assisting the delivery of Maroon babies under the direction of an elder woman, the nana.

**Bonesetters.** Bonesetters train primarily by observation and the empirical experience of seeing bones set. There is sometimes a family tradition in this work but the role can be assumed by anyone with the requisite experience and skill. The bonesetter needs to be able to fashion splints, do some elementary massage, and administer herbs that help reduce swelling and pain and assist healing. Bonesetters usually work as individuals who gradually establish a reputation within the Maroon community.

**Dancers.** The dancer was a distinctive ritual and religious figure that was last seen in Mooretown in the 1940s. Dancers specialized in ailments caused by spirits and in severe cases that had not been resolved by other medical means. They conducted public and private rituals in which the dancer, assisted by prayers and drumming, went into spirit possession and then healed from the possessed state.

**"Science Men".** The distinctive characteristics of this kind of Maroon healer relate to their role as seers and

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 757**

diviners, and their use of European magic and occult sciences. Invocations, fashioning charms and talismans, and using oils, candles, and holy water in their rituals are part of their expertise. They may specialize in fortune telling, sexual and love magic, magic related to farming or treating particular health problems with a combination of rituals and herbal medicine. "Science men" or "scientists" are frequently associated or identified with obeah (the Afro-Jamaican sorcery tradition) and herbalism, and may or may not perform any of the other healer roles already mentioned. They are often ambivalently valued figures inspiring both fear and respect. A few science men occasionally have clients coming in from abroad or from distant regions within Jamaica.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

### **Maroon Disease Theory: Etiology**

**Cold and Blood.** Cold and blood are important concepts in Maroon explanations of the causes of sickness. "Cold" is a fundamental element of Maroon etiology, an explanation for a general type of disease process with wide ramifications. When Maroons speak of "contracting a cold" or "contracting cold" they are referring not to the sickness itself as we might in speaking about a head cold, but to "cold" as a causal factor underlying the symptoms that have developed (Cohen, 1973, p. 69). According to them, "cold" is responsible for the majority of the sicknesses afflicting Maroons. "Cold" is a range on a continuum of judgments that Maroons use in describing bodily sensations related to temperature. While this scheme of explanation tends to focus on the effect of cold, the other extreme is not neglected and a few ailments are traced to the effect of too much heat, the most prominent of these being "belly hot."

"Cold" is a pervasive generalized sensory quality or force that emanates from certain objects or places in the environment. The earth or ground is a source of cold; so is immersion in cold water or getting soaked in the torrential downpours that mark the lives of both Leeward and Windward Maroons day after day for weeks at a time. But encounters with these cold-emanating elements of the environment are common everyday occurrences. Under certain conditions, however, contact with cold can adversely affect people's health. This contact is even more dangerous if cold is actually able to enter the body and reside there. Cold permeates the whole body once it has made its way inside.

Blood is the most important part of the body, its vital force. Maroons evaluate and describe blood by referring to its ability to flow, its purity, and its strength. Break down and impurity of blood cause the organs to malfunction and fail. For Maroons a warm body is a healthy body. It is the blood and its circulation through the body that keep the body warm. When cold intrudes itself into the body the thickness and stubbornness of cold mix with the blood, rendering it stagnant, obstructing perspiration (itself a cleansing process). If the blood is pure, strong, and flowing it will force the cold back out of the body otherwise the cold mixes with blood and causes it to "sleep" and not flow, and the body becomes vulnerable to disease.

What causes and facilitates the intrusion of cold into the body is the sudden or rapid alternation of extreme states of heat and cold. This is especially true if the rapid/sudden alternation of heat and cold is repetitive and reoccurs over a few months or goes on over years. Cold accumulates in the body because of poor defenses (i.e., impure, stagnant, or weak blood). Cold becomes "rooted" in the body as subsequent intrusions occur, only emerging as an identifiable disease years later. The accumulation and repeated intrusions of cold trigger a gradual development from transient discomfort to chronic disease and pain (arthritis, asthma) or even permanent disability (blindness, deafness) (Cohen, 1973, p. 75.) Some health problems ultimately traced to cold intrusion include: loss of appetite, malaise, asthma, pneumonia, diarrhea, boils, deafness, blindness, arthritis, catarrh, some fevers, blockage of the urine, sore throat, tuberculosis, and earaches.

**Germs.** Maroons attribute some diseases to entities they call "germs." Germs are little organisms living in the ground (Some people say that they can see them). Germs breed in dust and in dirt and it is from there that they venture out to attack human beings. Once they attack, germs survive by "feeding on the flesh" of their victims. "Cold" in the body provides germs with an environment where they can thrive, but germs will not abide long in "heat" (Cohen, 1973, pp. 79–80). While it can be argued that their conception is an inadequately understood mixture of the antique and the contemporary, nevertheless it does overlap with biomedical understandings in so far as

Maroons think of germs as very small living things capable of causing disease.

Germs provide Maroon etiology with an agent to use in explanations of disease causation that draw on the idea of contagion. This contagion can be between one human being and another, and also between human and nonhuman life forms as in the case of flies and mosquitoes. According to them, germs may be transmitted by food. (The necessity of boiling pork before cooking it any further comes from the need to kill germs as much as anything else.) Coughing in someone's face, putting one's foot in another's boot, and drinking from a sick person's glass are other means of transmitting germs and sickness. Malaria, gonorrhea, "night fever," urinary blockage, tooth decay, grunitch, ringworm, other body itches, and sores are all problems Maroons attribute to germs. Urinary blockage comes from drinking unclear water, that is water contaminated with dirt and therefore, with germs.

Maroons have no direct action they can take against germs and the preventive strategies they employ against germs are mainly prompted by the idea of contagion between human beings. They do not use their germ ideas to explain the upper respiratory infections that are so common among them and which the visiting medical teams treat with antibiotics. Although Maroons appreciate the efficacy of the antibiotics they get from physicians, they do not understand the basis of that efficacy, and they do not relate it to their own indigenous germ theory.

**Things People Do or Do Not Do.** Maroon's etiological system also implicates behaviors related to food and physical exertion as causes of sickness.

*Diet.* Mooretown Maroons trace problems such as constipation, diarrhea, stomach pains, chest and gas pains, nausea, vomiting, and high blood pressure (and the headaches and nose bleeds they connect with it) back to an imbalance between "hard" and "soft" foods in the diet. Mooretown Maroons consider yellow and Negro yams to be "hard" foods. (Pumpkin, dasheen, and coco are hard foods, too.) Other yams, though, such as renta and St. Vincent yams, are "soft," as are boiled banana, boiled rice, chocho, and mango (Cohen, 1973, p. 80). The amount of meat a person consumes is also considered important. Too much beef, mutton, or "rich" food injures the body.

There is a small minority of Maroons in Accompong who are Rastafarians and follow that religion's dietary practices. For them even following the dietary strictures noted above does not ensure good health, either physically or spiritually. The most orthodox of the Rastas are vegetarians, eschewing all meat especially pork. For the most part they either grow their own food or trade for it with other Rastas, and promote a doctrine of "ital" or "natural" eating that bans salt, sugar, alcohol, and the store bought foods that so often contain these substances. Their views have begun to spread but they still constitute a marginal minority group among Maroons. One point where the Rastas and more general Accompong Maroon ideas converge, however, is on the issue of pesticides and chemical fertilizers. Quite a few Accompong Maroons oppose the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides for growing food crops. They would not use them and say that eating foods grown this way affects people's health and causes disease.

*Work, Exercise, and Physical Exertion.* We noted the importance Maroons attach to blood and blood circulation when we described their ideas about what happens when "cold" enters and lodges itself within the body. Contrary to the stagnating and contaminating effects that cold has on the blood; work, exercise, and physical exertion cause blood to flow freely hence directly and positively affecting health. Physical work also cleanses the body of internal poisons that adversely affect blood quality. The poisons leave the body through perspiration. Maroons view perspiration itself as a cleansing process.

Hard work has a social value for Maroons and is an important component of how men assess each other as farmers. They also believe that hard work has health consequences. When people are too sedentary, do not work enough, and do not get enough exercise, sometimes they get sick. On the other hand, a person can exert themselves too much or inappropriately and end up with health problems too, especially if they fall or get hit by something. Excessive or inappropriate exertion underlies back pain and pains in the heart, biliousness, stiff neck, cataracts and eye inflammation, hernias, and some instances of urinary bleeding (i.e., those not caused by falls or gonorrhea). Physical exertion also includes sexual intercourse. "Running around with too many women" leads to impotence. Sometimes Maroons use exercise, particularly walking, as a form of self-treatment as when Accompong Maroons with chest colds attempt to treat the cold by "walking it out."

*Emotional Reactions.* Although emotions are a minor component of their disease theory system, Maroons do believe that emotional reactions can cause health

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 759**

problems. Too much excitement, for example, or a startling sudden fright can cause pains in the heart (Cohen, 1973, p. 82). If a pregnant woman has a strong emotional response to a particular person or animal, the attributes that ignited the pregnant mother's emotional reaction—(a man's deformity or hirsuteness, an animal's crippled limb)—get transferred to her unborn child. Later on, though it may stop short of tears, a mother's disappointment or anger at some aspect of her child's behavior can seek vengeance and harm the child on its own without her conscious intention. In the last two instances the mother–child bond provides the social and biological context in which the mother's emotional reaction creates an unusual relationship between the child and an external event.

**Spiritual Intervention: Duppies, the Devil, and God.** Religious ideology thoroughly permeates the lives of rural Jamaicans and spirit concepts supply a pervasive idiom for explaining misfortune. Although Maroon etiology charts the actions of duppies, the Devil, and God as they relate to the domain of human sickness; the full domain of spiritual interventions in Maroon life is much wider and the true domain being dealt with is not disease and/or sickness but misfortune: road and farming accidents, problems with neighbors, marital tensions, sexual difficulties, economic woes, and personal anxieties. The actions of spirits may underlie all of these problems.

Duppies are ancestral spirits, also called "shadows," "shades," and "wandering spirits." The duppy differs from the soul in that it remains in the grave after death; the soul does not. With the proper rites the shadow reaches the land of the dead where the fact that it has made the transition from being a live person to being a dead one is confirmed. Without the proper funeral rites the "shadow" becomes a duppy, a dispossessed and dissatisfied ghost that brings misfortune and terrorizes the community. When a duppy's attack comes through illness, it is called a spirit illness. The Devil also afflicts humans with sickness and, though the range of sicknesses is no different from those associated with duppies, the Devil is more selective in his choice of victims. These are primarily people who are sinful as opposed to those who are righteous and of strong Christian faith. God can also visit sickness upon a person as a punishment for wrong doing, for someone who has malevolently, intentionally, and knowingly harmed other people.

Spirits can cause any sickness. Whether the sickness results from spiritual intervention is not something Maroons can recognize by the fact that the sickness has occurred or by the symptoms it presents. In addition, using spiritual intervention to explain the cause of a particular disease does not automatically cancel out other possible explanations for it. Although Maroons may attribute "madness," "fits," leprosy, and stroke to duppies and spiritual interventions, they will acknowledge other causes as well. If the sickness or misfortune has struck suddenly and for no apparent reason, Maroons may suspect that spirits have been involved.

Some Maroons have an idea of how the sicknesses they encounter are supposed to progress and this colors how they explain them. Often this concept of disease progression resembles an S-curve with a gradual mounting of disease symptoms and discomfort that reaches a peak of maximum intensity and is then followed by a less gradual falloff. When the sickness does not follow the progression healers and lay people recognize as normal for that ailment, they may be forced to consider whether there has been some intervention by spirits. In other cases, they are forced to resort to spiritual intervention as an explanation because they have exhausted all the other possibilities their etiological system offers and because the sickness has proved refractory to both folk and biomedical treatments.

### **Treatments**

All of the healer types make use of a wide variety of locally available plants in the forms of infusions of leaf teas, decoctions made from the roots of plants to create "roots tonics" or "bitters," and tinctures using white rum, wine or some other alcohol as a solvent medium. The Maroon herbal pharmacy supplies them vermifuges, cathartics, sedatives, diuretics, emmenagogues, antihypertensives, and medicines serving many other uses. The uses often overlap and are emphasized variously in the practices of the different healer types. For example, many of the same herbs that are used to modulate menstruation, ease, and speed up labor in childbirth, and perform purifying "washouts" of the body also induce abortion, so midwifery requires a sophisticated knowledge of these herbs and their dosage effects. "Bush baths" are another means of using herbs medicinally. The healer ties up bundles of leaves and dips them in a tub or small basin of hot bath water to steep. The patient either submerges himself in the water or sits over the water's steam. Treatment with poultices involves crushing the plants into a pulpy mucilaginous mass, which is then positioned over and wrapped around the affected area. Poultices can be made from either fresh or dried herbs. If dried herbs are being used a common practice is to mix them with cornmeal or some other starchy substance to bind the dry leaves together and wet them in an effective way. Another use of medicinal plants in healing involves striking or lightly hitting the patient's body with the plants themselves.

Religious ritual is an integral part of the recognition and treatment of some medical problems. Some Maroon healers claim a kind of psychic ability that allows them to diagnose a patient's ailments with no information from them. They may do this through divination with devices such as a chunk of crystal or the Bible, or simply by looking at the patient. Bush baths are thought to have both medicinal and spiritual properties and may be accompanied by songs. Striking the patient's body with healing plants is regarded as a cleansing act and may be accompanied by songs and associated with other rituals. And the midwife augments her knowledge of herbal medicine not only with skills in physically manipulating the fetus and the pregnant woman's body, but also with the ability to perform the ritual procedures needed after the birth.

All three spiritual causes of sickness and misfortune duppies, the Devil, and God—are resorts when other explanations within the etiological system fail, or the sickness is anomalous, and common therapies do not suffice. As Maroons' ability to predict, explain, and treat specific sicknesses diminishes, spirits' explanatory role increases. Furthermore, as the spiritual actor and the mechanisms involved become more remote from the human and less alterable by human action, they become more and more powerful. There are defenses against sickness-causing duppies (among them obeahmen, science men, and good duppies). If God did not defeat the Devil in the battle for the sinner's heart, in the Mooretown of olden days at least, it was possible to call on the dancer, a healer who could succeed where ordinary healers could not and was able with his spirits' aid to stand and confront the Devil himself. But before the wrath of God even extraordinary healers are helpless. Any sickness that God causes can only be healed by God. The utter helplessness of humans before God testifies to the ultimate power of God over all. This kind of sickness brings Maroons into direct confrontation with that ultimate power and imparts the knowledge that in this situation they have reached the absolute limit of their human and spiritual capabilities.

The national government has provided biomedical training to a small number of Maroons as health aides and these health aides render first aid for minor problems to people in the community and assist visiting nurses when they come through. Church-sponsored medical teams including physicians are an infrequent presence in the Maroon settlements and may only appear for a few days two or three times a year. Sometimes antibiotics obtained through a doctor's prescription become items of trade, are sold for a few dollars, and get into the hands of people who use them inappropriately and ineffectively. Given the sporadic availability of biomedical care, most Maroons rely on self-treatment with over-the-counter items or the teas they know as a first resort. Vicks Vapo-Rub, the bathing soap sometimes incorporated into poultices, kerosene, and headache and cold remedies such as Comtrex and aspirin are all commercial items available locally and used to self-treat health problems. White rum also figures prominently in self-treatment and in the materia medica of herbalists.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

## **Pollution, Purity, and Sexual Experience**

In rural Jamaica generally sexuality is closely connected with ideas of pollution, waste, and impurity. The male's semen is viewed as a kind of waste product that women's bodies are only able to tolerate and fully absorb when it fertilizes an egg. Otherwise women's absorption of semen fosters decay, pressure and sickness, things they avoid only because of menstruation, a process that cleanses the body of semen, excess blood and a host of other impurities. Men's bodies do not accumulate impurities as rapidly as women's do; and men also tend to cleanse themselves more rapidly of these impurities through sweating. Maroons do not consider sexual intercourse to be either good or bad in itself. Instead they consider it to be inevitable, but also healthy, for most people. It is denial of the sexual impulse and of sexual gratification that they regard as unhealthy, as it leads, in their thought, to mental instability and "madness" in women and back problems and accumulation of toxic substances in men due to their failure to ejaculate.

Sexual experiences generally begin at mid-adolescence so that 14- and 15-year-olds are often sexually active. Both females and males are likely to have a succession of sexual partners. But males are more likely to have several sexual partners at once. Women are more likely to have a series of

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 761**

short-lived relationships before settling into a more steady sexually exclusive relationship with one male; over her life there may be a series of these longer lasting unions, which may or may not eventuate in legal marriage. This mating pattern is reflected, albeit negatively in certain ideas about the health effects of multiple mating and multiple sexual partners. These operate differently for females and males. Each man's semen is supposed to be unique, differing from that of all other males. If a woman has more than one sexual partner at a time their semen will mix inside her body after she absorbs them. Mixing different men's semen is both taxing and dangerous to the woman's body and accelerates the process of decay and sickness we described earlier. This belief tends to decrease women's attempts to obtain sex outside of a current relationship. The corresponding belief for men is one that regards excessive intercourse or having too many women as a cause of impotence or erectile dysfunction. In this case men may seek out any of a number of roots tonics that claim to deal with these problems (Cohen, 1973; Sobo 1993, p. 221).

Having a baby automatically sweeps out the impurities in a woman's reproductive system. The new mother becomes clean while the childless woman's level of purity ebbs and flows with her menstrual cycle. Post-menopausal women, however, escape this purity bind altogether. After menopause their wombs are thought to "close up," and a man's discharge cannot lodge within them. They neither generate impurities relevant to sexuality nor can they absorb them from men; nothing accumulates within them. The woman who is childless is pitied rather than stigmatized or derided. In part this is because the cause of childlessness is not thought to lie within her but with her mate or their relationship. Mooretown Maroon males believe men are the most important and powerful element in reproduction; women are just containers. If a couple is infertile, then, the blame falls on the man because his "seed" (semen) must have become sick or weak (Cohen, 1973). Maroons also believe that disharmony between sexual partners may cause infertility.

### **Contraception and Abortion**

There seems to be a high degree of ambivalence about both contraception and abortion among Maroons. Reproduction forges links between males and females that imply a regime of reciprocity and kin connections which fragile, conflicted, and unreliable as they often are—still have to be dealt with and often channel decisions around contraceptive practices and abortion. According to some Maroon women indigenous birth control practices have been lost in Accompong, leaving no local alternatives for contraception. Couples in Accompong have become almost totally dependent on outside sources and nonindigenous methods for birth control. Indeed contraception goes against the implicit ideology surrounding both sexual intercourse and social intercourse. Contraception places the power of continuity within the hands of women as opposed to men. Contraception also removes the woman from the round of reciprocity with the network of the partner. On the other hand contraception also allows people to limit the size of their families and strike the balance between what they can invest in the care and rearing of children and what the children can return to the parents in terms of love, care, and labor.

A survey of clinic records of women utilizing family planning in Accompong gives a tentative picture of contraceptive use that differs from the conclusions of the National Survey for the region. Depo-Provera injection is clearly the most common contraceptive method used by women in Accompong. Younger women favor condoms. Condom use peaks between ages 18 and 24 and drops dramatically after 30 years of age. Intrauterine device use is uncommon and is only found in women under the age of 30.

Just under 23% of the women in the Accompong clinic sample had had one or more abortions. Undoubtedly this figure understates the abortion rate for women because it only accounts for the surgical abortions of women referred by clinic physicians. While contraceptive knowledge has been lost in some Maroon communities, knowledge of herbal abortifacients has not. Furthermore, as we noted earlier, herbal abortifacients form part of a continuum of treatments aimed at purifying the blood, regulating menstruation, and managing childbirth. Early abortions, whether spontaneous or accidentally or deliberately induced by natural medicines, might not even be classified as abortions by those experiencing them, nor reported as such to anyone at all.

The abortion rate reflected in clinic records appears to be related to the length of time a woman has been involved in family planning on one hand, and the number of times she has been pregnant on the other. The number of abortions per woman decreases the longer they have been on birth control and is highest for women who have used contraception for a year and a half or less. Elisa Sobo's rural Jamaican informants supported a suggestion put forward by Brody that Jamaican women's use of abortion increased with successive pregnancies (Brody, 1981, p. 51). Even my very limited quantitative data from Accompong also tend toward this conclusion and implies that Maroons share this correlation of abortion and pregnancy with the wider Jamaican population.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

The traditional Maroon birth process involved a team of women headed by an elder midwife called a nana. There are few nanas today. Contemporary Maroon women frequently voice the need to train midwives and revive the practice of midwifery but the remaining midwives are not called on very often except in emergencies. Nowadays most women trek considerable distances to hospitals in neighboring towns to give birth. First I will describe what was the traditional practice until fairly recently.

The mother in labor is taken to a birthing room or some other area where she is prepared to give birth. Typically the nana administers the woman a variety of teas specialized for different purposes: teas to cleanse the bowels; a tea made from fresh cut cerassee to cleanse her uterus and womb. Other teas will have already been given to her in advance of the labor pains—to prepare her to dilate. The nana "bands" or places a cloth around the mother's stomach, anoints it with leaf herbs and oil, and massages her throughout the delivery. If the nana comes to believe that the labor is taking too long she will give the mother castor oil, penny royal tea, or a tea made from piabah to speed it up (Crellin et al., 1998, pp. 41–42, 63, 65).

After the baby is born, the nana and birth team have to do a number of things to protect the baby from sickness, and establish the baby's relationship to the land where it will reside, as well as its relationship to the community of ancestral dead. They lightly wash the newborn child with white rum and massage the bottoms of the baby's feet, its head, and navel with this liquor to ward off cold. Newborns attract spirits, so the nana uses bluing derived from plant dyes to mark an "X" on the baby's forehead and also rubs some onto the infant's eyebrows to prevent spirits from troubling or harming it. Putting asafetida on the baby's navel discourages playful spirits from even coming around.

The nana and the birthing team burn the placenta under a tree that is dedicated to the baby and bury it there

**762 Jamaican Maroons**

in a brief ceremony that includes making a nonalcoholic libation to the ancestors and reading psalms from the Bible. The baby's navel they tie off with a cotton string and burn it and bury it at the same spot as the afterbirth or, failing this, under another tree dedicated to, and thereafter symbolizing, the baby's link to its ancestors. After the delivery the nana and birthing team also give the new mother a special bush bath. (Some midwives have the mother drink some of this bath mixture before they throw it out.) Mother and baby then spend the next 9 days together in the birthing room where the women will look after them during the subsequent days of "special care and welcoming."

### **Infancy**

Depending on the number of other children a mother has and the nature of her other responsibilities in the household, babies usually feed at the breast until their first teeth appear. Sometimes women use a commercially prepared formula along with breast-milk. Goat milk is available if there is a problem with feeding but it is used only in emergencies. When infants cease breast-feeding they are weaned onto soft foods, often a preparation composed of seasonal fruits and vegetables in a pulverized form. Mothers may also spoon-feed infants a thick porridge, fruit juice, and mashed fruits. It is not unusual to see a 3-year-old child receiving porridge from a bottle. Infants' diets may lack variety but malnutrition is uncommon. Sometimes, though, there are problems: When infants' teeth come in: their gums hurt and they may develop diarrhea. A Maroon remedy for the gum pain is to rub the gums with a young tomato. The diarrhea can be helped with a "rehydration salt" of lime juice, sugar, and soda given by the spoonful.

A not uncommon malady of infants is the "mole cold." According to Maroons, this infantile malady develops either because the mother takes her infant outside while the rain is falling and the baby's fontanel becomes wet; or because the mother has not done a good job of drying the baby's scalp after bathing it. Mole colds are fateful for later life. If the mole cold takes root, Maroons predict the child will become a sickly adult (Cohen, 1973, p. 75).

### **Childhood and Adolescence**

Mothers or grandmothers care for small children by using home remedies and herbs. Within the household there is

#### **Health Through the Life Cycle 763**

a value placed upon listening to parents and elders. While a small percentage of parents beat "bad" children, parental discipline is usually light, consisting of a spank or yelling as well as reasoning. Children assist in household labor and, when they get older and strong enough, they help with farm work in the fields. Children are often dispersed or moved between households. These shifts in residence and between caretakers sometimes make a dramatic difference in the health status of infants and young children.

Children and adolescents quite early take on the dietary patterns of adults: yams, rice and kidney beans, breadfruit, dumplings, bananas, and plantain predominate at meals. Pineapple and papaya, oranges, and apples, neesberry, and ackee go in an out of season. Salt-preserved codfish is a mainstay because fresh fish is expensive and has to be brought in. Maroon diet makes protein deficiency a real problem for adolescents and both young and mature adults. Beef and pork rarely appear at meals and the diet is high in sugar, starches, and salt.

Immunization for common infectious diseases affecting children depends upon the visits of medical teams from non-governmental organizations or the existence of a clinic. Often sponsored by religious groups which dispatch the teams 2 or 3 times a year, the medical teams are conscientious in giving, recording, and maintaining a program of childhood immunizations, and doubtless the disease picture for early childhood in Maroon communities would be very different without them. But immunizations do not take care of everything and there are number of very common health issues for Maroon children.

The most prominent children's health problems include worms (round worms, pinworms, tapeworms, long worms, etc.), upper respiratory infections, sores, asthma, rashes, "runny belly," scabies, eczema, "loose bowels," ear infections, iron and zinc deficiencies (often a result of worm infestation), and pica. Accompong Maroons associate children's worm infestations with excessive sugar consumption.

A significant part of Maroon childhood is spent in school. These are usually Protestant mission schools that emphasize Christian religious teachings while also giving instruction in secular subjects, mete out harsh discipline, and have corporal punishment as a standard practice. The poorer Maroon children may only wear their shoes—if they possess them at all—to school or church and go barefoot the rest of the time, a situation that predisposes them to pedal fungal infections. About a quarter of the students drop out at the primary school level, especially boys. Whether they have remained in school or not, by age 12 Maroon children are often able to take care of simple medical problems on their own using traditional medicines, especially teas, and fresh picked leaves.

### **Adulthood**

The two largest age groups in Mooretown and Accompong are the youth and elders. Adults and young adults, particularly the males, are highly mobile and are often away from the villages for long periods. Working away from home forces them to leave their children in the care of grandparents or other relatives. Of the middle aged as many have migrated as have remained in the countryside, gone to England or the coastal cities. Hypertension, back pain, insomnia, arthritis, and epigastric pain bedevil the adult men, as do the injuries and wounds that result from farm work. The health problems of Maroon women are very similar to the males' except that the women are more likely to suffer from headaches and psychiatric disorders.

Adults use both traditional medicines and the nonprescription commercial medications available at small local stores for self-treatment. Maroons treat themselves for common mild problems or may seek assistance from another adult or a relative. Mild problems that linger may occasion a trip to a town where there is a biomedical practitioner or an older mature Maroon woman who has had much experience with diagnosing or treating similar problems. Severe, painful, or disturbing problems of long duration call for either a biomedical doctor or a more specialized Maroon healer. Sometimes a failure of biomedical diagnosis and treatment confirms the patient's own self-diagnosis and directs them back to the Maroon folk system where herbal therapies predominate, sometimes supplemented by divination and other rituals.

Menopause is dealt with through dietary prescriptions (such as increase in eating green, leafy vegetables) and a variety of herbs that are said to reduce the symptoms and strengthen the body. Domestic violence (men beating women) flares up because of rumors of female infidelity or men finding out that their women have been with other men. If attacked by men, women are encouraged to fight back. Men's drunkenness is an important cause of arguments and violence between men and women. Alcohol use also figures prominently in fights between men. Knives and machetes are the weapons of choice but injuries from using these weapons in fights are much less common than injuries from using the same tools in farm labor. No one I talked to could recall a local incident of murder or rape.

### **The Aged**

Prominent health problems of Maroon elders include chronic pain (hands, feet, stomach, and "all over"), high blood pressure, arthritis, stomach problems, nerves, weakness, and fatigue, also diabetes. Quite a few elderly Maroons continue doing light farm work into their sixties and seventies. Subsistence requires it. With the old cooperative work, labor exchange, and barter arrangements long laid low, elders must either farm or hire wage workers—not a viable option for most elderly Maroons. Instead the elders depend on their adult children who have remained in the Maroon communities to assist and look after them. Often, however, their children have left and gone to the cities or overseas. These children may send money back to elders but they are not there to look after them. In these cases other relatives take care of them.

### **Death and Burial**

Although women usually outlive men, Maroons generally die in their 60s and 70s. The abeng player is the first to be notified after a Maroon dies; his job is to blow the abeng to announce the death of a Maroon to all the Maroon community. Nowadays the body of the deceased is given over to a mortician in a nearby city for 2 or 3 weeks for embalming and to allow relatives across Jamaica or from overseas time to get to the Maroon community for the funeral. In Accompong they used to preserve the body within the village for 3 or 4 days before the funeral. This was done by sinking a zinc lined shaft into the ground, putting the body in it and keeping the shaft continuously filled with ice while draining off the water from the melting ice. The body orifices of the deceased (their ears, anus, nose, and eyes) would be stuffed with native coffee and cotton before placing it in the shaft.

Maroons have always buried their dead in coffins. People used to pitch in spontaneously to dig the grave but now at least some of the diggers have to be paid. Anyone can dig a grave and there is no stigma attached to being a gravedigger. At the graveside libations of white rum bring the ancestors near and give energy to the gravediggers who sometimes sing Kromanti songs while they work. It takes several days to dig the grave and construct the concrete burial vault. The deceased's family supplies the diggers with food at the gravesite and hosts a wake the night before the funeral.

After the abeng player has announced the arrival of the body, the funeral begins at a Christian church with a service usually called a "Thanksgiving." After the service the abeng player leads a procession from the church through the town to the cemetery blowing the abeng to make continuing musical announcement of the key events of the burial up to its final moments. The process of interment in the burial vault is accompanied by the blowing of the abeng and by hymn singing at the graveside.

This burial sequence is the same for men and women. Children who die after reaching school age receive the same kind of funeral and burial as adults, including the blowing of the abeng. Children who die before school age do not receive a funeral. Their mothers bury them without ceremony in a shallow vaultless grave dug behind the house.

The modern public cemeteries near churches supplement much older burial ground, which may or may not have the concrete slabs or raised headstones that are in common use to mark graves now. Some Maroons bury their dead relatives near their homes as opposed to the communal burial sites. They say they do this simply because they want their dead relatives near them.

## **REFERENCES**

- Barker, D., & Spence, B. (1988). Afro-Caribbean agriculture: A Jamaican Maroon community in transition. *Geographical Journal, 154*, 198–208.
- Barrett, L. (1976). Healing in a balmyard: The practice of folk healing in Jamaica, W. I. In W. D. Hand (Ed.), *American folk medicine* (pp. 285–300). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Besson, J. (1979). Symbolic aspects of land in the Caribbean: The tenure and transmission of land rights among Caribbean peasantries. In Malcolm Cross & Arnaud Marks (Eds.), *Peasants, plantations and rural communities in the Caribbean* (pp. 86–116). Location/ Guildford Press.
- Besson, J. (1997, Fall). Caribbean common tenures and capitalism: The Accompong Maroons of Jamaica. *Plantation Societies in the Americas, 4*(2 & 3), 201–232.
- Bilby, K. (1994). Maroon Culture as a distinct variant of Jamaican culture. In Kofi E. Agorsah (Ed.), *Maroon heritage: Archaeological, ethnographic and historical perspectives* (pp. 72–85). Kingston: Canoe Press.
- Brody, E. B. (1981). *Sex, contraception and motherhood in Jamaica*. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.