#### **Introduction 145**

- Guinebert, C. (1959). *The Jewish world at the time of Jesus*. New York: University Books.
- Hensley, D. (1993). *Hell's Gate: Terror at Bobby McKay's Music World*. Jacksonville, FL.: Audio Books Plus.
- Herskovits, M. J. (1937). *Life in a Haitian valley*. New York: Knopf.
- Hollan, D. (2000). Culture and dissociation in Toradja. *Transcultural Psychiatry, 37*, 545–559.
- Jeanmaire, H. (1951). *Dionysus: Histoire du culte de Bacchus*. Paris: Payot.
- Johnston, S. I. (2001). Charming children: The use of the child in ancient divination. *Arethusa, 34*, 97–117.
- Kahn, M. S., & Kelly, K. J. (2001). Cultural tensions in psychiatric nursing: Managing the interface between western mental health care and Xhosa traditional healing in South Africa. *Transcultural Psychiatry, 38*, 35–40.
- Kehoe, A. B. (2000). *Shamanism and religion: An anthropological exploration in critical thinking*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Kendall, L. (1985). *Shamans, housewives, and other restless spirits: Women in Korean ritual life*. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
- Kenyon, S. (ed.). (1995). Possession and social change in eastern Africa. *Anthropological Quarterly, 68*(2), 71–132.
- Kiev, Ari (ed.). (1964). *Magic, faith and healing: Studies in primitive psychiatry today*. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
- Kleinman, A. (1980). *Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lambeck, M. (1989). From disease to discourse: Remarks on the conceptualization of trance and spirit possession. In C. A. Ward (Ed.), *Altered states of consciousness and mental health: A crosscultural perspective*. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- Lewis, I. M. (1989). *Ecstatic religions* (Rev. ed.). Baltimore, MD: Penguin.
- Maurizio, L. (1995). Anthropology and spirit possession: A reconsideration of the Phythia's role at Delphi. *Journal of Hellenic Studies, 115*, 69–86.
- Moore, J. G. (1982). Music and dance as expressions of religious worship in Jamaica. In S. Ottenberg (Ed.), *African religious groups*

*and beliefs: Papers in honor of William R. Bascom*. Meerut, India: Folklore Institute.

- Palmié, S. (1991). *Das Exil der Götter: Geschichte und Vorstellungswelt einer afrokubanischen Religion*. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang.
- Prince, R. (1964). Indigenous Yoruba psychiatry. In A. Kiev (Ed.), *Magic, faith, and healing: Studies in primitive psychiatry today* pp. 84–120. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
- Raybeck, D., Schobe, J., & Grauberger. J. (1989). Women, stress and participation in possession cults: a reexamination of the calcium deficiency hypothesis. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* n.s. 2, 139–161.
- Salima, R. (1902). *Harems et musulmanes d'Egypte (Letters)*. Paris: Felix Juven.
- Shaara, L., & Strathern, A. (1992). A preliminary analysis of the relationship between altered states of consciousness, healing and social structure. *American Anthropologist*, *94*: 145–160.
- Sidky, H. (1994). Shamans and mountain spirits in Hunza. *Asian Folklore Studies, 53*, 57–96.
- Suryani, L., & Jensen, G. D. (1993). *Trance and Possession in Bali*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Welte, F. M. (1990). *Der Gnawa-Kult: Trancespiele, Geisterbeschwörung und Bessessenheit in Marokko*. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Peter Lang.
- Welte, F. M. (1999). Le cult des Gnaoua de Meknès. In A. Chlyeh (Ed.), *L'Uinvers des Gnaoua* (pp. 65–80). Paris: Éditions la Pensée Sauvage.
- Winkelman, M. (1992). *Shamans, priests, and witches: A cross-cultural study of magico-religious practitioners*. Tempe: Arizona State University.
- Witztum, E., Grisaru, N., & Budowski, D. (1996). The "Zar" possession syndrome among Ethiopian immigrants to Israel: Cultural and clinical aspects. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 69*, 207–225.

# **Shamanism**

#### **Michael Winkelman**

## **INTRODUCTION**

The term shaman entered English from other cultures (Flaherty, 1992) and has been attributed to practices around the world (Vitebsky, 2001). Shamanism received widespread academic attention following Eliade's (1964) *Shamanism: Archaic techniques of ecstasy*, which considered shamanism a worldwide healing practice involving ecstatic communication with the spirit world on behalf of the community (cf. Halifax, 1979; Hultkrantz, 1973). Whether shamanism is cross-cultural or regionally specific, and consequently an etic or emic phenomenon, is contentious. Some consider shamanism specific to Siberia (e.g., Siikala, 1978), while others considered shamans to be any practitioners who voluntarily enter altered states of consciousness (Peters & Price-Williams, 1981).

Cross-cultural and interdisciplinary research indicates shamanism is an etic phenomenon involving psychobiological adaptations to the adaptive capacities of altered states of consciousness (ASC) or the integrative mode of consciousness (Winkelman, 2000). Shamanism was a central cultural institution at the dawn of modern humans some 40,000 years ago (Clottes & Lewis-Williams, 1998; Ryan, 1999). Shamanism is a fundamental aspect of

human evolutionary psychology that was transformed by sociocultural evolution, but persisted in other forms of shamanistic healing (Winkelman, 1992, 2000). This entry addresses both the specific aspects of shamanism and the universal therapeutic mechanisms of shamanistic healers, and focuses upon the generic aspects of, rather than the numerous, culturally specific forms.

# **CROSS-CULTURAL PERSPECTIVES ON SHAMANS**

The problems of a definitional approach to shamanism (e.g., see Jakobsen, 1999; Townsend, 1997) are overcome by a cross-cultural approach that provides an empirical basis for characterizing shamans. Cross-cultural research reveals an etic shamanism world-wide in hunter–gatherer societies and universal practices using ASC for healing (Winkelman, 1986a, 1990, 1992; see Winkelman & White, 1987 for data and methods). Shamanism was an ecological–psychobiological adaptation of hunter– gatherer societies to biological structures, psychosocial processes, and therapeutic needs (Winkelman, 2000). This psychobiological foundation for the hunter–gatherer shaman also provided the basis for the persistence of similar ASC-based healing practices in more complex societies; these have been referred to as shamanistic healers (Winkelman, 1990), recognizing their continuity with shamanism.

The foundations of shamanism are derived from: (1) ASC induction activities that elicit the relaxation response and produce theta wave synchronization across levels of the brain; (2) analogic and visual symbolic systems involving a presentational symbolism and other innate representational modules for self, "others," mind, and nature; and (3) socioemotional and psychodynamic ritual processes and their physiological, social, psychological, and cognitive effects. Shamanistic ASC involve a biological mode of consciousness with many adaptive physiological consequences directly related to healing (e.g., relaxation, psychological integration, opioid, and serotonin-mediated effects). Shamanism uses presentational symbolic systems (Hunt, 1995) and analogical thought processes produced through integration of innate representational systems of the brain, specialized adaptations for processing perceptions of social relations (self/others), their intentionalities ("mind reading"), and animal knowledge (natural history representations) (see also Mithen, 1996). Shamanic universals of animism, animal spirits, totemism, soul flight, and the guardian spirit complex involve manipulation of information regarding personal, social, and natural identities through analogical and visual representations (Winkelman, 2000). These use innate brain processing modules for knowledge about mind, self, and others to understand nature; and reciprocally internalizes these natural models for development of self and social representations (Winkelman, 2000). These community ritual activities manipulate and strengthen social identity, using psychosocial processes for emotional healing.

## **UNIVERSALS OF SHAMANS**

Cross-cultural research (Winkelman 1986a, 1990, 1992) indicates a core set of characteristics associated with healing practitioners of hunter–gatherer societies. In addition to the ecstasy (ASC), spirit world interaction, and community relations emphasized by Eliade, other characteristics of shamans include soul journey or flight, soul loss and recovery, death and rebirth, hunting magic, and other therapeutic processes.

Shamans are found among hunter–gatherers and societies with limited agriculture or pastoral subsistence patterns and political integration limited to the local community. Shamans provide healing, divination, and charismatic leadership. Shamans are also capable of malevolent acts, or sorcery. Characteristics of shamans include: training and professional practice based upon the use of ASC; a soul flight ASC and soul recovery; their transformation into animals and control of animal spirits; death and rebirth experiences; and the provision of hunting magic and assistance in food procurement. Predominant shamanic illnesses result from soul loss, attacks by spirits and sorcerers, and the intrusion of foreign objects and entities into the body. Shamanic world views include a multileveled universe including upper and lower worlds connected by an *axis mundi*, often a "sacred tree" through which the shaman travels between worlds. The shamanic ritual was the most significant social event in these societies. In an all-night ritual attended by the entire community, the shaman engaged in ritual interactions that brought the community into direct experience of the spirit world. Shamans are selected through the outcomes of spirit encounters that occur in deliberately induced ASC (e.g., vision quests) or through spontaneous

#### **Universals of Shamans 147**

or accidental ASC experiences interpreted as signs of selection by spirits. Shamans often come from shaman families, but in most cultures anyone may be selected by the spirits through successful training experiences. These often involve an extension of vision questing experiences undertaken by the entire population (or all males) during the adult transition. Shamans are mostly males, but most cultures also allow females to be shamans before or after child-bearing years (Winkelman, 1992).

### **Shamanic ASC**

Ecstasy, trance, or ASC are central to selection, training, and practice, and induced through many procedures that have physiological effects (Winkelman, 1986b, 1992, 2000; cf. below). Shamanic ASC occur in a dramatic ritual encounter within the spirit world. After extensive singing, chanting, drumming, and dancing, shamans collapse into apparent unconsciousness, but have an intact memory of the ensuing visionary experience upon returning to ordinary reality. Shamans experience flying to other worlds with spirit allies, or encountering spiritual or supernatural entities. Sometimes shamans' ASC involve an internal focus of attention without extensive induction procedures. The typical procedures used by shamans to induce an ASC involve extreme activation of the sympathetic nervous system through drumming and dancing until exhaustion of the sympathetic system from extreme exertion leads to collapse into a parasympathetic dominant state characterized by intense visual activity. Shamans also induce ASC through fasting, other forms of auditory stimulation (e.g., clapping, singing, and chanting), prolonged periods of sleeplessness, temperature extremes, and painful austerities. Hallucinogens are used in some traditions (see Furst, 1976; Harner, 1973; Winkelman, 1996). Deliberate periods of sleep and dream incubation may also be used for inducing ASC.

### **Soul Journey**

The soul journey or flight is a universal feature of shamanism, although not characteristic of all of the shamans'ASC. The shaman's interaction with spirits may take the form of a journey into the spirit worlds, a visit from the spirit world, or a transformation into an animal. Shamans'ASC are typically referred to as flights or journeys, and share visual experiences in which some aspect of the practitioner (i.e., soul, spirit, or animal familiar) interacts with spirits in a non-ordinary reality. The crosscultural distribution of experiences similar to shamanic flight has an innate basis in psychophysiological structures that reflect homologies across symbolic, somatic, and physiological systems (Hunt, 1995; Laughlin, 1997; Winkelman, 2000). The visionary experiences of the soul journey reflect a natural phenomenon of the human nervous system and occur as a consequence of the dysinhibition of the visual centers of the brain. Soul journey involves "taking the role of the other" in the visual spatial modality involving a presentational symbolism (Hunt, 1995). These externalized self-representations provide new forms of self-awareness and subjective experience, maximizing the symbolic self-referential capacity in the imagetic–intuitive mode. The shamanic soul flight is a representation of the shaman's transcendence. Shamans'ASC normally do not involve possession (spirit takes over and dominates consciousness), but rather the control of spirits, particularly animal spirits.

### **Death and Rebirth**

Shamans' training generally includes a "death and rebirth" experience, an initiatory crisis typically involving illness and suffering from attacks by spirits that lead to the experience of death. This is followed by descent to a lower world where spirits and animals attack and destroy the victim's body. The initiate is then reconstructed with the addition of spirit allies that provide powers. The death and rebirth experience reflects processes of self-transformation that occur under conditions of overwhelming stress and conflicts that result in fragmentation of the conscious ego (Walsh, 1990). The experiences are "autosymbolic images" reflecting the breakdown and disintegration of psychological structures (Laughlin, McManus, & d'Aquili, 1992). The death and rebirth cycle reflects a fragmentation of the conscious ego and self, experienced symbolically as death; and their reformation guided by innate drives toward psychological integration. Shamanic ritual processes manipulate symbolic constructs and neurological structures to restructure the ego, producing a new level of self and identity. The restructuring of the ego is promoted by holistic imperatives toward psychointegration (Laughlin et al., 1992), providing a dramatic alleviation of psychosomatic, emotional, and interpersonal problems. This self-transformation is core to the exceptional health of shamans, providing a basis for individuation and self-actualization. Although pathological interpretations of the shaman have been offered, Noll's (1983) application of diagnostic criteria of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychological Association (DSM) rejects this; nonetheless, the initiatory phase may involve conditions akin to acute psychosis (Walsh, 1990).

### **Soul Loss**

A central shamanic illness is soul loss, which Achterberg (1985) characterizes as an injury to the core or essence of one's being. Soul loss reflects concerns with the essence of crucial aspects of the self (Ingerman, 1991), involving the loss of, or injury to, fundamental aspects of personal identity. This injury to one's essence is manifested as despair, disharmony, and loss of meaning in life and feelings of belonging and connection with others. "Soul" constitutes a vital essence of self-emotions. Soul loss occurs from trauma that causes an aspect of one's self to dissociate. This separated aspect of the self carries with it the impact of the traumatic experiences that are unavailable to the rest of the self, arresting ego and emotional development. Reintegration of these dissociated aspects of self is central to healing. Soul recovery involves the shaman's dramatic enactment of battles with terrifying and threatening spirit images that symbolize disowned and repressed aspects of the self (Walsh, 1990). Through their recovery one regains a sense of a social self alienated by trauma and feelings of disharmony and disconnectedness (Ingerman, 1991). Community is significant in soul retrieval, with social support vital to the healing processes and re-integration of self. Community participation facilitates social bonding and release of the body's opioids, producing a sense of well-being. The shaman's dramatic struggles with the spirit world to realize soul recovery and power animal recovery produce powerful experiences, transforming self and altering social relationships.

### **Therapeutic Processes**

The psychodramatic ritual encounter with the spirits is a foundation of shamanic therapeutics. Therapeutic effects derive from physiological and psychological effects of ASC, manipulation of spirit world constructs, and community relations discussed below. Shamanic therapeutics are mediated through song, chants, music, and percussion, eliciting the ancient audio–vocal systems of the brain (Oubré, 1997). Music has a number of different therapeutic effects through physiological and psychological actions, including stress reduction, affecting access to unconscious information, and elicitation of emotional and cognitive processes (Winn, Crowe, & Moreno, 1989). Visualization, or mental imagery cultivation, is also employed as a principal shamanic technique (Noll, 1985). Shamans also use physical therapeutic practices, including: rubbing or massaging the body; laying on of hands to transfer healing energies; sucking on the patient's body to extract objects and infections; incisions to extract foreign objects; washing and cleansing the body; and herbal or other natural substances (Winkelman & Winkelman, 1991).

# **SHAMANISTIC HEALERS**

All societies have healers who use ASC in community rituals to interact with the spirit world (Winkelman, 1986b, 1992). These *shamanistic healers* share core characteristics of shamans—ecstasy (ASC), community, and spirits—reflecting psychobiological principles of the brain that are manifested universally (Winkelman, 1992, 2000). The biologically based ASC central to shamanism is also the foundation of shamanistic healers' training and practices. ASC enhance integration of lower brain processes with frontal processes through induction of synchronized theta wave patterns that entrain the brain with common patterns across the neuraxis (nerve bundle running from the base of the brain to the frontal cortex). Community has a variety of psychosocial functions and psychobiological effects in healing, including eliciting opioid-mediated immune system enhancement. The spirit world is a symbol system for social identification and self-development and differentiation. Shamanistic healers share other characteristics, including: beliefs that spirits and humans cause illness; using spirits in therapeutic processes; and ritual manipulations for the restoration of health (Winkelman & Winkelman, 1991). Other types of shamanistic healers (e.g., mediums and healers) differ from shamans because of the effects of their respective societies (agricultural, politically integrated) (Winkelman, 1986a, 1990, 1992).

### **Psychobiological Structures of Shamanistic ASC**

All cultures have procedures for accessing ASC but differ in their attitudes toward these states and the means for controlled access (Laughlin et al., 1992). These universals of shamanistic practices reflect underlying

#### **Shamanistic Therapeutic Processes 149**

brain structures and functions that elicit operations of an *integrative* mode of consciousness (Winkelman, 2000). This integrative mode of consciousness reflects the ubiquitous response of the brain to diverse conditions that induce synchronized limbic system discharge patterns. These discharges entrain across the neuraxis of the brain, synchronizing the frontal cortex with coherent slow wave EEG patterns in the alpha and theta range (Mandell, 1980; Winkelman, 1986b, 1992, 2000). Physiological mechanisms underlying the integrative mode of consciousness are based in neurobiochemical pathways involving activation of the temporal lobe and limbic system serotonergic pathways to the lower brain (Mandell, 1980). These limbic system processes integrate information from the whole organism into emotion and memory, and mediate selfpreservation, family behavior, novel sensory information, and control of the sleeping/waking cycles.

ASC of other shamanistic healers may involve soul journey, but typically have other psychophysiological and experiential dynamics. Possession ASC of mediums have characteristics of a "take over" of the person by spirits (Bourguignon, 1976; cf. Goodman, 1988; Lewis, 1988) and temporal lobe symptomology (tremors, seizures, convulsions, and amnesia) (Winkelman, 1986b, 1992). Possession is not a unitary phenomenon, but involves a variety of different psychodynamic processes including dissociation, illness, communication, role enactment, and political struggle (Boddy, 1994; Shekar, 1989). Possession ASCs predominantly occur in complex societies with hierarchical political integration and reflect the psychodynamics of oppression and powerlessness (Bourguignon, 1976; Winkelman, 1986b, 1992). Meditative ASC are characterized by deliberate relaxation (direct parasympathetic activation) and focus of attention. Castillo (1991) characterizes meditative practices as involving the differentiation of a participating self engaged in the world from a detached observing self. The neuroendocrine mechanisms of meditative effects on physiology and psychology involve stress reduction through enhancement of serotonin functioning (Walton & Levitsky, 1994) and stimulation of theta brain-wave production. Meditation intervenes in the stress cycle, inducing relaxation, lowering autonomic arousal, and enhancing brain-wave coherence in theta frequencies. Meditation increases serotonin levels, reducing cortisol levels and the limbic system's anger and fear reactions. This mirrors Mandell's (1980) serotonergic model of ASC and suggests serotonin's generic role in the therapeutic mechanisms of ASC, manifested in synchronous high-voltage, slow frequency brain-waves (alpha, theta, and delta activity, especially 3–6 cycles/s).

# **SHAMANISTIC THERAPEUTIC PROCESSES**

Therapeutic mechanisms of shamanistic healing derive from ASC, community relations, and ritual spirit-world interactions. ASC have physiological effects, including the relaxation response, the elicitation of opioid release, and enhanced serotonergic action. The spirit world plays a role as "sacred others," representing personal and community identity models and aspects of the psyche. The spirit world and community's therapeutic roles include models for development, social support, and community bonding. Ritual processes manipulate physiology, psychology, and social relationships for therapeutic processes.

### **ASC Bases of Shamanistic Therapies**

Therapeutic mechanisms of ASC involve parasympathetic dominance, interhemispheric synchronization, and limbic–frontal integration (Winkelman, 1992, 1996, 1997, 2000). These physiological processes facilitate healing through a variety of mechanisms, including: inducing physiological relaxation and reducing tension and stress; regulation and balance of psychophysiological processes; reducing anxiety and phobic reactions and psychosomatic effects; accessing normally unconscious information; enhancing behavioral–emotional–cognitive integration; enhancing social bonding and affiliation; and regulating emotions, self, and social attachments.

The parasympathetic dominant state evokes the relaxation response, a generalized decrease in sympathetic nervous system activity, and enhanced alpha and theta brain-wave activity. The relaxation response has therapeutic value in addressing stress-related physical and psychological conditions. Rapid collapse into a parasympathetic dominant state can have therapeutic effects involving erasure of conditioned responses, dramatic changes in beliefs, and increased suggestibility, enhancing placebo and positive psychosomatic effects. ASC activate typically unconscious processes, integrating into the conscious mind material that is normally inaccessible. These repressed dynamics are sources of conflicts that affect emotions, behavior, and physiological responses. ASC enhance expression of repressed aspects of self by reducing habitual screening processes and giving expression to non-verbal information.

ASC evoke paleomammalian brain or limbic system functions that manage autonomic nervous system balance, emotional mentation, self and social identity processes, bonding and attachment, and the integration of information. These contribute to healing, producing an integration of personal and social consciousness. The theta wave entrainment characteristic of ASC produces integration across hierarchical brain levels, an integration of pre- or unconscious functions into conscious awareness. ASC and ritual enhance integration of cognitive and emotional processes and information from different functional systems of the brain, providing optimal conditions for learning, attention, memory, and adaptation to novel situations (Mandell, 1980).

### **Therapeutic Aspects of Community Relations**

Shamanistic healing typically occurs in a community context. Community participation facilitates therapeutic effects derived from psychosocial influences (positive expectation and social support). These collective rituals strengthen group identity and commitment, enhancing community cohesion by reintegrating patients into the group. Communal healing practices reinforce attachment needs in the mammalian biosocial system (Kirkpatrick, 1997). Attachments and affectional bonds that evolved to maintain proximity between infants and care-givers provide a secure basis for the self, feelings of comfort, and protection from powerful figures (e.g., shamans, spirit allies).

Shamanistic practices enhancing social cohesion elicit psychosociophysiological mechanisms that release endogenous opiates. Frecska and Kulcsar (1989) review evidence that shamanistic practices elicit psychobiologically mediated attachment based in opioid mechanisms. Opioid release is produced through cultural symbols that have been cross-conditioned with patterns of attachment and their physiological and emotional responses. Emotionally charged cultural symbols associated with physiological systems during attachment socialization link mythological and somatic spheres, providing a basis for elicitation of the opioid system in shamanistic ritual. Endogenous opioids are also stimulated by a variety of physical aspects of shamanic ritual (Prince, 1982; Winkelman, 1997), including: extensive dancing and other exhaustive rhythmic physical activities (e.g., clapping); temperature extremes (e.g., sweat lodges); stressful procedures such as fasting, flagellation, and selfinflicted wounds; emotional manipulations, especially fear and the elicitation of positive expectations; and night-time activities when endogenous opioids are naturally highest. Opioid release stimulates emotions and physiological processes, including endocrine and immunological systems (Frecska & Kulcsar, 1989), enhancing psychoneuroimmunological responses. The euphoria from activation of the body's opioid system produces a sense of certainty and belongingness. These dynamic functions of the psyche provide coping skills and mechanisms for maintenance of bodily homeostasis (Valle & Prince, 1989). Endogenous opioids facilitate environmental adaptation, enhance biological synchronization within a group, reduce pain, and enhance tolerance of stress. These experiences strengthen social relationships in an experience of *communitas*, the essential bonds among group members. This community identity induces dissolution of self-boundaries, identification with others, and the development of an integrated self that can heal others, exemplified in shamanic healing.

### **Meaning and Emotions**

Shamanistic healing addresses the needs met by all of religious healing systems, the provision of meaning and explanations that meet needs for assurance, instilling confidence and a sense of certainty that counteracts anxiety and its physiological effects. Shamanistic healing rituals manipulate meaning to elicit placebo responses and their physiological effects. Symbolic manipulations can intervene in relieving the stress mechanisms of the general adaptation syndrome, providing explanations that alleviate anxiety. Ritual and social support can alleviate the high level of pituitary/adrenal activity of the resistance stage of the stress reaction through changing emotional responses and the balance in the autonomic nervous system, through integration of the emotional and egoic levels, and by resolution of social conflicts. These symbolic manipulations also elicit emotions and their physiological consequences, linking body and mind through effects on the limbic system.

All shamanistic healing processes address emotions, but the emotional psychodynamics of soul journey, possession, and meditation differ significantly (Winkelman, 1999). Shamanistic healing processes share approaches,

#### **Shamanistic Therapeutic Processes 151**

however, in addressing emotional distress through the provision of explanations and mechanisms for obtaining relief, and in eliciting community support systems that meet fundamental human needs for belonging, comfort, and bonding with others. Shamanistic healing effects emotions through: elicitation of repressed memories, restructuring painful memories, confession and forgiveness, resolving intrapsychic conflict, alleviating repressions, and giving expression to unconscious concerns. Explanations provided in shamanistic healing processes typically minimize personal guilt, negative emotional process, intrapsychic conflict, and internal discrepancies through attributing responsibility to external agents (i.e., spirits). Ritual controls attitudes through metaphoric and affective processes operating independently of higher cognitive processing, providing mechanisms for manipulating affective responses independent of habitual resistances. Emotions and unconscious structures are typically addressed by attributing these to external forces (spirits). Shamanic ritual also provides psychoemotional and mental reprogramming of lower brain processes in the material embodied in the chants, songs, and psychodramatic enactments that change perception of self, social relations, and emotions.

Shamanism produces meaning through universal aspects of symbolic healing (Dow, 1986), particularizing the patient's circumstances within a cultural mythology, and manipulating that system to emotionally transform the self-system of the patient. Ritual manipulation of the spirit world enables shamans to symbolically transform individual psychophysiological processes through emotions related to well-being and attachment. Shamanistic ritual activities access innate drives toward self-differentiation and identification with "other," promoting reorganization at higher levels of integration. Through ritual manipulation of psychophysiological structures not directly accessible to the conscious ego, shamans evoke cognitive and emotional responses that cause physiological changes. These are achieved by the manipulation of cultural symbols associated with autonomic responses and through activities that cause physiological changes (e.g., drumming, fasting).

### **Spirit as Biopsychosocial Dynamics of Self and Other**

The spirit relations of shamanism are part of a broader animistic framework. Animism involves beliefs in a soul or vital principle animating entities and producing their behaviors and observed properties. Animism is exemplified in a universal anthropomorphism, the attribution of human characteristics, particularly those associated with self and mind, to non-humans (Guthrie, 1993). This human tendency to animate the natural world involves a relational epistemology that situates humans in the environment and plays a fundamental role in the construction of personhood and communal identity (Bird-David, 1999). Spirits provide a language of intrapsychic and psychosocial dynamics and relationships, and consequently a system for manipulating self, identity, and relations with others.

The shamanic spirit world is a conceptual framework representing aspects of self; ritual symbolic manipulation of these spirit constructs can affect attachments and emotions by operating on structures functioning outside of conscious awareness. Spirits are the most fundamental cause of shamanistic illness, and are also fundamental structures of self and others, representing generic aspects of human thought. Ritual interactions with spirits elicit these primordial psychocognitive processes and forms of representation and communication that manage the relationships of self-concept, social "others," and emotional well-being.

Shamanistic meanings involve attributions to a spirit world, embodied in animism, the belief that spiritual beings motivate the behavior of humans, animals, and natural phenomena. Animistic meaning systems involve projected cognitive similarity—a belief that the world's unseen forces are like humans' cognitive, emotional, and social capacities. Spirits are attributions based in metaphoric extensions of the self for modeling the unknown other. Spirit beliefs reflect social structures, social and interpersonal relations, group and individual psychodynamics, and cognitive processes. Shamanistic healing makes maladies meaningful in the context of both cultural life, and in relationship to innate structures of selfperception. Shamanic healing uses psychobiologically based references for understanding personal psychodynamics in terms of a body-based system of meaning (Laughlin, 1997) and innate representational systems (Winkelman, 2000). These innate structures are entrained by symbolic processes, allowing satisfactory meanings to emerge from symbolic ritual manipulation of unconscious structures.

Spirits are symbolic systems, representing complexes, organized perceptual, behavioral, and personality dynamics dissociated from ordinary awareness, normal and social identity. These complexes are dissociated aspects of the personality. Shamanistic healing practices elicit a holistic imperative (Laughlin et al., 1992), a drive toward integration across levels of consciousness. These disowned, un-integrated or unconscious aspects of self are symbolically manipulated through spirit concepts, producing healing by re-structuring the interactions among personal and collective dynamics. The ritual elicitation of the emotional unconscious and transference of control of intentional processes to the shaman and spirit world enables individual alignment with social expectations and meaning systems. Shamanic healing integrates the self through visual and corporeal processes, uniting conscious and unconscious information.

### **Spirit Relations as Role-Taking**

Shamanism provides therapeutic processes through role-taking (Peters & Price-Williams, 1981). Role-taking is exemplified in spirit world interaction where shamans adopt the personalities of the spirits. Spirit world dynamics are representations of personal and social psychodynamics (emotions, attachments, complexes, and social forces), permitting ritual affects on the psychodynamics of the patient. Manipulation of spirit constructs is therapeutic because they represent fundamental aspects of self and others. Dramatic enactments of interactions with spirit "others" provide mechanisms for personal selfdevelopment and roles for individual re-socialization in the spirit symbolic systems. Identity modification occurs through internalization of social expectations, exemplified in animal allies and powers. These self-development activities are exemplified in the vision quest (or guardian spirit quest), which involves seeking a personal relationship with the spiritual world. These personal relations with spirit allies, powers, and guardians were central to the development of adult skills and competencies, providing personal powers, strength, and assistance in personal and social choices for adult life (Swanson, 1973). Animism, totemism, and guardian spirits are natural symbolic systems that differentiate and constitute the self in relation to others. Incorporating animal spirits as part of identity and powers reflects self-representation through "sacred other" (Pandian, 1997). Attribution enables reciprocal internalization of the other's superior qualities, enhancing one's self-esteem. These provide cultural processes for production of the symbolic self and self models for the resolution of social contradictions in the representation of the self. Shamanic dynamics

produce alternate forms of self for problem-solving and psychosocial adaptation. Spirit allies and identities provide variable agents to mediate conflict among social and personal goals.

# **CONTEMPORARY SHAMANIC ILLNESS AND HEALING**

The psychobiological basis of the shamanistic paradigm is revealed in its persistence in contemporary religious experiences (Stark, 1997) and psychological crises. Shamanic dynamics are reflected in the DSM-IV category "spiritual emergencies," which includes: spontaneous shamanic journeys; possession; the death and rebirth experience; mystical experiences with psychotic features; and experiences of psychic abilities (Walsh, 1990). The shamanic paradigm provides a useful framework for addressing these experiences as natural manifestations of human consciousness, and as developmental opportunities rather than pathologies. This reformulation permits addressing these powerful unconscious dynamics as opportunities for transformation to greater health, just as the shamanic initiatory crisis provides transformational potentials. Crisis experiences associated with shamanism—attacks by spirits, death and dismemberment, depersonalization, and out-of-body experiences can be interpreted within the shamanic world view as growth opportunities. The shamanic paradigm re-interprets symptoms of acute psychosis, emotional disturbance, hallucinations, ASC, and interaction with spirits as symbolic communications for personal development. These can be managed by integrating shamanic healing principles into counseling and psychotherapy (Krippner & Welch, 1992). The psychobiological basis of these experiences within a model of evolutionary psychology permits treating these conditions as natural rather than aberrant. Shamanistic procedures elicit brain processes and structures that provide opportunities to develop control over these experiences, providing an alternative to traditional psychiatric treatment approaches with drugs that repress these experiences. Rituals and deliberate access to ASC allow for management of these distressing intrusions with experiences mediated by natural healing symbol systems. One aspect of contemporary shamanic healing involves "core shamanism" popularized by anthropologist Michael Harner (1990) and the Foundation for Shamanic Studies. This system is based in common principles and practices

#### **References 153**

of shamanism found worldwide. It acts upon the assumption that there is a non-ordinary reality that involves spirits and souls, and that compassionate spirits can be elicited to assist in human healing. Shamanic therapies are eclectic, taking a holistic approach in which they complement other approaches. They address soul loss, guardian spirit and power loss, spirit and object intrusion, and possesion (Harner & Harner, 2000); shamanic treatments are also considered particularly effective for the treatment of the consequences of trauma, drug dependence, and mental and emotional illness. Shamanic therapies involve restoring and maintaining personal power through an alliance between the shaman and client that requires the latter's self-discipline and dedication. Relationships with the spirit world, particularly animal powers, are central to maintaining personal well-being.

Central aspects of the classic shamanic vision quest involved processes for self-empowerment. A similar approach underlies contemporary shamanic counseling and the training of the client to make a shamanic journey on his own to acquire or restore his personal power. This active aspect of shamanic journeying induces a sense of mastery and control. Harner (1988) characterizes shamanic counseling as "a method of personal empowerment wherein one comes to acquire respect for one's own ability to obtain spiritual wisdom without relying on external mediators" (p. 181). The shamanic healing approaches encompass virtually all spiritual healing practices (Harner & Harner, 2001); their emphases include using soul journey to treat spiritual aspects of illness through the assistance of spirit allies while in an ASC. Shamanism's biopsychosocial approach to healing integrates emotional, mental, spiritual, and social dimensions within a physiological framework.

## **SUMMARY**

Shamanistic practices reflect ancient human traditions of healing through altering consciousness, manipulating identity and psychosocial dynamics through constructs represented in the spirit world, and eliciting the biopsychosocial dynamics of community support. These traditions are rooted in human psychobiology and brain dynamics, giving them a continued relevance in the contemporary world. The widespread persistence of these practices and their resurgence in the modern world is vibrant testimony to the continued relevance of shamanic healing. These community-based spiritual practices may provide important antidotes to the contemporary malaise, alienation, and anomie among modern populations afflicted by violence, trauma, dislocation, and meaninglessness.

## **REFERENCES**

- Achterberg, J. (1985). *Imagery in healing: Shamanism and modern medicine*. Boston, MA: New Science Library: Shambhala.
- Bird-David, N. (1999). "Animism" revisited: Personhood, environment and relational epistemology. *Current Anthropology, 40*, 67–91.
- Boddy, J. (1994). Spirit possession revisited: Beyond instrumentality. *Annual Review of Anthropology, 23*, 407–434.
- Bourguignon, E. (1976). *Possession*. San Francisco, CA: Chandler and Sharpe.
- Castillo, R. (1991). Divided consciousness and enlightenment in Hindu Yogis. *Anthropology of Consciousness, 2*(304), 1–6.
- Clottes, J., & Lewis-Williams, D. (1998). *The shamans of prehistory: Trance and magic in the painted caves*. New York: Harry Abrams.
- Dow, J. (1986). Universal aspects of symbolic healing: A theoretical synthesis. *American Anthropologist, 88*, 56–69.
- Eliade, M. (1964). *Shamanism: Archaic techniques of ecstasy*. New York: Pantheon Books.
- Flaherty, G. (1992). *Shamanism and the eighteenth century*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Frecska, E., & Kulcsar, Z. (1989). Social bonding in the modulation of the physiology of ritual trance. *Ethos, 17*(1), 70–87.
- Furst, P. (Ed.). (1976). *Hallucinogens and culture*. San Francisco, CA: Chandler and Sharp.
- Goodman, F. (1988). *How about demons? Possession and exorcism in the modern world*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Guthrie, S. (1993). *Faces in the clouds*. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Halifax, J. (1979). *Shamanic voices*. New York: E.P. Dutton.
- Harner, M. (Ed.). (1973). *Hallucinogens and shamanism*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Harner, M. (1988). What is a shaman? In G. Doore (Ed.), *Shamans path: Healing, personal growth and empowerment* (pp. 7–15). Boston, MA: Shambhala.
- Harner, M. (1990). *The way of the shaman*. San Francisco, CA: Harper & Row.
- Harner, M., & Harner, S. (2000). Core practices in the shamanic treatment of illness. *Shamanism*. *13*(1–2), 19–30.
- Hultkrantz, A. (1973). A definition of shamanism. *Temenos, 9*, 25–37.
- Hunt, H. (1995). *On the nature of consciousness*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Ingerman, S. (1991). *Soul retrival*. San Francisco, CA: Harper Collins.
- Jakobsen, M. (1999). *Shamanism: Traditional and contemporary approaches to the mastery of spirits and healing*. New York: Berghahn Books.
- Kirkpatrick, L. (1997). An attachment-theory approach to psychology of religion. In B. Spilka & D. McIntosh (Eds.), *The psychology of religion*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.