## **MOVEMENT AND RESIDENCE**

### ANIRUDH BURMAN

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

ARTICLE 19(1)(d) guarantees all citizens the right to move freely throughout the territory of India. Article 19(1)(e) guarantees all citizens the right to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India. Article 19(5) enables the State to impose 'reasonable restrictions' on these freedoms in the interests of the general public, or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe. What import does the right of the State to impose reasonable restrictions have? The exception allows for the promotion of reciprocal individual rights, and also for restrictions imposed in furtherance of the State's governance functions. Patti Tamara Lenard categorises these restrictions into two types: a restriction on individuals from going to a location of their choice, and when individuals are forced to move away from a location, where they would prefer to stay.<sup>1</sup>

The rights to free movement and residence, as they exist within the Constitution, were envisaged as protections against sub-national restrictions on movement and residence. The debate focused on restrictions that may be imposed to preserve law and order. When the first draft of these freedoms was introduced before the Constituent Assembly, ZH Lari, while discussing the subject, referred to the restrictions by saying that the rights have been hemmed in 'by such provisos and conditions that they reduce them to a nullity  $\ldots$ <sup>2</sup> He proceeded to observe that the Article 19 (then Article 13) freedoms are 'indefinite, insufficient and ... vague'.<sup>3</sup> Kazi Syed Karimuddin sought to bring attention to existing laws that would be saved by the suggested restrictions. According to him, the Goonda Public Safety Acts in all the provinces, in which there is 'neither appeal, nor any warrant is necessary for arrest, and searches can be made without justification,' would be one such law. $4$ 

Article 16(3) of the Constitution explicitly permits discrimination in public employment on the basis of residence. Laws also provide for preferential treatment on the basis of residence in education. The balance between laws in public employment and education that discriminate against non-residents and the rights of movement and residence has not been explicitly decided. The resolution of this conflict is, however, essential to the question of whether our Constitution effectively enables a principle of sub-citizenship, and therefore a national market for labour. The clear concern that free movement and residence would be curtailed by parochial concerns of ensuring greater regional representation and opportunity has been borne out by the wide variety of legal requirements that operate to restrict free movement and residence today.

### **II. CONTEXT AND CONFLICT**

Table 47.1 provides an illustrative list of laws and measures that impede the rights of free movement and residence.

The traditional paradigm of discourse on these rights focuses on 'law and order' issues such as externment, deportation, and police surveillance.<sup>5</sup> As  $\overline{\text{Table 47.1}}$  $\overline{\text{Table 47.1}}$  $\overline{\text{Table 47.1}}$  highlights, such issues are a small subset of a larger set of restrictions on movement and residence.

A major category of restrictive laws and measures are related to residency requirements. In January 2010, the Maharashtra Government barred people not domiciled in the State from acquiring taxi licences in Mumbai.<sup>6</sup> In many instances, law enforcement authorities have allegedly acted in a discriminatory fashion while handling complaints of 'outsiders' from other Indian States.<sup>7</sup> Such practices are not recent. Katzenstein documents such practices in the State of Maharashtra from the 1960s and reports that while State Governments are constrained from imposing formal residency requirements in the private sector, they were using informal tactics such as 'issuing of licenses, permits, and inspections'.<sup>8</sup> In 1973, the Maharashtra Commissioner of Industries wrote to private employers asking them to create quotas for locals. $9$ 

States also impose residency requirements for holding property in certain States in India. Himachal Pradesh<sup>10</sup> and Uttarakhand are prominent examples. Notably, in 2011 the Uttarakhand High Court struck down the residency requirement that prevented non-residents from acquiring more than 250 square metres of land.<sup>11</sup> Many such laws and administrative practices have a direct effect on the freedom of movement and residence, as they place an effective bar on residency. Many State Governments condition the receipt of social welfare benefits on conditions of local residency. Reservation of seats for local residents in educational institutions and employment is quite common,  $12$ as are restrictions on the transfer of land to non-residents for the protection and promotion of the deprived. Examples of the latter are the Kerala Restriction on Transfer by and Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act 1999 and the Gujarat Prohibition of Transfer of Immovable Property and Provision for Protection of Tenants from Eviction from Premises in Disturbed Areas Act 1991.

#### <span id="page-1-0"></span>**Table 47.1 Measure Impeding Movement and Residence**

| Law/Measure                                                    | Subject of intervention/Restriction                                                                                                                                                                                      | Movement/<br>Residence | Examples                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Arrest, imprisonment,<br>and detention laws                    | (a) Allow the State to imprison persons.<br>(b) Allow the State to detain persons who could<br>potentially commit certain crimes.                                                                                        | Movement               | Indian Penal Code 1860                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Land/Property<br>transfer laws                                 | (a) Prevent transfers of land/property on the basis of<br>residence.<br>(b) Provide for compulsory acquisition of land and<br>rehabilitation.                                                                            | Residence              | (a) Gujarat Prohibition of Transfer of Immovable Property and<br>Provision for Protection of Tenants from Eviction from<br>Premises in Disturbed Areas Act 1991<br>(b) Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land Reforms Act 1972 |
| Benefits based<br>on residence/<br>domiciliary<br>requirements | (a) Land/Property transfer/Ownership laws.<br>(b) Business permissions.<br>Reservations in educational institutions and<br>(c)<br>employment.<br>(d) Welfare benefits and subsidies.                                     | Both                   | Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence)<br>Act 1957                                                                                                                                                               |
| Public health,<br>environment, and<br>safety laws              | (a) Requirement to wear crash helmets while driving.<br>(b) Prevention of trafficking of women.<br>(c) Allow the State to isolate persons suffering from<br>diseases.                                                    | Both                   | (a) Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles Rules 1964<br>(b) Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 1956<br>Goa, Daman, and Diu Public Health Act 1985<br>(c)                                                                            |
| Restriction on<br>movement                                     | (a) Direct prevention of movement in certain areas within<br>the territory of India.<br>(b) Externment: allows law and order authorities to<br>direct a person to remove himself from a particular<br>geographical area. | Movement               | (a) Chin Hills Regulation 1896<br>Madhya Pradesh Public Security Act 1959<br>(b)<br>Bombay Police Act 1951<br>(c)                                                                                                         |

In spite of such examples, there is substantive internal movement of individuals within the country. The 2001 census data states that out of a then population of 1.02 billion people, 307 million people were reportedly 'migrants by place of birth'—that is, they were residing in a place different from their place of birth.<sup>13</sup> There is, however, one important point to be considered. Only 42.3 million out of this 307 million migrant population was reportedly inter-State migration. Most of the migration has been intra-State. This may be caused at least partly due to residency requirements acting as effective checks on inter-State migration, compared to a relative lack of sub-State residency barriers. As the Report on Conditions of Work and Promotion of Livelihoods in the Unorganised Sector states, migrant labour faces various disadvantages compared to resident labour.<sup>14</sup>

To what extent are these residency requirements legitimate and constitutionally permissible? Court judgments and legislative practice have ensured that a vast proportion of State-provided/backed educational and employment opportunities are reserved for residents. While courts have held that residence cannot be the sole ground for reservation, they have also stated that it can be one of the factors that may be taken into account.

A third broad category of restrictions is those on grounds of public health, safety, and order. Courts have construed such restrictions broadly, and sometimes justified extreme measures in 'public interest'. In many cases, these restrictions may directly impact the economic interests of individuals. Courts have not paid adequate attention to whether the measures imposed were the least restrictive measures to achieve the desired objective of the impugned law. A further reconsideration of the specific impact of these restrictions is therefore required.

## **III. THE JUDICIAL APPROACH**

There are three broad classifications of the judicial approach to free movement and residence:

1. On restrictions imposed for promoting law and order, courts have used Article 21 principles of procedural fairness and natural justice to scrutinise externment, deportation, and preventive detention laws.

2. On restrictions imposed in order to promote equality interests (including rehabilitation for land acquisition), there is an absence of engagement with the curtailment of the freedom interests by the impugned laws or measures.

3. On restrictions imposed in order to promote public health, safety, and the environment, courts have given wide latitude to State action, in one instance expressly disavowing a more costly, but less restrictive method of regulation.

# **1. 'Law and Order' Restrictions**

The willingness to move and/or settle is premised upon a guarantee of legal certainty. In a constitutional democracy effectively promoting fundamental rights, the promise of a right to move and reside freely mitigates the economic risks of relocation. Laws that exacerbate legal uncertainty on these issues therefore undermine this freedom itself. Such laws therefore fundamentally undermine the citizen–State compact of legal certainty and fairness, and disincentivise the development of a nationally mobile labour force.

## a. *Preventive Detention Cases*

Preventive detention laws in India are valid under Article 22 of the Constitution. In *AK Gopalan v* State of Madras,<sup>15</sup> a writ was filed challenging the order of detention under section 3 of the Preventive Detention Act 1950. It was contended that the Act contravenes Articles 13, 19, 21, and 22 of the Constitution. According to the Court, since Article 22 specifically deals with preventive detention, Article 19 has no effect on preventive or punitive detention.<sup>16</sup> The Supreme Court also noted that the right to move freely throughout the territory of India is very different from the right to life under Article 21. In his minority judgment, Fazl Ali J disagreed, and stated that Articles 19, 21, and 22 overlap, and that a deprivation of personal liberty also affects the freedom of movement throughout the territory of India.<sup>17</sup>

The majority judgment carving out separate spheres for Article 19 and Articles 21–22 (also effectuated by laying down a direct-effect test for the interpretation of fundamental rights) created a situation where a law affecting an Article 21 or Article 22 right was valid even if it infringed an Article 19 freedom. The direct-effect test, and the distinction between 'personal liberty' and 'freedom' therefore had the result of *narrowing* the scope of examination of an impugned law against the Constitution. The direct-effect test is particularly problematic in cases where multiple constitutional provisions are applicable. Laws on preventive detention are explicitly covered under

Article 22. However, as later cases have clearly held, laws affecting one right may also incidentally affect other rights.<sup>18</sup> This is clearly visible in the following sections discussing affirmative action laws and their effect on movement and residence. An implicit focus on direct effects in such cases has led to inadequate scrutiny of such measures with regard to fundamental freedoms.

In 1954, the Calcutta High Court decided otherwise. In *Kshitindra Narayan Roy Choudhury*'s case, <sup>19</sup> the petitioners were originally detained under the Bengal Criminal Law Amendment Act 1930, and then the Preventive Detention Act. Holding the preventive detention law void in light of it not being a reasonable restriction under Article 19(5), the High Court held that under the law there is no effective relief by way of prayer to the courts as it prevents the disclosure of the grounds of detention to the courts, and there is no requirement that the detention order has to be made after the satisfaction of the competent authority on reasonable grounds.  $\frac{20}{2}$  In doing so, the Court sought to ensure procedural safeguards later explicitly read into Article 21. It then explicitly stated that laws of preventive detention are subject to Article 19.

### b. *Externment Laws and Orders*

The power to direct a person to leave a particular area existed in many police statutes present in the country. Goonda laws of various States continue to give the local administration the power to extern people declared as 'goondas'.<sup>21</sup> One commentator notes (based on an empirical study of goonda police files in Calcutta) that 'in official discourse, the "goonda" came to be more described than defined …', pointing to the effort of the administrative machinery to 'peripheralise' persons labelled as 'goondas'.<sup>22</sup> In recent years, States have brought in amendments to these laws. Some States have expanded the definition 'goonda' to include offences under the Information Technology Act 2000 and the Copyright Act 1957. <sup>23</sup> Critically, these amendments enable the police to take *preventive* action, including externment, against persons suspected of being about to commit offences under these laws. This is significant, especially since the penalties in these laws themselves do not provide for externment. The scope of 'reasonable restrictions' that may be imposed on Article 19(1)(d) and (e) is therefore expanding into a set of laws that do not contemplate such restrictions.

The Indian Supreme Court has construed the provisions of such laws liberally to allow these laws to exist, but has also required minimum procedural fairness in the application of these laws. The Supreme Court heard one of the first major challenges to such powers in a five-judge bench in *Hari* Khemu Gawali's case.<sup>24</sup> The vires of certain provisions of the Bombay Police Act 1951 were challenged (section 57). The police under section 57 against the petitioner passed externment orders, as he was a previously convicted citizen. Under section 57, if a person had committed certain offences previously, and the police felt that he was likely to commit the same or similar offences again, it could issue an externment order against such person. Laws, it said, can be made to prevent the commission of crimes, and these are reasonable restrictions in the interest of the general public: 'In doing so the State may have to curb an individual's activities and put fetters on his complete freedom of movement and residence in order that the greatest good of the greatest number may be conserved.'<sup>25</sup>

The minority disagreed. Jagannadhadas J, writing for the minority, argued that the constitutional validity of the laws of preventive restriction as opposed to preventive detention have to strike a balance between fundamental rights and 'social control':

[I]n a state where personal liberty is a guaranteed fundamental right, the range of such preventive action must be limited to a narrow compass … the proper balance between the fundamental right and social control is not achieved by vesting the power … in such wide terms as in Section 57 ... Such a provision would lead to serious encroachment on the personal liberty of a citizen.<sup>26</sup>

The minority argued for what we now understand as Article 21 conceptions of natural justice to be read into laws imposing restrictions on fundamental rights. By 1967, the Supreme Court had substantially come round to the minority view and narrowed the majority's construction in *Maneka Gandhi*'s case. Similar considerations of procedural safeguards were considered while scrutinising the impugned measures in *Gurbachan Singh*'s case<sup>27</sup> and *Baldeo Prasad*'s case.<sup>28</sup>

The majority judgment, however, seems dismissive of necessary procedural safeguards. One illustration of this is its judgment with regard to the absence of an advisory board under the impugned law.<sup>29</sup> It was contended that while preventive detention laws had the requirement of scrutiny of the material on which a preventive detention is based, such a provision was absent in the impugned law. Rather than examine the absence of such a provision as forming part of a larger absence of procedural safeguards, the majority stated: 'Hence it cannot be said that the existence of an Advisory Board is a sine qua non for the constitutionality of a legislation such as the one before us.<sup>30</sup>

Perhaps, more significantly, it undermines the principle of 'innocent until proven guilty' by sanctioning the use of past criminality as a basis for imposing coercive force on such citizens (by externing them) without such citizens actually being adjudged guilty of committing a criminal act.

### c. *Arrest, Bail, and Related Procedures*

The history of preventive detention and reforms surrounding it has been inexorably tied to the development and reform of laws surrounding bail.<sup>31</sup> In *Madhu Limaye*'s case, <sup>32</sup> the question of whether section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is constitutional when tested under Articles  $19(1)(a)$ , (b), (c), and (d) came up before the Supreme Court. A seven-judge bench came to the conclusion that 'Section 144 is not unconstitutional if properly applied and the fact that it may be abused is no ground for striking it down'. 33 In *Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia*'s case, <sup>34</sup> a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court discussed the provisions of anticipatory bail in section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973. The Court held that the denial of bail is a deprivation of personal liberty. It stated that unnecessary additional constraints should not be put on the scope of section 438 as the 'right to personal freedom cannot be made to depend on compliance with unreasonable restrictions'.  $\frac{35}{2}$  While this judgment tested the vires of section 438 against Article 21 of the Constitution, it discussed the imposition of constraints on 'personal freedom' and 'unreasonable restrictions', thereby using tests borrowed from Article 19.

The Court makes a distinction between bail, when a person has been arrested and already lost his freedom, and anticipatory bail, when a person not yet arrested is asking for freedom in the event of an arrest. Interestingly, the Court may have used this observation to circumscribe the scope of anticipatory bail. However, it goes on to state, 'That is the stage at which it is imperative to protect his freedom... and to give full play to the presumption that he is innocent.<sup>36</sup> The emphasis of the Court on the presumption of innocence contrasts strikingly with the decision in *Hari Khemu Gawali*'s

case, decided in 1956. One reason for this may be the increasing suspicion of the Indian State after the Emergency in 1975–76, and the conscious effort of the Court in recasting its role as an active protector of fundamental rights.

In *Prem Shankar Shukla*'s case, 37 the petitioner sent a telegram to the Supreme Court stating that handcuffs were forced on him and others. As per then prevalent practices, ordinary undertrials were routinely handcuffed. The three-judge bench held that handcuffing is prima facie unreasonable and 'at the first flush, arbitrary'.<sup>38</sup> According to it, an '[i]nsurance against escape does not compulsorily require handcuffing'.<sup>39</sup> Striking down the practice, the Supreme Court held that the application of handcuffs is not a reasonable restriction.

In the few cases that laws imposing restrictions have been held to be unreasonable, the criteria for unreasonableness have been similar to 'due process' requirements under Article 21. For example, in *Kshitindra Narayan Roy Choudhury*'s case, the High Court of Calcutta struck down the relevant law, since it did not give any effective relief against adverse administrative order, and there was no requirement of the reasonable satisfaction of the administrative authority passing a detention order. Similarly, in *Baldeo Prasad*'s case, the Supreme Court struck down a portion of a law providing for externment, stating that there were no sufficient safeguards against the deprivation of liberty under Articles 19(1)(d) and (e). Under the impugned law, there was no provision requiring the District Magistrate to come to an *ex-ante* determination about the applicability of the law to the concerned individual, thereby defeating certain principles of natural justice.

It is therefore important to question whether 'liberty' and 'freedom' refer to the same thing, necessitating the application of judicial principles relevant to one constitutional provision to another. Freedom is generally understood to be a state of existence where an individual is free from control. Liberty, on the other hand, is understood to mean freedom that is conferred or granted by an external agency. Therefore, while the tests under Article 21 are definitely relevant for Article 19(1), they need not be the only tests for examining the validity of reasonable restrictions (the Supreme Court, for example, has evolved such tests on the freedom of speech). $\frac{40}{2}$ 

### **2. Laws and Measures Aimed at Positive Discrimination**

Does protection from discrimination, or constitutionally permissible positive discrimination, also protect freedom? Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution provide affirmative action measures that Parliament and State legislatures can take. Article 16 prohibits discrimination in unemployment on the grounds of residence, but enables reservations for backward classes. Though Article 15 does not explicitly mention residence as a consideration for affirmative action, States have in fact imposed domiciliary requirements for reserving seats in educational institutions.

The tension between equality and freedom sought to be highlighted in this section is the classical tension between positive and negative rights. $\frac{41}{1}$  The Constitution explicitly allows the Indian State to take affirmative action. The judgments on this issue are important not because of the tension between positive and negative rights, but because of the lack of engagement with this tension. In a situation where a balance between the two needs to be clearly delineated, the lack of engagement implicitly makes one subservient to the other. As the following cases highlight, affirmative action seems to be a higher constitutional norm than the freedom of residence, even though courts have not explicitly stated the same. This has direct consequences for the national market in labour, as courts uphold restrictions
that inhibit free movement and residence.

# a. *Education*

One such case is *Saurabh Chaudri*'s case, <sup>42</sup> where the petitioners challenged practices of educational institutions reserving seats on the basis of domicile and institutional preference. The key issue was whether reservations in educational institutions based on domicile are constitutional. The petitioners argued that Article 15(1) explicitly bars reservation on a residential basis. It was argued that all Indians should have one domicile, and not separate State domiciles. The Court held that unlike Article 16(2), Article 15(1) prevents discrimination only on the basis of 'place of birth', and not domicile or residence.<sup>43</sup> Reservation on the basis of domicile is therefore permissible in educational institutions. The Supreme Court, however, did not discuss the interference with Article 19(1)(e). It examined the impugned measures from a non-discrimination perspective, reiterating its earlier judgment in *Pradeep Jain*'s case. <sup>44</sup> There are, however, a few interesting points of note. First, the judges refused to apply a strict scrutiny test as followed in the United States. Its reason for doing so was nothing more than that 'Such a test is not applied in the Indian Courts.'<sup>45</sup> Secondly, it said that for admissions to postgraduate courses there should not be any reservation based on residence following the decision in *Pradeep Jain*'s case.

In *DP Joshi v State of Madhya Bharat*, 46 the Supreme Court upheld the imposition of differential capitation fees on students of a college based on 'bona-fide residence' within the then State of Madhya Bharat. *Bona fide* residency was defined in terms of both domicile and residence, with added requirements of length of residency based on the person's domiciliary status.  $\frac{47}{1}$  There was thus a clear nexus between residency and the basis of discrimination. Yet, the Court did not examine the impugned law from this perspective. The majority judgment focused around the discriminatory aspects of the impugned law, but did not discuss the measure's impact on residency. Jagannadhadas J, in his minority judgment, observed that the intent of the impugned rule was that 'the benefits of the exemption from capitation fees should be available only to persons born in Madhya Bharat and the burden of the capitation fees should be borne by persons not born in Madhya Bharat'.  $\frac{48}{5}$ 

However, he also confined his analysis to whether the provision was unfairly discriminatory. One observable methodology of judicial construction that emerges from this and the following cases is that the Court is confining its analysis of the impact of such measures on a State/local basis, rather than a national one. While an analysis of discrimination in such cases necessitates a comparison between the insider (State resident) and the outsider (non-resident), an analysis of the impact on freedom equally requires the measurement of the law's impact on a national scale. While at a local level the imposition of residency requirements is merely a condition for transferring benefits, from a national perspective it inhibits movement and therefore contributes to fragmentation.

*Pradeep Jain*'s case is perhaps the most significant case discussing residency requirements in reservation measures. At the outset, Bhagwati J declared that there is no concept of a State domicile in India. However, he agreed that 'domicile', as used by State Governments while prescribing domiciliary requirements, is used loosely and has the same meaning as residence, and proceeded to:

[S]trongly urge upon the State Governments to exercise this wrong use of the expression 'domicile' from the rules regulating admissions to their educational institutions and particularly medical colleges and to desist from introducing and maintaining domiciliary requirement as a condition of eligibility for such admissions. 49

#### The judgment went on to decry the use of residency requirements from an equality paradigm:

It is axiomatic that talent is not the monopoly of the residents of any particular State… What is necessary is equality of opportunity and that cannot be made dependent upon where a citizen resides … it would be against national interest to admit in medical colleges or other institutions giving instruction in specialties, less meritorious students when more meritorious students are available, simply because the former are permanent residents or residents for a certain number of years in the State while the latter are not  $\ldots$   $\frac{50}{50}$ 

The judgment then proceeded to reiterate previous decisions holding intra-State residency requirements as invalid. However, on the core issue of whether residence is a permissible criterion of eligibility, it upheld the impugned laws. Citing the judgment in *DP Joshi*, it stated that since classification based on residence is valid, a residency requirement of ten years or more as an eligibility criterion is equally valid.  $51$  It then drew a peculiar distinction in the case of postgraduate courses and stated that admissions to these should be on an all-India basis, observing that 'it would be eminently desirable not to provide for any reservation based on residence requirement within the State or on institutional preference'.  $52$  While the Court is avowedly against diluting the principle of merit, it considers itself bound by precedence, and is cognisant of the need for special measures with respect to certain categories of persons.

### b. *Employment*

In January 1969, the Andhra Pradesh government passed a series of measures called the 'Telangana Safeguards'. The State Government relieved all non-Telangana domiciled government officers who were holding posts reserved for Telangana domiciles. Section 3 of the rules under the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act stated that a person would not be eligible for appointment to a post within Telangana unless residency requirements were satisfied. A five-judge bench in *AVS Narasimha Rao*'s case held the rules invalid. <sup>53</sup> The Court held that though Article 16 permits certain discriminatory action on the basis of residence, it does not permit intra-State discrimination. This power too, has been conferred on Parliament, and not on State Governments. In *KC Sharma*'s case,  $\frac{54}{2}$  the validity of the selection process of the posts of primary school teachers was challenged. The selection criteria gave bonus marks to candidates from that particular district, in addition to domiciles of Rajasthan.<sup>55</sup> The Court explicitly stated that discrimination only on the basis of residence or place of birth was prohibited.<sup>56</sup> The Court accordingly struck down the selection criteria.

These and other cases have judged the issues relating to residential requirements within an equality framework.<sup>57</sup> There is a lack of engagement with the right to free movement and residence that begs the question—is the right to free movement and residence not curtailed in such cases, or if it is, is the curtailment implicitly assumed to be a reasonable restriction? Clearly, the impugned laws and measures do not *prevent* either movement or residence. They merely *disadvantage* individuals on the basis of residence. However, the extent and impact of the disadvantage to those disadvantaged by such affirmative actions should be moot when judging the validity of laws under **Part III** of the Constitution.

The fact is that the nature and permissibility of discrimination has faced far greater judicial scrutiny than the discriminatory measure's impact on freedom. In *Pradeep Jain*'s case, residential requirements were held to have a reasonable nexus to the object sought to be achieved—that is, increasing availability of medical facilities in underserviced areas. A strict scrutiny standard of review<sup>58</sup> may have highlighted that the same object could have been achieved by requiring posteducation service requirements instead of prescribing residency requirements.

# **3. Laws and Measures Aimed at Public Safety, Health, Environment, and Land Acquisition**

In cases pertaining to this third category of cases, the Court's inability to define a clear balancing principle between rights and permissible restrictions is evident. In the cases discussed below, courts have given wide deference to State action.

### a. *Land Acquisition*

Land acquisition is the taking of property by the State, and by doing so, in many cases, residence. Though the right to reside is not extinguished on the taking of residential property, the impact of such taking on residence is undeniable. Courts have not directly considered the impact of land acquisition measures on the right to reside and settle freely. However, there have been indirect references to the nature of interference with this right, and consequent State action.

For example, in *Narmada Bachao Andolan*, 59 the High Court of Madhya Pradesh had issued directions for the allotment of agricultural land in lieu of the land acquired for the construction of the Omkareshwar Dam in Madhya Pradesh.<sup>60</sup> The Supreme Court explicitly stated that the 'acquisition of land does not violate any constitutional/fundamental right of the displaced persons'.<sup>61</sup> While discussing the obligation of the State Government to rehabilitate persons who had been displaced, the Court said that: $\frac{62}{5}$ 

It is desirable for the authority concerned to ensure that *as far as practicable* persons who had been living and carrying on business … on the land acquired, if they so desire, and are willing to purchase and comply with any requirement of the authority  $\ldots$  be given a piece of land  $\ldots$ <sup>63</sup>

# b. *Restrictions on General Physical Movement*

In *Ebrahim Vazir Mavat*, <sup>64</sup>, the Supreme Court struck down section 7 of the Pakistan Control Act 1949 for infringing the right to reside and settle freely under Article 19(1)(e). According to the Court, to allow a citizen to be removed from the country for the commission of an offence would be to destroy an individual's right to citizenship under the Constitution.<sup>65</sup> Section 7 of the Act that provided for this power therefore was an unreasonable restriction on the petitioner's right under Article 19(1) (e).

One of the most contentious issues litigated within the ambit of  $Part III$  of the Constitution has been the right of a person to carry a passport and travel abroad. Article 19(1)(d) only guarantees the freedom to move freely within the territory of India. In 1967, the Supreme Court held that the existing law governing the issuance and regulation of passports violated Article 21 in *Satwant Kumar* Sawhney's case.<sup>66</sup> Though this case is not directly related to Article 19(1)(d), it does have a direct bearing on the following case of *Maneka Gandhi v Union of India. <sup>67</sup>* SK Sawhney was an Indian citizen carrying on the business of export–import and manufacture of automobile parts. The Assistant Passport Officer called upon him to return the passports. Sawhney alleged a violation of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court struck down the relevant provision of the law on the ground that the law did not have adequate procedural safeguards against an order asking the person to return the passport. Parliament went back and enacted a new law, the Passports Act 1967. Section 10(3)(c) of this Act was challenged before the Supreme Court in *Maneka Gandhi*'s case. The Supreme Court upheld the validity of the law, but in doing so, made significant statements as to the nature and interrelationship between various provisions in **Part III** of the Constitution. The pronouncements relevant to our discussion are the following.

First, the Supreme Court held explicitly that the right to movement within and outside India is not a part of the freedom of speech and expression. The two rights are independent, even if a restriction on one has an impact on the other. Secondly, Chandrachud J, in his concurring opinion, noted that fundamental rights are not mutually exclusive. He stated that a law affecting personal liberty under Article 21 would have to satisfy the tests under Articles 14 and  $19.68$  Significantly, he observed that:

[T]he ambit of a freedom cannot be measured by the right of a State to pass laws imposing restrictions on that freedom… Article 19(1)(a) … does not delimit that right in any manner and there is no reason … why the courts should strain the language of the article to cut down the amplitude of that right  $\ldots$  subject of course to  $\ldots$  reasonable restrictions  $\ldots$ <sup>69</sup>

### c. *Public Safety/Public Morals Related Restrictions*

In *Kaushailiya*'s case,  $\frac{70}{2}$  the Supreme Court dealt with the constitutional validity of the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act 1956 and orders made under it. Section 20 of the law allows for the deportation/externment of prostitutes in the vicinity of certain areas and buildings such as educational and religious institutions. The respondents were prostitutes carrying on their trade in Kanpur. The City Magistrate Kanpur asked them to show cause why they should not be removed from their place of residence. The judgment upheld the validity of the law and overturned the decision of the Allahabad High Court that had declared the law invalid.

The Supreme Court held that while a 'prostitute has a fundamental right to move freely throughout the territory of India; and under sub-clause (e) thereof to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India  $\ldots$ <sup>71</sup> 'uncontrolled movement' in crowded areas 'not only helps to demoralise the public morals … to spread diseases not only affecting the present generation, but also the future ones. Such trade in public may also lead to scandals and unseemly broils.<sup> $22$ </sup>

According to the Court, the test of reasonableness depends on the 'values of life in a society', the circumstances at the time the restriction is imposed, and the degree and urgency of the evil sought to be controlled.<sup> $\frac{73}{2}$ </sup> It went on to observe that 'If the evil is rampant, it may also be necessary to provide for deporting the worst of them from the area of their operation… There cannot be two views on the

question of its control and regulation.<sup>774</sup>

In discussing the validity of section 20 of the impugned law under Article  $19(1)(d)$  and (e), the Court held that while section 20 is certainly a restriction, it is not unreasonable.<sup>75</sup> Importantly, the Court engages with an independent framework of interpretation of Article 19(1) rights. It does so by stating that restrictions imposed ought not to be arbitrary and excessive. $\frac{76}{10}$  It explains how section 20 of the law meets the requirements of procedural due process. It then proceeds to substantively discuss whether the power to deport is unreasonable, and concludes that once the legislature has agreed that prostitution as an activity is illegal and punishable, externment cannot be held to be unreasonable. While it examines the test of what constitutes arbitrariness in some detail, it concludes that the measure is not excessive, based on the assumption that procedural fairness is a check against excessiveness. Therefore, while there is an engagement of what measures are excessive under Article 19(2) to (5), the axis of engagement does not change in comparison to other cases.

In *Ajay Canu*,<sup>77</sup> the validity of Rule 498-A of the Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles Rules 1964 was challenged as violating Article 19(1)(d) of the Constitution. Rule 498-A mandated drivers of motorcycles and scooters to wear crash helmets. The Supreme Court held that Rule 498-A was enacted for the safety and benefit of individuals. It is so because it increases freedom of movement by freeing the driver of the apprehension of a fatal head injury if an accident takes place. On this basis, it concluded (remarkably), that 'We do not think there is any fundamental right against any act aimed at doing public good.<sup>7</sup><sup>28</sup> However, it said, even if it is assumed that there is a restriction on a fundamental right here, such a restriction is reasonable.<sup>79</sup> Though the Court highlights the tension between an individual's right and the public good, it fails to articulate a clear standard for determining when one ought to weigh against the other.

A similar tension emanates from the judgment of the High Court of Bombay in *Lucy R D'Souza*'s case.<sup>80</sup> The petitioner challenged the validity of section 53 of the Goa, Daman, and Diu Public Health Act 1985. Section 53 allows the State Government to isolate persons found to be positive for AIDS for such periods as may be considered necessary and in such institutions or wards as prescribed. The High Court upheld the provision. It stated that while isolation has serious consequences, 'in matters like this individual rights has to be balanced [against] the public interest'. The 'former must yield to the latter' in cases like this. $\frac{81}{5}$ 

# d. *Restrictions Imposed Directly on Economic Activity*

In the *Kerala Trawlnet Boat Operators'* case, 82 the activities of certain fishing boats off the coast of Kerala were sought to be regulated by the State Government. They were barred from bottom trawling in certain parts of the sea during specific periods of the year. In their defence, it was argued in their defence that there was no reason for a complete prohibition on passage over such areas. If the boats indulged in any violations, they could be checked, caught, and prosecuted. The Supreme Court responded to this particular argument by stating:

<sup>[</sup>H]aving regard to the vast area involved. It is not practicable. The cost of an effective supervision would be prohibitive. It would not be in the interest of the general public. Since the reasonableness of the restriction has to be judged on the touchstone of general public interest, whether under clause (5) or clause (6) of Article 19 of the Constitution, the above considerations (cost and practicability) are not irrelevant.<sup>83</sup>

This judgment justifies the imposition of a more restrictive State action in favour of a less restrictive one on the ground of the cost of 'effective supervision'. While the cost of regulation is a valid consideration while taking into account the restrictions imposed, the judgment does not highlight any calculation of the relative costs of these two measures. A judiciary more committed to carving out greater freedoms for citizens may have required the State to demonstrate that the measure sought to be imposed is indeed the least restrictive curb on fundamental rights.

In *R Chingaravelu*,  $\frac{84}{5}$  the appellant was carrying Rs 65 lakh in cash to negotiate a sale of property from Hyderabad to Chennai. As soon as he landed at Chennai airport, income tax intelligence officials caught hold of him, took him to an office, questioned, and detained him for fifteen hours. They confiscated his cash, and finding nothing a few days later, returned his money. The Supreme Court stated that when a passenger carries large amounts of cash and his claims regarding its source and legitimacy have to be verified, 'delay and inconvenience is inevitable'. $\frac{85}{5}$  In such a situation the rights of the passenger have to yield to the public interest:

The nation is facing terrorist threats. Transportation of large sums of money is associated with distribution of funds for terrorist activities, illegal pay-offs, etc … rampant circulation of unaccounted black money destroying the economy of the country. In this background ... such action [of the officers] cannot be termed as high-handed or unreasonable.<sup>86</sup>

Intelligence officers are therefore required to satisfy themselves that 'such a large amount is being carried for a legitimate purpose'.  $\frac{87}{1}$  If the tone and tenor of these cases does not make it apparent, there is an inherent bias exhibited by courts towards blunt instruments of control. Once a restriction is imposed, courts seem to be unwilling to go beyond the veil of government mechanisms of imposing these restrictions. This category of cases highlights the reticence of the judiciary in evolving new dimensions of the fundamental rights of movement and residence. Rights can be dynamically expanded by two methods: positively creating more rights by reading in freedoms within the constitutional text, or by adopting a more conservative attitude towards restrictions that may be considered 'reasonable'. The decisions of the judiciary show a proclivity for the former and a reticence to engage in the latter. This is evident in a long chain of cases—land acquisition (*Narmada Bachao Andolan*) and prostitution (*Kaushailiya*), among others. In all these cases, blunt instruments for imposing restrictions have been allowed without substantive discussions on the *least* restrictive methods of imposing restrictions in the public interest. In certain cases, such blunt instruments have been explicitly defended (*Kerala Trawlnet Boat Operators*).

# **IV. CONCLUSION**

Of the three categories of laws and jurisprudence discussed above, those that pertain to the maintenance of law and order probably have the least impact on a national labour market. While courts have examined these on the basis of procedural and substantive safeguards, many of them can potentially be used to deter movement and/or residence. There has been no expansion of these freedoms through a whittling down of what restrictions are considered reasonable (except *Prem Shankar Shukla*'s case, where handcuffing per se was held to be an unreasonable restriction, to be applied only in extreme cases). <sup>88</sup> Except in stray cases, the judiciary has consistently refused to apply a strict scrutiny test.

With regard to the class of cases pertaining to the maintenance of public safety and morals, we find

that the judiciary has not actively required precision in regulatory instruments designed to impinge on the freedoms of movement and residence. Consequently (or perhaps this is the actual cause), there is an insignificant degree of evolution in the conception of what these freedoms mean. $\frac{89}{10}$  The judiciary seems to continue to believe that 'The state is virtuous, the citizen infirm.<sup>200</sup>

In *Katz v United States*,  $\frac{91}{2}$  the United States Supreme Court had held that a warrantless phone tapping of the petitioner's telephone constituted a violation of the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution. However, while doing so, the United States Supreme Court carved out a narrow 'automobile exception<sup>'92</sup> to the general prohibition against warrantless searches. It stated, 'when a policeman has made a lawful custodial arrest of the occupant of an automobile, he may, as a contemporaneous incident of that arrest search the passenger compartment of that automobile'.<sup>93</sup> This is an example of how courts have sought to preserve the scope of the right while allowing law enforcement the minimal effective powers of search and seizure without a warrant. <sup>94</sup>

The patchwork of laws and measures requiring residency requirements, on the other hand, directly impact the mobility of labour. In a government-dominated economy, parochial considerations can considerably benefit local constituencies by limiting educational and employment opportunities. As envisaged by the drafters of the Constitution, the freedoms of movement and residence were intended to guard against precisely such nativist tendencies. Although this might well be a coincidence, it is worth considering the correlation between the judiciary's firm and explicit stand against intra-State residency requirements, and the markedly greater volume of intra-State migration compared to inter-State migration.

While the promotion of the freedom interest encourages competitiveness and merit, the promotion of the equality interest under the Constitution encourages protectionism. Additionally, equality interests may be better served by a careful balancing of the freedom interests sought to be protected, such as by requiring post-educational service obligations on graduates from educational institutions in a specific region, as opposed to residency requirements during admission. The existing jurisprudence in such cases, however, completely fails to perform this balancing act.

The approach of the United States Supreme Court provides a useful comparison in similar circumstances. The United States Supreme Court has held the right to travel to be a part of 'liberty', which a citizen cannot be deprived of without due process of law under the Fifth Amendment.  $\frac{95}{1}$  In *Shapiro v Thompson*, <sup>96</sup> the Court held that statutes imposing a one-year residency requirement for payment of aid to families with dependent children were unconstitutional denials of equal protection. Since the residents had a fundamental right to inter-State migration, the Court used a 'strict scrutiny' standard for striking down the requirement.  $\frac{97}{7}$  According to the United States Supreme Court, legislation must serve a valid State purpose, and it must be reasonable in attaining its purpose. Now, in order to retain a residency requirement, a State has to show some compelling interest that cannot be reasonably attained in any other way.<sup>98</sup> The Indian Supreme Court explicitly refused to follow such an approach.<sup>99</sup>

Each of the three broad categories of restrictions discussed above has significant impact on free movement and residence. Taken together, they present a wide-ranging series of laws and measures that not only affect both public and private spheres of individuals, but also impose significant constraints on the national labour market. In addition to directly preventing movement and residence, they disincentivise labour mobility across India.