Historically speaking, there are two ways in which the issue of the decline of ethics in governance has been addressed. First, some hold the view that the decline of ethics in governance cannot be conclusively arrested through administrative acts, given its roots in the wider socio- economic and political milieu. What is therefore required is to create an environment in which values of integrity, honesty and the rule of law are uncritically appreciated and respected, notwithstanding provocations to the contrary. This is easier said than done since it involves an overhauling of the system, drawing its sustenance from the milieu in which it is located. To accomplish the goal, one needs to devise means that will have long- term effects on society. These means must be nurtured through socialization, beginning with one's childhood; they are not merely means in the conventional sense of the term, but are effective designs for fundamental socio- economic and political changes that are subtle and goal- driven. As history has shown, sustained endeavour in which these means remain critical results in transformations. These also create impulses for change, a change seen as being natural and integrally connected with efforts towards building a society free from retarding influences.

 The second device that is resorted to quite often to arrest the deterioration in ethics in public authorities is taking steps towards reforming administration at regular intervals. Based on the belief that the key to the decline of ethics is the rising tide of corruption, some experts have sincerely pursued a line of thinking in which administrative reform is seen to be an effective mechanism. By suggesting various ways of tackling corruption and malpractices, which have an obvious debilitating effect on governance, they usually end up with a design of administration which, they think, is adequately equipped to take care of administrative decay. Logically persuasive and administratively feasible, these designs are usually aimed at putting in place a system whereby the fundamental objective of public administration – serving the public – is neither compromised nor bypassed. This seems to be relatively easier than the first option, because, drawing on its collective experience, the state is well equipped to suggest ways and means for improvement. Since designs for administrative reforms do not radically alter the ideological texture of the system, they are rather easily accepted. This suggests that administrative reforms provide a better and also far more effective means of arresting administrative decay. There are two assumptions which are critical here: on the one hand, it is assumed that the key to change in administration is consciously chosen designs for reforms which are both contextual and futuristic: contextual, because they are usually centred around those issues which seem to have bothered the decision makers; futuristic, since these designs are prepared keeping in view the possible changes in administration and the repercussions from the public and those involved in governance following the implementation of the measures. Seeking to address the new social, economic and politico- ideological concerns for which the prevalent administration appears to be inadequate, the second assumption underlines, on the other hand, the importance of stakeholders in shaping an appropriate administrative design for them. An administration's inner strength and capability is judged and assessed on whether it is an effective tool for fulfilling a goal. So, administrative reforms are also an attempt at adapting administration to the interests of those who are expected to be served; the failure here denotes distortions in administration that contribute to an environment in which tendencies towards undermining ethics in governance seem to have an edge.

 There is, however, a cautionary note. Ethics in governance cannot be ensured by administrative acts alone; they also require societal changes, in which the values of ethics are respected. The significance of administrative reforms should not be underestimated: they provoke debates on the critical nature of ethics in public life. What is argued here is the importance of the dialectical interconnection between administrative reforms and societal changes, at the same time as seeking to understand and conceptualize the processes for establishing ethics in governance. The argument hinges on the point that administrative reforms will become far more effective if they are supplemented by a consolidated societal drive against the tendency to belittle ethics in governance. Keeping in view this fundamental observation, this chapter, by delineating the salience of administrative reforms for ethics in public life, concentrates on how they have contributed to transforming Indian administration over the years. It is also argued here that administrative reforms are definite measures that nurture and also protect the ethical basis of administration, as the history of administrative reforms in India has shown. Administrative reforms are both transformative and also designs reflecting a drive towards adapting the administration to context- specific societal demands. By providing a detailed study of the various schemes of administrative reform that India has undertaken, particularly since her political independence in 1947, this chapter, reconfirms the point that administrative decrees for reform, despite being contextdependent, always have a societal impact by arresting distortions in administration and consequently reaffirming the importance of ethics in governance.

## **What is administrative reform?**

Administrative reform is basically related to the idea of a change in administration that is brought about through deliberate effort. It should, however, be borne in mind, as Machiavelli warns, that

there is nothing more difficult to arrange, more doubtful of success and more dangerous to carry through than initiating changes in a state's constitution. The innovator makes enemies of all those who prospered under the old order, and only lukewarm support is forthcoming from those who would prosper under the new.1

Administrative reform is therefore 'a risk, a gamble in which the odds are heavily against success . . . [and] it can take generations for administrative behaviour and values to change appreciably'.2 There are, thus, hardly any magical keys to administrative reform. It is a long- term process that requires talent, zeal and commitment, scarce resources and, above all, time, whereas governments tend to look for short- term and quick solutions. Reform is, thus argues Gerald Caiden, 'tossed around like a boat in a storm [since] from conception to finality is a long, arduous and difficult journey beset with numerous obstacles, unforeseen perils and unexpected surprises'.3 Underlining the criticality of the political ambience in which administrative reforms are attempted, Caiden further argues that they are 'an artificial instrument of administrative transformation against resistance'.4 While elaborating on administrative reform as a conceptual category, he thus identifies three important characteristics: first, it entails a thorough reconstruction of the machinery of government which, in effect, means a complete or partial overhauling of the existing administrative structure that appears to have lost momentum in the changed circumstances; second, it aims at systematic transformation and not piecemeal change, permanent alterations and not cosmetic touches, in structure, territorial organization, budget management, planning processes and personnel practices to reduce corruption, incompetence and red tape; third, the different sectors and programmes must be rationalized and reorganized for more effective performance; and, finally, the machinery of government must be simplified and streamlined to eliminate unnecessary duplication, reduce inconvenience and minimize pluralism.5 It is thus believed that administrative reform is a persuasive tool to bring about changes in public governance in accordance with what is deemed to be appropriate in a specific context. As a goal- driven initiative, administrative reform thus provides a way to arrest distortions in governance and also contributes to processes whereby the issue of ethics receives adequate attention in decision making. Difficulties notwithstanding, the drive towards administrative reform always remains, as history shows, integral to the socio- political churning that usually creates an environment for change. The political authority cannot easily escape this drive, given its organic roots in the wider social, economic and political milieu. The desire for ethics in governance is also based on the internal concern for streamlining governance to make it sensitive to the values of public service; this can be a determining source of administrative reform, although the importance of external stimuli cannot be neglected, because ethics in governance is usually the outcome of a contextual dialectical interconnection between internal necessity and external insistence. In the ultimate analysis, administrative reforms seeking to reinforce the fundamental ethos of administration are a deliberate mechanism for the

administrative changes required to make governance attentive to the basic moral code of conduct while still fulfilling its goals.

## **Ethics and administrative reforms in India**

Governance in a democratic polity cannot be absolutely aloof from ethics, since it is meant to serve the public; even in an authoritarian regime, despite its inherent tendency to pursue partisan goals, public administration cannot publicly declare its private goal because of the obvious adverse impact on the governed. There is therefore depth in the argument that public authorities, notwithstanding their context- dependent instrumental goals, cannot afford to ignore their publicness at any cost. Public administration is, in other words, devoid of its kernel if it is conceptualized without understanding its emphasis on public well- being as a fundamental goal. The section thus argues that governance is an act of articulating and also implementing ideology- driven socio- economic and political objectives in specific circumstances. The fundamental ethos of administration can be conveniently bypassed if the publicness of public administration is heavily compromised. In such circumstances, the considerations of ethics in public life do not appear to be as critical as expected. Ridden with distortions, governance thus becomes clearly instrumental, being utilized for fulfilling personalized goals and missions. This, however, does not happen overnight since governance- deficit is an offshoot of long- drawn-out processes which are also linked to overall social and political decadence in the society in question. Administrative reforms, as argued above, are about those devices that are considered to be effective in arresting decadence in public authority. These are both internally articulated and driven by external demands; they can thus be said usually to emerge out of a respect for justice and fair play, because this is what ethics in governance is all about. Ideologically charged and empirically designed, administrative reforms are thus not merely tools of change, but also thoughtful endeavours towards charting out a definite course of action which is, in principle, tuned to the ethical concern for public well- being.

 Turning to the 'reforms' scenario in India, one has to run through a long period of bureaucratic ups and downs since the advent of colonial rule. During the imperial rule, the core purpose of administration was to bolster colonialism, with the people's interests being absolutely peripheral if not entirely absent. Hence administrative reforms had, for obvious reasons, the single priority of perpetuating British rule. This was suppressive and contrary to the values of the British Enlightenment, which highlighted social virtues such as benevolence, compassion and tolerance. Colonialism, assessed in such a perspective, was an aberration, since it struck at the very foundation of the Enlightenment principles. Nonetheless, the most significant change that the British administration initiated had been the gradual suppression of custom by law in the management of public services. It was also strongly felt that involvement of Indians in the administration was necessary to create strong roots in the society under British rule. The 1892 *Indian Council Act* thus stated that the aim of this Act was

to widen and expand the functions of the Government of India, and to give further opportunities to the non- official and native elements in Indian society to take part in the work of the Government, and in that way, to lend official recognition to that remarkable development both of political interests and political capacity that had been visible among the higher classes of Indian society since the Government of India was taken over by the Crown in 1858.6

 In conformity with the above claim to expand the foundation of governance in India by accommodating Indians in the administration, several legislative enactments were made, despite the fact that centralization of power and authority remained the preeminent goal of British administration, and one that was never compromised. Nonetheless, a change in governance was visible with the involvement of Indians in administration; though in a very limited way, the administration was receptive to the voice that came from the grassroots against tyrannical exercise of power. Perhaps the most (and last) significant constitutional measure in India during the British rule was the 1935 *Government of India Act,* which drew on inputs from the Indian Statutory Commission, the All Parties Conference, the Round Table Conferences and the Joint Parliamentary Committee of the British Parliament. Seeking to establish a federal form of government in which the constituent provinces had autonomous legislative and executive powers, the Act paved the way for a parliamentary form of government in which the executive was made accountable within certain bounds to the legislature. This radically altered public administration in India, including the civil service in the country. Although the well- espoused federation never came into being, the Act was nonetheless a powerful comment against an integrated administrative system of the colonial variety. A perusal of the Act draws our attention to the following features:

- a provincial autonomy was recognized by giving the provinces a separate legal identity and liberating them from central control except for certain specific purposes;
- a federation of India was established, demarcating domains between the provincial governments and the federal central government;
- dyarchy, discontinued in the provinces, was introduced at the centre. The responsibilities for foreign affairs and defence were 'reserved' to the control of the Governor- General; the other central responsibilities were transferred to ministers in the provinces, subject to 'safeguards';
- the federal principle was recognized in the formation of the lower house of the central legislature though the de facto ruler, remained the Governor- General;
- a separate electorate was retained following the distribution of seats among the minority communities, as devised by the 1932 Communal or MacDonald Award.

The *Government of India Act* redefined 'public' in public administration. The introduction of provincial autonomy enabled the Indian ministers to be directly involved in administration, although they had to function under the overall restriction of colonialism. Hence it was characterized as 'a gigantic constitutional façade without anything substantial within it'. The Act was also a sign of the determination of the British government to shift the Indian question towards electoral politics. By involving Indians in the administration, the Act had brought more players into the arena of public administration. There is no doubt that the Act introduced Indian politicians to the world of parliamentary politics and, as a result of the new arrangement stipulated by the Act, politics now percolated down to the localities, which had largely remained peripheral to that point. The available evidence also suggests that the Act was the price the British paid for the continuity of the Empire. What thus appears to be a calculated generous gesture was very much a politically expedient step. In fact, the surrender of power, although at the regional level, caused consternation among the advocates of British power in India, who saw an eclipse of British authority in this endeavour.

 An uncritical assessment of the major landmark constitutional initiatives during colonial rule may lead one to conclude that these were initiated by the British for the purpose of better administration for the Indians. But that would underestimate the spirit of nationalism. If one goes beyond the surface, what is evident is that public administration underwent changes largely because of the British effort to defuse popular discontent. Hence the argument that every constitutional drive was initiated by the Raj is totally unfounded. History reveals that there were situations that forced the British authority to adopt measures to control agitation. For instance, the Congress campaign in the 1880s contributed a lot to the introduction of the 1893 reforms. Behind the 1909 Morley–Minto Reforms lay the *Swadeshi* Movement and revolutionary terrorism. Similarly, the 1919 Montague–Chelmsford Reforms were attempts at resolving crises that began with the Home Rule League and climaxed in the 1919 Rowlatt Satyagraha and the Non Cooperation Movement of 1910–21. To a large extent, the Gandhian civil disobedience movement (1930–2) accounted for the introduction of constitutional measures seeking to involve Indian politicians in public administration.

 Furthermore, the interpretation of these constitutional designs remains partial unless it is linked to the broader socio- economic and political processes in which they were conceptualized. An attempt to analyse the structure and dynamics of constitutional politics without reference to the broader social matrix and economic nexus is futile, because the politico–constitutional structure reflects economic and social networks, religio- cultural beliefs and even the nationalist ideology which impinged on the organized world of administrative and constitutional structure. So an urgent and unavoidable task for an analyst is not to completely ignore the broader socio- economic context but to ascertain its relative importance in shaping a particular constitutional initiative. For instance, the 1932 Communal Award was believed to have been initiated by the British to expand political activity among the Muslims in Bengal and Punjab. But, as studies have shown, it was also a concession the British were forced to grant in order to make the maintenance of the Empire easier. The sharing of power with

the native elites was thus prompted by considerations other than merely British initiatives.

 With independence, the nature and the spirit of administration were bound to be radically different since its moral foundation had undergone dramatic changes. The Indian historical experience, both during the British period and its immediate aftermath, has led to the emergence of a public administration that was ill- suited to the needs and aspiration of the people. The reasons are not difficult to find, as studies have shown that the bureaucrats who were brought up and trained in the colonial administrative culture were wedded to the Weberian characteristics of hierarchy, status and rigidity of rules and regulations and concerned mainly with the enforcement of order and the collection of revenues. For the colonial regime, this structure was appropriate; however, it was completely unfit to discharge functions in the changed environment of an administration geared to the task of development. As the Government became the main institution for development in the democratic set- up that India adopted following independence, the role of officials underwent changes. The sole objective of officials became to 'emphasize results, rather than procedures, teamwork rather than hierarchy and status, [and] flexibility and decentralization rather control and authority'.7 Seen as 'the development administrator', a bureaucrat, endowed with 'tact, pragmatism, dynamism, flexibility, adaptability to any situation and willingness to take rapid, ad- hoc decisions without worrying too much about procedures and protocol'8 was thus hailed as perhaps the most effective aid to accomplishing the ideological mission that an independent India had undertaken.

 Following independence, government functions expanded in scope and content. With the introduction of the parliamentary form of government and the setting up of people's institutions right down to village level, there has been an inevitable rise in the level of expectation and government performance has been seen to vary. People's institutions were set up with the objective of creating selfgoverning institutions at village level. A true democracy, as advocated by Gandhi, ensures that local, state and national representatives are accountable to the people for local, state and national matters respectively, through effective transparency. Such one- to-one accountability may promote responsible politics and competent political professionals. That objective remains distant. Our present system based on diffused accountability, as mentioned in the consultation paper of the National Commission for Review of the Working of the Constitution, 'breeds corruption and attracts self- seekers to politics'. For this breed, the paper further underlines, 'interests of national development, welfare of the people and needs of good governance take lower priorities, if any'.9 Similarly, independence and Five Year Plans were perceived by the people as synonymous with economic and social equity and well- being, and freedom from want and oppression. In the early days of the planning era, people did not quibble much about shortages, which they confronted with fortitude, because the future held hope and promise for them. With the passage of time, they felt their hopes had been dashed, and, as the paper indicated, they were 'nowhere near the promised land of honesty, plenty and happiness'. The era of self- governance,

decentralization and community development was flagged in with considerable élan and fan- fare. For example, the three- tier *Panchayati Raj* system and the urban local bodies were conceived of as a properly meshed network of institutions to accelerate the development process. Revolutionary in scope, the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth amendments (1992) to the Constitution sought to advance the concept of 'self- governance' by providing for (a) regular elections, (b) minimal suppression of *Panchayati Raj* bodies through an administrative fiat and (c) regular finances through statutory distribution by state finance commissions. But, for various reasons, the political process became what may be termed as 'reversed', and highly centralized and personalized systems of government developed both at the central and state levels. There has been a massive erosion of institutions, whether they are the Parliament and parliamentary institutions, or the party system and democratic procedures in the running of parties, or the judiciary, or indeed the press.

 Given the new challenges of economic development and social change, the prevalent administrative set-up was both structurally inadequate and functionally unprepared in India's changed socio- political circumstances. So there was a need for administrative reforms whereby the structure would respond to the systemic changes in the Indian polity following the British withdrawal. While redefining the nature of civil service in independent India, Jawaharlal Nehru thus commented that since 'the state has become a dynamic state – not a static state – Services (administrators) have to adapt themselves to the changes . . . have to adapt methods to the changed conditions of work and the changed objectives of work'.10 Several steps were undertaken in the aftermath of the 1947 transfer of power.

 The first step was undoubtedly the Secretariat Reorganization Committee, appointed by the imperial government even before the actual transfer of power. In its report, submitted in August 1947, the Committee commented extensively on 'the unresponsive' nature of the administration, that was simply 'incapable' of handling 'the new challenges' in the aftermath of the British withdrawal.11 This line of thinking was pursued in 1951 in two subsequent reports – *Public Administration in India* and *Efficient Conduct of State Enterprises*, prepared by A D Gorwala for the Planning Commission. Recommending the introduction of the 'organization and method' procedure in government departments and public enterprises, Gorwala suggested steps to ensure 'efficiency' and 'discipline' in the civil service. What separates this report from the earlier ones is the considerable emphasis on 'the coordination between politicians and administrators' for 'smooth and efficient' functioning of public administration.12 A D Gorwala's report was submitted on 30 April 1951. The report stated that, although the administrative machinery had remained sound, the increasing work load had been adversely affecting the performance of the personnel. The major recommendations included (a) maintenance of high standards of integrity and efficiency in administration, (b) that the machinery be reorganized to ensure speed, effectiveness and accountability (c) that some basic structural changes be introduced to improve the quality of services, and (d) that arrangements be made for

training of officials and recruitment through the Public Service Commissions to avoid nepotism and patronage.

 In his in- depth study of the Indian administration in 1953, Paul Appleby suggested radical reforms of an administrative structure that was 'archaic', 'feudalistic' and 'unimaginative' and hence was simply 'inadequate' to fulfill the primary goal of nation with 'a long history of colonialism'. In his report, Appleby criticized 'the structure which subordinated the national Government to State, district and municipal control making implementation of programmes of national importance difficult'. He therefore suggested some structural changes such as (a) creation of middle- level functionaries and recruitment of more executives at all levels, (b) a more flexible system of recruitment to meet particular needs and requirements, (c) the setting up of panels of qualified persons in place of the existing practice of selecting individuals, (d) arranging of refresher courses for serving personnel, (e) setting up of an Organization and Management Division in each Department to monitor the work, and (f ) finding ways to improve the administration through specialized studies and reviews undertaken by the Institute of Public Administration. Moreover, he was critical of the tendency of the Ministry of Finance to centralize powers and not to delegate them to the operational ministries. Furthermore, while commenting on the nature of subordinates at the cutting edge level of bureaucracy, Appleby expressed concern at the growing level of corruption by saying that 'it is not surprising that it is at these cutting edges – post offices, district sub offices, in agricultural extension and in many places – where corruption is most common and where personal disgruntlement is the great handicap in the way of pushing on programmes . . . actually undertaken and not merely verbalized'.13 He referred to the diffusion of responsibility from the top to the lower levels and the lack of 'facilities for administrative delegation'. Because of this diffusion of responsibility, it was difficult to ascertain 'accountability'. There was, according to him, 'too much scrutiny and too many impediments before the fact and too little systematic review and scrutiny after the fact'.14 What is thus required for administration to remain relevant, felt Appleby, is regular review of decisions by taking into account the contextual inputs.

 What drove Appleby in this exercise was his concern for change, which was unlikely to happen in the administration given its colonial roots? In other words, an administration that had served the imperial rulers did not appear to be appropriate for a free nation with its own socio- political and economic agenda. In fact, it is clear in Appleby's report that the prevalent bureaucratic set- up that sustained foreign rule was a mismatch with India's national aspiration. What was most surprising to him was the acceptance of 'an administrative machine' simply because of its 'instrumental' significance. As a result, the later efforts at administrative reform appear to have focused more on structural changes that were believed to be crucial in radically altering the inherent ideology of Indian public administration. The report of the Second Pay Commission (1957–9) is illustrative here. Appointed in 1957, the Commission's primary task was to examine 'the principles' that should govern 'the structure of emoluments and conditions

of service' of central government employees. In order to ascertain efficiency, the Commission suggested the classification of government offices into 'attached' and 'subordinate' offices on a functional basis and bringing the relevant Secretariat and the attached offices under 'a single headquarter organization'. The other notable recommendation, drawing on the British pattern of Whitley Councils, was the creation of machinery for negotiation and settlement of disputes between employers and employees. Although this recommendation was almost shelved, the growing corruption in administration led to the appointment of the 1964 Santhanam Committee that looked into the problem of administrative corruption. Its recommendations were largely procedural in the sense that the roots of corruption lay in the violation of the established systems and procedures. What was groundbreaking was the recommendation for the creation of a central vigilance commission, as a permanent administrative wing to keep a sustained watch on civil servants.

 The most comprehensive enquiry ever undertaken in the aftermath of decolonization was the Administrative Reforms Commission that came into being in 1966 under the stewardship of Morarji Desai. Two important ideas seemed to have governed the constitution of this Commission: first, the changing nature of administration – from a mere law- and-order maintenance agency to an apparatus responsible for development – radically altered the traditional conception of administration; second, the ideological goal of a socialist pattern of society called for a drastic overhauling of the machinery of government that so far had discharged its responsibility in a very stereotypical manner. So the commission was given a very wide mandate and was entrusted with the task of

giving consideration to the need for ensuring the highest standard of efficiency and integrity in the public services and for making public administration a fit instrument for carrying out the social and economic goals of development as also one which is responsive to the public.15

As is evident, the Commission sought to redefine public administration by recognizing the importance of the 'public' in administration. Furthermore, the adoption of a socialistic pattern of society brought about radical changes in conceptualizing the role of administration. Guided by the objective of establishing a socialistic pattern of society, the Commission was entrusted with a 41-point charter, grouped into ten specific areas of enquiry which are as follows: (1) the machinery of the government of India and its procedures of work; (2) the machinery for planning at all levels; (3) centre–state relationships; (4) financial administration; (5) personnel administration; (6) economic administration; (7) administration at the state level; (8) district administration; (9) agricultural administration; and (10) problem of redress of citizen's grievances. In 20 reports that the Commission submitted, there were altogether 581 recommendations that covered the entire gamut of Indian administration. The most important recommendations relate to the structural transformation of central government, including the composition of the cabinet and other governmental departments

responsible for developmental plans and programmes. Suggesting a maximum strength of 45 for the central cabinet, the Commission defined the role of the prime minister as a guide, coordinator and supervisor of a collectivity, known as the cabinet. The commission also provided a checklist of what the prime minister should do, largely in conformity with the Westminster form of cabinet government, where the premier is the pivot of the government. The other substantive recommendation involved the minister–secretary relationships that lay at the root of an efficient administration. In other words, being critical of the 'neutrality' in the civil service, the Commission supported a bureaucracy that clearly upheld the political will of the country, as articulated by the prime minister and his cabinet. Since the government was committed to socialist principles, the civil service, which was responsible for the implementation of this goal, was expected to reorient its role in the changed circumstances. Although the Commission maintained the obvious distinction between policy making and its execution in public administration, there was no rigidity in its characterization of the role of the political and permanent executives. As both of them constituted integral parts of an organic whole, it would be simply unrealistic, the Commission held, to overlook the mutual interaction between the two.

 While the Commission devoted a great deal of energy to the structural reform of central government, personnel administration also received attention for it was the human content that ultimately decided the character of public administration. Just as with the 1953–5 Hoover Commission, which believed that 'the government cannot be any better than the man and woman who make it function', the Commission also insisted that 'the road to the top must be open to every competent and qualified government servant [and] to higher management in the Secretariat, talent must be drawn from every cadre and class of government servants'. Drawing on this philosophy, the Commission articulated its suggestions in four different ways: first, a rational system needs to be devised for recruitment to policy- making positions, with the recruitment of personnel possessing the required qualifications and competence. This involves an optimum use of different services for secretariat assignments and also the adoption of special measures to build the necessary specialization in the secretariat; second, senior management personnel must be selected from all relevant sources – generalist and specialists – and, for this purpose, talent needs to be discovered and developed in all the services, especially among those who have not so far been inducted into the higher management positions in the secretariat to any significant degree; third, a rational pay structure requires to be installed so as to truly reflect the actual responsibilities associated with each job; and, finally, to boost morale in the civil service, talented lower rank personnel should be given greater scope than what exists now to move up in the hierarchy on the basis of competence and performance.

 The Commission report is probably the most exhaustive checklist of steps to streamline the administration in the changed socio- political environment. Drawing on 'certain basic considerations', the most significant recommendation, apart from the introduction of the concept and technique of performance

budgeting, is the appointment of *Lokpal* (at the centre) and *Lokayaukta* (in the states). Perhaps the two most important areas touched on by the Commission in its reports are (a) the minister–civil servant relationship, wherein it emphasized the need for the depoliticization of services; and (b) the creation of a climate and culture of administration, wherein the growth of personal relationship between individual civil servants and the minister should be stopped. However, a close look at the recommendations suggests that the Commission, instead of radically altering the structure, was favourably inclined towards mere 'cosmetic' changes within the administration. It is pertinent to mention here that administrative reform appears futile unless it is accompanied by political reform. In other words, since public administration is hardly neutral, its nature is contingent on that of the 'political' in which it is located. So the Commission report, despite being voluminous although not so illuminating, was scarcely effective in substantially transforming the Indian administration, which had, for obvious reasons, colonial roots. Notwithstanding the declared objective of making the administration responsive to the people, the report thus remained a wellresearched document on Indian administration with no far- reaching impact.

 During the period between the appointment of the Commission in 1966 and the inauguration of the Fifth Pay Commission in 1997, there were no major committees except three isolated attempts: (a) to improve the pattern of combined services, a competitive examination introducing a preliminary tier of examination to eliminate the large number of candidates having less potential for success, as a sequel to the 1976 Kothari Committee report; (b) to revitalize the *Panchayati Raj* system of governance at the grassroots by converting the three- tier structure into a two- tier structure (1979 Mehta Committee), which has contributed significantly to the adoption of the *Seventy- Third Amendment Act* in 1992, and (c) to change the system of economic administration (the 1986 Jha Committee). Following these efforts, the most dramatic administrative reform scheme was articulated by the 1997 Fifth Pay Commission that has, as shown below, radically altered the prevalent conceptualization of reform by tuning to the compulsion of liberalization and the emergence of a new economic order. Similarly, the reconstitution of the grassroots governance, in the light of the 1992 *Seventy-Third Amendment Act*, has introduced new dimensions in rural administration by seeking to bring in the hitherto peripheral sections of society in the decision making.

 It is obvious that, even before the onset of liberalization, several measures were adopted to revitalize the administration that owe their origin to completely different socio- economic concerns. These reforms were largely internally generated, while post- liberalization efforts were mostly externally driven. In this series of reform schemes, the recommendations of the 1981 National Police Commission (NPC) are different not only in their thrust but also in raising probably very crucial questions in a context in which those possessing the legitimate instruments of coercive power tended to distort the public nature of their authority at the slightest pretext.

## **National Police Commission Report**

A critical look at police behaviour reveals an important dimension of its history that continues to influence its nature even after 50 years of independence. It would not be an exaggeration to argue that the Indian police remains the same at least in substance as when it was formally inaugurated with the promulgation of the 1861 *Police Act* in the shadow of the 1857 armed struggle against the British and with the main objective of ensuring imperial rule. Replacing the old *daraga* system that had become redundant with the spread of the British ascendancy in India, the new system was introduced with a view to expanding its reach as widely as possible. The police were an instrument of control, an instrument that was, for obvious reasons, unsparingly used to advance the cause of British imperialism. It had therefore no societal trust. Despite the fact that the colonial state embodied the theory and practice of the rule of law in its constitutional deliberations, the police force was mired in partisanship, its role was vicious and its image was deliberately nurtured as adversarial to society. Notwithstanding severe indictment during its four decades of existence until the point of the 1902 Police Commission, no reform was allowed by the colonial government either of its organization or its work culture. The police therefore emerged as a timetested instrument that was allowed to function almost without shackles.

 It is not difficult to understand why the colonial state preferred the Irish constabulary model to the Metropolitan model, which had sought to provide a new image for the police, one in which they hardly ever used force. For obvious reasons, the British government had never allowed the colonial states to adopt the Metropolitan Bobby model, which drew upon a style of community policing that did not resort to coercion except under exceptional circumstances. Not only was the Irish Constabulary a time- tested force in Ireland, the model seemed to be the most appropriate in firmly establishing and maintaining British hegemony in circumstances in which the colonial state was most vulnerable. Primarily a coercive instrument, the police hardly had any interactions with the people, because it was believed that a well- defined distance from the people was necessary in order to ruthlessly implement the official decrees of the Raj.

 For the colonial state, the choice of the Irish Constabulary model was an obvious one. What is surprising is the continuity of that same model, even after India became free. Despite being critical of the British police that had sustained the most oppressive administration, the nationalist leaders, including Vallabbhai Patel and Jawaharlal Nehru, allowed the system to remain, simply because of its efficiency in law enforcement under colonialism. Even Gandhi was not in its favour. Drawing on and inspired by *ahimsa*, he therefore perceived the police as conducive to a radically different socio- economic and political order in which 'the sprit of violence will have all but vanished and internal disorder will come under control'.16 Those who opposed the continuity of the Irish Constabulary model because of its ideological underpinning seemed to have been persuaded in view of the sudden outbreak of communal violence immediately after the transfer of power. What was readily acceptable because of the exigencies of the

situation became a permanent feature of independent India, since the political leadership – regardless of ideology – began to relish a partisan police force that allowed the government to use a legitimate coercive force as and when required to pursue a political goal. The 2002 Gujarat carnage is perhaps the best available illustration to show how the police went berserk at a critical juncture to please their political bosses. However, it would be wrong to suggest that the police always act in accordance with the ruling authority's dictation. Again, the Gujarat case demonstrates the extent to which the local police reflected the mood of the majority community. By getting involved in the mayhem, either through actions or non- actions, the Gujarat police had articulated its response to the riot merely as an integral part of the majority community. By sharing the emotions of the majority community, the police had hardly remained secular. Gujarat is probably the latest example of the police being an active partner in the Hindutva campaign. Perhaps the most glaring example of a police force that tends to become communal at the slightest provocation is the Provincial Armed Constabulary in Uttar Pradesh. Examples can easily be multiplied showing the complicity of that constabulary with those for Hindutva. What stands out was its role during the 1992 Ayodhya catastrophe, when it was reported to have directly participated in the demolition of the controversial Islamic historical relic.

 In view of the growing communalization of the police force, perhaps this is an appropriate time to have a fresh look at the 1981 report of the NPC. Before the NPC was inaugurated, several police commissions were appointed by various states, with Kerala being the pioneer in instituting a Police Reorganization Commission in 1959. Appointed in the aftermath of the 1975–7 Emergency, the NPC made several recommendations on police reforms in its eight- volume report, submitted in 1981. What is ironical, however, is that those who argued strongly for police reform since they suffered most as a result of police brutality during the Emergency held power at the centre in 1996–7, and yet there was a complete silence on what was hailed as 'a groundbreaking document' that would radically alter our approach to the police and policing in India.

 The NPC has touched on a wide range of issues concerning the police in India. The two areas that appeared to have bothered the Commission most were (a) the misuse of the police and (b) accountability and police performance. For the Commission, the Emergency was a reference point at which the bias of the ruling authority seemed to have determined police behaviour. The police were used not merely as an instrument of the state or the government in power, but also of the politicians who had lost their legitimacy to rule. Jayprakash Narayan's appeal to the police to disobey the illegal order of their bosses in the wake of the *Chhatra Sangarsh* movement in Bihar was perhaps the first articulated signal of the possible devastation resulting from police complicity with the government of the day.

 According to the NPC, the police themselves at the behest of politicians distorted their role during the Emergency. The Commission thus exhorts that 'the police sub- culture should take into account the fundamental rights of the people, the supremacy of laws and not of executive fiat, and our constitutional goal towards a developed and egalitarian society'.17 There are innumerable examples

to show that 'putting down political dissent became a tacitly accepted objective of the police system in most of the states'. In order to express their loyalty to the ruling party, the police always dealt with the law and order situations 'with a political eye'. The NPC was candid in seeking to conceptualize 'the police brutality and its cancerous corruption' by underlining that

no thinking and planning are in evidence because the senior administrative ranks are perpetually insecure and are exhausted by the continual effort to survive, in an atmosphere where their assessment by the executive – administrative and political – is not always based on merit. Clearly the police organization as it stands today is unfit to discharge its duties.18

To contain the misuse of the police, two major recommendations were made: (a) there should be a tenured office of the Chief of Police, selected by a panel drawn from a committee comprising the chairman of the UPSC, the Union Home Secretary, the senior most heads of central police organizations, the Chief Secretary of the state and the existing Police Chief of the state; and, (b) there should be a six member permanent State Security Commission with a fixed term of three years to review annually the performance of the police.

 The other serious recommendation involved measures to ascertain police accountability for the discharge of their duties. There are three types of interlinked accountability – accountability to the people and to the law and organizational accountability – that the police should seek to ensure.

 There is a well- defined mechanism within the organization to ascertain 'internal accountability' for the police. This, by itself, does not ensure accountability to the people, for which mere recommendations will not suffice. So, accountability in this context presupposes two- dimensional responsibilities: on the one hand, the police are to discharge their responsibilities in accordance with both organizational rationality and systemic rationality, based on the law of the land; on the other hand, accountability also requires the duties to be discharged to the satisfaction of the party for whose benefit they are being performed. What it suggests is the importance of certain well- defined norms whereby a constant watch is maintained by the people. Over the years, it has been observed that the police seem to be completely alienated from the people whose agents they are and to whom they are ultimately accountable. It is not surprising that the use of third degree methods and custodial deaths have been on the rise. The police seem to be the easily available coercive instrument of the elected representatives, whenever they are required to forcibly suppress mass agitation against those representatives' misuse of public office. The NPC noted that, on innumerable occasions, the police acted like a mercenary force and ignored completely its societal role in defending the people, regardless of religion, clan and creed.

 There is no doubt that these recommendations, if implemented, would radically alter not only the image of the police but also their functioning in a multireligious society such as India. What is most disturbing, however, is the reluctance of even those who suffered due to police atrocities to take care of the recommendations when they come to power. The reasons are not difficult to seek. The police appear to be a handy instrument at the disposal of the ruling authority to pursue sectarian interests with legitimacy. The roots of this blatant distortion therefore lie elsewhere. If society is affected by a communal virus so that an anti- Muslim bias gets translated into violent action with the slightest provocation, it would be wrong to blame only the police for those distortions in our secular fabric. The NPC recommendations seem to have provided a good reference point to deal with those fundamental socio- political issues which, though directly linked to the functioning of the police, are equally significant in grasping what provokes mass hysteria at regular intervals in India.

## **Recent conceptualization of ethics in governance**

Concern for ethics in governance is being continuously pursued by those in authority in tandem with the demands that the wider socio- economic and political milieu make on the system. Reform efforts in government have thus been a natural response. As shown above, the Administrative Reform Commission (1966–70) in India produced a series of reports concerning almost all the departments of the government. Every Pay Commission report in India carried with it many recommendations for changes in public administration per se. What is important to note is that these reform proposals were discussed within the framework of traditional public administration. The accountability of the civil service to the elected element within the overall accountability structure laid down in the parliamentary system of government was not in question. There was general consensus that public administration could be reformed effectively by a combination of strategic management, structural organization and the development of better personnel management systems.

 In the 1980s, the global socio- economic and political scene started changing rapidly. The failure to control the economy in the developed West led to the rejection of old solutions of control. There was an accompanying change in political ideology, particularly on the right, that broke with the old consensus. The state seemed to lose its preeminence in governance because the inputs from civil society and other national and global agencies were equally important in contemporary governance. Ethics in governance is no longer confined to the four walls of public governance; instead it is also being conceptualized in response to what emanates from the wider socio- economic and political contexts. Given the relative decline of the state in governance, public ethics cannot be appropriately comprehended in a state- centric discourse. Hence, one has to be sensitive to those factors that may not have been taken seriously in traditional approaches to public administration, but have now acquired tremendous significance in view of the growing importance of non- state actors. This is a significant change that needs to be conceptualized, keeping in mind the fact that public administration has ceased to be bureaucracy- centric.

 As is evident, the concern for administrative reform in India is not of recent origin. What is new is the context in which this is being articulated. With the

adoption of the New Economic policy in the early 1990s, there have been attempts at dismantling the centrally directed framework of economic development. This is also the beginning of the period when international donor agencies have exercised immense influence in the domestic economy by attaching conditions to the provision of aid. These conditions were, at the outset, merely prescriptions for the administration of that aid; later, however, they became mechanisms for reform of the overall framework of governance itself. Given the rising tide of 'neo- liberalism', no country is free from this. The changed empirical context has contributed to a new conceptualization in the form of 'reinventing government', which seeks to articulate the transformed role of public administration.

 The reforms in administration in India in the 1990s have been basically driven by measures on economic liberalization. The Indian response was clearly articulated in the 1996 conference of Chief Secretaries, which suggested several corrective steps to arrest the drift in the civil service before it was too late. The basic concern of those participating in the conference was to transform an aloof, impersonal and paternalistic bureaucracy into one that was citizen friendly and sensitive to user needs. What was suggested in the conference had its roots in the arguments put forward by Rajiv Gandhi, the former prime minister, in favour of 'responsive administration'. In his series of speeches at the workshops for district magistrates and collectors that spanned almost two years between 1987 and 1988, Rajiv Gandhi argued that

[the] paternalistic model of [our] administration is not suitable for a society where the main thrust of administration is on development. It was agreed that the regulatory functions of administration should not be seen as an end in themselves, as they tended to be in colonial times, but as a means of reinforcing and sustaining the processes of broad based development. [A] more representative and more responsive administration would be better placed to relate the purposes of administration to the larger goals of our national life – democracy, socialism, secularism and non- alignment.19

The other point that was made related to 'the dependency syndrome' of the people. Bureaucracy continues to remain 'a doer' and not 'an enabler'. The people in general wait for the government to do 'the simplest things which they can do themselves'. The system has become 'so top- heavy and top- oriented' that at every level, people look to the level above for a solution. What is therefore needed is 'to push the administration down, not just in the administration but also sometimes out of the administration to the community'. By involving people in both planning and executing developmental programmes at the grassroots, the administration will become both 'responsive' and 'representative' in character.

 Given the new emphases in contemporary public administration, it is now clear that traditional public administration is hardly an appropriate tool to conceptualize contemporary governance. Critical of the pyramidal structure of administration, the new wave is articulated by a model in which 'centralization and top downs get edged out, compelling innovation and dictating empowerment of functionaries at the cutting edge'.20 With the flow of power downwards, those who matter at the field level gain strategic importance, and administration is forced to shift its attention from a hierarchically informed and bureaucratically designed response to a citizen- friendly approach vis- à-vis public affairs. So, the mere instrumental importance of administration seems to be gradually phasing out, giving way to a proactive system of governance in which the citizens are not merely recipients but clients with significant influences on both the content and the style of governance.

 So, in this changed perspective, the focus in these reforms is 'on reshaping the boundaries and responsibilities of the state, through privatization, the restructuring of public services, and the introduction of private market discipline into public administration'.21 Contemporary public administration is not just about efficiency; it also upholds democratic participation, accountability and empowerment. There is therefore a constant tension between (a) how to make government efficient and (b) how to keep it accountable. There is also a corresponding tension between 'the conception of people as consumers in the context of relations between state and market' and the conception of 'people as citizens in the context of relations between state and society'.22 What it suggests is the increasing importance of citizen participation in public affairs.

 Several steps have been taken to restructure the administration in response to this impetus from both domestic and external sources. Of these steps, the adoption of the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth Amendment Acts of 1992 and the implementation of the fifth Pay Commission report appear to be significant because of their impact on existing governance. Arising from the perspectives outlined above, these were momentous steps that were potentially groundbreaking and contained seeds for radical transformation of both the content and style of governance. Interestingly, these two measures – the Amendment Acts and the Pay Commission recommendations – coincided not only with the liberalization impetus of central government, but also with the World Bank's marked emphasis on 'good governance' and decentralization. As the fundamental impulse of policy making moves away from centralized state institutions towards the market, these amendments, in principle, should facilitate the creation of structures that devolve power to localized bodies. The underlying principle of *panchayati raj* is the use of local knowledge, popular experience and participation in the making of decisions that affect local people. There is no doubt that the reformed *panchayati raj* institutions are supposed to reconstitute the decisionmaking processes on the basis of local participation on a continuous basis and thus, in principle, represent an institutionalized shift in power towards lower, hitherto 'disempowered' sections of the rural population.

 Notwithstanding the shortcomings of the prevalent system of local governance, which are linked to the existing social and economic bases of power, these amendments, especially the *Seventy- Third Amendment Act*, provide an alternative to the state- led and re- distributive developmental models. The renewed movement towards democratic decentralization and citizen- centric government

has eroded the bureaucratic monopoly over the development processes and has shifted the locus of power to those who matter at the grassroots. This has been a reality due to variety of factors. With the constitutional recognition of rural and urban local bodies, state- level election commissions and finance commissions and the granting of mandatory status to the *gram sabahas*, the bureaucrats are seen as mere facilitators and promoters of development and not as regulators and directors. Within the theoretical format of democratic decentralization, bureaucracy is a catalyst for change rather than the agents of change. So, it is a significant step in eroding the overwhelming paternalistic authority hitherto enjoyed by the bureaucracy.

 If the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth Amendments denote 'the political route' to the people's empowerment, the Effective and Responsive Administration package that arose out of the 1997 Chief Minister Conference in New Delhi was an articulation of 'the managerial route' to redefine the power equation between government and citizens. The imperative need was for government at all levels to reinvent itself, redefine its roles and responsibilities and bring about reforms in all the areas in which it interfaced with the people. The public image of the bureaucracy, it was candidly confessed, was one of inaccessibility, indifference, procedure- orientation, poor quality and sluggishness, proneness to corruption and non- accountability for results. The pressing need was therefore 'to assure the people of India of an efficient, open, responsible, accountable, clean and dynamically adjusting administration at all levels'. Immediate steps should be taken to restore people's confidence in the capacity and fairness of the administration. Very significantly, the conference recognized that 'governance has to extend beyond conventional bureaucracies to involve actively citizens and consumer groups at all levels, to empower and inform the public and disadvantaged groups, and to ensure service and programme execution through autonomous elected local bodies'.23 There were, thus, three important aspects of this new agenda for civil service reform: (a) there was a crisis in the administration, which was not people- sensitive or citizen- friendly; (b) there was an urgent need to bring about reform in administration to make it people- sensitive, efficient and cost- effective; and (c) there was also the need for a change in the mindset so that governing could be conceived afresh as 'governance' – a wider term than mere formal 'government' – opening, in the process, possibilities of the inclusion of other actors, such as citizens, consumer groups, elected local bodies or those who are linked with the administration in some way or the other. As is evident, a managerial reform package seeking to transform public administration needs the following three measures: (a) accountability- fostering measures; (b) measures for promoting transparency and openness and (c) measures directed at civil service performance and integrity. So, reform is nothing but an enlargement of opportunities for all, not just for the select few.

 The recommendations of the fifth Pay Commission were another milestone in the direction of the above well- directed designs for civil service reform. True to the spirit expressed at the 1996 Chief Secretaries conference, the fifth Pay Commission recommended: (a) downsizing the government through corporatization of activities which involved the 'manufacturing of goods or the provision of commercial services'; (b) transparency, openness and economy in government operations through 'privatization of activities where government does not need to play a direct role' and also 'contracting out of services which can be conveniently outsourced to the private sector';24 and (c) contractual appointments in selected areas of operation 'for the purpose of maintaining a certain flexibility in staffing both for lateral entry of experts, moderating the numbers deployed depending on the exigencies of work and ensuring availability of most competent and committed personnel for certain sensitive/specialized jobs.'25

 The central government had been advised to go for a 30 per cent reduction in the strength of the civil service since, as the Pay Commission felt, it would be unwise to let the government sector continue as 'an island of inefficiency' and 'inertia'. The normal procedure of voluntary retirement after completing 20 years' service was to be continued. Alongside this, the Commission recommended a special scheme of voluntary retirement in those departments where surplus manpower had been identified. In such cases, there should be a provision for the selective retirement of persons, with the initiative always resting with the government over any 'golden handshakes'.

 The other significant recommendation of the Commission concerned 'openness' in administration. This stated that, apart from what was detrimental to the interests of the nation, the security of the state or its commercial, economic and other strategic interests, 'nothing should be held back just to subserve the interests of individual bureaucrats and politicians'.26 Everything else should be made public. Every important government decisions involving 'a shift in policy' should invariably be accompanied by a White Paper 'in the nature of an explanatory memorandum'. As an integral part of civil service reform, the Commission insisted on the formation of an efficient grievance redress machinery '[that] has to be effective, speedy, objective, readily accessible and easy to operate'.27 Drawing upon the examples of Canada, the UK and Malaysia, where effective grievance redress systems had been functioning efficiently, the idea of a Citizen's Charter – defining the rights of the customers of government schemes and services – was mooted by the Commission. The recognition by the Commission of the citizen's right to information and the procedures suggested in this connection are of seminal importance from the point of view of debureaucratizing government and making it citizen- friendly. The issues raised by the Pay Commission figured prominently in the 1997 Conference of Chief Ministers at which an action plan was adopted to (a) make the administration accountable and citizenfriendly, (b) ensure transparency and the right to information and (c) cleanse and motivate the civil services.

 The latest in government–citizen relationships is the concept of the Citizen's Charter. Democracy demands that the citizen's voice be heard and taken note of in the delivery of services to him/her, particularly if those services are rendered by government agencies. In fact, the parameters of the services need to be defined by the requirements of the citizens. It is at this interface between the citizen and the service provider that trust is demanded, and that is the point at

which, very frequently, trust breaks down. Problems arise relating to transparency, accountability and the responsiveness of the public administration. The Citizen's Charter was perceived as an instrument that could be used to chisel out the possibilities of a healthier relationship between the service provider and its user. In India, it was also seen as a vehicle for building greater awareness of their mutual responsibilities among both the government and the citizen.

 Under the Charter, citizens have been brought to the centre of all the government's activities, changing the prevalent concept of treating citizens as passive recipients of government service. The idea behind the Charter is to tap the citizens' responses to the actual working of government organizations. Normally, the Charter would cover all public services and aim at demanding from the government and service organizations (post office, railways etc., for instance) accountability, transparency, quality and choice for all the services provided by them to the people. The Charter is not, at all, a list of new principles of governance; instead, it has merely reiterated those norms that ideally should constitute the foundation of public administration. It is, therefore, an attempt to bring back the basic values of public administration that have been eroded for various socio political reasons connected with the evolution of the political system.

# **Concluding observations**

Administrative reforms and the concern for ethics in governance are dialectically connected: the latter sets in motion processes that the former articulates in the form of policy decisions. In order to conclusively address and resolve contemporary socio- economic and political issues, governance needs to be regularly reinvented; otherwise, it will lose its salience. So, administrative reforms are regular events that are usually undertaken with an ideological, but contextdependent, agenda since administration is also a problem- solving tool. Administrative reforms require negotiation and contestation, which further confirms that politics remains critical in their conceptualization. As shown above, administrative reforms in India contributed to the articulation of ethics in governance, defined differently in the different historical phases that India has encountered in her journey as a polity. During British rule, the issue of ethics did not seem to figure prominently, since colonialism had completely different ideological goals that ran contrary to the interests of the 'native' citizens. Nonetheless, the concern for ethics did initiate processes for reorienting administration in such a way as to give prominence to the prevalent rules of law, and not to customs, as had been the practice in the preceding years before British rule was firmly and legally established in India. For colonialism to flourish, the change from custom- based governance to one that derived its sustenance from well- defined constitutional principles appeared to be ethical to the Indians who had shown up till then their habitual obeisance to royal diktat, based generally on customs. As time passed, the colonial government agreed to accommodate Indians in the administration, as part of their ideological mission to rule India in accordance with the fundamental principles of the British Enlightenment. This certainly had a political angle which we cannot lose sight of. Nonetheless, the drive towards running the administration on the basis of codified rules and regulations seems to have been derived from the urge to establish ethics in governance. There is no doubt that colonial administration, however rule- bound it had been, was an exploitative system. Yet, by insisting on a rule- bound governance, colonial administrators did create an environment in which an alternative form of administration was not only conceptualized, but pursued, one that was contrary to the whimsical governance that they had inherited once they had established their hegemony in India. The fundamental point that governance no longer remained the prerogative of the ruler but was dependent on written laws seems to have instilled the idea that, to remain ethical, public administration had to be sensitive to the rules and regulations that were meant to serve 'the subjects of the Crown' in accordance with what the colonial rulers had construed as the best possible principles of governance.

 Independent India has, as the above discussion has shown, different sets of challenges that are both inherited from the long colonial rule and also drawn from the obvious contextual constraints. The founding fathers, in order to fulfil their exclusive ideological priorities, had prescribed a system of administration that was tuned to the goal of development in accordance with the much- hyped socialist pattern of society. What did not seem to have received adequate attention from those who had presided over India's destiny at the dawn of India's rise as an independent polity was whether the existing administration bequeathed by the colonial power was sufficiently equipped to handle the administrative issues confronting India following the 1947 transfer of power. India's growth was not satisfactory and it was alleged that the economic model that the democratically elected rulers suggested was not suitable. The administration was charged with being prejudiced when several scams broke out in the first years of India's existence as an independent nation. Two issues seem to have become preeminent. On the one hand, questions were raised about the integrity of those holding power; the misappropriation of public funds could not have been possible without the complicity of top political bosses. On the other hand, this was identified as testimony to the breakdown of India's moral fabric, which encouraged individuals and groups to bend rules and regulations to achieve personal ends. Reiterating that ethics in governance was too critical to be neglected, several specific steps were undertaken: the most prominent among them was, as discussed at length in this chapter, the appointment of the first Administrative Reforms Commission in 1964. As will be shown in Chapter 5, it was felt that the decline of ethics and the increasing incidence of corruption in India were mutually supportive, an idea that the Santhanam Committee had, most critically, probed in its 1964 report on the prevention of corruption which provided a thorough analytical statement on the linkages between the decline of ethics and serious administrative lapses.

 Despite the fact that committee after committee came out heavily against corruption and malpractices in governance, the situation has hardly improved; corruption continues to plague the system. It has thus been argued that the system could be improved once the roots of corruption receive no nourishment. This

may not be an easy thing to achieve, because vested interests are too powerful to disappear so quietly. Administrative reforms in India thus get reduced to mere window dressing, since most of the radical recommendations are usually shelved given their possible adverse effect on the existent power- equations, which are nurtured by the politicians for their personal gain. This is, however, not to suggest that change is impossible; in fact, history is full of examples to prove otherwise. What innumerable instances from India show is how the release of mass energy for a cause radically alters the texture of a system even in adverse circumstances. While administrative reforms do not seem to be adequately equipped to bring about a complete overhaul of the system, since they usually have a limited mandate, they nonetheless articulate those significant inputs that are most critical in assessing the nature of contemporary governance. Indicative of the deterioration of the system, administrative reforms are thus possibly the most powerful steps to recharge its vitality, by following what is deemed to be appropriate in a specific context. Herein lies the importance of having administrative reforms at regular intervals to remind those in authority of their responsibility to exercise power in a way that upholds the fundamental ethical tenets of governance.

 Administrative reform is a continuous challenge to those seeking to understand the processes of governmental renewal, which derive their impetus from the sense that the existing political and governmental systems do not meet contemporary demands. In other words, administrative reform does not take place in a vacuum and is always inspired by the failure of the existing system of governance to respond effectively to the social and political needs of the governed. In the context of 'breathtaking change', the bureaucratic institutions that developed during the industrial era seem to be inadequate and the importance of globalization as the conceptualization of new issues involving the government and the governed cannot be glossed over in such a scenario. So, a new perspective – underlining the role of market or market- type mechanisms in redefining the nature of governance – has emerged in which administrative reform is articulated. What is new here is a distinctive formulation, synthesizing traditions of public administration with contingent changes in public service provision and influences from the private and voluntary sectors. The process, known as the pluralization of the state has, as has already been shown, redefined the contours of reform so that the state is a mere agency along with others involved in public affairs. Administrative reform is thus a practical scheme of governance highlighting a clear theoretical advancement in the discipline of public administration.

 Administrative change is inevitable because (a) public administration regularly negotiates with the changing priorities of the society of which it is a part, and (b) it seeks to incorporate not only the new administrative techniques but also the ideas that grow out of socio- economic and political churn. The constant governmental renewal thus appears to be the outcome of the search for an appropriate administration keeping pace with changing reality. So, it would not be wrong to argue that governmental renewal is primarily inspired by 'ideologies,

philosophies and policy approaches on which interventions in society are based'.28 Governance is a legitimizing device for government action that is justified by the rationale from which a government draws its sustenance. In a democracy, for instance, the administrative reform is usually articulated in measures reflective of the predominant politico- ideological values. Not only do they provide rationale for governmental action but they are also yardsticks for assessing policy alternatives. As has been shown, reform efforts in India reveal the extent to which the changing priorities of the political system act decisively in governmental renewal. Whether in the pre- liberalization phase or its aftermath, administration reinvents itself to accommodate the dominant values from which its legitimacy is drawn. Before the onset of globalization, the distinctive feature of public administration was that, despite having nurtured the colonial structure, it had successfully injected new dynamism into governmental activities reflective of a conscious search for an alternative both in spirit and content. Globalization, with its ideological package of 'structural adjustment', means an altogether different and intricate external environment that seeks to radically alter both the administrative set- up and the values on which it is based. Several steps have already been undertaken to undermine the bureaucratic grip over public administration in India. The recommendations of the fifth Pay Commission (1997) seem to have upheld this spirit while suggesting several steps for administrative reorganization in India. Changes in administration are, however, mostly cosmetic in nature. So, although the reform efforts have a direction, their lack of appropriate ideological backing appears to have weakened the entire project.

## **Notes**

- 1 Niccolo Machiavelli, *The Prince*, Penguin, London, 1979, p. 59.
- 2 Gerald E Caiden, 'Administrative reform proceed with caution', *International Journal of Public Administration*, 22 (6), 1999, p. 820.
- 3 Ibid., p. 827.
- 4 Gerald E Caiden, 'Development administration and administrative reform', *International Social Science Journal*, 2 (1), p. 8.
- 5 Gerald E Caiden's foreword in Mohammad Mohbbat Khan, *Bureaucratic Self-Preservation: failure of major administrative reform effects in the civil service of Pakistan*, University Press Limited, Dhaka, 1980.
- 6 The 1892 Indian Council Act quoted in A Berriedale Keith (ed.) *Speeches and Documents on Indian Policy, 1750–1921*. Vol. II. Oxford University Press, London, 1922, p. 79.
- 7 Anil Bhatt, 'Colonial bureaucratic culture and development administration: portrait of an old- fashioned Indian bureaucrat', *Journal of Commonwealth and Comparative Politics*, 17(3), 1979, p. 259.
- 8 Ibid., p. 281.
- 9 *Review of Election Law, Processes and Reform Options*, (a consultation paper), National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution, New Delhi, (no date), p. 19.
- 10 Jawaharlal Nehru's speech 'A word to the services', (delivered on 9 December 1955), *Jawaharlal Nehru and Public Administration*, Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi, 1975, pp. 42–3.