**1**

## **The Improbable Border Dispute**

The Bumla Pass, high up in the eastern Himalayas and 5,000 metres above sea level, sits on the crest of the craggy mountain ranges that separate the Indian subcontinent from the Tibetan high plateau. Sharp, even taller peaks rise in the distance along the watershed that today forms the LAC between India and China. The air is thin, there are no villages in the vicinity, and the only local people who venture up here are semi-nomadic yak herdsmen. They cross freely between Chinese- and Indian-controlled territory with their beasts during the grazing season, which is in summer when the slopes of the mountains are covered in grass instead of snow.

Other outsiders are not allowed to visit Bumla without special permits issued by Indian authorities. This is a heavily militarized area and nearly all the vehicles on the narrow road that winds its way up to the pass are army trucks and jeeps. On the southern edge of the pass stands a cluster of solid buildings: a meeting hall, observation towers, and guard posts. A sign has been erected to show where the area under Indian control ends. It displays an Indian and a Chinese flag and the text 'Two Old Neighbouring Civilisations. India, China, Partners in Progress'.<sup>1</sup> Bumla is one of the few places along the Sino-Indian boundary where army officers from both countries meet to discuss issues of mutual concern, or to celebrate each other's national days. When that happens, the Chinese put up some tents, which are dismantled as soon as the events are over. There are no solid structures immediately on the other side of the pass, because that would, for the Chinese, be tantamount to recognizing that the crest of the mountains is the official border between the two countries.

This is the McMahon Line, which was named after Henry McMahon, the chief British negotiator at Shimla in 1913–14, and recognized by

Britain and Tibet, but not by successive Chinese governments. And it was here at Bumla that one of the most decisive battles was fought during the 1962 War.

Fighting erupted early on the morning of 23 October 1962 as Chinese forces north of the pass unleashed a massive artillery barrage on the Indian side. Explosions lit up the sky and echoed between the mountains. At daybreak, the Chinese had overrun the nearest Indian position, a small outpost manned by 30 soldiers from the paramilitary Assam Rifles; 17 men lay dead, and the 13 survivors were captured alive. A somewhat stronger Sikh regiment, which was based a distance away from the actual pass, put up fierce resistance—until they ran out of ammunition and had to withdraw. 2

With a total strength of six infantry regiments and an independent battalion, the victorious forces of China's PLA could begin their advance without much hindrance. The Indians had hundreds of troops in the area, but they were poorly equipped and supply lines from the plains of Assam in the south were long and hazardous. Only jeeps and convoys of pack animals could make it all the way to Tawang, the main town in the northwestern corner of what was then called the North-East Frontier Agency (NEFA), an administrative unit under the state government of Assam, and now is the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh. There was no resistance at Tawang, as the Indian Army had evacuated the town during the night after the attack on Bumla. Tawang fell into the hands of the PLA on 24 October 1962.

The Chinese assault on Indian positions along the frontier had actually begun on 19 October, with the bombardments of Indian army positions northwest of Tawang followed by massive artillery barrages and infantry attacks on 20 October at Thagla ridge, west of Bumla and near the border with Bhutan. On the same day and at the very same time in the morning, other Chinese regiments attacked Indian outposts in Ladakh in the northwestern corner of Kashmir at the other end of the Indian subcontinent. Thus, the war was not confined to the NEFA, though the losses were the heaviest on the eastern front. At Thagla, the PLA wiped out almost the entire Indian Seventh Brigade and captured its commander, Brigadier John Dalvi. Unable to withstand the onslaught of the stronger and more heavily armed units of the PLA, India's defences in the western part of NEFA were in disarray.

Getting supplies to their troops was not as big a problem for the Chinese as it was for the Indians because of the roads that had been built years before the attack. Several of those led right down to the LAC, opposite the NEFA in the east. In the west, there was the highway that the Chinese had built through Aksai Chin connecting Xinjiang with Tibet.

After the Indian defences near Thagla and Bumla had been obliterated, the PLA was able to march down to Tawang. At 3,048 metres above sea level, Tawang is still high up in the mountains, but in a relatively fertile valley well below the much higher peaks and passes along the frontier. As soon as Tawang was captured and the surrounding area secured by the PLA, thousands of porters, construction workers—and bulldozers and heavy machinery—poured across Bumla. Working round the clock in three shifts, it took the Chinese only 13 days to construct a road from the pass to Tawang, a distance of nearly 40 kilometres through extremely difficult and mountainous terrain. The PLA trucks now rolled into Tawang, which now became a major supply base for the Chinese. Then they pushed south, and the strategic Sela Pass, 78 kilometres south of Tawang, was in Chinese hands after a fierce battle with Indian troops. On 19 November, the Chinese juggernaut reached the town of Bomdila, 170 kilometres south of Tawang. The Chinese were now only a few days' march from Assam and the fertile plains around the River Brahmaputra.

By that time, the war had spread as Chinese troops had crossed into the far eastern corner of the NEFA. On 22 October, the Chinese launched an attack on an Indian outpost at Kibihtoo, north of the small town of Walong near the border with Myanmar. After a lull in the fighting, the PLA resumed its advance on 13 November, and Walong was overrun three days later. The PLA units also attacked and captured some villages in what the Indians then called the Subansiri and Siang Frontier Divisions immediately south of the Line of Control (LoC) in the central sector of the NEFA.

There was total panic on the Indian side. Outgunned and overwhelmed by a superior force, India's defences in the NEFA had crumbled and Indian soldiers were in retreat from the entire territory. Many believed that the PLA would march on to capture Assam with its oil fields, tea gardens, jute plantations, and other riches. Even the garrison town of Tezpur in the Brahmaputra Valley was evacuated as the Indians awaited what seemed to be the inevitable outcome of the debacle in the Himalayas.

The attacks were not confined to the Indian positions along the eastern border, between the NEFA and Tibet; a remote Indian Army outpost in Ladakh's Aksai Chin area in the northeastern corner of the state of Jammu and Kashmir was also attacked. Ten minutes later, Chinese ground forces commenced their attack, and that outpost was overrun. According to Indian military sources, the defenders had no artillery pieces or mortars, only small arms and open trenches to fight from.<sup>3</sup> Not a single Indian soldier at that company outpost escaped alive or unhurt. Of the 68 men defending the position, 36 were killed, and the others were wounded or taken prisoner.

Following this initial success in Ladakh, the Chinese advanced, launching multidirectional attacks from the north, south, and east on other Indian positions in the area. Chinese intelligence gathering in the area prior to the attacks had been meticulous. Having spent several years in Tibet, occupying the country, and preparing for a war against India, the Chinese were also acclimatized to the high altitude, and they were evidently trained in how to make breaches in the half-constructed network of Indian defences.<sup>4</sup>

By the end of October, the Chinese had occupied most of the strategic Kailash Range that rises from the eastern flank of the upper Indus Valley, the strategic Kongka Pass, and the area down to Pangong Lake, an endorheic lake with saline water situated at an altitude of more than 4,000 metres. Four battalions of Indian troops had entirely been wiped out and others were in retreat from their positions in the highlands. Then followed a lull in the fighting while the Chinese reorganized their forces, strengthened their defence lines, and brought in more supplies. On 18 November, they were ready to strike again, and multidirectional attacks were used here as elsewhere on the battlefront to encircle and crush the Indian outposts that remained in the area.

But then, on 19 November, the same day as the PLA reached Bomdila, China's Premier Zhou Enlai called Purnendyu Kumar Banerjee, the Indian chargé d'affaires in Beijing, to his residence. Zhou informed him that, on 21 November, the Chinese would declare a ceasefire and begin to withdraw all their troops to positions 20 kilometres north of the LAC. The Chinese stuck to their pledge, and the war was over. Within a couple of weeks, the PLA was back on the Chinese-controlled side of the mountains.

The Indians were stunned, and so were many political and military observers all over the world. What had prompted the Chinese to attack and

what had caused such a short but extremely bloody and vicious war? According to Chinese records, Indian casualties stood at 4,897 dead and wounded and 3,968 captured alive. The Ministry of Defence in New Delhi puts India's losses at 1,383 soldiers killed, 1,047 wounded, 1,696 missing in action, and the same number of soldiers captured alive as the Chinese had announced, at 3,968. The PLA casualties were considerably lower, with 722 killed and 1,697 wounded, according to Chinese sources. No Chinese soldier was captured alive, which, as US military historian Larry Wortzel and Chinese scholar Cheng Feng point, out is 'a rarity in the history of warfare'.<sup>5</sup>

But the Chinese attack should not have come as a total surprise. Chinese encroachments into what the Indians considered their territory had begun as early as the mid-1950s. Apart from finding out, in 1957, that the Chinese had built a 179-kilometre road through Aksai Chin in the west, the first skirmishes on the Sino-Indian border occurred as early as 25 August 1959, when a Chinese patrol attacked an Indian position at Longju on the NEFA frontier. Then, on 21 October of the same year, a fire fight broke out at Kongka La in Ladakh. The first incident, at Longju, resulted in two casualties on the Indian side and at Kongka La, 17 Indian soldiers were killed in what China claimed was an act of 'self-defence'. The Indians, on the other hand, said that their troops had been subjected to 'sudden and aggressive firing' from the Chinese side.<sup>6</sup>

The key to understanding the origins of the 1962 War, and the conflict and rivalry between India and China, lies in taking a critical look at the writing on the sign at Bumla. Despite what it says about the 'Old Neighbouring Civilisations', which are supposed to be 'Partners in Progress', it is hard to imagine two cultures that are more different than India and China in terms of history, social structure, and political culture.

The Indian kingdoms and empires, which have waxed and waned in the subcontinent over the centuries, have always been immensely diverse, with a multitude of languages and different religions. And most of these languages have their own alphabets, all different from one another. Even today, 'unity in diversity' is what holds India together. No single religious, linguistic, or political group can claim monopoly on power, and that is why democracy has survived in India.

China, on the other hand, has a long history of imperial rule under one dominant ethnic group, the Han Chinese, which has, over the centuries,

subdued and, in some instances, absorbed, other, minor groups of people. It is true that the last imperial dynasty in China, the Qing, was Manchu and that the country was somewhat multicultural in character during its reign (which lasted from 1644 to 1912) than it had been under previous emperors, possibly with the exceptions of the Liao, Jin, and Mongol dynasties, which were also non-Han. But while retaining some of their own ethnic identity, the Manchu elite also acquired all the trappings of traditional Chinese rulers. They spoke standard Chinese and the Manchu language almost died out in China in the nineteenth century. Even so, Dr Sun Yat-sen, one of the founders of the anti-Qing movement, wrote in 1904 that the goal of the struggle was 'to expel the Tatar [i.e., Manchu] barbarians'.<sup>7</sup> In 1912, the Qing Dynasty was overthrown and Dr Sun became the first president of the Republic of China. For decades after that, many families of Manchu descent tried hard to conceal their heritage and to conform to the Han Chinese customs and culture.<sup>8</sup>

Local dialects may differ in China, and several, among them Cantonese, Hakka, and Fujianese, are not mutually intelligible and differ from 'standard' Chinese, but the writing system, based on logograms and not on a phonetic alphabet, remains essentially the same all over the country. As for its political culture, China has long been dominated by authoritarian schools of thought, be it Confucianism or Communism in the past, or today's post-Communist totalitarian capitalism.

This is not to say that Chinese society would necessarily be incompatible with democratic values. Taiwan is a shining example of a country with a Chinese culture that has managed to shake off authoritarianism and become one of Asia's most vibrant democracies. But mainland China during the days of confrontation with India in the 1960s was a brutal dictatorship with a centuries-long history of authoritarian rule, and that has not changed even though a remarkable economic liberalization has taken place since the 'capitalist roader' Deng Xiaoping introduced his free-market reforms in the 1980s. There is a democratic opposition in China today, but it is still small and largely limited to dissident intellectuals.

When India became independent in 1947, it maintained many institutions that had been introduced during British rule such as an elected parliament and a professional judiciary. After the British left, those institutions were developed into fully democratic entities, not dominated by

a foreign power. India became a parliamentary democracy with an abundance of political parties. The Indian Army, too, although now commanded exclusively by Indian officers, is steeped in the encrusted regimental traditions of the British era. The command structure remains the same, its ethnically based units have been retained and new ones have been added, and, most importantly, civilian control of the armed forces has been the rule since independence.

The British Indian Army had fought alongside other British forces in Asia and Europe during World War II, while soldiers from independent India took part in the United Nations' peace keeping missions in the Middle East in the mid-1950s and in the Congo in the early 1960s. A paramedical unit was sent to Korea in 1950 and Lieutenant General Kodendera Subayya Thimayya served as the Chairman of the Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission set up by the UN when hostilities there were over. Timmy to his friends and even the general public, he was trained at the British military academy at Sandhurst and was the only Indian to command an infantry brigade in the British Indian Army during World War II. Thimayya was awarded the prestigious Distinguished Service Order by the British Crown and was also mentioned in dispatches for his outstanding record during the war against the Japanese in Asia.

In 1954, India sent an infantry battalion to Indochina—Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia—and supporting staff for ceasefire monitoring and repatriation of prisoners of war. Never involved in combat, their duty was to supervise the implementation of the 1954 Geneva Accord for peace in Indochina, and the Indians remained there until 1973, working together with personnel from Canada and Poland.<sup>9</sup>

On the home front, the Indian Army fought a bitter war with Pakistan over Kashmir immediately after independence in 1947, and armed security forces were used to integrate some former princely states, which were reluctant to join independent India. In the mid-1950s, the army was sent in to quell a separatist rebellion in the Naga Hills near the eastern border with Myanmar and became involved in a long drawn-out war with tribal guerrillas in the area. In 1961, the army also took over Goa, Daman, and Diu, three Portuguese enclaves on India's western coast. Then came the 1962 conflict with China, and several more wars fought with Pakistan since the first armed confrontation in 1947.

The Indian Army has, by and large, remained a professional force that has stayed clear of involvement in politics. Its main objective has always been to defend the country's frontiers and to safeguard what the elected government considers India's national security interests to be. Even retired army officers prefer to become security analysts for think-tanks rather than seeking careers as politicians.

On the other hand, the role-model for the PLA, after the war, was personified in the fictitious soldier Lei Feng,<sup>10</sup> a humble, apple-cheeked character who would repair his army truck with a wrench in one hand and a book by Chairman Mao in the other—and whose goal, allegedly in his own words, was to 'become a stainless-steel screw for the Party'.<sup>11</sup> The legend —and myth—of Lei Feng may seem comical in today's world, but it has survived decades of political change in China. Even today, 5 March is officially celebrated as Learn from Lei Feng Day.

With or without Lei Feng, the PLA, as the name suggests, had always been an ideologically motivated 'people's army' set up in the late 1920s at the end of the first alliance between the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and the nationalist Kuomintang (KMT). Led by Zhou Enlai, He Long, and Zhu De, some of the KMT troops had rebelled against the government during an uprising at Nanchang. The uprising was crushed, but a Communist armed force, first called the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army, was officially formed on 1 August 1927. It became known simply as the Red Army and fought several battles against the KMT's troops. It was further hardened during an epic military retreat from its old stronghold in Jiangxi in the south to Yan'an in Shaanxi in northern China in 1934–5. The Long March, as it came to be known, lasted for 370 days during which the Communist forces covered 9,000 kilometres. Only 8,000 made it to Yan'an, and of these, 7,000 were from the original 86,000 who had set out from the south in October 1934. Disease, hunger, and battles with government forces as well as armies led by local warlords had taken a heavy toll.

At the new, well-defended base area in Yan'an, the Red Army was rebuilt into a formidable fighting force. During the war against Japanese invaders, which lasted from 1937 to 1945, the Red Army was allied with Chiang Kai-shek's KMT forces. But fighting between the Communists and the Nationalists broke out again after the Japanese defeat in 1945, and the revolutionaries now came to be known as the PLA. By the time World War

II was over and the civil war began, the Communist forces had over 900,000 regular troops and 2 million in militia units.<sup>12</sup>

The KMT was defeated and Chiang Kai-shek escaped to the island of Taiwan, where his Republic of China lived on along with the futile hope of reclaiming the mainland someday. That was not to be, and, on 1 October 1949 before hundreds of thousands of cheering people, the Communist leader Mao Zedong proclaimed the People's Republic of China, saying, 'Never again will the people of China be an enslaved people!'<sup>13</sup>

Mao has been hailed in official Chinese history as a military genius, but that is a myth which became part of the bizarre personality cult that was developed around him in the 1960s. Mao was a political rather than a military leader. The actual commander and founder of the Red Army and the PLA was Zhu De, a warlord in the southern provinces of Yunnan and Sichuan who had joined the Communists during the Nanchang uprising. Zhu had begun his revolutionary career as a Great Elder of a lodge of Gelaohui, one of China's most powerful secret societies. He was also an opium addict until he received treatment in Shanghai in the early 1920s. It was not Mao but Zhu who, despite his dubious personality, formulated the operational principles of mobile warfare summed up in the famous maxim:

When the enemy advances, we retreat. When the enemy halts and encamps, we harass them. When the enemy seeks to avoid battle, we attack. When the enemy retreats, we pursue.14

Zhu remained the PLA commander-in-chief through 1954 and held several political positions until he was purged during the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960s. Mao may not have been a military commander, but his contribution to the Communist military doctrine was his famous slogan 'political power grows out of the barrel of a gun', which comes from a speech he gave at a meeting with the CCP's Central Committee in November 1938.<sup>15</sup> That phrase has since become the guiding principle for revolutionary movements all over the world. (And to support revolution even in other countries has been a Marxist dogma since Karl Marx himself coined the phrase, 'Workers of all countries, unite!')

The two armies, and their commanders, who clashed in the Himalayas in 1962 could not have been more different, and that is an important, and often overlooked, aspect of the war. It was a clash of civilizations, not only,

or even primarily, a war for control of some remote mountaintops in the Himalayas or about where the border between India and China should be drawn.

Yaacov Y.I. Vertzberger, an Israeli scholar, argues that Nehru failed to understand the cultural and historical differences between India and China, and therefore grossly misjudged China's intentions. In Nehru's view, there was an objective, universally accepted, international legal system. If India only could back its case with maps and treaties, China would eventually recognize that India was legally in the right. China, on the other hand, has never paid any attention to international law, not at that time, as Vertzberger pointed out in his studies in the 1980s, and not much later, as we have seen in the South China Sea dispute. According to Vertzberger, Nehru did also not fully understand 'the basic differences between the process by which India had gained its independence and the one by which the Chinese were liberated from the Japanese and the domestic reactionary forces [the KMT]'.<sup>16</sup>

India had gained its freedom through civil disobedience campaigns, and thus with little bloodshed, which made it possible for the colonial power and the independence movement to part in what amounted to mutual friendship and respect. Mao Zedong's communists, on the other hand, had had an entirely different experience. According to Vertzberger, 'Thus, India could reject British colonialism as a general philosophy and yet adopt some of the trappings it had left behind, such as political culture, borders, and geostrategic thinking.'17 Nehru had 'adopted British geo-strategic concepts, because for him there was a continuity between the past and present'.<sup>18</sup> There was no such concept of continuity on the Chinese side. Any agreement that had been signed with a foreign power before the 1949 Communist victory could be—and was—dismissed as 'an unequal treaty' that the new regime did not have to honour. Mao himself had made 'Abolish the Unequal Treaties!' one of the nine fundamental principles he outlined as early as 1925.<sup>19</sup>

While the Indian diplomats and academic researchers in the late 1950s and early 1960s were busy writing White Papers to prove that India's interpretation of the border issue was historically correct, China was preparing for war. <sup>20</sup> For the Chinese, the legal approach to the border problem was 'nothing but hypocrisy and fraud',<sup>21</sup> Vertzberger argues.

China saw no reason to honour what it terms 'unequal, colonial treaties' and therefore never recognized the McMahon Line. China still lays claim to most of today's Arunachal Pradesh and continues to place the border along the foot of the mountains on all its official maps.

Those supporting China's claims, among them Neville Maxwell and Alastair Lamb, point out that this is also approximately where maps from British times, and some even after India's independence, show the border to be. Ironically, by referring to old maps and treaties, Maxwell and Lamb are making the same misjudgement as Nehru, but in reverse, with different interpretations. But not even the most ardent supporters of China's claims would argue that the line on those old maps was an international boundary between India and China with border gates manned by Indian or British Indian, immigration and customs officials on one side and the Chinese on the other. Even if one assumes that Tibet was part of China when India was a British colony, it would also be hard to argue that the area was under Lhasa's jurisdiction.

S. Mahmud Ali, former head of the Bengali language service of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), states in his otherwise authoritative book about the Sino-Indian conflict that the NEFA, until 1951, had been 'administered by Tibetan lamas'.<sup>22</sup> That is a gross misrepresentation of the reality at the time. No Tibetan lamas ever ruled over the area now claimed by China. Tibetan tax collectors were stationed at Tawang and a few other areas in the far west and taxes were also collected from some village tracts in the immediate vicinity of the crest of the Himalayan ranges, which was as far as centrally-controlled Tibetan administration ever reached. Today, China refers to Arunachal Pradesh as 'South Tibet', a concept that never existed in the past.

The line at the bottom of the hills on British maps simply marked the limits of organized colonial administration. The non-Tibetan tribes in the areas between that line and the McMahon Line for the most part governed themselves, but had commercial and other contacts with the Brahmaputra plain. If they spoke any language other than their own, it would have been Assamese, or broken Assamese mixed with local expressions, which became known as 'Nefamese' when the NEFA was formed in the 1950s.

The only recorded presence of any Chinese, other than spies, in the area before the 1962 War was sometime between 1910 and 1912. In the late imperial era, the Chinese sent troops into Tibet. The invasion was led by

General Zhao Erfeng, who earned the nickname 'Butcher Zhao' for his brutal suppression of the Tibetans. In 1910, his troops reached Lhasa, and according to historian John Rowland, '[a] pitiful force of Tibetan soldiers fought a rear-guard action while the God King [the Dalai Lama] and his entourage made good their escape to Sikkim on horseback'.<sup>23</sup> The Dalai Lama sought refuge in India, where he was received by the British in Kolkata.

Butcher Zhao left Tibet in 1911 to suppress a rebellion in Sichuan and was later captured and executed by rebellious republican forces. But some Chinese officials remained in Tibet until 1912, and they crossed the Himalayas into the far eastern corner of what later became the NEFA. They erected some border pillars in the far eastern south of Walong, and then withdrew.

Those markers stood there until January 1914, when a British administrator called T. O'Callaghan removed them. He also crossed the watershed into Rima on the Tibetan side, conferred with Tibetan officials there, but saw no Chinese influence even in that area.<sup>24</sup>

A year before O'Callaghan removed the border markers, a British expedition led by Captains Frederick Marshman Bailey and Henry Treise Morshead had been sent to survey areas west and northwest of Walong. They found the Tibetan officials alarmed at the prospect of a British takeover of the area, and even of Tibet itself.

Bailey's account25 of a meeting with a local Tibetan official says that,

He asked if we were going to place officers in Mipi or in the Lohit Valley. I said that an officer was being stationed at Walong in Mishmi country. Were we then going to station officers in Tibet also? I assured him that we were not. I do not know if he believed me. He merely answered that in Tibet, their only experience of foreigners was of the Chinese and they were cruel people.

Memories of Butcher Zhao's rampaging were still fresh in people's minds.

Evidently, there were no Chinese administrators in the area at the time they had left in 1912 when the occupation of Tibet ended and the Chinese troops had returned home—and, apart from being staunchly anti-Chinese, the Tibetans were of the opinion that the crest of the mountains was where their jurisdiction ended.

Maxwell, however, has a different version of the significance of the border markers and where the border should be, 'The Chinese…put up border markers in 1910, and the Tibetans maintained that the boundary lay

there and not some twenty miles upstream where the McMahon Line put it'.<sup>26</sup> It is unclear on what Maxwell based his assertion of some kind of consensus between the Tibetans and the Chinese on the border issue. It is highly unlikely, and, in any case, those markers stood there for just over two years.

The Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950 dramatically altered the geopolitics of the entire region. Tibet, which until then had had closer ties to India than China, was no longer a de facto independent country. One of the few in the Indian government who understood the profound significance of this change was the home minister, Vallabhbhai Patel, who, only a month before his death in December 1950, wrote to Nehru,

We have to consider what the new situation now faces us as a result of the disappearance of Tibet, as we know it, and the expansion of China up to our gates. Throughout history, we have seldom been worried about our north-east frontier. The Himalayas has been regarded as an impenetrable barrier against threats from the north. We had a friendly Tibet which gave us no trouble. The Chinese were divided. They had their domestic problems and never bothered us about our frontiers.27

But the idealist Nehru, who failed to understand the mindset of Beijing's new communist rulers, continued to believe in friendship with China. India and China, in his view, were both countries which had risen from repression and should work together with all the newly liberated countries in Asia and Africa. And, in the 1950s, relations between India and China seemed to blossom under the Hindi slogan *Hindi Chini Bhai Bhai* or 'Indians and Chinese are brothers'.

India officially recognized Chinese sovereignty over Tibet for the first time through the 1954 Agreement between the Republic of India and the People's Republic of China on Trade and Intercourse between India and the Tibet Region of China'.<sup>28</sup> But India had, in effect, recognized Tibet as part of China in September 1952, when it formally agreed with the Chinese authorities, rather than with the Tibetans, to change the status of its mission in Lhasa to that of a Consulate General.<sup>29</sup> India had also been one of the first non-communist countries to recognize the People's Republic of China, and diplomatic relations at the ambassadorial level were established on 1 April 1950.

The Hindi Chini Bhai Bhai relationship was supposed to be cemented in a preamble to the 1954 agreement, which included the Five Principles of

Peaceful Co-existence, known as the Panchsheel Treaty from *panch* meaning five, and *sheel* meaning virtues in Sanskrit. These were,

- 1. Mutual respect for each other's territorial integrity and sovereignty.
- 2. Mutual non-aggression.
- 3. Mutual non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
- 4. Equality and co-operation for mutual benefit.
- 5. Peaceful co-existence.

But China was still weak, and it was India, and especially its dignified statesman Nehru, that was the champion of the newly independent countries in Asia and Africa as old colonial empires, ruled by the British, the French, and other Western powers, crumbled. Nehru's Panchsheel also came to form the basis of the Non-Aligned Movement, which was born when leaders from 29 mostly newly independent Asian and African countries met in the Indonesian resort city of Bandung in April 1955.

Amidst its fruit orchards, Dutch-built canals, and colonial bungalows, it was Indonesia's President Sukarno who played host to an array of African and Asian leaders, including the mercurial Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, Egypt's firebrand Prime Minister Gamal Abdul Nasser, Sir John Kotelawala of Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), Pakistan's Prime Minister Muhammad Ali Bogra, and Myanmar's Premier U Nu. As the black limousines carrying the dignitaries arrived at the meeting hall in Bandung, many expressed a greater fear of 'colonialism' than of communism.

China's Zhou Enlai was also there, invited at Nehru's insistence. But Zhou almost did not make it. The Kashmir Princess, the Air India plane that Nehru had sent to fly him from Hong Kong to Jakarta, crashed into the South China Sea on 11 April 1955. A bomb had been planted on the plane by KMT agents, and the target was obviously Zhou. But he had been delayed and was not on-board. Zhou left China three days after the crash and flew to Yangon in Myanmar to meet with Nehru and U Nu before continuing on to Bandung to attend the conference.

Between June 1954 and January 1957, Zhou paid four visits to India, and, in October 1954, Nehru flew to Beijing, where he met not only Zhou but also the supreme leader Mao. It was, as the *New York Times* stated, the first visit by the head of a non-communist government since the creation of the People's Republic of China. 'The six miles between city and airport

were walled by unbroken banks of humanity, clapping, cheering and crying the inescapable Chinese slogan, "Long live peace",' the newspaper reported.<sup>30</sup>

But the situation in Tibet was becoming serious as the Chinese occupation had turned brutal and bloody. According to Tibetan resistance fighter Gompo Andrugtsan, 'The Chinese collected large sums of money for taxes, locals were selectively arrested and publicly executed to arouse terror, monasteries were destroyed, and monks were imprisoned or executed without reason.'<sup>31</sup>

This led to an uprising among the Khampas, nomads of eastern Tibet, who had always been fiercely independent. They struck back, ambushing Chinese army convoys with whatever weapons they had. The resistance of the Khampas attracted the attention of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which airdropped supplies into Tibet; some Khampas managed to get out and were trained on the US-held pacific island of Saipan. The town of Kalimpong in northern West Bengal became a base for clandestine activities and intelligence gathering.

US–China scholar John W. Garver quotes in his account of the Sino-Indian conflict,

the closest study of India's decision-making process during this period, by Steven Hoffman [who concludes that] 'it is unclear how much India's government knew in 1958 or 1959 about the major CIA programme' ...[Indian security chief Bhola Nath] Mullik maintained in his memoir that Nehru told him that *armed* Tibetan resistance would be suicidal, counter-productive, and insisted that peaceful, non-violent resistance was the best way. [Tibetan historian] Tsering Shakya also concluded that Nehru and other Indian leaders were not aware until after the 1962 war of the extent of US activities in support of Tibetan armed resistance.32

On the other hand, authors Kenneth Conboy and James Morrison assert that Nehru and Mullik, at least, knew the general parameters of the programme and tacitly condoned it.<sup>33</sup>

The Chinese, unable to understand the genuine resentment and anger the Tibetans felt about the occupation, were convinced that India supported the resistance. Sino-Indian relations deteriorated even further when the Dalai Lama fled to India after the failed uprising in Lhasa in March 1959. At a CCP Politburo meeting on 17 March, Zhou stressed upon what he saw as a connection between the uprising and the Indian government, and he went on to speculate that both Britain and the United States had provided support

for the rebels in collusion with India, and that, 'a commanding centre of the rebellion has been established in Kalimpong'.<sup>34</sup>

There was no more Hindi Chini Bhai Bhai and it was at this time that Deng Xiaoping argued that India had to be taught a lesson The incursions into Longju in August 1959 and Kongka La in October were most likely meant to probe India's defences. The American academic Donald S. Zagoria in his comprehensive study of the Sino-Soviet conflict has another explanation for the Chinese attacks in 1959; it once again shows that China's conflict with India was never mainly about border demarcation or whether or not old treaties should be honoured. He refers to what was said by a Polish delegation that visited Beijing in October 1959 for the 10th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China,

It was also becoming increasingly clear that Mao's—and China's worldview was fundamentally different from Nehru's ideals of nonalignment and non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries. The Western concept of the Three-World Model, as formulated during the Cold War, meant that the US and its allies belonged to the First World, the Soviet Union and its satellites to the Second, and neutral and non-aligned countries to the Third World. Mao's Three Worlds Theory was different. To him, the US and the Soviet Union belonged to the First World; Japan, Europe and Canada formed the Second World; and Asia, Africa, and Latin America were the Third.

Naturally, China aspired to become the leader of the Third World and dethrone India from the position it held throughout the 1950s as the main voice of the newly independent Asian and African nations. Wang Hongwei, a researcher from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, spelled it out in one of his studies, 'India after annexing more than 560 principalities, sent forces into Kashmir and embarked on expansionism … Since then the bourgeois elite of India stepped on the stage of contemporary Asian history and strived for power and hegemony, and acted as if they were leaders.'<sup>36</sup> And in order to change that, China had to show that it was militarily

The Poles … supposed that Chinese Communist resentment at being left out of high-level negotiations was one of the motivations behind Peking's (Beijing's) decision to stir up trouble with India over the boundary question. The October incident in Kashmir, where several Indian soldiers were ambushed and killed, was said to be intended as a reminder to India, the Soviet Union, and the West that there were important areas of the world where settlements could be reached only by direct negotiations with Peking.35

superior to India. That was achieved in 1962. India never recovered from the defeat—Nehru himself died a broken man in 1964, and China under Mao became the beacon for most of the Third World revolutionaries. As Mao had said, 'political power grows out of the barrel of a gun'.

The 1962 War also forced India to abandon its non-aligned status, first by seeking support from the US and later by allying itself with China's new enemy, the Soviet Union. Non-interference became history when Indian troops intervened in East Pakistan in 1971 and helped the resistance fighters there break away to form Bangladesh. Mahatma Gandhi's nonviolent ideals had definitely given way to a militarized India, which expanded its armed forces and even exploded its own nuclear device in May 1974. China had won. India was no longer an example to follow for the Third World. China was.

Even a cursory look at the history of China's wars since 1949 shows that border disputes were never a main guiding principle in Beijing's foreign policy. Apart from the invasion of Tibet and bombardments of the nationalist-held islands of Quemoy and Matsu in the Taiwan Strait in the 1950s (which were meant to consolidate the new communist government over what it considered its rightful territory) China's wars have always been ideologically motivated, meant to show its superior strength vis-à-vis adversaries and to demonstrate socialist solidarity with its 'comrades-inarms'. Respect for international boundaries has never been an issue.

In Korea in the early 1950s, hundreds of thousands of Chinese 'volunteers' streamed down the peninsula to support the communist regime in the North and its war against the US-allied South. The Korean War ended in an armistice in 1953, and a still-divided nation, a Chinese ally, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in the North, and the pro-West Republic of Korea in the South. Chinese losses in that war were immense, as it resorted to 'human-waves tactics', i.e., sending wave after wave of inexperienced recruits to face the bullets and the artillery of the south. An estimated 152,000 Chinese died and 383,000 were wounded in that war, but China had for the first time showed that it was a military force to be reckoned with and that it would not hesitate to suffer heavy casualties if a political point could be made.

After the Mekong River Operation across the border into Myanmar in 1960–61, China embarked on a strategically even more adventurous campaign in the same region. In January 1968, thousands of Chinese

crossed the border again into Myanmar—this time as 'volunteers' to fight alongside the insurgent Communist Party of Burma (CPB), which resorted to armed struggle against the Myanmar government shortly after independence in 1948. Since the early 1950s, more than 140 Myanmar Communists had been living in exile in China, but it was not until an unpredictable general, Ne Win, seized power in the capital Yangon in March 1962 that they began to receive substantial Chinese support for their cause. It is generally assumed by most Westerns scholars that the anti-Chinese riots in Yangon in June 1967 became the catalyst for China's decision to aid the CPB. But, like the border dispute with India, that was only a pretext for China to move into action.

CPB cadres had already begun surveying the border areas for possible infiltration routes in 1963. At the same time, they were introduced to a group of ethnic Kachin rebels who had also retreated into China in the early 1950s. As most of the Myanmar communists were urban intellectuals, that group of warlike Kachin tribesmen were to become the nucleus of the CPB army. But, until the early 1970s, Chinese 'volunteers' made up the bulk of the CPB's fighting force. Most of them were youthful Red Guards from China, who had received their political schooling during the Cultural Revolution. But among them were also more experienced PLA officers and political commissars.

Chinese support for the CPB continued until Deng Xiaoping, a political hardliner but an economic reformer, changed Beijing's foreign policy in the 1980s from support of revolutionary movements to bilateral trade with China's neighbours and other commercial activities. But the Chinese never completely abandoned the CPB. It was still a useful tool, which the Chinese could use to exert its influence inside Myanmar.

In March 1969, a border war broke out between China and the Soviet Union, ostensibly over the ownership of some sandbanks in the River Ussuri. But, as was the case with India in 1962, political motives were more important than the exact alignment of the border. Beijing wanted to show the Third World that revolutionary China was strong enough to stand up even against the 'Soviet revisionist renegade clique', as the Chinese called the Soviet leaders after Beijing had broken ties with Moscow in 1960. China, not the Soviet Union, was the true leader of all the oppressed peoples of the world.

Chinese support for North Vietnam and the communist guerrillas in the South was substantial until that war ended in May 1975. But centuries of mutual distrust between the Chinese and the Vietnamese let to strained relations, with Hanoi allying itself with the Soviet Union. When Vietnam invaded Cambodia, China's main ally in the region, in December 1978– Janaury 1979, it was time for Beijing to teach another neighbour 'a lesson'. In February 1979, Chinese troops—and they came from the same regiments as those that had taken part in the 1961 campaign against the KMT in Myanmar—crossed the border into northern Vietnam. But this time, the PLA was not as successful as it had been against India in 1962. The Vietnamese fought back, inflicting heavy casualties on the Chinese. No one really won that war—and it turned out to be the last of its kind that the PLA fought. Since then, efforts have been made to turn the PLA into a more modern and professional force, not the 'people's army' of the past.

But back in 1962, the PLA was still an ideologically motivated entity guided by the political commissars from the CCP, and it is clear that India, and Nehru in particular, did not realize that. Nehru's faith in Zhou was also misguided. George Patterson, a British Tibet expert who was fluent in several local dialects, writes in his *Peking Versus Delhi*, <sup>37</sup> which was published in 1963,

There is another side to Chou [Zhou] which is not so well-known as the charming, brilliant, even 'moderate', exterior which he uses to win friends and influence people. In 1931, Kao Chen-chang [Gu Shunzhang], a member of the Communist Central Committee and Chief of the Communist secret police, broke with the Communists and informed to the police in Hankow [Hankou], a group of men led by Chou himself murdered the whole family, including servants and babies, by strangulation.

Gu himself was not among those killed, and the decision to punish the family was made as he had managed to escape from the clutches of the Party. When Gu had outlived his usefulness to the KMT authorities, he was executed by the police in 1935. Zhou, meanwhile, carried out many similar purges and killings of real or imagined traitors to the Communist cause. Zhou was as much a hardliner as the dreaded security chief Kang Sheng, who became notorious for his brutality during the Cultural Revolution in the 1960s.

Moreover, Chinese articles and documents show that Nehru's apparent fondness for Zhou was not reciprocated. The Chinese Communists always considered Nehru a bourgeois nationalist leader, and not even as a mild socialist. The earliest attacks on the Indian prime minister came even

before the People's Republic of China was proclaimed on 1 October 1949. Nehru was a 'running dog of imperialism', according to an article on 19 August 1949 in *Shijie Zhishi* ('world knowledge'), a magazine published by the CCP's Culture Committee. In its 16 September 1949 issue, the magazine proclaimed, 'Nehru riding behind the imperialists whose stooge he is, actually consider[s] himself the leader of the Asian people… as a rebel against the movement for national independence, as a blackguard… as a loyal slave of imperialism, Nehru has always been made the substitute of Chiang Kai-shek by the imperialists.'<sup>38</sup>

Even if Nehru was unaware of what Zhou and his comrades were writing in their Chinese-language publications, and saying about him behind his back during the days of Hindi Chini Bhai Bhai, the CIA certainly knew what the Chinese were up to. A top secret CIA report from 2 March 1963,39 which has only recently been declassified, states,

The Chinese diplomatic effort was a five-year masterpiece of guile, executed—and probably planned in large part—by Chou En-lai [Zhou Enlai]. Chou played on Nehru's Asian, anti-imperialist mental attitude, his proclivity to temporize, and his sincere desire for an amicable Sino-Indian relationship. Chou's strategy was to avoid making explicit, in conversations and communications with Nehru, any Chinese border claims, while avoiding any retraction of those claims which would require changing Chinese maps. Chou took the line with Nehru in Peiping [Beijing] in October 1954 that Communist China 'had as yet had no time to review' the Kuomintang maps, leaving the implication but not the explicit promise that they would be revised. In New Delhi in November–December 1956, Chou sought to create the impression with Nehru that Peiping would accept the McMahon Line, but again his language was equivocal, and what was conceded with his left hand, he retrieved with his right.

The same CIA report says that the former prime minister of Myanmar, Ba Swe, had written a letter to Nehru in 1958, warning him to be 'cautious' in dealing with Zhou on the Sino-Indian border issue. At the same time, Myanmar was engaged in talks with the Chinese about their common border, which was eventually demarcated in 1960 after an agreement, which was not unfavourable to Myanmar, had been reached.

According to the report, 'Nehru is said to have replied by declaring Chou to be "an honourable man", who could be trusted'.<sup>40</sup> Nehru, and India, had to pay a heavy price for that trust when the PLA came storming across the Himalayas in October 1962.

Some analysts and historians have argued that China would have been willing to settle the border dispute with India through some 'give-and-take' on both sides. The Chinese would give up their claim to the NEFA in exchange for India's recognition of China's de facto control of Aksai Chin.

After all, that was how China had settled its border disputes with Myanmar, Nepal, and Pakistan. But this argument fails to make a distinction between Beijing's relations with smaller neighbours such as Myanmar and Nepal, and the importance of a strategic alliance with Pakistan, and the fact that China's disputes with India go way beyond drawing a line on the map and demarcating it on the ground. And, as noted, in the 1950s, China emerged as India's main rival for leadership of the newly independent nations in Asia and Africa.

Today, an entirely new situation has emerged. Bilateral trade between China and India—not across the closed border but by sea—is booming; in 2015–16, it stood at US\$ 70.73 billion, but it should be added, India's trade deficit is US\$ 52.68 billion. China imports minerals, ores, and cotton from India, while India buys electronic equipment, computer hardware, and chemicals from China.<sup>41</sup>

However, the rivalry between India and China is far from over, and the distrust between the two countries remains deep and profound. To China, Arunachal Pradesh is still 'South Tibet' and travellers from that part of India get their Chinese visas stapled into their passports. According to the Chinese, they are not foreigners, as they are coming from a part of China that is under Indian occupation. This is a gesture that serves no purpose other than to humiliate India and the Indians.

More alarmingly, China has not ceased its support to rebels in India's troubled northeast. Nagas, Assamese, and Manipuris have been able to buy weapons on what is euphemistically called 'the black market' in China. Paresh Baruah, the leader of the main outfit, the United Liberation Front of Asom [Assam] (ULFA), stays in Chinese towns and travels freely across the country. The Chinese may argue that they are only reciprocating India's act of providing sanctuary for the Dalai Lama, allowing the enemy of one country to stay in the other. But while the Dalai Lama is not the leader of a band of armed insurgents, Baruah certainly is.<sup>42</sup>

Bumla and other passes in the Himalayas may be quiet today, but there is growing concern over a cascade of dams the Chinese are planning to build on the Brahmaputra in Tibet, where it is called Yarlung Tsangpo in Tibetan and Yarlung Zangbo on Chinese maps. One dam, at Zangmu in southeastern Tibet, became operational in October 2015, and there are another 27 proposed dams on the Brahmaputra and its tributaries before the river enters India. Naturally, that plan has caused controversy as the

Chinese have not consulted India and Bangladesh, the downstream countries that would be affected by these dams.<sup>43</sup> China's attitude towards its neighbours has been the same on the Mekong, where a number of dams have been built inside China without any consultation with Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam, through which that river also flows.

Despite the tension along and across the border, the centre of frictions between India and China today is not in the Himalayas but in the Indian Ocean. The Chinese are making inroads into what India has always considered its 'own lake', and that could lead to conflict. China wants to keep a close watch on the sea lanes used by its suppliers of oil in the Middle East, but that means challenging India's supremacy in the Indian Ocean. Recent joint naval exercises between India and the United States, and Japan's interest in those, show that there is a new Cold War, this time with China rather than the Soviet Union as the main adversary.

In the middle of this imbroglio lies Myanmar, which has always strived to be a neutral buffer state between regional rivals, but more often than not ended up as an area of conflict between players, indigenous as well as foreign, vying for power and influence. During the decade 1968–78, the Chinese poured more aid into the CPB in Myanmar than they had into any other communist movement outside Indochina. A 20,000-square-kilometre base area was established along the Chinese border in Myanmar's northeast. The Chinese built two small hydroelectric power plants inside the CPB's territory, and a clandestine radio station, 'the People's Voice of Burma', began transmitting from the Yunnan side of the border in 1971. It was later moved to the CPB's headquarters at Panghsang inside Myanmar, where the entire leadership resided in houses built by the Chinese.

On the Thai border, ethnic Karen, Shan, and Mon rebels were allowed to set up bases, and buy supplies and weapons from the Thai side. The Thais wanted a border buffer between themselves and their historical enemy, Myanmar, which had invaded their country in the past and had sacked the old capital of Ayutthaya in 1767. While such concerns may seem anachronistic in today's world, they were real enough for the Thais.

In the west, near the border with East Pakistan (later Bangladesh), Muslim guerrillas from the Rohingya community in Myanmar's Rakhine State have been active since Myanmar became independent from Britain in 1948. India never supported any rebel movement in Myanmar, but gave

asylum to U Nu, who was ousted by General Ne Win in 1962. During a pro-democracy uprising in August–September 1988, the activists received moral support from Indian authorities.

The situation in Myanmar's border areas changed dramatically when, in March–April 1989, the once powerful CPB collapsed after a mutiny among the rank-and-file of the party's army, most of whom were Wa tribesmen. The Wa were headhunters who lived in the mountains straddling Myanmar's northeastern border with China and had been recruited into the communist army without having any clear idea of the ideology for which they were fighting and dying. Almost the entire old leadership fled to China, where they were given asylum. The CPB subsequently broke up into four ethnic armies, of which the United Wa State Army (UWSA) is by far the strongest.

The 1989 CPB mutiny actually suited China's interests, and there are strong suggestions that China's clandestine services actively encouraged the Wa and others to rise up against their leaders. In view of Deng's new polices, which emphasized trade and economic expansion, the CPB's old leadership, which remained staunchly Maoist, had become a liability.

In the years following the CPB mutiny, trade between China and Myanmar blossomed. China flooded Myanmar's markets with cheap consumer goods and imported mainly raw materials such as timber and minerals. The annual exchange of goods soon reached the US\$ 1 billion mark. The surge in bilateral trade between Myanmar and China was facilitated by Western sanctions and boycotts, which at that time were in force because of the Myanmar government's gross violations of human rights. China did not have to face any competition and became Myanmar's most important foreign trade partner.

But China was not going to give up the foothold inside Myanmar that it had had since the late 1960s. In May 1989, the UWSA entered into a ceasefire agreement with the Myanmar government, which, on the one hand, suited China's new commercial interests, and on the other, also helped strengthen the UWSA. After all, the Chinese had had a longstanding relationship with most of the leaders of the UWSA, dating back to their CPB days. Thus, the UWSA has been able to purchase vast quantities of weapons from China, including heavy artillery, surface-to-air missiles, and armoured fighting vehicles.

Today, the UWSA is better armed than the CPB ever was. It can field at least 20,000 well-equipped troops as well as thousands of village militiamen and other supportive forces. Moreover, the top leaders of the UWSA are usually accompanied by Chinese intelligence officers who provide advice and guidance.

In recent years, Myanmar has mended its ties with the West, partly because the Chinese influence, even dominance, was becoming overwhelming, and sanctions have been lifted. China's sending of even more weaponry to the UWSA is a way of putting pressure on Myanmar's government at a time when its relations with Washington are improving. As China sees it, it cannot afford to 'lose' Myanmar to the US and the West. A strong UWSA provides China with a strategic advantage, and it is also a bargaining chip in negotiations with the Myanmar government.

When Aung Min, the then president office minister, visited Monywa, a town northwest of Mandalay, in November 2012, to meet local people protesting a controversial Chinese-backed copper mining project in the area, he openly admitted, 'We are afraid of China…we don't dare to have a row with [them]. If they feel annoyed with the shutdown of their projects and resume their support to the Communists, the economy in border areas would backslide. So you'd better think seriously.'<sup>44</sup> By 'the Communists' he clearly meant the UWSA and its allies, among them the Myanmar National Democratic Alliance Army (MNDAA) in the Kokang area, another former CPB force in Myanmar's northeast, which indeed resorted to armed struggle in February 2015.

China, predictably, has denied any involvement in that conflict, but the fact remains that most of the MNDAA's weaponry and vast quantities of ammunition have been supplied by the UWSA. According to a well-placed source, China was indirectly 'teaching the Myanmar government a lesson in Kokang: move too much to the West, and this can happen'.<sup>45</sup> At the same time, China is playing another, 'softer' card by being actively involved in the so-called 'peace talks' between the Myanmar government and the country's multitude of ethnic rebel armies.

Whether China wants to export revolution or expand and protect commercial interests, it apparently feels that it needs to have a solid foothold inside Myanmar. There is no better and more loyal ally in this regard than the UWSA and its former CPB affiliates. Myanmar is China's 'corridor' to the Indian Ocean as an outlet for trade from Yunnan and other

landlocked southwestern provinces, quite apart from Beijing's strategic interests in the region. Although there are no, and have never been, any Chinese bases there, as some Indian writers have suggested, China has helped Myanmar upgrade its own naval facilities—and that is worrying enough for India.

In April 2015, India eventually ran out of patience with Myanmar's turning a blind eye to the presence of Indian rebels on their soil. Indian commandoes crossed the border into Myanmar and destroyed a number of camps where Assamese, Manipuri, and Naga rebels were ensconced. The rebels were armed with weapons obtained from secret arms factories inside a former CPB area in Myanmar's northern Kachin State. Although located inside Myanmar, the machinery and the technicians came from China. The Chinese may have no interest in independence for Assam, Nagaland, or Manipur, but they evidently want to keep the Indians off balance—at least as long as the Dalai Lama is alive and the Tibetan exiles are being provided with sanctuaries in India.

Besides the broader issue of the vast differences in the respective cultures and worldviews to which the sign at Bumla refers somewhat presumptuously to as 'Two Old Neighbouring Civilisations', the question of Tibet remains at the heart of the conflict between India and China. And if the proponents of the Chinese version of the border dispute and the 1962 War had paid more attention to the Chinese source material, even they would have discovered that border demarcation was never the main issue. On 6 May 1959, only weeks after the Lhasa uprising against the Chinese occupation of Tibet, the official Chinese news agency Xinhua published an article titled 'The Revolution in Tibet and Nehru's Philosophy', accusing the Indian prime minister of having adopted 'the strategic aspirations of British imperialism'.<sup>46</sup>

According to US security expert and former CIA analyst Bruce Riedel, 'On the day the article attacking Nehru was published, Zhou Enlai said in a public forum that Nehru "had inherited England's old policy of saying Tibet is an independent country" and that this mentality was "the centre of the Sino-Indian conflict"'.<sup>47</sup> Vertzberger was obviously right in his conclusion that Nehru and the Chinese leaders had incompatible worldviews, and, in a more modern context, it can be argued that China and India are still worlds apart when it comes to culture and strategic thinking.

China may have been grossly mistaken in believing that Nehru, of all Indian leaders, wanted to seize Tibet. But, the Chinese fear of 'losing' what they have always considered an integral part of their country has been a factor that has determined relations between China and India for more than a century, and still does. And events first came to a head at Shimla in 1914 —at a time when China was weak as millennia of imperial rule were being replaced by a new, chaotic republican order.