# **SECULARISM AND RELIGIOUS FREEDOM**

### RONOJOY SEN

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

IT is now accepted that the Indian version of secularism differs from the American or the European model. $\frac{1}{2}$  The debates in the Constituent Assembly, which drafted the Indian Constitution between 1946 and 1949, reveal that there were real differences on the direction that Indian secularism should take. Though there were attempts to insert the term 'secular State' in the draft constitution on the one hand and to begin the preamble by invoking God on the other, both did not succeed. Members such as HV Kamath, Govind Malaviya, and SL Saxena wanted to begin the preamble to the Indian Constitution with the phrase 'In the name of God'.<sup>2</sup> After a heated discussion on the merits of this proposal, Kamath's amendment was put to vote and defeated. At the other end of the spectrum, the same fate befell Brajeshwar Prasad's proposal to begin the preamble with the following words: 'We the people of India, having resolved to constitute India into a secular cooperative commonwealth to establish socialist order  $\ldots$ <sup>3</sup> It was only in 1976, during the Emergency, that 'secular' (as well as 'socialist') was inserted into the preamble of the Constitution through the Forty-second Amendment.

This chapter addresses the tensions in the constitutional provisions with regard to freedom of religion. I primarily examine Articles 25, 26, and 28 of the Indian Constitution and how the Supreme Court has dealt with the voluminous litigation around these Articles. The two central provisions regarding freedom of religion are Articles 25 and 26. Article 25 guarantees the right to 'profess, practice and propagate religion', but also permits the State to regulate 'economic, financial, political or other secular activity associated with religious practice', as well as provide for 'social welfare and reform' of Hindu religious institutions. $\frac{4}{3}$  Article 26 guarantees religious denominations, among other things, freedom to manage their religious affairs.<sup>5</sup>

Litigation around these two Articles has broadly centred on two issues. The first is the distinction between the religious and secular, particularly in the case of Hinduism. The Court has dealt with this by bringing into play an 'essential practices' test to decide what is essential to Hinduism and used it to distinguish between the sacred and the secular. The Court's intervention to decide what is religious and what is not in a secular, constitutional culture is hardly peculiar to India. As Pratap Bhanu Mehta points out, in most constitutional settings courts 'have to determine whether or not a policy places a substantial burden on the free exercise of religion. This might require the court to have not just a definition of religion but also to determine whether a particular practice counts as falling under that definition.<sup>'6</sup> What is unusual, however, is the Indian Supreme Court's activism in fashioning religion in the way the State or the judges would like it to be, rather than accept religion as practised by believers. This has also prompted the Court to step into the minefield of how to define Hinduism, leading to unanticipated outcomes such as characterising Hinduism as a 'way of life' and legitimising the use of Hindutva (or Hinduness) in election campaigns. Secondly, there is the claim to selfidentification which has been denied to religious sects and groups. Since the 'wording of Articles 25

and 26 establishes the primacy of public interests over religious claims and provides a wide scope for governmentally sponsored reforms',  $\frac{7}{7}$  the Supreme Court has often had to adjudicate on which religious denomination or institution legally qualifies as Hindu. Thus, a whole range of religious denominations from the Satsangis to the Ramakrishna Mission have gone to court seeking the status of a separate religion and the privileges that come with it.

There have been other contentious issues, such as the right to propagate religion present in Article 25, which have come up before the Court and been controversially interpreted. This chapter also examines the Court's position on the right to teach religion in educational institutions, permitted in specific State-funded institutions under Article 28.

## **II. RELIGIOUS VERSUS SECULAR AND THE ESSENTIAL PRACTICES DOCTRINE**

Beginning with the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Act (HRCE Act) in 1951, where a new department headed by a commissioner was created to supervise temples and *maths*, several other States have followed suit.<sup>8</sup> Legal challenges to these legislation have meant that the courts are frequently asked to decide what constitutes an 'essential part of religion', thereby being off limits for State intervention, and what is 'extraneous or unessential', thereby permissible for the State to interfere. Some legal scholars have labelled the Court's attempts to define what is fundamental to any religion the 'essential practices' doctrine.<sup>9</sup> In effect, the essential practices doctrine has become the court's standard method to distinguish between the religious and the secular.

The essential practices test has been used by the Court to decide a variety of cases. These can broadly be classified under a few heads. First, the Court has taken recourse to this test to decide which religious practices are eligible for constitutional protection. Secondly, the Court has used the test to adjudicate the legitimacy of legislation for managing religious institutions. Finally, the Court has employed this doctrine to judge the extent of independence that can be enjoyed by religious denominations.

The essential practices doctrine was a derivative discourse of the colonial-era doctrine of 'justice, equity and good conscience'. After Independence, it was first articulated in *Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v Sri Lakshimindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt*, <sup>10</sup> also known as the *Shirur Mutt* case. It is important to consider this case in some detail, since it is has become obligatory to cite *Shirur Mutt* in most cases related to reform of Hindu religious institutions. Not only was the meaning of religion, as protected by the Constitution, enunciated in *Shirur Mutt*, but also guidelines as to who qualified as a religious denomination were set forth.

In *Shirur Mutt*, the petitioner, the superior or *mathadhipati* (also referred to as *mahant*) of Shirur Mutt, challenged the Madras HRCE Act  $1951$ ,  $\frac{11}{10}$  on the principal ground that it infringed Article 26 of the Constitution. Before dealing with the provisions of the Act, the Court asked a central question: 'Where is the line to be drawn between what are matters of religion and what are not? $12$  To come up with a working definition of religion, BK Mukherjea J, who wrote the judgment, drew on examples from the United States and Australia. He rejected the definition of religion offered by the US Supreme Court in *Davis v Beason*: 'The term religion has reference to one's views of his relation to his Creator, and to the obligations they impose of reverence for His Being and character, and of obedience to his will. It is often confounded with the cultus or form of worship of a particular sect,

but is distinguishable from the latter.<sup>'13</sup> The Court pointed out the inadequacy of this definition in the Indian context by noting that there are major religions like Buddhism or Jainism 'which do not believe in God or in any Intelligent First Cause'.<sup>14</sup>

Instead, Mukherjea J drew on the *Adelaide Company v Commonwealth* judgment in Australia, where the Court said the Constitution not only protected 'liberty of opinion' but also 'acts done in pursuance of religious belief as part of religion'.<sup>15</sup> Collapsing the belief-practise dichotomy, he observed:

A religion undoubtedly has its basis in a system of beliefs or doctrines which are regarded by those who profess that religion as conducive to their spiritual well-being, but it would not be correct to say that religion is nothing else but a doctrine or belief. A religion may not only lay down a code of ethical rules for its followers to accept, it might prescribe rituals and observances, ceremonies and modes of worship which are regarded as integral parts of religion  $\dots$ <sup>16</sup>

It should be mentioned here that this definition of religion, which included rituals and ceremonies as 'integral', was significantly different from the definition offered by the Bombay High Court in an earlier case. In *Ratilal Panachand v State of Bombay*, <sup>17</sup> where the constitutional validity of the Bombay Public Trusts Act of 1950 had been challenged, MC Chagla CJ observed that 'whatever binds a man to his own conscience and whatever moral and ethical principles regulate the lives of men, that alone can constitute religion as understood in the Constitution'.<sup>18</sup> In the same judgment, Chagla stated, 'Essentially religion is a matter of personal faith and belief, of personal relation of an individual with what he regards as his Maker or his Creator or the higher agency which he believes regulates the existence of sentient beings and the forces of the Universe.' <sup>19</sup> The definition from *Shirur Mutt* cited earlier shows that Mukherjea J rejected the High Court's narrow definition of religion. Subsequently, Mukherjea J overturned the *Ratitlal* judgment too when the case came up for hearing before the Supreme Court.<sup>20</sup>

According to Mukherjea J, the US and Australian Constitutions did not impose any limitation on the right to freedom of religion. It was the US and Australian courts that introduced the limitations on the grounds of 'morality, order and social protection'.<sup>21</sup> Mukherjea J, however, believed that the Indian Constitution was an improvement on other Constitutions, since it clearly laid out what could be regarded as religion:

Our Constitution-makers, however, have embodied the limitations which have been evolved by judicial pronouncements in America or Australia in the Constitution itself and the language of Articles 25 and 26 is sufficiently clear to enable us to determine without the aid of foreign authorities as to what matters come within the purview of religion and what do not. $22$ 

According to the Court, 'what constitutes the essential part of a religion is primarily to be ascertained with reference to the doctrines of that religion itself<sup>". 23</sup> This 'essential part' of religion is protected by the Constitution: 'Under Article 26(b), therefore, a religious denomination or organization enjoys complete autonomy in the matter of deciding as to what rites and ceremonies are essential according to the religion they hold and no outside authority has any jurisdiction to interfere with their decision in such matters.<sup>24</sup> However, the State can legitimately regulate religious practices when they 'run counter to public order, health and morality' and when they are 'economic, commercial or political in their character though they are associated with religious practices'.  $\frac{25}{25}$ 

*Shirur Mutt* was also a landmark judgment because it validated a major portion of the Madras HRCE Act 1951, which was the first State legislation to put in place an elaborate regulatory mechanism for Hindu temples and *maths*. Several other States followed with similar legislation, which were also taken to court, but *Shirur Mutt* has remained the model for the Court. There is no need here to go into the details of the *Shirur Mutt* judgment regarding the Madras HRCE Act. It is noteworthy that the Court in large measure gave its approval to State control of Hindu temples and religious institutions.

The primary contribution of *Shirur Mutt* to the legal discourse on religion was the recognition that 'protection under Articles 25 and 26 was not limited to matters of doctrine or belief only but extended to acts done in pursuance of religion and therefore contained guarantees for rituals, observances, ceremonies and modes of worship'. $\frac{26}{5}$  Another important principle enunciated by Mukherjea J was the 'complete autonomy' granted to religious denominations to decide which religious practices were essential for them. Mukherjea reiterated this point in *Ratilal*, which was decided by the Supreme Court the same year as *Shirur Mutt*:

Religious practices or performances of acts in pursuance of religious beliefs are as much a part of religion as faith or belief in particular doctrines … No outside authority has any right to say that these are not essential parts of religion and it is not open to the secular authority of the State to restrict or prohibit them in any manner they like under the guise of administering the trust estate.<sup>27</sup>

Finally, *Shirur Mutt* is a landmark case because it contained a contradictory trend—though the judgment is celebrated for widening the definition of religion to include rituals and practices, at the same time it sanctioned an elaborate regulatory regime for religious institutions. This anomaly has been noted by PK Tripathi: 'In the final analysis, therefore, articles 25 and 26 do not emerge from the judgment in the Swamiar case as very effective weapons of attack on social legislation affecting the management of religious institutions.<sup>28</sup>

Although a broad definition of religion was laid out in *Shirur Mutt*, the subsequent judgments of the Supreme Court would circumscribe the religious practices that were guaranteed constitutional protection. Two cases in the early 1960s would substantially reformulate the essential practices doctrine. PB Gajendragadkar J, who later went on to become the Chief Justice of India, handed down the rulings in both these cases. The first of these cases was *Durgah Committee v Syed Hussain Ali*. 29 In this case, the *khadims*<sup>30</sup> of the shrine of Moinuddin Chishti in Ajmer challenged the Durgah Khwaja Saheb Act of 1955. Among other things, the *khadims* contended that the Act abridged their rights as Muslims belonging to the Sufi Chishtia order. The *khadims* maintained that their fundamental rights guaranteed by several constitutional provisions, including Articles 25 and 26, had been violated.

Gajendragadkar did not make any reference to the scriptures. Instead, he skilfully constructed a 'secular' history of the Ajmer shrine to 'ascertain broadly the genesis of the shrine, its growth, the nature of the endowments made to it, the management of the properties thus endowed, the rights of the Khadims  $\ldots$ <sup>31</sup> After surveying the history of the shrine from the pre-Mughal to the contemporary period, the Court concluded that the administration of the shrine 'had always been in the hands of the official appointed by the State'. $\frac{32}{2}$  The Court, however, conceded that the Chishtia sect could be regarded as a religious denomination. But this did not eventually have any impact on the Court's decision, which upheld the validity of the Durgah Khwaja Saheb Act and dismissed the constitutional challenges to the Act. In doing so Gajendragadkar issued a 'note of caution' that would not only highlight the role of the Court in deciding what was an 'essential and integral' part of religion but also make a distinction for the first time between 'superstitious beliefs' and religious practice.

the practices in question should be treated as a part of religion they must be regarded by the said religion as its essential and integral part; otherwise even purely secular practices which are not an essential or an integral part of religion are apt to be clothed with a religious form and may make a claim for being treated as religious practices within the meaning of Article 26. Similarly even practices though religious may have sprung from merely superstitious beliefs and may in that sense be extraneous *and unessential accretions to religion itself*. Unless such practices are found to constitute an essential and integral part of religion their claim for the protection under Art. 26 may have to be carefully scrutinized; in other words, the protection must be confined to such religious practices as are an essential and integral part of it and no other.<sup>33</sup>

This extraordinary statement by the Court pushed the essential practices doctrine in a new direction. The Court was not only going to play the role of the gatekeeper as to what qualified as religion, but now it was also taking up the role of sifting superstition from 'real' religion. This was a clear statement of the Court's role—which had not been so overt until now—in rationalising religion and marginalising practices that did not meet the Court's test. According to JDM Derrett, the courts could now 'discard as non-essentials anything which is not proved to their satisfaction—and they are not religious leaders or in any relevant fashion qualified in such matters—to be essential, with the result that it would have no constitutional protection'.  $\frac{34}{3}$ 

This redefinition of the essential practices test and the enhanced role of the Court in rationalising religion would be articulated by Gajendragadkar in two more landmark cases that were decided soon after *Durgah Committee*. The first was *Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj v State of Rajasthan*, 35 where the Tilkayat Govindlalji, the traditional spiritual head of the Nathdwara temple in Rajasthan, challenged the constitutionality of the Nathdwara Temple Act 1959. One of the grounds for challenging the Act was infringement of Articles 25, 26(b), and 26(c) since it was claimed that the temple was a private one owned and managed by the Tilkayat as head of the Vallabha denomination. By reconstructing the doctrine of the Vallabha school and the history of the temple, the Court held that the temple was a private one and that the Tilkayat was 'merely a custodian, manager and trustee of the temple'. <sup>36</sup> The Court endorsed the Act, laying special emphasis on a *firman* (order) issued by the ruler of Udaipur in 1934, which declared that the royal court had absolute rights to supervise the temple and its property and even depose the Tilkayat if necessary.

While the outcome of *Govindlalji* was unexceptional given the history of the Court in sanctioning State regulation of religious institutions, Gajendragadkar in his judgment pointed out why the claims of a community regarding their religious practices could not always be accepted:

In cases where conflicting evidence is produced in respect of rival contentions as to competing religious practices the Court may not be able to resolve the dispute by a blind application of the formula that the community decides which practice is an integral part of its religion, because the community may speak with more than one voice and the formula would therefore break down. The question will always have to be decided by the Court and in doing so, the Court may have to enquire whether the practice in question is religious in character and if it is, whether it can be regarded as an integral or essential part of religion, and the finding of the Court on such an issue will always depend upon the evidence adduced before it as to the conscience of the community and the tenets of its religion.<sup>37</sup>

Though Gajendragadkar admitted that this approach might present some difficulties since 'sometimes practices, religious and secular, are inextricably mixed up', he was confident that the Court would be able to distinguish between religious and what was 'obviously' a secular matter.<sup>38</sup> Gajendragadkar thus rejected the argument of the senior advocate, representing the appellants, who quoted from the Australian court ruling in *Adelaide Company of Jehovah's Witnesses v Commonwealth*: 'What is religion to one is superstition to another.<sup>39</sup> The Court dismissed this proposition as of 'no relevance':

If an obviously secular matter is claimed to be [a] matter of religion, or if an obviously secular practice is alleged to be a religious

practice, the Court would be justified in rejecting the claim… a claim made by a citizen that a purely secular matter amounts to a religious practice, or a similar claim made on behalf of the denomination that a purely secular matter is an affair in matters of religion, may have to be rejected on the ground that it is based on irrational considerations and cannot attract the provisions of Art.  $25(1)$  and Art.  $26(b)$ .<sup>40</sup>

The series of rulings in the early 1960s firmly established the principle that it was the Court's task to ascertain what constituted religious doctrine and practice. The Gajendragadkar rulings went further and specified that even practices that can be accepted as religious might be classified as superstition or irrational. Dhavan and Nariman's assessment in 1997 sums up the situation as it was after *Yagnapurushdasji v Muldas*: 'Judges are now endowed with a three step inquiry to determine, in tandem, whether a claim was religious at all, whether it was essential for the faith and, perforce, whether, even if essential, it complied with the public interest and reformist requirements of the Constitution.<sup>'41</sup>

The role of the Court in determining what constitutes religion as well as essential religious practice has remained undiminished since the formative years of this doctrine. Subsequent rulings have built on case law but hardly ever reconsidered the doctrine of essential practices. The essential practices test was one of the major tools whereby the Supreme Court sanctioned a complex regulatory regime for Hindu temples. As has been noted earlier, in *Shirur Mutt* the Court gave its approval to the bulk of the Madras HRCE Act 1951. Soon after the Madras Act, most States in India put in place regulatory mechanisms for Hindu religious institutions. Though many of these State legislation were challenged, the Court usually approved them with minor alterations. One of the consequences of this has been the bureaucratisation of religion, with State-appointed officers taking over the running of temples at the expense of traditional authorities. The undermining of traditional heads of temples such as the Nathdwara or the Jagannath temple at Puri had already begun from the 1960s. Temple functionaries like the *archakas* (priests) and other intermediaries like *pandas* and *sevaks* (attendants) have also been severely affected. *Seshammal v State of Tamil Nadu* was one of the first cases where the hereditary principle for temple priests was held to be void. $\frac{42}{5}$ 

There was a spate of litigation in the 1990s centred on major Hindu shrines like Tirupathi, Vaishno Devi, Jagannath, and Kashi Vishwanath.<sup>43</sup> K Ramaswamy J handed down the majority of the judgments, where challenges to the extensive State regulation of these temples were dismissed. This has led Dhavan and Nariman to observe, 'If the regulatory impetus provided by Justice BK Mukherjea in the fifties was enlarged by Justice Gajendragadkar in the sixties, the latest judgments of Justice K. Ramaswamy have enthusiastically supported the "nationalization" of some of India's greatest shrines.'<sup>44</sup>

Another significant effect of the essential practices doctrines has been the marked disinclination of the Court to accept the practices of religious groups of recent origin. In a case involving the Ananda Margis, <sup>45</sup> the Court decided that the Ananda Margis were a religious denomination. However, in Acharya Jagdishwaranand *v* Commissioner of Police,  $\frac{46}{5}$  the Court refused to accept the *tandava* dance as an essential practice of the Ananda Margis, reasoning that the 'Ananda Marga as a religious order is of recent origin and *tandava* dance as a part of religious rites of that order is still more recent. It is doubtful as to whether in such circumstances *tandava* dance can be taken as an essential religious rite of the Ananda Margis.<sup>247</sup> The Court had occasion again in 2004 to take up the issue and further narrowed the scope of essential practices to mean the foundational 'core' of a religion. AR Lakshmanan J, however, notably dissented. Harking back to *Shirur Mutt*, he said, 'What would constitute an essential practice of religion or religious practice is to be determined with reference to

the doctrine of a particular religion which includes practices which are regarded by the community as part and parcel of that religion.<sup>'48</sup>

A shift in the Court's dominant line of thinking can be discerned in a more recent case involving a mining project in the Niyamgiri Hills, Orissa, which was seen to be infringing on land considered sacred by the local tribals. In *Orissa Mining Corporation Ltd v Ministry of Environment and* Forests,<sup>49</sup> the Supreme Court deliberated on whether the religious rights of the inhabitants of Niyamgiri, such as the Dongaria Kondh, were being affected. The Court ruled that the question of whether tribal and forest dwellers had rights of worship over the Niyamgiri Hills had to be considered by local elected bodies such as the *gram sabha*. <sup>50</sup> Despite the occasional deviation, such as the judgment on Niyamgiri, Mehta is right in his assessment of the courts when he says they 'tell us not only what public purposes ought to be authoritative constraints on behavior but also which interpretation of religious doctrine should be considered authoritative'.<sup>51</sup>

#### **III. SELF-IDENTIFICATION AND THE DEFINITION OF HINDUISM**

One of the landmark cases in independent India where the issue of self-identification of religious groups came into sharp focus was *Sastri Yagnapurushdasji v Muldas Bhudardas Vaishya*, <sup>52</sup> also known as the Satsangi case. The 1966 case involved the Satsangis or followers of Swaminarayan (1780–1830) who claimed that their temples did not fall under the purview of the Bombay Harijan Temple Entry Act 1948. The Act provided that every Hindu temple shall be open to Harijans or untouchables. By the time the case reached the Supreme Court via a trial court and the Bombay High Court, the Central Untouchability (Offences) Act of 1955 had already come into effect. The case made by the Satsangis was that the 'Swaminarayan sect represents a distinct and separate religious sect unconnected with the Hindus and Hindu religion, and as such, their temples were outside the purview of the said Act'. $\frac{53}{5}$ 

The Satsangis claimed separate status on four grounds. First, they argued that Swaminarayan, the founder of the sect, considered himself as Supreme God. Secondly, it was urged that the Satsangi temples could not be regarded as Hindu temples since they were used to worship Swaminarayan and not any traditional Hindu deity. Thirdly, it was pointed out that the Satsangis propagated the idea that worship of any god other than Swaminarayan was a betrayal of faith. Finally, it was contended that there was a procedure of initiation (*diksha*) into the Swaminarayan sect by which a devotee assumed a distinct and separate identity.

The Court rejected the contention of the Satsangis relying primarily on a description of their religious practices by Monier-Williams in his *Religious Thought and Life in India*. Based on its reading of Monier-Williams and reports of the Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency, the Court concluded: 'In our opinion, the plea raised by the appellants that the Satsangis who follow the Swaminarayan sect form a separate and distinct community different from the Hindu community and their religion is a distinct and separate religion different from Hindu religion is entirely misconceived.'<sup>54</sup>

However, the examination of the religious practices of the Satsangis was somewhat incidental in the Court's ruling. *Yagnapurushdasji* was far more critical for the Supreme Court's construction of Hinduism, a construction that has since become hegemonic in judicial discourse. Writing for the
Court, PB Gajendragadkar CJ—who had already authored some of the most important judgments on the question of freedom of religion—proceeded to inquire: 'What are the distinctive features of Hindu religion? $2.55$  At the same time, he admitted that the question 'appears to be somewhat inappropriate within the limits of judicial enquiry in a court of law',  $\frac{56}{10}$  but he did not allow that to deter him. Drawing primarily from English language sources, the Court put forward the view that Hinduism was 'impossible' to define:

When we think of the Hindu religion, we find it difficult, if not impossible, to define Hindu religion or even adequately describe it. Unlike other religions in the world, the Hindu religion does not claim any one God; it does not subscribe to any one dogma; it does not believe in one philosophic concept; it does not follow any one set of religious rites.<sup>57</sup>

Confronted with this amorphous entity, the Court concluded, 'It [Hinduism] does not appear to satisfy the narrow traditional features of any religion or creed. It may broadly be described as a *way of life* and nothing more.'<sup>58</sup>

Once the civilisational or cultural view of Hinduism was posited, it was not difficult for the Court to construct an all-encompassing version of Hinduism that included a variety of creeds and sects. Hence, any reform movements, including Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism, were seen as merely different sects within Hinduism.

The development of Hindu religion and philosophy shows that from time to time saints and religious reformers attempted to remove from the Hindu thought elements of corruption and superstition and that led to the formation of different sects… If we study the teachings of these saints and religious reformers, we would notice an amount of divergence in their respective views: but underneath that divergence, there is a kind of subtle indescribable unity which keeps them within the sweep of the broad and progressive Hindu religion. 59

Gajendragadkar's view is, in fact, enshrined in the Constitution, where Explanation II appended to Article 25 says that the 'reference to Hindus shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jain or Buddhist religion'. It is noteworthy that the Court could well have decided *Yagnapurushdasji* without going into a detailed exegesis of Hinduism. As Marc Galanter has pointed out in his analysis of *Yagnapurushdasji*, the Court could have decided the case with reference to Article 25(2)(b) of the Constitution, which empowers the State to overcome caste and denominational barriers within Hinduism.<sup>60</sup> In any case, in an earlier judgment the Court had said temple entry acts prevail over denominational claims to exclude outsiders.<sup>61</sup>

In *Yagnapurushdasji*, the Court used a variety of sources to define Hinduism. Robert Baird describes the Court's reasoning thus: 'All of the authorities to whom appeal is made stress the wide range of Hindu belief and practice. That which had been the obstacle to constructing a model of Hinduism which would fit the concrete data is turned into one of its major characteristics—it is inclusive.' <sup>62</sup> Radhakrishnan, who first wrote about Hinduism being a 'way of life', in particular plays a crucial role in shaping the Court's conception of Hinduism.

The importance of *Yagnapurushdasji* was that the Court was interpreting Hinduism as an inclusivist religion drawing heavily from the ideas of Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and his intellectual predecessors. In this sort of usage, certain features of Hinduism are most important: tolerance, universality, a classical core, and a search for a fundamental unity. The Court's views on Hinduism and its inclusive nature recurred in subsequent judgments. In several important later judgments, the Supreme Court relied on the construction of Hinduism as elaborated in *Yagnapurushdasji*.<sup>63</sup> Since *Yagnapurushdasji*, claims put forward by different Hindu sects to be regarded as a separate religion have not found favour with the Court. Among the more prominent cases was the denial of the status of

a separate religion status to the Arya Samaj<sup>64</sup> and Ramakrishna Mission, 65 the latter being accorded a 'religious minority', that is, separate religion, status, by the Calcutta High Court, only to have it changed to a religious denomination status by the Supreme Court.

Similarly, the followers of Sri Aurobindo were told that they were not members of a religious group. Ruling on the legitimacy of the Auroville<sup>66</sup> (Emergency Provisions Act) Act of 1980, RB Misra J, writing for the majority, wrote that 'there is no room for doubt that neither the Society nor Auroville constitutes a religious denomination and the teachings of Sri Aurobindo only represented his philosophy and not a religion'.<sup>67</sup> More recently, the Court dismissed the claims of Jains for minority status:

The so-called minority communities like Sikhs and Jains were not treated as national minorities at the time of framing the Constitution. Sikhs and Jains, in fact, have throughout been treated as part of the wider Hindu community which has different sects, sub-sects, faiths, modes of worship and religious philosophies.<sup>68</sup>

The inclusivist reading of Hinduism had wider political effect too. In the mid-1990s the Court in the controversial 'Hindutva' ruling<sup>69</sup> conflated the inclusivist discourse on Hinduism, outlined in *Yagnapurushdasji*, with the exclusivist version of Hinduism propounded by Hindu nationalists.<sup>70</sup> In discussing Hindutva, JS Verma J first went over the definition of Hinduism presented in *Yagnapurushdasji*. Basing his opinion on his reading of the inclusivist Hinduism of *Yagnapurushdasji* and on another later decision,<sup>71</sup> Verma proceeded to conflate Hindutva with Hinduism by arguing that Hindutva was a 'way of life' and could not be equated with 'narrow fundamentalist Hindu religious bigotry': $\frac{72}{2}$ 

Thus, it cannot be doubted, particularly in view of the Constitution Bench decisions of this Court that the words 'Hinduism' and 'Hindutva' are not necessarily to be understood and construed narrowly, confined only to the strict Hindu religious practices unrelated to the culture and ethos of the people of India, depicting the *way of life* of the Indian people. Unless the context of a speech indicates a contrary meaning or use, in the abstract these terms are indicative more of a *way of life* of the Indian people and are not confined merely to describe persons practicing the Hindu religion as a faith.<sup> $3$ </sup>

While the judgment dealt with electoral speech rather than religious freedom, the way Hindutva was framed and interpreted was promptly appropriated by the Hindu nationalists.<sup>74</sup> The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) referred to the judgment in the party's 1999 election manifesto: 'Every effort to characterize Hindutva as a sectarian or exclusive idea has failed as the people of India have repeatedly rejected such a view and the Supreme Court, too, finally, endorsed the true meaning and content of Hinduism as being consistent with the true meaning and definition of secularism.' Since then it has become standard practice for the BJP and other Hindu nationalist groups to refer to the Court ruling to justify the inclusiveness of Hindutva.

## **IV. THE RIGHT TO PROPAGATE RELIGION**

The right to propagate religion, guaranteed in Article 25, has frequently come up before the courts. This has been tied to the question of whether it is permissible to convert a person from one faith to another and the legal status of a convert. The major court rulings on conversions in independent India can be broadly classified into three categories. First, there are the cases challenging the legality of legislation to regulate conversions, which are in effect in some States of India. Secondly, there are cases involving converts, particularly to Christianity, who claim the benefits of caste-based reservation in jobs, elections, and educational institutions available to the Scheduled Castes. Thirdly, there is a category of cases where converts have 'reconverted' back to Hinduism and asked for restoration of reservation benefits.

One of the early cases where the Supreme Court had to deal with the issue of conversion was *Chatturbhuj Vithaldas Jasani v Moreshwar Parashram*. <sup>75</sup> Here the case involved the disqualification of a candidate belonging to the Mahar caste, Gangaram Thaware, who was contesting a reserved seat for Scheduled Castes, for having converted to the Mahanubhava Panth. The Court was primarily concerned with the question whether Thaware had ceased to be a Mahar when he joined the Mahanubhava Panth. Though the Court, using the precedent of the celebrated *Abraham v Abraham* case, <sup>76</sup> ruled that the conversion did not mean that Thaware had lost his Scheduled Caste status, it laid out a complex understanding of conversion:

Conversion brings many complexities in it train, for it imports a complex composite composed of many ingredients. Religious beliefs, spiritual experience and emotion and intellectual conviction mingle with more material considerations such as severance of family and social ties and the casting off or retention of old customs and observances.<sup>17</sup>

The first real opportunity to clarify the right to propagate religion came in the landmark *Rev Stanislaus v State of Madhya Pradesh* case. <sup>78</sup> Here two State legislation—Madhya Pradesh Swatantra Adhinayam and the Orissa Freedom of Religion Act, aimed at regulating conversions were being challenged. These legislation had one thing in common: they prohibited religious conversion by the use of force, allurement, or fraudulent means. Legislation meant to check conversions had a precedent in Princely States in colonial India. Some of these were the Raigarh State Conversion Act 1936, the Sarguja State Apostasy Act 1945, and the Udaipur State Anti-Conversion Act 1946. In independent India, Orissa and Madhya Pradesh were the first two States to pass such legislation in the 1960s, followed by Arunachal Pradesh in 1978. More recently, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh in 2003 and Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh in 2006 have passed similar legislation. In Tamil Nadu, a similar law was enacted in 2002 but repealed two years later. The Rajasthan legislation was sent back by Indian President Pratibha Patil, who was then Governor of Rajasthan. These laws have made conversion a cognisable offence under Sections 295A and 298 of the Indian Penal Code. In some of the States, the punishment is doubled if a minor, a woman, or person belonging to the Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe is forcibly converted. From 1954 onwards, there have also been unsuccessful attempts for a central legislation on the lines of the State Acts. In 1954, a Bill known as the Indian Converts (Regulation and Registration) Bill was tabled in the Lok Sabha, but this was rejected by the House. A Freedom of Religion Bill was again presented to the Lok Sabha in 1978, but before any discussion could take place the incumbent government fell in 1979.<sup>79</sup>

Rev Stanislaus, a Christian priest from Madhya Pradesh, had challenged the Madhya Pradesh legislation on two grounds. One was that the State legislature did not have the authority to make the law and secondly, that the law infringed Article 25. The Madhya Pradesh High Court upheld the Act, ruling that penalising conversion by force, fraud, or allurement did not contravene Article 25. Another petitioner, Yulitha Hyde, had challenged the Orissa Act. The Orissa High Court took an opposite stance, saying that the term 'inducement' was too vague and could not be covered under the restrictions in Article 25. It also ruled that the State legislature had no power to enact a law related to religion.

When the case came up before a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court, it ruled that the State

legislatures were within their right to pass the Acts, since they were meant to maintain public order. On the critically important question of infringement of the right to propagate guaranteed in Article 25, AN Ray CJ, who delivered the judgment, followed an odd line of reasoning:

What the Article grants is not the right to convert another person to one's own religion by an exposition of its tenets. It has to be remembered that Article 25(1) guarantees freedom of conscience to every citizen, and not merely to the followers of one particular religion, and that, in turn, postulates that there is no fundamental right to convert another person to one's own religion because if a person purposely undertakes the conversion of another person to his religion, as distinguished from his effort to transmit or spread the tenets of his religion, that would impinge on the 'freedom of conscience' guaranteed to all the citizens of the country alike.<sup>80</sup>

Ray made a distinction between a benign propagation of religion, which was permitted, and attempts to convert people to one's religion, which the Court felt impinged on freedom of conscience. In making this distinction, Ray drew upon an earlier judgment, *Ratilal Panachand*, which said that Article 25 sanctions propagation of religion for the 'edification' of others.

The *Stanislaus* judgment has been criticised by several commentators for its peculiar understanding of propagation of religion, which precluded conversion. One of India's most respected constitutional scholars had this to say about the *Stanislaus* judgment:

The right to propagate religion gives a meaning to freedom of choice (of religion), for choice involves not only knowledge but an act of will. A person cannot choose if he does not know what choices are open to him. To propagate religion is not to impart knowledge and to spread it more widely, but to produce intellectual and moral conviction leading to action, namely, the adoption of that religion. Successful propagation of religion would result in conversion . . . Conversion does not in any way interfere with the freedom of conscience but is a fulfillment of it and gives a meaning to it. The Supreme Court judgment is clearly wrong. It is productive of the greatest public mischief and ought to be overruled.<sup>81</sup>

Over thirty years after it was delivered, the *Stanislaus* judgment has, however, not been reconsidered by a larger bench and continues to be the last word on the meaning of the right to propagate.

## **V. TEACHING RELIGION**

How has the Supreme Court interpreted Article 28, which prohibits religious instruction in State-run educational institutions? <sup>82</sup> The crucial ruling in this area is *Aruna Roy v Union of India*, <sup>83</sup> where public interest litigation challenged the National Council of Educational Research and Training's (NCERT) National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCFSE) on the ground that it violated the constitutional principles of secularism among other things. In the *Aruna Roy* judgment of 2002 and an earlier case, *DAV College v State of Punjab*, 84 the Supreme Court laid out what was permissible with regard to religion in school and university texts and curriculum. The Court made a critical distinction between 'religious instruction' and 'religious education', with the latter being permitted in the educational curriculum.

The *Aruna Roy* case is the latest as well as the most detailed discussion of what can be legitimately taught as religion in educational institutions. The NCFSE was formulated in 2000 when the BJP was heading a coalition government at the Centre. Among other things, the petitioners objected to some specific proposals in the NCFSE—in the section titled 'Education for Value Development', which they contended violated Article 28. One was the proposition that there had been erosion of 'essential' values and that 'value based education would help the nation fight against all

kinds of fanaticism, ill will, violence, fatalism, dishonesty, avarice, corruption and drug abuse'.<sup>85</sup> The primary bone of contention, however, was a related proposal:

Another significant factor that merits urgent attention now is religion. Although it is not the only source of essential values, it certainly is a major source of value generation. What is required today is not religious education but education about religions, their basics, the values inherent therein and also a comparative study of the philosophy of all religions.<sup>86</sup>

The NCFSE went on to qualify this proposal by saying that 'education about religions must be handled with extreme care … All religions therefore have to be treated with equal respect (Sarva Dharma Sambhav) and there has to be no discrimination on the ground of any religion (panthanirapekshata).<sup>287</sup>

Speaking for the Court, MB Shah J rejected the contention that NCFSE infringed Article 28 on three grounds. First, it referred to several government-appointed commissions and reports, which advocated value-based education. It mentioned in particular the SB Chavan Committee, which said that religion is the 'most misused and misunderstood concept' and that 'the basics of all religions, the values therein and also a comparative study of the philosophy of all religions should begin at the middle stage in schools and continue up to the university level'.<sup>88</sup> The Court was in full agreement with this view and said 'religion is the foundation for value-based survival of human beings in a civilized society'. Secondly, the Court said that study of religions was in consonance with Article 51- A of the Constitution, which among other things declares that it shall be the duty of every citizen to 'promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities …' Thirdly, the Court referred to an earlier case, *DAV College v State of Punjab*, where the petitioner argued that provisions for teaching Guru Nanak's philosophy infringed on Article 28(1). There the Court made a distinction between religious instruction and study of religions. It said, 'To provide for academic study of life and teaching or the philosophy and culture of any great saint of India in relation to or the impact on the Indian and world civilizations cannot be considered as making provision for religious instruction.<sup>89</sup>

In a concurring judgment, Dharmadhikari J said, 'The academic study of the teaching and the philosophy of any great saint such as Kabir, Guru Nanak and Mahavir was held to be not prohibited by Article 28(1) of the Constitution.<sup>90</sup> He, however, admitted that there was a 'very thin dividing line' between imparting of religious education and study of religions. Dharmadhikari J gets around this problem by positing that the Indian concept of dharma differs from religion as understood in the West. According to him, in the concept of dharma 'different faiths, sects and schools of thoughts merely are different ways of knowing truth which is one'.<sup>91</sup> This allows for the teaching of religious education, which would mean 'approaching the many religions of the world with an attitude of understanding'.  $\frac{92}{2}$  He stressed that this understanding of religion is essential for a multi-religious society such as India.

The *Aruna Roy* judgment was greeted by a chorus of disapproval from sections of the media and some commentators while the BJP welcomed it. The former feared that the State was preparing the ground for religious instruction in schools and that it was a blow to secularism in India. Martha Nussbaum is scathing in her criticism of the judgment: 'Justice Manharlal Bhikalal Shah's majority opinion is one of the weakest pieces of legal argumentation that has recently emerged from the Supreme Court of India.<sup>93</sup> However, this sort of reading ignored the realities of constitutional secularism in India and its many inherent contradictions. Indeed, *Aruna Roy* is one of many judgments that mirror the complexities and contradictions of the Indian secular State. In *Aruna Roy*, the Court was, however, not concerned with the propriety of religious instruction. It sought to make a distinction between religious instruction and religious education or study of religion. This distinction, the Court pointed out, could be traced back to the Constituent Assembly debates. The distinction between religious instruction and religious education is also present in reports drafted by prominent government-appointed commissions, including the Radhakrishnan and Kothari reports.

## **VI. CONCLUSION**

Indian secularism was originally based on the 'equal respect' $\frac{94}{94}$  theory where the State respects and tolerates all religions. This might also be called the Nehruvian formulation of secularism. This is a position that oscillates between *sarvadharma samabhava* (goodwill towards all religions) and *dharma nirpekshata* (religious neutrality). It is no secret that Jawaharlal Nehru saw religion as a force that checked the 'tendency to change and progress'. But he did not let his personal convictions colour his conception of the secular State. He wrote, 'A secular state does not mean an irreligious State: it only means that we respect and honour all religions giving them freedom to function.<sup>95</sup> On another occasion, Nehru defined a secular State as one where there is 'free play for all religions, subject only to their not interfering with each other or with the basic conceptions of our state'. <sup>96</sup> This conception of a secular State is what Rajeev Bhargava describes as 'principled distance', which he believes is the primary characteristic of Indian constitutional secularism. In this interpretation, a secular State 'neither mindlessly excludes all religions nor is merely neutral towards them'.<sup>97</sup> Rajeev Dhavan offers yet another description of constitutional secularism by disaggregating Indian secularism into three components: religious freedom, celebratory neutrality and reformatory justice.<sup>98</sup>

The constitutional provisions on religion thus make Indian secularism open-ended. It also leaves ample scope for play and internal tensions. This, of course, makes the task of the Court much more difficult than in secular democracies, where the separation between religion and State is better defined. The Court has usually preferred the language of uniformity in favour of one that is more sensitive to religious and legal pluralism. The essential practices doctrine can be seen as the Court's attempt to discipline and cleanse religion or religious practices that are seen as unruly, irrational, and backward by putting the State in charge of places of religious worship. This has not only narrowed the 'institutional space for personal faith'<sup>99</sup> but also marginalised popular religion. That the Court has been able to do so is due to the structure of Hinduism, where there is no organised church or authoritative religious text. At the same time, the Court has defined Hinduism in a manner that has precluded any exit options for sects as well as aided in a homogeneous construction of religion. Both on the tolerance and neutrality fronts, Indian secularism, as interpreted by the courts, has not entirely lived up to what the makers of the Constitution envisioned.

<sup>1</sup> One of the early works to note the distinctiveness of Indian secularism was Donald E Smith, *India as a Secular State* (Princeton University Press 1963). Since then there has been much written on Indian secularism. See, for instance, Rajeev Bhargava (ed) *Secularism and Its Critics* (Oxford University Press 1999) and Anuradha Dingwaney Needham and Rajeswari Sunder Rajan (eds) *The Crisis of Secularism in India* (Permanent Black 2007).

<sup>2</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 10 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 439, 17 October 1949.

<sup>3</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 10 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 447, 17 October 1949.