# **4 NEP**

# How Change Came

In the years 1921-2, and for a few years thereafter, the entire social-economic balance shifted. The private sector, the 'petty bourgeoisie', came to act in a way that seemed to be in total conflict with the ideology and practice of the war-communism period. The role of the market, in relations with the peasants and even within the state's own economic sector, was dramatically enhanced. Yet when at last the bitter logic of circumstances convinced Lenin of the need for change, the full extent and consequences of the change were not, at first, discerned.

We have seen how, all the way up to February 1921, Lenin kept stubbornly on the course of all-round nationalization, centralization, the elimination of money, and, above all, the maintenance of prodrazverstka. There was no pressure on him from his colleagues to change this policy. Events, rather than the central committee, provided a potent means of persuasion. The first public sign of second thoughts came in a speech at the plenary session of the Moscow Soviet, on 28 February 1921: he saw the point of a delegate's argument to the effect that the peasants needed to know what they had to deliver to the state, i.e. that the seizure of 'surpluses' be replaced by a tax in kind *(prodnalog);*  they would consider this proposal.<sup>1</sup> Once this idea was accepted, however reluctantly, it was bound to lead to a reconsideration of the entire basis of the war-communism economy. As already mentioned in the last chapter, any hesitations he may have had left on the subject were overcome when the peasant risings in many parts of the country were followed by the Kronstadt sailors' revolt. This occurred during the sessions of the tenth party congress in March 1921. As emergency military measures were improvised to crush the revolt, so Lenin proposed the substitution of food tax (prodnalog) for confiscation of surpluses (prodrazverstka).

The decisive decree went through the party and Soviet organs during March 1921. The tax in kind was fixed substantially below the 'requisitioning' targets of the previous year, and therefore well below the actual needs for produce. Thus the delivery quota for 1920-21 had been 423 million poods, whereas the grain tax in kind for 1921-2 was fixed at 240 million poods. For potatoes the figures were respectively no and 60, for meat 25.4 and 6.5, and so on.<sup>2</sup> In 1924 tax in kind was replaced by a money tax, but this was after the stabilization of the currency was well under way.

After payment of tax, the peasants were to be free to use the rest of their produce as they thought fit, and could sell it 'in the local market', in the words of the original decree. But this would make little sense if the object was to encourage sales of food to the food-deficit areas, and so this limitation was quickly forgotten.

And since it was absurd to contemplate peasants travelling hundreds of miles to sell their own goods in remote industrial cities, the legalization of private trade was inevitable too, despite the strong feelings of revulsion which private trade inevitably caused among many party members. Again, at first it was hoped to control such trade strictly, to limit it. 'Freedom of trade', said Lenin to the tenth congress, 'even if at first it is not linked with the white guards, like Kronstadt was, none the less inevitably leads to white-guardism, to the victory of capital, to its full restoration.'<sup>3</sup> Yet in practice the desperate need for free exchange of goods was such that, once trade of any kind was legalized (March 1921), it grew like a snowball and swept away restrictions. Cooperative trading was encouraged, and was particularly successful in selling consumers' goods in the countryside, as well as goods of all kinds in towns alongside the state retail network, which was gradually being built up from the ruins of war communism. However, private traders were allowed gradually to enter into trade deals of almost every kind: selling to peasants,

buying from peasants, buying from and selling to state enterprises, selling goods made by state factories as well as those made by a resurgent private manufacturing sector (of which more later).

At first, when the party was persuaded of the need for change, it was thought that the retreat would be limited to the substitution of'commodity exchange' *{produktoobmen)* for confiscations. Speaking in October 1921, Lenin frankly admitted this had been an error, an illusion. The only way was trade, and the state and party would have to learn to trade. 'What is the use of talking to us about state trade,' argued a delegate. 'They didn't teach us to trade in prison.' Lenin replied: '.. . Were we taught to fight in prison? Were we taught how to administer a state in prison?'<sup>4</sup> The logic of events, or 'the elemental forces of the petty-bourgeois environment', swept aside efforts to restrain them.

None the less, the party firmly held to the decision to retain in the hands of the state 'the commanding heights' of the economy: banking, foreign trade, large-scale industry. But it was recognized that the attempt totally to nationalize manufacturing was an error. Under the conditions of 1921, with shortages of every kind, especially of fuel, many state-operated enterprises had to be closed, and some of these, as well as small workshops nationalized in the previous two years, were leased to private entrepreneurs and cooperative groups of various kinds, payment being in goods, or taxes in money. Such small enterprises as escaped the nationalization decrees were allowed to re-open. On 17 May 1921 the decree nationalizing all small-scale industry was formally revoked. On 7 July 1921 every citizen was authorized 'freely to undertake handicraft production and also to organize small-scale industrial enterprises (not exceeding ten to twenty workers)'. Leasing of enterprises in the possession of VSNK H was regulated by a decree of 5 July 1921, and leasing continued through 1922. Already early in 1922 over 10,000 enterprises had been leased, on terms of two to five years on payment of ten to fifteen per cent of output, but of these the large majority were windmills. 3,800 were appreciable enterprises, employing fifteen to twenty persons, and fifty per cent of the lessees were private individuals, some of them former owners.<sup>5</sup> By October 1923 the number of leased enterprises had risen to 5,698, employing an average of sixteen

workers; of these, 1,770 were in food processing, 1,515 in hides and skins. Outright denationalization was rare: seventy-six enterprises were 'returned to their former proprietors' by the presidium of VSNKH , an unstated number by provincial organs.<sup>6</sup>

The New Economic Policy was universally referred to as NEP, and the 'privateers' who flourished under it were known as 'Nepmen'. It was a form of mixed economy, with an overwhelmingly private agriculture, plus legalized private trade and smallscale private manufacturing. We shall show later on that the 'Nepmen' did make considerable headway. However, the authorities did not allow the creation of big private enterprises, though a total of eighteen private enterprises did employ 'between 200 and 1,000 workers' each in 1924—5.' The vast majority of those engaged in manufacturing and mining worked for the state.

## Famine

But the still feeble economy was struck at once by a disaster of the first magnitude. The cumulative effect of years of prodrazverstka had caused a marked reduction of sowings, and on top of this there was a severe drought in the east and south-east. The result was an appalling famine. The 1920 grain harvest, only 54 per cent of the 1909-13 average, was bad enough. In 1921 the harvest was only 37.6 million tons, only 43 per cent of the pre-war average overall, but far worse in the affected areas.<sup>8</sup> Uncounted millions died. Relief measures were taken. The tax in kind had to be waived in the affected provinces. But supplies in the hands of the authorities were far too small to render effective help to the starving. An emergency relief committee was formed, with prominent non-communists, even with anti-communists such as Prokopovich and Kuskova, as participants. (They were soon afterwards arrested.) American aid was accepted, under the auspices of the American Relief Administration. Scarce resources of foreign currency were used to purchase grain. Yet shortage of food, the breakdown of transport and general disorganization limited the effectiveness of relief measures. Diseases such as typhus carried off many. Millions of hungry survivors wandered in search of some sort of food into the more fortunate provinces.

## **Industrial Difficulties**

With the fuel crisis causing the closure of many state-operated factories, 1921 was a nightmare year for people and government alike. Towards the end of the year and in 1922 there emerged a nightmare of a different kind. The leadership decided that the time had come to abandon the system under which state industry had been operating. Hitherto, as has already been mentioned, they had produced regardless of cost, receiving all their money expenses from the state. The various factories were under divisions (glavki) of VSNKH ; they produced to their orders, and received materials and fuel (when they received them at all) in order to carry their orders out. Wages had almost lost their significance, and rations and services were mainly free. The result was a monstrous growth of bureaucratic tangle, an unworkable degree of centralization ('glavkism'), waste and inefficiency. It was found necessary to close many enterprises because there was no fuel and no materials. While desperate efforts were made to restore rail transport and the fuel industries - and by the end of 1922 substantial progress had been made in that direction the opportunity was taken to rebuild state industry on a new commercial basis, to shed surplus staff and to compel more efficient operation by making management pay its way. Wages were once again paid in cash, and in July-August 1921 services were again charged for. Rationing was abolished on 10 November 1921.<sup>9</sup> No more was heard of the abolition of money as a means of leaping into socialism. Much was heard instead of the urgent need for a stable currency, in which calculations and payments could be made. State industry and state trade was henceforth to operate on economic or commercial accounting *(Jkhozraschyot).*  Materials and fuel had to be bought. Workers had to be paid. The necessary resources would have to be obtained from sales. No more spoon feeding, and no easy sources of credit. This stern medicine was contained in a government decree of 9 August 1921. To enable industry to operate in this way, it was necessary to divide it into autonomous units, instead of treating it as if it were part of one great firm of which VSNK H was the board of

directors. These units were, in most cases, known as 'trusts', which controlled varying numbers of 'enterprises' (*predpriyatiya*), i.e. factories, workshops, mines. A few large plants were themselves considered each to be the equivalent of a trust. They were all now to operate commercially. At first there were various limitations on their freedom to sell or purchase, though the major part of industry had already during 1921 been told to sell what they could where they could. But by early 1922 the trusts (or large autonomous enterprises) were having to fend for themselves. Profit-making and the avoidance of losses were to be the operational criteria. There was, as a rule, no definite obligation to give priority to supplying the state; if 'privateers' offered better prices, they handled the goods. If private contractors or intermediaries gave better service than the trading organizations which were slowly replacing the materials-allocation bureaucracy of the warcommunism period, then here too the Nepmen got the business. As Lenin said, communists had to learn to trade. But by 1922-3 (the economic year ended on 30 September) 75 per cent of all retail trade was in private hands.<sup>10</sup> Conditions in 1921-2 were anything but conducive to commercial accounting and orderly trading. There was famine and desperate general shortage. Factories had few reserves, and trusts had little cash. To obtain liquid assets they had to sell, and sell quickly. Yet the general poverty was such that few would buy. Paradoxically, the feeble industrial effort managed to cause a glut on the highly disorganized market. Trusts competed with one another in trying to sell even raw materials and equipment to raise cash. They opened their own stalls in city streets to do so - this was the so-called razba*zarivanie*, or disposing of assets by bazaar methods.

All this led to a relative fall in prices of industrial goods as compared with (very scarce) foodstuffs. (Note the word 'relative'; both were rising fast with the inflation.) Prices often failed to cover costs. Unsaleable goods piled up amid universal shortages. Trusts were unable to pay their inflated staffs, and unemployment grew rapidly, even though over half of the pre-war proletariat had fled from the towns. The apparently vital need for more output co-existed with its unsaleability. Such were the immediate consequences of the sudden immersion of industry in the cold bath of commercial principles. But we shall see that by 1923 the tables were turned.

Lenin was prepared to go to almost any lengths to restore the economy, feeling, with justice, that this was essential for survival. He fought hard to convince doubting comrades that foreign concessions were an entirely proper way out of the problem of reconstruction, and his works and speeches at this period abound in references to this subject. Some said: 'We chased out our own capitalists, and now we call in foreign capitalists.' Lenin insisted that, by letting foreign capitalists operate oilfields, exploit timber resources and so on, the Soviet state would obtain materials of which it stood in desperate need, and some modern equipment would be provided by the concessionaries. A major move in this direction might have led to a big enclave of foreign-owned industry inside Bolshevik Russia. Lenin had exaggerated hopes of this, and gave publicity to a few ambitious capitalists, such as the American businessman Vanderlip, who came to Moscow with various proposals. However, in the end it came to very little. Only forty-two concession agreements were made, and only thirty-one of those functioned, mainly in timber. In 1924-5 only 4,260 workers were engaged in thirteen significant 'concessionenterprises'.<sup>11</sup> All sixty-eight concessions which existed in 1928 accounted for 0.6 per cent of industrial output.<sup>12</sup> Probably the main reason was the acute distrust of the Bolsheviks on the part of the capitalists abroad, which is hardly surprising in view of the chaotic state of Russia at the time, the declared hostility of the Bolsheviks to the capitalist order, and the fact that they had denounced and defaulted on all past Russian debts, confiscated foreign property, etc.

Foreign trade, however, began to grow again. In 1921 this was still deeply affected by immediate emergencies: grain and coal were imported to deal with critical situations. But a more normal trade pattern began slowly to emerge. A trade agreement was signed with Britain in 1922, and other countries followed suit. In fact, in 1922 there were some complaints from trusts about competition from imports, since some consumers' goods were purchased to provide incentives for the labour force. Imported locomotives, farm machinery, electrical and other equipment, contributed greatly to recovery. Exports in 1924-5, though only a little over a third of 1913 levels, were nine times above those of **1921-2. <sup>1</sup> <sup>3</sup>**

## **Transport**

As already indicated, the transport situation in 1921 was appalling. Over half of the available locomotives were described as 'sick' and the repair shops were incapable of coping with their tasks, for lack of manpower, equipment and fuel. Indeed in 1921 the principal bottleneck in the railways was poor supplies of fuel for locomotives, and even the few that were in good health could not run. Great efforts were made to build up stocks of fuel, and scarce foreign currency was used to import locomotives and components. In 1922-3 45 per cent more passengers and 59 per cent more goods were moved than in the previous year. Recovery continued. In 1923-4 rail transport carried 54 per cent of its 1913 traffic. Already in 1926-7 it surpassed 1913 levels. It is interesting to note that the estimate made in 1922 concerning the recovery of rail transport proved to err greatly on the side of caution: by 1926-7 it had been expected that only 62.7 per cent of the prewar level would be reached. In this and in some other respects, the ability of the economy to do better than bourgeois specialists expected may have influenced the minds and attitudes of the political leadership, and affected their subsequent behaviour when faced with warnings from these specialists about overoptimism.

Road transport consisted at this period almost wholly of horsedrawn vehicles. Even in 1925 the whole vast territory of the Soviet Union contained only 7,448 cars, 5,500 lorries and 263 buses.<sup>14</sup>

#### **Currency Reform**

The logic of NEP required, as we have seen, a stable currency. Meanwhile the rouble continued to depreciate with startling rapidity. The virtual abandonment of price control, under conditions of the most acute scarcity, gave a new twist to the inflationary spiral. During the war-communism period, as we have seen, many a Bolshevik leader accepted the proposition that it was possible, or soon would be, to do without money. Now the word 'money' could be used again, instead of such evasive abbreviations as *sovznak*  ('Soviet token'). It was one thing to desire currency stabilization, however, and another to achieve it. At first there were various experiments designed to find a stable unit of account. Thus the budget drawn up in 1922 was in terms of pre-war roubles, the then existing rouble being 60,000 times greater. But rapid depreciation led to a sharp rise in this figure. There were various devices such as the 'gold rouble', once again linked with pre-war purchasing power, a circumstance which led Preobrazhensky to assert that the value of this kind of Soviet money was based on the memory of what prices had been in 1913. Loans were raised and payments demanded in this unit of account, though the actual cash in use was still the rapidly depreciating rouble which poured from the printing presses. (The first loan of the NEP period was levied in terms of rye.) The decision was taken in July 1922 to create a new unit, the *chervonets,* backed by gold, and to pass as quickly as possible to a stable currency, a properly balanced budget and sound finance, based on a gold standard (though without any freedom to buy or sell gold, and with a strict government monopoly of foreign trade and foreign dealings generally). Memoranda by Lenin include a request to the Commissar of Finance, SokoPnikov, to send him a note setting out his proposals for the free circulation of gold.<sup>15</sup> Even though this did not happen, it is an interesting fact that such ideas were mooted and were contemplated by Lenin himself. Indeed, for a short while the chervonets was quoted and bought and sold in foreign exchange markets. But through the rest of 1922 and all of 1923, the chervonets and the paper rouble coexisted unhappily, the latter becoming so utterly valueless that Bazarov quipped that 'the time is not far distant when the sum of those nominal roubles will exceed the number of all atoms or electrons of which our planet is composed'.<sup>16</sup> The chervontsy were few, in heavy demand, and only available in large denominations. The rouble or *sovznak* was still legal tender for most purposes. The rouble currency in circulation increased as follows:

|                  | (milliards) |
|------------------|-------------|
| January 1921     | 1,169       |
| 1 October 1921   | 4,529       |
| 1 September 1922 | 696,141     |
| .1 January 1923  | 1,994,464   |

Already in October 1922 one pre-war kopek equalled something like 100,000 of these so-called roubles or sovznaki. No wonder 'in villages transactions were accounted in poods of bread grains, which became a general unit of account'.<sup>17</sup> Soviet scholars and politicians earnestly debated the nature and purpose of money.<sup>18</sup>

For nearly two years there was 'bipaperism', a unique phenomenon. The chervonets (= 10 new stabilized roubles) became sole currency in February 1924. One of these new roubles was equal to 50,000 *sovznaki* of 1923 issues, and one *sovznak* rouble of 1923 represented one million *sovznaki* of 1921 issue. So 50,000 million was the approximate devaluation ratio. When finally withdrawn, the *sovznak* circulation reached 809,625,216,667,200,000 '1923' roubles.<sup>19</sup> It is only right to mention that Germany in 1923 'achieved' even more, if for somewhat different reasons.

This entire operation was carried out under the aegis of the State Bank, created in October 1921, and of the People's Commissariat of Finance *(Narkomfin),* under the energetic and competent commissar, Sokol'nikov. Not very surprisingly, these institutions during the twenties were the cautious conservative guardians of financial orthodoxy, aiming at the preservation of a balance which had been achieved amid so much difficulty.

In 1922 several other banks were created, with the aim particularly of facilitating the necessary credits to industry (Prombank and Electrobank, the latter to 'finance electrification'), to municipal enterprises (Tsekombank) and agriculture (Cooperative bank, with State Bank participation, as well as private shareholders).

The problem of balancing the budget, without which currency stabilization would have remained a pipe-dream, was solved by levying a variety of excise taxes, commuting agricultural tax in kind and the *corvee* into money payments, taxes on private and state enterprises, income and property taxes, and a whole range of others

#### **88 NEP**

(e.g. a 'military tax' levied on those who had 'no right to serve in the Red Army'), plus voluntary and forced savings, such as a 6 per cent bond issue which was 'placed by coercion amid capitalist elements'. In the financial year 1923-4 the budget was balanced, in 1924-5 there was a surplus.<sup>20</sup> (The financial and economic year, until 1930, covered the period 1 October-30 September.)

#### **Scissors Crisis**

However, 1923 brought a fresh crisis. From a situation in which the terms of trade between village and town were too favourable to the former - though under conditions of famine the peasants were unable to take much advantage of this - the changed circumstances led to an opposite distortion: a rapid move in relative prices in a direction unfavourable to the village, so unfavourable indeed as to discourage agricultural marketings and to constitute a political menace, since the precarious political stability of the regime depended on peasant acquiescence, or at least a decision on their part not to rebel.

The reasons for this remarkably rapid change were the following. Firstly, agricultural production recovered more rapidly than industry. The 1921 famine led to a decline in the area sown in the following year, since there was a shortage of seed and able-bodied peasants in the affected provinces. This is shown in the table on page 89. However, the 1922 harvest was fairly good; by 1923 the sown area reached almost 90 per cent of the pre-war level, and while the harvest was still far below 1913 levels, the shortage of food was no longer desperate. By contrast, the ruined industrial structure took much longer to repair. The same table shows that industry in 1923 was relatively much further below 1913 levels than was agriculture. Industry was handicapped by the destruction of its basic capital, years of neglect in maintenance, shortages of spares and of skilled labour, of knowledgeable management, of fuel, materials, means of transport. The general chaos of previous years had led to a shift away from industrial and towards food crops, so that, for example, the acreage under cotton had fallen from 688,000 hectares in 1913 to 70,000 in 1922. It was impossible

|                                                       | 1913          | 1920  | 1921                  | 1922  | 1923   | 1924         | 1925    | 1926   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-------|-----------------------|-------|--------|--------------|---------|--------|
| Industrial (factory)<br>production<br>(million 1926-7 |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| roubles)                                              | 10,251        | 1,410 | 2,004                 | 2,619 | 4,005  | 4,660        | 7.739   | 11,083 |
| Coal (million                                         |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| $tons)$ *                                             | 29.0          | 8.7   | 8.9                   | 9.5   | $13-7$ | 16.1         | 18.1    | 27.6   |
| Electricity                                           |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| (million kWhs)                                        | 1.945         |       | 520                   | 775   | 1,146  | 1,562        | 2.925   | 3,508  |
| Pig iron (thousand                                    |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| tons)                                                 | 4,216         |       | 116                   | 188   | 309    | 755          | i,535   | 2,441  |
| Steel (thousand                                       |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| tons)                                                 | $4.23 \times$ |       | 183                   | 392   | 709    | 1,140        | 2,135   | 3,i4i  |
| Cotton fabrics                                        |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| (million metres)                                      | 2,582         |       | 105                   | 349   | 691    | 963          | 1,688   | 2,286  |
| Sown area                                             |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| (million ha.)                                         | 105.0         |       | 903                   | 77-7  | 91.7   | 98.1         | $104-3$ | 110.3  |
| Grain harvest<br>(million tons)                       |               |       | 80.1146.1X 37.61 50.3 |       | 56.6   | $51-4$       | $72-5$  | 76.8   |
| Rail freight carried                                  |               |       |                       |       |        |              |         |        |
| (million tons)                                        | 1324          |       | 394§                  | 39-98 | 58-o§  | $\circ$ 7-5§ | 8348    |        |

\* Excluding lignite.

f This was an extremely favourable year.

 $X$  These are Gladkov's figures; some other sources are higher (e.g. 42.3 for 1921).

§ For post-war the 'economic year' (i.e. 1920-^21,1921-2, etc.).

Not available.

(Sources: Sotsialisticheskoe stroitefstvo SSSR (1934), pp. 2-3; Gladkov, Sovetskoe narodnoe khozyaistvo (7927-5) (Moscow, 1964), pp. 151, 316,357, 383; E. Lokshin: Promyshlennost' SSSR, ig40-6j (Moscow, 1964), p. 32; Nar. Khoz., 1932, p. 8.)

*Note:* There are minor disparities between various sources for most years.

to find currency with which to import sufficient materials to restart the textile industry quickly. In 1922 its output was only 26 per cent of pre-war, while agriculture reached 75 per  $\text{cent}^{21}$ 

Secondly, the chaotic conditions in which newly formed state trusts unloaded their goods and materials in competition with one another did not last. Credits began to be available from the reorganized banking system.  $V S N K H$  reacted to the 1921–2 experience by creating 'syndicates' during 1922-3. These were government disposal agencies which limited or eliminated competition between trusts, and they joined together for the purpose of joint selling. This placed them in a strong position to demand higher prices when, as was often the case, the state sector of industry was the dominant producer of the items in question.

Thirdly, state industry was inefficient, operating far below capacity, with heavy overheads and much overstaffing. Labour productivity was far below pre-war. Costs were therefore high.

Fourthly, the wholesale and retail distribution system was exceedingly inefficient and costly. According to Preobrazhensky, the average trade margin in 1913 was 17.3 per cent. It had now grown to something like 60 per cent.<sup>22</sup>

Fifthly, the government was in fact the principal purchaser of bread grain, despite the substantial role of the Nepmen, and it sought to buy at low prices.

Finally, the peasants were losers in the inflationary race, when money depreciated daily, because even a week's delay in a journey to town to spend the money meant heavy loss. (The peasants seem to have been the last to get the new chervonets currency.)

The 'price scissors' parted, in the sense that industrial prices were above, agricultural prices below, their 1913 prices. On 1 October 1923, in terms of the newly-stabilized currency, industrial prices were 276 per cent of 1913, agricultural prices 89 per cent. The same source shows the stages by which this remarkable shift in relative prices was achieved:

| Industrial prices as a ratio of agricultural prices<br>(1913 relationship =<br>100) |           |        |  |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|--------|--|
|                                                                                     | Wholesale | Retail |  |
| October 1922                                                                        | 131       | 161    |  |
| December 1922                                                                       | 141       | 167    |  |
| February 1923                                                                       | 169       | 180    |  |
| May 1923                                                                            | 215       | 223    |  |
| July 1923                                                                           | 202       | 211    |  |
| September 1923                                                                      | 294       | 280    |  |
| October 1923                                                                        | 310       | 297    |  |

*(Source:* Gladkov, *Sovetskoe narodnoe khozyaistvo (tg2i-\$),* (Moscow, i960), p. 413.)

Thus, by October 1923, when the 'scissors crisis' reached its

peak, industrial prices were three times higher, relative to agricultural prices, than they had been before the war. It was hardly surprising that this caused trouble.

To some extent this wide price divergence was self-correcting. The peasants were the principal purchasers of manufactured goods, and state industry experienced severe difficulties in selling. Seasonal factors also led to a rise in agricultural prices in the months that followed. However, the government reacted strongly, and helped to restore a less unhealthy price relationship. Vigorous attempts were made to force prices of state manufactures down; there were decrees controlling prices (or preventing increases without authorization); there were drives to reduce surplus staff in industry and in the trade networks, to improve and extend the system of consumer cooperatives, to tighten credit so as to compel trusts to unload stocks. Industrial output meanwhile continued to recover rapidly, though still far below pre-war levels (see above). VSNKH , thoroughly alarmed, was exercising its still considerable formal authority over the state sector of the economy, and a combination of all these factors led to a partial closing of the blades of the now-notorious price 'scissors'. During the financial year 1923-4 industrial selling prices fell by 23.3 per cent. A People's Commissariat for Trade was set up, which tried with marked success to enlarge the area of state trade and to sell manufactured goods in rural areas at prices below those charged by Nepmen. By April 1924 the agricultural price index had risen to 92 (1913 = 100) and the industrial index had fallen to 131,<sup>23</sup> in terms of the new stable currency. By then voices were being raised declaring that the blades had come too close together. This formed part of the debate about the future of NEP and the basic strategy of the Soviet regime, which will be discussed in the next chapter.

#### Planning and Control

So the NEP system of mixed economy weathered the storm and, with the establishment of a stable currency and balanced budgets, entered into calmer waters by 1924. The years 1924 and 1925'

may be described as 'High NEP'. Before discussing the issues and arguments which arose and which, in due course, ended the system, we must take a look at the system as it was during this period. How did it work? Was there any planning and, if so, by whom? What was the relative weight of the private sector? How autonomous were the trusts, and what were the powers of VSNKH ? What was happening in agriculture? What was the situation of the workers and of the trade unions? To these and similar questions the rest of this chapter will be devoted.

Let us begin with *planning.* VSNK H was decentralized by the 'trustification' of 1921-2, but was still the headquarters of Soviet state industry. Of the 430 trusts functioning in 1922, 172 were subordinated to VSNK H directly or via its local organs *(Promburo),* and 258 to local *sovnarkhozy* (councils of national economy). To take an example, thirty-three trusts in the metal goods industry were subordinate to VSNKH , controlling 316 factories employing 218,344 workers, while the twenty-four 'provincial' trusts ran ninety-five factories employing 12,701 workers, i.e. these were mainly small-scale. Trusts were in total command of 'their' factories, the latter having no financial autonomy and, as a rule, no separate profit-and-loss accounts or separate legal personality. They had, roughly speaking, the same status as a subdivision of a Soviet enterprise in the sixties, or of a sub-unit within a centralized Western corporation. Indeed, the term 'enterprise' *(predpriyatie)* was not used to describe them. Their entire output was planned and sold by the trust, who supplied them with the funds they needed, e.g. to pay the labour force. Gradually this situation changed, but it was not until 1927 that the directors of what came to be called 'enterprises' within the trusts acquired defined rights and duties - though not yet a legal personality. Actual powers of directors varied greatly within different trusts, and there was little attempt at this period at standardization of practices. According to a resolution of 29 July 1922, VSNK H operated its control over industry by:

(1) Methods of an economic character: the financing of industry, the organization of industrial credit, price policy, etc.

(2) Methods of an administrative character: appointment and dismissal of responsible officials of trusts and other trading-andindustrial units, the transfer of material resources **from one**  branch of industry to another, from enterprise to enterprise, **and**  so forth, in conformity with the industrial plan.

(3) Methods of a production-planning character: the drafting of production and disposal plans, inspection and checking on their execution, ensuring the conformity of the industrial **plan**  with the general plan, etc.

That is to say, becoming in substance the Commissariat for Industry and Trade, VSNK H is the real boss *(khozyain)* over the enterprises within its jurisdiction. All talk of the narrowing of VSNKH'S functions and the transfer of part of these to improvised *{fakuttativnye* - perhaps 'optional') industrial units represents vulgar free-tradeism *(fritrederstvo)*  [sic!].. *. u* 

One senses in this a concern to assert the authority of VSNKH , but it would be a great error to take such formulations literally. It is not only that the resolution in question had no legislative effect. Even legal decrees in those days of uncertain 'revolutionary legality' seldom described the real situation, and were in any event badly or vaguely drafted.

Decrees defining and re-defining the functions and internal organization of VSNK H were numerous, and no attempt will be made here to trace the many changes. A decree of 12 November 1923 repeated many of the points cited above, but in a less assertive way, with more emphasis on trusts and on relations with other bodies. Thus point (d) of Section II of the decree gives VSNK H the function of 'formulation of the production plan and budget of industry of all-union significance, the examination of production plans and industrial budgets of union republics, the formulation of a general production plan and budget for the industry of the entire Soviet Union and its submission through Gosplan for confirmation to the Council of Labour and Defence (STO). ..' . The new emphasis on union republics was due to the formation of the USSR as a federal state in 1922. The function of control over its subordinate units is several times qualified by reference to 'conformity to existing legislation', presumably designed to prevent too much interference from above with the trusts.

**VSNK H in 1923-6 included** the **following** sections, departments or units:

(1) The chairman and presidium of VSNKH .

(2) Internal administration.

(3) Chief economic administration (GEU) with the Industrial planning commission *(Promplan)* attached to it.

(4) Central administration of state industry *(Tsugprom)* (with numerous industrial sub-divisions).

(5) Chief administration of the armaments industry.

(6) Scientific-technical department.

The metal industry and electricity generation came under the successors of the former glavki (Glavmetall, Glavelektro) which, for some odd reason, were directly subordinated to the presidium of VSNK H and not to Tsugprom. In addition, other specialist committees were attached to VSNKH. <sup>2</sup> <sup>5</sup>

Republican councils of national economy (sovnarkhozy) were also set up, with powers over less important industries and the right to be consulted by VSNKH . Provincial and regional councils continued to exist, with powers that varied greatly. In some cases they administered all-union industry in their area, in others only purely local industry.

So at this period state industry of all-union significance was under the authority of VSNKH , which (except for metal and electricity) operated its control through the above-named Tsugprom and its industrial sector divisions, sometimes directly and sometimes through local organs. Its general-policy functions were largely duplicated by the chief economic administration (GEU) of VSNKH , its planning functions by Promplan within GEU. Promplan, in turn, duplicated some of the planning functions of Gosplan, which was under the STO, not VSNKH . This clumsy administrative machinery was rearranged rather more logically in 1926-^7, when both the GEU and Tsugprom were abolished, and the industrial-sector divisions were once more given the name and status of glavki and placed directly under the presidium of VSNKH , as also was the planning unit Promplan.

These changes may, however, amount to no more than different labels on the doors of mostly the same officials and offices. They do not begin to show us the actual functions of VSNKH , the extent of central control over trusts by its administrative subdivisions, or the extent to which in fact there was any real planning in the twenties. This is not easy to define or describe. The best and most detailed account is undoubtedly by Carr and Davies.<sup>24</sup> This shows that there was marked inconsistency between industries and dates. Thus some key sectors of heavy industry, which supplied 'strategic' items for the economy, were given orders as to what to produce and for whom, and therefore the appropriate division of VSNK H exerted, *vis-a-vis* the trusts, power of detailed supervision and control, in many respects similar to the powers of ministries *vis-d-vis* enterprises in the later 'Stalin' model. On the other hand, many trusts, especially in the consumers' goods industries, made up their own production plans by reference to the market, and VSNK H did little to interfere. Indeed, in the case of textiles the VSNK H division (Glavtextil') was almost powerless, the trusts dealing above all with the 'textile syndicate', the state wholesaling organization which came to act as agent for supplies to the textile industry and to exercise a dominant role, so much so that Glavtextil' was abolished in 1927 as superfluous. Various organs of VSNK H gave orders on all sorts of issues; many trusts were in effect wholly autonomous most of the time. No clear picture emerges, except that, firstly, control over new investment was much tighter than over current business, and, secondly, control of all kinds became stricter towards the end of the decade, as resources became tighter. There will be more about this in Chapter 6. We must now look briefly at the planning mechanism as it existed at this time.

Gosplan, as we have seen, was set up to assist the Council of Labour and Defence (STO). The latter body was nominally a commission of the Council of Peoples' Commissars, but in fact it was the effective economic-military cabinet, was presided over by Lenin while he was still capable of work, and included among its members the chairman of VSNKH , as well as the commissars of War, Labour, Transport, Agriculture, Supplies and a representative of the trade unions.<sup>27</sup> Its decrees carried legal force, as if they were issued by the government. Gosplan (at first officially known as the state general-planning commission) was set up on 22 February 1921 to 'work out a single general state economic

plan and methods and means of implementing it'. The members were appointed by the STO. Its duties were redefined on 21 August 1923, its title being now the more familiar 'state planning commission'. The first paragraph concerning its functions was reprinted almost verbatim as above. It was also to help to prepare the budget, examine 'basic questions concerning currency, credit and banking', industrial location and standardization. It had an essential coordinating function, in that it had the right to examine and express its views on all plans and production programmes put forward by people's commissariats (including VSNKH) .

It can be seen that duplication and some rivalry with the planning division of VSNK H inevitably arose. Thus the work of preparing the 'control figures for 1925-6' was undertaken only by Gosplan, and Krzhizhanovsky, Gosplan's head, complained to the fifteenth party congress about the lack of cooperation with other agencies.

However, as already pointed out, the word 'planning' had a very different meaning in 1923-6 to that which it later acquired. There was no fully worked-out production and allocation programme, no 'command economy'. The experts in Gosplan, many of them non-party or former Mensheviks, worked with remarkable originality, struggling with inadequate statistics to create the first 'balance of the national economy' in history, so as to provide some sort of basis for the planning of growth. The pioneering contribution of Russian economics at this period will be the subject of comment in the next chapter. The point is that what emerged from these calculations were not plans in the sense of orders to act, but 'control figures', which were partly a forecast and partly a guide for strategic investment decisions, a basis for discussing and determining priorities. An expert committee of VSNKH , known as OSVOK (Council for the Restoration of Basic Capital) studied the capital assets and needs of various branches of the economy, and produced a series of reports and recommendations (1923-5), which affected government thinking. But neither was this yet operational planning.

So neither Gosplan nor VSNK H could provide, or tried to provide, output plans for all trusts and enterprises, except some in some key sectors. Most trusts made their own arrangements, with only partial supervision from above. They varied greatly in size and *modus operandi*. Some were very large indeed, such as the Baku oil organization, which, being responsible for the bulk of Soviet oil production, was closely linked with the relevant subdivision of VSNKH. Others were more remote from the control of VSNKH, and made contracts freely with other trusts, with private traders, cooperatives and the like, negotiated credit arrangements with the bank, or with each other, guided very largely by the profit motive, with spasmodic efforts at price control by the centre, though there was a marked tendency towards tighter control later in the decade, as we shall see.

Dzerzhinsky, chairman of VSNKH and head of the Cheka (police), wrote in 1924: 'We have almost every trust doing just what it pleases, it is its own boss, its own Gosplan, its own Glavmetall [the metals division of VSNKH], it is its own VSNKH, and if anything does not work out right it hides behind the backs, and receives the support, of local organs.<sup> $28$ </sup> He sought, with only modest success, a tighter degree of control over the trusts

Already some of the trusts themselves were felt to be too unwieldy and too large for economic operation. Thus one finds the twelfth party congress (1923) urging trusts to give more initiative to the enterprises comprising them, also to calculate profitability and to issue bonuses at enterprise level. But little was changed until much later.

#### Prices, Markets and Private Enterprise

With the coming of NEP, the problem of price control became particularly acute, especially under conditions of scarcity of goods, when wages were again being paid in money, and free rations and services were ending. A decree of 5 August 1921 set up a Prices Committee attached to the Commissariat of Finance. It had power to fix wholesale and retail prices for goods made or sold by state enterprises, as well as prices at which government agencies were to buy from others, for instance private peasants. However, these controls were largely ignored, and in 1922 were replaced by so-called 'approximate' *(orientirovochnye)* prices, which soon came to be regarded as minima, so the trusts pleased themselves. Exceptions were the selling prices of some monopolized commodities, such as salt, tobacco, kerosene and matches, and where prices were genuinely fixed by the government, though private traders sold them, when they could get them, at any price which the local market could bear. A Commission on Trade attached to the STO, set up in 1922, endeavoured with some success to establish direct links between state industry and consumer cooperatives, and to cut out private commission agents, but had no effective way of controlling prices.<sup>29</sup>

The co-existence of private and state (plus a largely autonomous cooperative) sectors, under conditions of inflation, transport breakdowns and administrative inefficiency, led to some very substantial price fluctuations. We have already referred to the price 'scissors' crisis of the autumn of 1923 and the great difficulties experienced at this time by state industry in selling their high-cost products, which became even dearer when they finally reached the consumer, especially in rural areas, through many private intermediaries. The Nepman was almost the sole seller in many rural areas in 1923. Where a rural cooperative existed, it was exceedingly inefficient. The following table, showing the figures for October 1923, illustrates this:

|                                                              | Cloth      | Nails      | Kerosene   | Sugar      | Salt       |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Trust (manufacturers') price<br>Provincial cooperative price | 100<br>174 | 100<br>136 | 100<br>100 | 100<br>162 | 100<br>107 |
| Village cooperative price                                    | 243        | 177        | 128        | 222        | 121        |

*(Source:* Malafeyev, *Istoriya tsenoobrazovaniya v SSSR* (Moscow, 1964), P- S3)

With such colossal margins, the cooperatives could hardly compete effectively with Nepmen.

Even in Moscow, where in 1922 a 'commodity market centre' *(tovarnaya birzha)* was set up under official auspices, the Nepmen controlled 14 per cent of purely wholesale trade, 50 per cent of mixed wholesale-retail trade and 83 per cent of retail, cooperatives taking 10 per cent and the state only 7 per cent. 'Wholesale trade in textiles in the country as a whole until March 1923 was at least 50 per cent in the hands of private capital.' Private trade in 1922- 3 constituted 78 per cent of all retail trade, the proportion falling to 57.7 per cent in 1923-4, 42.5 per cent in 1924-5, 42.3 per cent in 1925-6 and 36.9 per cent in 1926-7.<sup>30</sup>

However, this falling percentage at first represented an increase in absolute volume, within a rapidly growing total trade turnover. Both wholesale and retail private trade rose by about 50 per cent in 1925-6. It was in the next year that the absolute volume of private trade began to fall.

Private trade filled the gap left by the inadequacy of the state and cooperative network. As already noted, it dealt with goods produced by state enterprises, as well as the bulk of the products of private industry and handicrafts - of which more in a moment. From 1923, at an increasing rate, the government expanded the state and cooperative network, and their share in the trade turnover rose constantly. At first this was by competition, and diverting more state-produced goods through 'official' channels. Later on, the Nepmen were squeezed out by methods of less agreeable kinds, as we shall see.

As for industrial production, in 1924-5 the situation was as follows: 'large-scale' industry — roughly coterminous with factory as distinct from workshop production — was overwhelmingly in state hands. A mere 1.82 per cent was private. However, the total output of small-scale and handicrafts industry was divided as follows:

|             | 1923-4 | 1924-5                       | 1925-6 | 1926-7 |  |
|-------------|--------|------------------------------|--------|--------|--|
|             |        | (percentage of total output) |        |        |  |
| State       | 2.2    | 2.6                          | 2.5    | 2.3    |  |
| Cooperative | 8.1    | 20.4                         | 19.8   | 20.2   |  |
| Private     | 89.7   | 77.0                         | 77.7   | 77.5   |  |

*(Source:* **Gladkov,** *Sovetskoe narodnoe khozyaistvo* **(/02/-5), (Moscow, i960), p. 201.)** 

In 1925, the following were employed in the above:

#### IOO NEP

| State industry        | 30,644       |
|-----------------------|--------------|
| Cooperatives          | 127,162      |
| Private craftsmen*    | 2,285,161    |
| Private<br>employment | f<br>270,823 |
| Total, small-scale    | 2,713,790    |

**\* Not employing labour outside family, t Employing labour, or employed.**  *(Source: ibid.,* **p. 204.)** 

This shows the domination of the private sector in small-scale industry, and also just how small-scale this industry was, with so large a proportion of it conducted on an individual or family basis. These private activities were greatly dependent on supplies of materials from state industry, and most of the workshops were leased from the state. A Soviet historian commented: 'This placed in the hands of the state a powerful weapon for controlling small-scale production.'<sup>31</sup>

Employment in private industry rose as follows:

*{per cent)* 

| 1924-5 | +13      |
|--------|----------|
| 1925^6 | + 20     |
| 1926-7 | + 2 or 5 |

This was followed by a catastrophic fall, the reason for which will be discussed later. 'Basic funds' (capital) in the private sector as a whole increased in each of the years in question.<sup>32</sup> However, the government was rapidly achieving an effective dominance, and, once the state and especially the cooperative trading network was effectively extended into rural areas, it could squeeze out private trade by starving it of manufactured goods, and private industry by starving it of fuel and raw materials, as and when it chose. In fact state-encouraged and state-supported cooperative retail trade multiplied exceedingly rapidly. In 1922-3 its share in retail turnover was only 10 per cent (as against 75 per cent for private trade); in 1926-7 its turnover had risen nineteen times in constant prices, the picture evolving as follows:<sup>33</sup>

|             | 1922-3 | 1926-7                |
|-------------|--------|-----------------------|
|             |        | (millions of roubles) |
| State       | 512    | 1,817                 |
| Cooperative | 368    | 6,838                 |
| Private     | 2,680  | 5.063                 |
| Total       | 3,560  | 13,718                |

The figures (in roubles of constant value) show the extremely rapid rate of recovery which characterized the first years of NEP.

## Agriculture and the Peasants

In agriculture, the private sector was predominant throughout the NEP period. There were few collectives and communes in 1918-20, in subsequent years there were even fewer. Even as late as 1927 the situation was as follows:

|                                        | Sown area<br>(per cent) |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| State farms                            | 1.1                     |
| Collective farms (all types)           | 0.6                     |
| Individual peasants                    | 98.3                    |
| (Source: Etapy ekonomicheskoi politiki |                         |

*SSSR,* edited by P. Vaisberg (Moscow, 1934). P- 35)

The effect of the land reapportionment of 1917-18, together with the further measures of 'class war in the villages' in 1918- 20, led to the elimination not only of the landlords' estates but also of many of the larger peasant holdings too. Millions of landless labourers, or ex-peasants who had returned from town in the days of war communism, had acquired land. Therefore the number of peasant farms rose sharply. From roughly 17 or 18 million on comparable territory before 1917 (exact comparisons do not seem to be available) the number of family holdings rose to 23 million in 1924 and 25 million in 1927. Poorer peasants had gained land at the expense of their neighbours. The average size of landholding fell, the extremes of riches and poverty diminished.

The years of revolution had undone much of the positive effects of the Stolypin reform. The traditional peasant community had presided over most of the land redistribution in 1918. It now had more power than at any time since 1906 to redistribute peasant holdings, to insist on traditional strip cultivation. In 1925 over 90 per cent of the peasants belonged to village communities. It could be asserted that 350,000 such communities controlled the economic life of the village.<sup>34</sup> Thus the effect of the revolution was, in a technical sense, reactionary. Land was sometimes scattered over dozens - sometimes a hundred - strips located in widely separated fields, and subject to redistribution. The threefield system was predominant, and modern crop rotations little used, as they did not fit the *mir* arrangements. According to evidence cited by Lewin, even as late as 1928, 5.5 million households still used the *sokha* (wooden plough), and half the grain harvest was reaped by sickle or scythe. Forty per cent was threshed with flails. Such modernization as had begun earlier in the century was largely lost. All this set big problems before the regime.

The situation was exacerbated by class attitudes. The simple categories of kulak, middle and poor peasant, to which should be added the landless labourer *(batrak),* were in reality anything but simple. Much was written and more was spoken about 'peasant stratification', and statisticians and analysts laboured to fit Marxist-Leninist definitions to complex phenomena which refused to conform to the prepared labels. (Theodore Shanin has pointed out, in his *Awkward Class,<sup>35</sup>* that intergenenrtional mobility and intermarriage caused real peasant attitudes to diverge from the oversimplified 'class' categories used in party debates.) Since the whole question was political dynamite, disinterested research was at a discount, or risky. As Carr put it: 'It was no longer true that class analysis determined policy. Policy determined what form of class analysis was appropriate to the given situation.'<sup>36</sup>

An admirable account **of** the situation may **be found** in the **work of** Moshe Lewin, and what follows is largely based on his researches. The difficulty was that each category shaded into the other. The 'landless' may have had some land, but so little that one or more members of the household spent much of the year working for another peasant, or for the *mir* (e.g. as shepherds), or in seasonal employment away from the village. The 'poor peasant' *(bednyak)* by definition had not enough land to feed his family, and he too hired himself out for part of the year, or members of his family did. It must be remembered that the peasant 'household' *(dvor)* usually included several individuals of working age, and this too made classification somewhat complex. The 'middle peasant' was often very poor indeed by any reasonable standard, and at the lower levels was indistinguishable from the poor peasant, in that members of the household frequently had to hire themselves out, but some also made use of hired labour themselves. Many so-called middle peasants were among those who had no horse (40 per cent of all peasants in the Ukraine, 48 per cent of those in Tambov province, etc.). Sometimes the analysts used the term *malomoshchnyi* (weak), a term which covered the less well-favoured middle peasant as well as the poor. Those above this ill-defined level would be classed as *zazhitochnye*  (prosperous), or *krepkie* (strong), and this would include some arbitrary proportion of middle peasants as well as the so-called kulaks. V. Tikhonov has argued that in 1918 the kulaks (the real ones) had been eliminated, that they did not really exist in the twenties, a view challenged by V. Danilov.<sup>37</sup>

What, then, was a kulak? This too was a category re-defined by statisticians to suit the political circumstances, or re-defined by politicians who ordered statisticians to produce appropriate figures to prove their point. Kulaks were generally deemed to number somewhere between 5 and 7 per cent of the peasantry. Yet by far the larger number of these were, by Western standards, poor. Two horses and two cows, and enough land to ensure a square meal the year round and something to sell, might qualify a peasant for the designation kulak. Yet, according to data collected by Lewin, only 1 per cent of the total number of peasant households employed more than one labourer.

Some kulaks were able to act as usurers (the word *kulak,* 'fist', was originally a term of abuse related to this particular function). Some were able to lend their poorer neighbours grain when, as often happened, they ran out of food in the spring. They were also able to hold stocks of food and so benefit from higher prices, whereas the less well-off peasants had to sell quickly after the harvest, when prices were low. They often had such machinery as was available, and benefited from hiring it out, as well as hiring out a horse or bull or other scarce beast. Kulaks had initiative, they had commercial sense. They excited jealousy at times, but they were also what every ambitious peasant wanted to become.

The numbers of alleged kulaks seemed to be growing:

|                                 | 1922 | 1923 | 1924 | 1925 |
|---------------------------------|------|------|------|------|
| Percentage of total households: |      |      |      |      |
| leasing land                    | 2.8  | 3.3  | 4.2  | 6.1  |
| employing labour                | 1.0  | 1.0  | 1.7  | 1.9  |
|                                 |      |      |      |      |

*(Source:* **Gladkov (1921-5), p. 271.)** 

But some of the 'employers' only used hired labour for a very few months in the year.

The government's dilemma from the first was this. There was the attempted 'class' analysis. All peasants had a kind of dual allegiance, being semi-proletarian, semi-petty-bourgeois. They vacillated, they could provide fertile ground for the resurrection of capitalism. On the other hand, the USSR was the republic of *workers and peasants.* NEP was based on the link or alliance *(smychka)* between them. The political conclusion was drawn, remembering Lenin's old dicta, that the poorer peasants would be allies, the middle peasants perhaps tolerant associates; the kulaks represented, by definition, the enemy, the menace. If any middle peasants, by their success, became kulaks, then they too joined the camp of those who would see the Soviet regime as a hostile force, and who would be busily secreting or engendering capitalism and political opposition.

However, to define any peasant who made good as an enemy would make nonsense of the principle of the smychka. Even more important, perhaps, was the fact that it made economic nonsense to penalize success when, above all, more production and more marketings were needed. Here, underlying all the factional disputes in the party over the peasant, which will be treated in the next chapters, were some very real perplexities and dilemmas.

Meanwhile recovery had to take place within an institutional setting of a semi-medieval character, under which the vast majority of small-holder peasants had little opportunity, incentive or resources to improve their methods of production or to use machinery. Their way forward as individual peasants would only be through consolidating holdings, increasing commercial production, and in general following the path which two million peasants had begun to tread on the morrow of the Stolypin reforms (see Chapter 1). But for Bolsheviks this was a path which led - or might lead - to capitalism.

Lenin, in one of his last works, saw a way out: cooperation and also mechanization. Gradually, cooperation would wean the peasant from individualism. Shown the advantages of mechanized cultivation, shown the power of the tractor, he would in time become converted to socialism. But for a long time to come he had to be handled carefully, and certainly he must not be forced, he must be patiently persuaded. This was accepted by all factions in the first years of NEP. Rural consumer cooperatives were favoured because, inter alia, they accustomed the peasants to cooperation. They were therefore deemed to be an instalment of 'Lenin's cooperative plan'. As for producers' cooperatives, little was said about them, and even less done, as may be seen from the figures cited on page 103. Typical of the period, and unquestioned at the time, was the assertion of N. Meshcheryakov, in a speech on a most formal occasion, an academic meeting in honour of Lenin shortly after his death: 'Lenin was a determined enemy of any sort of coercion in the area of agriculture. Lenin said that only a fool could think of coercion in relation to the peasantry ... There is only one road, that of persuasion. $^{38}$  It matters little in the present context that this was hardly a correct characterization of what Lenin actually did in 1918-21. This is how his views were interpreted in 1924.

The peasants were handicapped not merely by the obsolete system of landholding. The First World War and the civil war had carried away many of the horses, which was one reason why many even of the 'middle peasants' did not have one. There were heavy losses in other categories of livestock. Sowings of industrial crops had fallen sharply, partly as a result of industrial collapse, partly because of the priority given by the peasants to subsistence crops.

It was a characteristic of the Russian peasant to produce mainly for subsistence. In pre-revolutionary times, according to Soviet calculations, landlords and kulaks provided between them 71 per cent of marketed grain. The middle and poor peasants, numerically far superior, managed less than 29 per cent and consumed most of their production themselves (only 14.7 per cent of their crops were marketed). The revolution had greatly added to the middle and poor peasants, and greatly reduced the number and scope of operations of the kulaks. So inevitably there arose a contrast between total output, which recovered first, and marketings which lagged behind.

The size of sown area and harvests and numbers of livestock showed rapid rise from the famine conditions of 1921. The following are the relevant figures:

|                              | (1913)    | 1922         | 1925  |
|------------------------------|-----------|--------------|-------|
| Sown area (million hectares) | (105.0)   | 77.7         | 104.3 |
| Grain harvest (million tons) | (80.1)    | 50.3         | 72.5  |
| Horses (million head)        | $(35-5*)$ | $^{2}4.^{1}$ | 27.   |
| Cattle (million head)        | $(58.9*)$ | 45.8         | 62.1  |
| Pigs (million head)          | $(20.3*)$ | 12.0         | 21.8  |

#### \* 1916 (Source: Sotsialisticheskoe stroitetstvo (Moscow, 1934), p. 4.)

By contrast, grain marketings remained below pre-war. The extent of the shortfall was deliberately exaggerated by Stalin. He claimed that in 1927 the proportion of grain marketed was only half of what it had been in 1913. This figure has been repeated by numerous authors, Soviet as well as Western. The Soviet writer Moshkov as well as the American analyst J. Karcz have

pointed out that Stalin substantially understated the level of marketings in the late twenties, and he also distorted the picture by comparing them with the single year 1913, which was abnormally favourable. Both Moshkov and Karcz would agree that marketed grain amounted to 16.7 million tons (about 25 per cent of production) in the years  $1909-13$ , and that it was something of the order of 16 million tons as an average of the years 1926-8, or roughly 21 per cent of total output, and not 13 per cent as claimed by Stalin and others. However, R. W. Davies has shown that, on a narrow definition of marketed grain, Stalin may have been right.<sup>39</sup> Even if one allows fully for Stalin's statistical devices, the fact remains that marketings were below pre-war, while the need for grain was increasing and would quite obviously increase rapidly as industrialization got under way.

The principal reason for low marketings has already been mentioned: the shift to a small-peasant subsistence-type economy. In 1925 the peasants were eating better, selling less. Contributory reasons, however, were unfavourable terms of trade with the towns (especially in the 'scissors' crisis period, and the blades of the scissors, as we shall see, parted again in due course), the efforts made to expand livestock numbers (livestock have to be fed), the greater attractiveness of industrial crops (after 1923) and, last but not least, the results of deliberate government efforts to control grain purchase prices. Thus as early as 1924-5 'decisive measures were taken to bring order into the system of [grain] procurements ... to strengthen planning and regulation, to push out the private traders. In 1925-6 measures were taken which reduced private trade in grain ..  $Z^{40}$  Already the government was the dominant purchaser, buying 75 per cent of marketed grain in 1925-6. With the abandonment of tax in kind in 1924, a money tax being substituted, the government was more than ever interested in paying as low a price as possible for *the* staple crop, grain. We shall see the effects of this policy on later developments

Exports were a principal sufferer from the low marketings, as the following figures show (in 1913, a good harvest year, grain constituted 40 per cent of total exports):

(millions of tons)

| 1913       | 12.0 |  |
|------------|------|--|
| $1925 - 6$ | 2.0  |  |
| $1926 - 7$ | 2.1  |  |
| $1927 - 8$ | 0.3  |  |
|            |      |  |

The peasants on their part reacted variously to the new situation and the opportunities it afforded. They naturally welcomed free trade and the private trader. Some better-off peasants tried to expand their activities. Opportunities were not lacking, when so many of the poorer peasants had insufficient land on which to live. and leased it officially or unofficially to a more prosperous neighbour and went to work for him. There are contradictory statistics on all this, no doubt due to the influence of factionalism on statisticians. This confused Soviet researchers in later years. Thus whereas, as we have seen, Gladkov's book gave peasant households hiring labour as 1.9 per cent of the total, another historian gave the figure as 7.6 per cent for the same year, 1925. He also recorded 1.7 million landless labourers.<sup>41</sup> whereas Gladkov pointed out that 450,000 of these were employed as herdsmen by village communities and not by kulaks. But obviously peasant differentiation deepened; a richer peasant class was emerging.

This was, of course, a quite natural and inevitable development within the peasantry, and the government did not like it, the more so as the traditional peasant meeting of elders  $(skhod)$  was a much more effective authority than the feeble and ineffective rural Soviet. The party was exceedingly weak in the villages. However, up to and including 1925, priority was given to encouraging output and sales, and therefore the less poor peasants received some encouragement, to the dismay of party activists in villages, and of those poor peasants who expected special favours. This, as will be shown later, was the subject of much bitter argument.

There is much evidence, presented especially by Yuri Goland,<sup>42</sup> to the effect that most rural party cadres were opposed to the policy of 1924-5, seen by them as excessively pro-peasant. At the fourteenth party conference (in 1925), Yu. Larin, criticizing Bukharin, said: 'he demands of us a promise that we will never, i.e. not in 15 or 20 years, confiscate or expropriate kulaks, semilandlords, the upper bourgeois strata. This we cannot give .. . We will confiscate, expropriate, large private enterprises when the time comes for so doing.' Clearly, these views were widely shared in the party. Stalin, at that time Bukharin's ally, said in his speech in January 1925 to the Moscow provincial party conference: 'The trouble, comrades, is that many of our comrades do not and will not understand the vital importance of this [peasant] question. They say that the leaders in Moscow find it fashionable to talk of peasants. This cannot be serious. This must be diplomacy, needed for the outside world. We can go on with previous policies .. . If the moscovites did not sit in their offices and came to the localities, they would see what the peasants really are and how taxes are collected.' KaUnin complained about discriminatory measures towards the better-off peasants. Goland cites a contemporary party critic, Ya. Burov, who collected much evidence of resistance by party cadres to the so-called 'new course' in the villages ('our party cannot really give up its political power to the peasantry', and so on). So when Stalin shifted his ground, he had support 'below'.

As for the peasant attitude to the regime, this must have been very mixed. True, they had gained land. However, they were well aware that they had seized the land themselves. Furthermore they had been much shocked by their experience of requisitions in the war-communism period, and had little understanding of or sympathy for the typical, overwhelmingly urban, communist officials. The party leaders' many pronouncements about the 'petty-bourgeois sea' that surrounded them must have given ground for uneasiness among those who read such pronouncements. Events would show that there were grounds for this distrust. The peasant, in any case, had the natural ambition to acquire more land, another horse, a cow, perhaps a labourer. Then, he knew, he would be classed as a kulak, publicly reviled as a menace and a bloodsucker, perhaps taxed heavily, and always conscious of appearing to be a menace in the eyes of at least some of the men in the Kremlin. Peasants, for the regime, were 'the accursed problem'. One imagines that most of the peasants reciprocated such sentiments. The fact that urban employment

#### **no NEP**

opportunities remained modest until the end of the twenties had one other consequence: the already considerable degree of rural over-population, in relation to land resources, was growing worse as the natural increase of the population replaced the heavy losses from war, famine and pestilence.

## The Urban Workers

What of the workers, the 'proletariat' in whose name the party exercised its dictatorship? The fall in their numbers during the period of war communism has already been noted. According to Soviet sources,<sup>43</sup> the total number of wage- and salary-earners had fallen from roughly n million in 1913 to only 6j million in 1921—2. The number of industrial workers more than halved in the same period.

With the coming of NEP and of recovery, conditions altered drastically, but at first it seemed to be a matter of jumping out of the frying pan into the fire. With the abolition of free rations and services the workers had to buy everything with a wage of minuscule proportions, which was being eaten away by raging inflation. Of course, the shortages of all kinds made a standard of life well below pre-revolutionary levels inevitable. However, during war communism, at least the worker was favoured, usually receiving higher rations and sometimes a pair of requisitioned bourgeois boots or trousers into the bargain. Now came NEP. In 'real' terms (i.e. in constant roubles) wages in 1922 came to 9.47 roubles per month (hundreds of thousands, or even millions, of the then existing sovznak roubles). The 1913 wage level in those same prices was 25 roubles.<sup>44</sup> Private traders charged prices which dismayed the underpaid proletarian, and made profits which made him wince. The conversion of workers' pay into purely money wages did not happen at once. At its lowest, in the first quarter of 1921, only 6.8 per cent of 'wages' were paid in money, the rest being issued free in the form of goods and services. Only in the middle of 1922 did over half of the wage take the form of money, and even in the first quarter of 1923, 20 per cent of the wage was in kind.<sup>45</sup> There were strikes, discontent, complaints. The trade unions, still responsive to pressure, made representations.

Conditions improved as more goods became available. The average monthly wage of workers in constant roubles was as follows:

|         | Monthly<br>(roubles) | Hourly<br>(kopeks) |
|---------|----------------------|--------------------|
| 1913    | 30-49                | 14.2               |
| 1920-21 | 10.15                | 5-4                |
| 1921-2  | 12.15                | 7-3                |
| 1922-3  | 1588                 | 8.9                |
| 1923-4  | 20.75                | 11.7               |
| '1924-5 | 25.18                | 14-3               |
| 1925-6  | 28.57                | 16.6               |

*<sup>(</sup>Source:* Gladkov, *Sovetskoe narodnoe khozyaistvo* (7927-5) (Moscow, i960), P- 536)

The statistics are of doubtful accuracy, given the great variety of local prices and the inflationary twists and turns, but they do reflect the consequences of rapid recovery of production. Farm prices, as we have seen, were relatively low after 1922. 1925 was a particularly favourable year, as all statistics show.

The comparison with 1913 is more favourable if one takes social services into account. These, for the 'proletariat', were relatively generous. Already the Provisional government had adopted advanced labour legislation, and the labour code of the war-communism period would have been very advanced indeed if it had been possible to make a reality of it in the chaos of the time. The labour legislation of 1922 reasserted some of the principles of past decrees, and laid down some new ones. Workers were entitled to an eight-hour day (less in heavy work), two weeks' holiday with pay, social insurance benefits (including sick pay, unemployment pay, medical aid). Collective agreements between management and unions would regulate wages and working conditions. A disputes commission, with the union strongly represented, would consider grievances. The regime could point with pride to such legal enactments; they were well ahead of their time.<sup>46</sup>

However, a grave problem emerged: that of unemployment. It rose particularly rapidly in 1923, when trusts were finding it difficult to sell their goods, and when the government's policy was to encourage profit-making, and the elimination of surplus jobs and featherbedding. With so much pre-war industrial capacity still out of use there was not enough work to go round, even for the reduced urban labour force. Unemployment reached 1.24 million in January 1924, and fell to 950,000 in the next year, but began rising again to reach a figure of 1.6 million in 1929.<sup>47</sup> This might not at first sight seem serious, since unemployment in Britain was of about this magnitude at the time, and Britain was a much smaller country. However, this would be a misleading impression. The vast majority of the population of the Soviet Union were peasants, and peasants - whether or not they are in fact lying on the stove and counting fleas - are not considered to be unemployed. Taken as a percentage of the *employed* labour force, 1.46 million was a very high figure indeed; there were only 8| million 'workers and employees' in 1924, still well below 1913 levels. Thus the problem of unemployment was serious, and remained so until the end of NEP and of the decade, when a very different policy rapidly caused an acute shortage of labour.

The social consequences of high unemployment affected the young people in particular, partly because the progressive labour legislation of 1922 gave them special privileges (including a sixhour day), which naturally made the employers (be they state managers or private Nepmen) think twice about employing them. Youth was already much shaken by its experience in the civil war. The number of orphan vagabonds *(besprizornye)* was a menace to public order. The fact that there were so few honest jobs for them to do was of no help in rehabilitating them. Crime rates were high.

Wage determination was supposed to be centralized: a unified seventeen-grade wage schedule was adopted in 1922. But this was unenforceable and was systematically ignored in favour of local bargaining. The trade unions had, on a formal level, increased authority to protect the workers and advance their interests. However, the union leaders, among whom Tomsky was particularly prominent, were in a dilemma. They were senior party officials, with the closest links with the party leadership. Times were very hard, it was everyone's duty to pull together. The boat should not be rocked. Strikes would delay recovery and were to be discouraged. It is true that in 1919-20 the trade-union communists functioned as a quasi-autonomous group, as witness their rejection of Lenin's views on managerial authority (see Chapter 3). However, party discipline had perceptibly tightened since then, particularly since Stalin had assumed the general secretaryship of the party in 1922. With Lenin out of action from the end of 1922, his successors were increasingly intolerant of dissent. In any case, the exercise of power in a hostile environment ('around us - the petty-bourgeois sea') predisposed them to stand together *vis-d-vis* the unpredictable and fickle masses, even though they could and did fight each other in the corridors of power.

The unions did have a clear and legitimate role as far as private employers were concerned. But they did not use their power to fight them, as this would have been contrary to the spirit of NEP; the dearth of all commodities required everyone to produce more.

In state enterprises, the trade-union committee secretary played a significant role alongside the manager and the party secretary. This kind of 'triumvirate' management persisted through most of the twenties. No doubt it was a step forward from 'workers' control', but it was still not an efficient method. However, since all the *spetsy* (specialists) and most managers were bound to be bourgeois and so of doubtful loyalty, this was a way of ensuring that each was provided with two watchdogs.

Given that tradition required some more direct workers' participation, there were also 'production councils' *{proizvodstvennye* soveshchaniya) and, in 1924, 'production commissions', the latter being permanent consultative bodies within factories, representative of the employees. $^{48}$  They seem not to have had much effect on management practices, but they did have an educational purpose: out of the workers that came forward in these bodies were chosen many future managers of a new type; they were sent off on training courses which provided new cadres, no longer of 'bourgeois' origin. In Leningrad alone, by April 1925, 900 such individuals were nominated for training for 'various administrative, technical and economic posts'.<sup>49</sup>

1925 may be said to have been the high point of NEP. The party's peasant policy was at its most tolerant; real or alleged kulaks were allowed to increase output. The humorist Zoshchenko wrote a story at this time about a kulak whose house was burning down; the (poor-peasant) fire brigade did not rush to put the fire out, but neither did the kulak. He was insured! So 'the fire brigade was deported for left-wing deviation' (the leftists, as will be seen, were accusing the leadership of being soft on kulaks). At the same time, while expanding state trade, the government was allowing Nepmen to function, as traders and as petty manufacturers and artisans, without much let or hindrance. A nationalized industry was operating on a largely decentralized basis. There was much talk of plans and planning, but no command economy. Growth was rapid, and so the system seems to be succeeding beyond reasonable expectation. But this growth was based to a great extent on the reactivating of existing capacity, the reabsorption of available factory labour. Thus, according to Kviring<sup>50</sup> gross investments in 1924-5 (385 million roubles) were not greatly in excess of depreciation allowances (277 million roubles), and yet the rate of growth in production in that and the next year was very rapid. Further progress would require a much greater investment effort, devoted more to building new plant than to repairing and renovating old ones. Just as to repair old 'sick' locomotives and to re-lay damaged track cost much less than building a totally new railway, so, as the period of reconstruction came gradually to an end, the rate of return on investment was found to decline substantially. Far-sighted party leaders could discern new problems and pitfalls ahead, calling perhaps for new policies.

Some of these leaders were already looking with distaste at the NEP compromise. Their arguments will form an integral part of the next chapter.