# Chapter 1 Introduction

Differences have been the hallmark of Indian society. These differences emerged as the result of various long and complex historical processes. The marks of differences have been diverse and varied, but the major ones have been located primarily around those of caste, language, religion, and region. To these principal marks of difference, the new one of tribe was added during the colonial period. Before the colonial period, the use of a generic term to describe tribal peoples was not in existence.

Some anthropologists have described the phenomena of caste and tribe as colonial constructions in the sense that the character of these groups was solidified by the British through processes of classification and enumeration. Béteille argues that this is truer of tribes than it is of castes. He holds that there was already a complex and sophisticated literature on the caste system before the adoption of British initiatives. Further, the use of the category of caste was not confined to the intelligentsia only but was also a part of the thinking of the common man much before the advent of the British. However, hardly anything corresponding to this existed in the case of those we know as tribes today. It is on this count that the category of tribe has been talked about as a colonial construction (Singh 1993; Béteille 1993). This statement is not meant to convey the claim that groups so identified did not have a distinct identity of their own. Indeed, not only did these groups see and identify themselves as being different, they were also seen as being different by others. However, the general category of tribe was absent. There were also no tribal writers or scholars to reflect on and write about the nature of tribes. Discussions of the nature and significance of tribe as a distinct category had to wait until the coming of colonial rule. The consciousness of the distinct and separate identity of all the tribes in India taken as a whole is a part of modern consciousness, brought into being by the colonial state and confirmed by its successor after

independence. Ray does talk of a category of people in Indian history now generally identified as tribes. These were the janas with an egalitarian form of social organization as against those with a jati system of social organization (Ray 1972). Other scholars caution against such a view. They point out that any attempt to identify jana with present-day tribals is not without difficulty. They say that the category is not only amorphous but also overlaps with that of non-tribe. Béteille argues that the distinction between jana and jati must have been less clear in ancient times than the corresponding distinction between tribe and caste today (Béteille 1986; Singh 1993; Roy Burman 1994).

Colonial administrators used the term tribe to describe people who were heterogeneous in physical and linguistic traits, demographic size, ecological conditions of living, regions inhabited, stages of social formation, and levels of acculturation and development. The need for such a category was necessitated by a concern to subsume the enormous diversity into neat and meaningful categories for both classificatory purposes and administrative convenience. Hence, although tribe as a category and as a point of reference may be treated as a colonial construction, the image and meaning underlying the category was far from being a colonial construction. (Indeed, there was much similarity between the connotations of the term tribe and the ideas and images constructed by Indian civilization of groups and communities that came to be designated as tribes during the colonial period.) The term tribe since the sixteenth century has referred to groups and/or communities living under primitive and barbarous conditions. Sanskritic and Hindu religious texts and traditions describe and depicte tribes in a similar fashion. Bara takes the point even further when he states that the pre-colonial depiction of the tribal people of India as dasyus, daityas, rakshasas, and nishadas, when juxtaposed with mid-nineteenthcentury Western racial concepts, advanced the aspect of bestiality associated with tribes (Bara 2002: 125).

The study of groups, which subsequently came to be described as tribal studies, began with the establishment of the Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1784. Since then, scholar – administrators have been writing general works on the people of different regions. These works were more in the nature of inventories and took the form of handbooks and monographs. Notable

among these works, focusing on groups and communities that later came to be called tribes, are Dalton's *Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal* (1872), Risley's *Tribes and Castes of Bengal* (1891), Russell and Hira Lal's *Tribes and Castes of the Central Provinces of India* (1916), and Thurston's *Castes and Tribes of Southern India* (1909). Vidyarthi describes this phase of studies on the tribes of India as the formative period, dating from 1784 to 1919. He identifies and describes the next two phases as constructive (1920–49) and analytical (1950 onwards). The constructive phase is the period when anthropology was introduced into university curricula in India, and the analytical phase saw the adoption of analytical and action-oriented approaches in the study of tribes (Vidyarthi 1982). There has been a flood of literature on tribes in the post-independence period. These have come from mainly three sources: the Anthropological Survey of India (ASI), university departments of sociology and anthropology, and tribal research institutes set up in states having a substantial tribal population. The tribal research institutes were established in the mid-1950s mainly to undertake problem-oriented research studies for the effective formulation and implementation of developmental programmes in tribal areas.

When the British began to write on India in the eighteenth century, they made no distinction between tribe and caste. Rather, the two terms were used synonymously or even cognately, notwithstanding the fact that the British did treat a segment of the population known later as tribes as different from the rest of the Indian population. The difference was conceived more in terms of ethnicity than in terms of caste and tribe. This can be inferred from the nature of the administrative systems in vogue in tribal and non-tribal areas. The two sets of population had by and large different administrative set-ups. Laws meant for the general population were usually not applicable in the case of groups called tribes. More often than not, special laws, that is, laws in consonance with the tribal system of administration, were framed for their governance. In colonial administrative parlance, the nature of such administration was described by terms such as non-regulation tracts, scheduled areas, or excluded and partially excluded areas. The difference was invariably linked with different conceptions of the two sets of people.

The attempt at delineating tribes began with the need to provide detailed and classified information about people in the census. Accordingly, a certain group of people was categorized as a tribe when the census began to be undertaken in the late nineteenth century, though the criteria used were far from unambiguous. After 1901, however, a somewhat clearer criterion began to be used. Tribes were identified and described as those groups that practiced animism; later the phrase tribal religion was used in its place. The use of this criterion was continued in subsequent census enumerations, but some other dimensions were also added. Thus, the 1921 census report described them as hill and forest tribes, and in 1931, when Hutton was the Census Commissioner, tribes were also referred to as primitive tribes. Through the adoption of descriptions such as hill and forest tribes and primitive and backward tribes, the elements of geographical isolation and primitive living conditions were added to the distinction between tribes and non-tribes. These elements were, however, never explicitly employed in delineating tribes in the census enumeration. What was employed explicitly was the aspect of religion. That is, tribes were those groups that did not adhere to religions such as Hinduism, Islam, and Christianity. If a group were shown to be Hindu in its beliefs and religious practices, it was identified as a caste. If it were shown to be animist, it was treated as a tribe. This distinction was not satisfactory for it is not difficult to show that caste Hindus practiced elements of animism.

Subsequently, however, a list of tribes began to be drawn up with a view to giving them certain political and administrative concessions. In doing so, the consistent application of the criteria was given a back seat. The list of scheduled tribes included in the Constitution had its genesis in these administrative and political considerations. It is obvious then that the list was drawn up more on the basis of administrative and political considerations, although it came to be accepted as part of scholarly vocabulary.

After independence, greater attention was paid to the criteria for determining tribes. However, even today, there is no agreement among scholars on this subject. The Tribal Welfare Committee of 1951, consisting of anthropologists, administrators, and social workers, set up under the auspices of the Indian Conference of Social Work in Calcutta, deliberated

on the criteria but could not arrive at a clear set. In the early 1950s, in an attempt to adopt criteria for identifying scheduled tribes, the Commissioner for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes sought the views of different provinces and states regarding prominent characteristics that might distinguish these communities. The criteria put forward by the different provincial governments make for interesting reading. They include such features as physical characteristics, linguistic affiliation, cultural contact, occupation, and ecological considerations (Khubchandani 1992). In the context of tribes, which are seen as not yet contaminated by the influence of Hindu civilization, the criteria used to distinguish them include such elements as living in inaccessible places, speaking a tribal dialect, practising animism, and engaging in primitive occupations. In addition, such groups were said to belong to either Negrito, Australoid, or Mongoloid stock, with nomadic habits and a love of dance and music. Different and even contradictory criteria have been used by scholars, administrators, and reformers for the purpose of identifying tribal groups. Thus how to use the term tribe in the Indian context, and what we mean by tribal society, has not been an easy question to resolve.

Tribes in India are thus defined not so much in terms of *coherent and well-defined criteria* but in terms of the *administrative* classification that divides the population into tribal and non-tribal. Tribes are treated as those groups enumerated in the Indian Constitution in the list of scheduled tribes. Indeed, the Constitution defines a scheduled tribe 'as such tribe or tribal community or part of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under Article 342 to be scheduled tribes'. And since the list is associated with the extension of administrative and political concessions and benefits to the groups mentioned therein, there has been little attempt to relate it to the definition of tribe. This does not mean that the politicoadministrative category has not been examined for its efficacy as a scientific tool. Indeed, where such an exercise has been undertaken, it has been shown to have little scientific use. In other words, the category of tribe as used in anthropological writings is shown to be valid for a very limited range of groups in the list. And yet the term tribe is not restricted to referring only to these groups. That there is a discrepancy between the concept and its application to different groups and communities listed as

tribes is obvious. Yet there seems to be no sign of the term being abandoned. There is then a certain special sense in which the term tribe has come to acquire its meaning in the Indian context, which is quite different from the way in which it has been used in the anthropological literature. Béteille's offers an apt description of this situation. He writes that when tribes and civilization coexist as in India and the Islamic world, being a tribe has been more a matter of remaining outside the state and civilization, whether by choice or by necessity, than a matter of attaining a definite stage in the evolutionary advance, from the simple to the more complex. Therefore, we cannot dismiss as anomalous the Indian practice of regarding as tribe a large assortment of communities differing widely in size, mode of livelihood, and social organization. They are all tribes because they all stood more or less outside of Hindu civilization and not because they are at exactly the same stage of evolution (Béteille 1986).

Given that the question of tribes in India is closely linked with administrative and political considerations, there has been more concern with the identification of tribes than with their definition. This statement is not meant to convey that lists have been drawn up without any conception of tribe whatsoever. There did exist some conception. This was obvious from the criteria that were adopted. These included such features as geographical isolation, use of simple technology, living conditions, general backwardness, practice of animism, tribal language, and physical features. The problem, however, lay in the fact that the criteria were neither clearly formulated nor systematically applied. One set of criteria was used in one context, and quite another employed in another. The result is that the list includes groups and communities strikingly different from each other in respect of not only the size of population but also the level of development. Indian anthropologists are acutely aware of a certain lack of fit between what their discipline defines as tribe and what they are obliged to describe as tribe. Yet they have continued with the use of the term.

In view of the above, there has been a lot of dissatisfaction over the use of the term tribe among scholars, administrators, and social workers. Alternative terms have been adopted, such as aborigines/aboriginals (Risley 1903; Elwin 1944), 'so-called aborigines', backward Hindus (Ghurye 1963), ethnic minorities (Pathy 1988), the fourth world (Sengupta 1982),

and tribes in transition (Desai 1960). However, these alternatives have failed to become general terms of discussion in the literature on tribes. New terms have been coined in recent years, such as the marginalized, dalits, and adivasis (indigenous peoples). The term 'the marginalized' is too general and is used to refer to wide segments of the population. Hence, it has not gained as wide a currency as the other two terms, namely dalit and adivasi. Activists and even social scientists widely employ the term dalit to refer to the former untouchables (scheduled castes) and tribes. Dalit in its English translation means oppressed people. In this sense, it is at times used to refer to wide sections of the population, such as peasants, workers, and women. More strictly, however, activists and social scientists, as noted earlier, use it to refer to the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. It has emerged from a certain context and from the experience of a certain category of people, namely the former untouchables. The term dalit describes this consciousness and the people who have had this experience are called dalits. Since scheduled castes and scheduled tribes suffer problems of a similar nature, such as exclusion, deprivation, and discrimination, and since there are constitutional provisions and special policies and programmes for their protection and welfare, there has been a general tendency to place them under the general category of dalit. However, the use of the term dalit to describe tribal populations betrays the social consciousness of the scheduled castes. Although tribal people suffer from the same sorts of problems as the scheduled castes, their historical experiences and social consciousness are markedly different from those of the scheduled castes. Hence to extend the category of dalit to tribes is to impose an alien consciousness on them. The kind of consciousness that tribes have of their own selves is not one of dalits but that of adivasis. It is a label that others have given to them, but tribes over the course of time have internalized it. It is through this category that they think of and relate themselves to others. Since the UNO's declaration in 1993 of the International Decade of the Indigenous Peoples, the category adivasi has become a powerful point of reference for social and political mobilization in India. The usefulness and significance of the term indigenous peoples in the context of India will be critically examined later in this book.

Language and region, each on its own, are important marks of difference, but they tend to coincide with each other in the Indian context. In fact, the two together have been the driving force behind the reorganization of society and polity in India in the post-independence period. Region and language, though important, do not tell us anything about the inner workings of the society and polity that they embody. What is even more striking is that despite differences on the basis of language and region, the societies so marked are enormously similar in their societal characteristics —religion and caste being predominant among them. Indeed, religion and caste cut across regions and languages, and to that extent they constitute a common thread across the diversity of languages and regions (Dumont 1998). It is this commonality that has come to be the principal unit of sociological study and discourse in India. Again, it is against this commonality of Indian society that tribes in India have been posited and constituted by sociologists and social anthropologists.

Consequently, the study of tribes has primarily been conducted from the perspective of caste. Caste being a unique and pervasive feature of Indian society, such a perspective may have been inevitable. Hence tribal studies in India have become caste-centric. Tribes have been seen as the natural equivalent of caste; a contrast has been drawn between tribe and caste, and even change among tribes has primarily been studied in terms of their transformation into castes. Paradoxically, this has been the case despite the fact that tribes have been seen primarily not only as a society but also as a particular type of society. Ideally, then, the contrast should have been not with caste but with society, as in the case of Oriya, Bengali, Telugu, etc. since the tribes represent all those features that are characteristic of a society. The caste orientation in tribal studies was reinforced in the postindependence period. Constitutional provisions for scheduled tribes and scheduled castes have further strengthened the caste orientation and perspective adopted towards an understanding of tribal society. That is, tribes are invariably seen as caste-like entities rather than as distinct societies.

The So-called Tribal Policy

After India became independent, formulating and implementing an appropriate policy for tribes assumed critical importance. Even before independence, the nature of the policy to be adopted had become a matter of heated debate between two scholars, namely Elwin and Ghurye. The debate had its genesis in Elwin's *The Baiga*, published in 1939. The argument made in the book was forcefully carried forward in a pamphlet, 'The Aboriginals', published in 1944. Here, Elwin made certain suggestions regarding the approach to be adopted towards tribes. The issue at the centre of the debate was whether the current state or condition of isolation of the tribes should be continued or whether they should be drawn into the larger society, so as to enjoy the benefits available to the general population. Elwin was charged with advocating the policy of isolation. The charge, Elwin (1960b) wrote later, was a result of suggestions badly put and the unfortunate connotation of the expression 'national park' used by him. The suggestion, he said, was made in desperation as the Baigas had very little left of their own when the book was written in 1939. It was not so much a matter of preserving their culture as of keeping them alive and protecting them from exploitation and oppression. Since then, there was a shift in Elwin's position and he no longer advocated the policy of isolation. One finds on closer examination that the policy was meant for a very small section of the tribal population. The policy Elwin advocated for the majority of the tribal population was no different from the policy advocated for the general population, for he believed that the problems faced by the tribal population could not be considered apart from those faced by the general village population. What Elwin advocated was not the same policy for the entire tribal population of the country (Elwin 1960b).

As against this, Ghurye advocated the policy of assimilation. He argued that the tribes were Hindus, or, to put it more bluntly, backward Hindus. He thought of them as inferior and backward because they were cut off from the large mass of the Indian population. He also identified them as standing a step lower on the evolutionary ladder, and in fact, not being very different from the mass of the Indian population. His considered view was that tribes should be assimilated into the larger society so that they could be lifted out of their abject poverty and base living conditions. This view placed tribals at the lowest position on the tribe–caste–class continuum, a conceptual

paradigm used for understanding the processes of change in tribal life. For Ghurye, this continuum suggested a movement of the tribals from tradition to modernity, from pantheism to a higher form of religion, from a base and crude way of life to one morally and ethically superior. This was a way of tracing the assimilation–integration stage of the tribals into the national mainstream (Ghurye 1963).

Neither of the two policies was thought adequate in independent India by the nationalist leadership. This is evident from the nature of the provisions laid down in the Indian Constitution for tribals. The provisions pointed to an approach that was quite different from those propagated by Elwin and Ghurye. The provisions included statutory recognition, proportional representation in the legislatures, the right to use their own language for education and other purposes, the right to profess their own faith, and the right to pursue development according to their own genius. The Constitution also empowered the state to make provision for reservation in jobs and appointments in favour of tribal communities. In addition, the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution required that the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of society, including tribals, be especially promoted. Moreover, the Constitution empowered the state to bring areas inhabited by tribes under the Fifth and Sixth Schedules for the purpose of special treatment with respect to the administration of tribal people. These constitutional provisions thus aimed at safeguarding, protecting, and promoting the interest of tribal peoples. If one were to examine these provisions more carefully, one would find that the Constitution clearly adopts a policy of integration rather than of isolation or assimilation, albeit without using the term and concept of integration even once. Indeed, there is no official document where the policy of integration finds an explicit formulation. Yet this is what goes in the name of tribal policy in India, not without reason, of course, if one were to take note of the constitutional provisions. In fact, the five principles mentioned by Nehru in his foreword to Elwin's *A Philosophy for NEFA*, which was proclaimed as the guide for tribal development, were no more than an enunciation of the principles underlying the constitutional provisions. The principles as enunciated by Nehru were:

- 1. People should develop along the lines of their own genius, and we should avoid imposing anything on them. We should try to encourage in every way their own traditional arts and culture.
- 2. Tribal rights in land and forest should be respected.
- 3. We should try to train and build up a team of their own people to do the work of administration and development. We should avoid introducing too many outsiders into tribal territory.
- 4. We should not over-administer these areas or overwhelm them with a multiplicity of schemes. We should rather work through, and not in rivalry to, their own social and cultural institutions.
- 5. We should judge results not by statistics of the amount of money spent, but by the quality of human character that is evolved (Elwin 1960a).

These principles have been the guidelines of tribal development more for the north-eastern region than for mainland India, where the reality has been a situation characterized more by assimilation than by integration.

#### The State Agenda for Tribals

The Constitution confers fundamental rights on all citizens irrespective of their caste, class, language, and creed. In constitutional and legal terms, tribes have also been given the same status as other citizens. This is an important step in building an inclusive society. In addition to the fundamental rights, the Constitution contains many special provisions for tribal people. These include provisions for their statutory recognition (Article 342); for their proportional representation in Parliament and the state legislatures (Articles 330 and 332); restrictions on the right of ordinary citizens to move and settle in tribal areas or to acquire property there (Article 19(5)); the protection of tribal language, dialect, and culture (Article 29); and for reservation in general (Article 14(4)) and in jobs and appointments in favour of tribal communities in particular (Article 16(4)). The Directive Principles of State Policy suggest that the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of society, including tribes, be especially promoted (Article 46). In addition, the Constitution empowers the state to bring the areas inhabited predominantly by tribes under special treatment for administrative purposes. Tribes have thus not only been endowed with citizenship rights but also with certain special rights. It is against this backdrop that the state's agenda for tribes has to be understood.

The different measures taken for their upliftment can be divided broadly into three categories, namely protective, mobilizational, and developmental.

### Protective Safeguards

The Constitution aims to protect and safeguard the interests of tribal people. Keeping this in mind, laws have been enacted in almost all the states with tribal populations to prevent alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes. In some parts, such acts have been in existence since the British period. In the post-independence period, various laws were adopted for the restoration of tribal land. Protection is also provided in the form of special administration of tribal areas. In administrative parlance, such areas are referred to as the Fifth and Sixth Schedule areas (Articles 244 and 244[a]). The Fifth Schedule provides for special legislative powers for the governor, the governor's report, and, most importantly, the tribal advisory council. The Sixth Schedule provides for autonomous district councils, thus offering scope for tribal self-governance. The Sixth Schedule in general covers the north-eastern region; the Fifth Schedule is in operation in other regions where tribes form a majority in a district or districts.

## Mobilizational Strategies

Mobilizational strategies refers to the reservation extended to tribals in fields such as education, employment, and politics. In each of these spheres, a certain percentage of seats are earmarked for the scheduled tribes. The quota was fixed keeping in mind the size of the scheduled tribe population when the measure was introduced. Accordingly, 7.5 per cent of seats were reserved for tribes in all these spheres. The size so fixed has remained the same until today even though the size of the population has changed. The provision of reservation in politics meant reservation of seats in Parliament and the state legislatures, meant to be in force for a period of 10 years. However, it has been renewed at the expiry of every 10-year period. It is important to note that such a time limit, contrary to general belief, was not fixed in the areas of government service and educational institutions. There were no reservation in the institutions of local self-governance until the 73rd Amendment to the Constitution.

Developmental Measures

Developmental measures include programmes and activities meant for the uplift and progress of tribal people. Efforts in this direction began with community development programmes, with the block as the main administrative unit. This was replaced by the tribal sub-plan approach under the Fifth Plan (1974–79). The approach has proved to be relatively effective in ensuring the flow of population-proportionate funds for tribals from the general development sector. Provisions have also been made for special central assistance to state tribal subplans. Poverty-alleviation programmes were launched under the Sixth Plan (1980–85). Under the Seventh Plan (1986–1990), two national-level institutions were set up, namely the Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation (TRIFED) and the National Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC). The aim of TRIFED is to pay remunerative prices for the forest and agricultural produce of tribes. The aim of NSFDC is to provide credit support for employment generation.

Despite the constitutional provisions and the special policies and programmes adopted by the state for the welfare and benefit of tribal people, the condition of the tribals continues to be deplorable. Land, the life-support system of tribals, continues to be passed from tribes to nontribes through such means as fraudulent transfers, forcible eviction, mortgages, leases, and encroachments despite legislation restricting the alienation of lands from tribes to non-tribes. As per the information available with the Ministry of Rural Development in January 1999, 465,000 cases of alienation of tribal land, covering an area of 917,000 acres, were registered in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, and Tripura (Planning Commission 2001: 39). Displacement is the other important factor accounting for the loss of control and ownership over land and forest by the tribals. Displacement has occurred primarily because of large-scale projects like industries, irrigation and hydraulic projects, and mining. Projects such as these resulted in the displacement of a total of 21.3 million people in the period 1951–90 in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Orissa. Of this number, 8.54 million, that is, 40 per cent, were tribals (Planning Commission 2001: 39). The large-scale alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes and the massive

displacement of tribal people largely explain why the percentage of tribal cultivators has declined from 68.15 in 1961 to 54.5 in 1991. Conversely, the percentage of agricultural labourers has increased from 19.71 in 1961 to 32.69 in 1991 (Planning Commission 2001: 91) Further, as much as 42.9 per cent of the operational holdings of tribes belongs to the category of marginal farmers, which means that they hold less than one hectare (Ministry of Tribal Affairs 2001: 36). It is, therefore, not surprising that a large proportion of the tribal population lives in poverty. In 1993–94, 51.14 per cent of tribal people lived below the poverty line compared to 35.97 per cent of the general population (Ministry of Tribal Affairs 2001: 43). About 80 per cent of tribal children are anaemic and 50 per cent of them are underweight (Planning Commission 2001: 23). The incidence of anaemia among tribal women is as high as 65 per cent compared to 48 per cent for the general population. Infant mortality and under-five mortality per thousand live births are as high as 83 and 126.6 respectively compared to 61.8 and 82.6 respectively for the general population (NFHS-II 2000). Even in the sphere of education, where tribes are said to have made some tangible progress, the scene is far from satisfactory. The literacy rate among tribes in 1991 was 29.6 per cent as compared with 52.2 per cent for the general population. The female literacy rate among tribes was 18.2 as against 39.3 per cent for the general population. What is a matter of great concern is that the gap between tribes and non-tribes has been widening steadily. The gap was 19.8 per cent in 1981 and increased to 22.6 per cent in 1991.

Through constitutional provisions and measures such as those described above, the state has attempted to encourage the inclusion of tribes in the larger society. Conferment of citizenship rights (civil and political rights) has been one of the major ways of building an inclusive society. To build this inclusive society not in the formal sense but in the substantive sense, special measures for the benefit and development of tribes and to increase their representation in state institutions were adopted. Attempts at building this inclusive society have been relatively successful in the direction of extending civil and political rights to tribes and in increasing their share and participation in state institutions such as Parliament and state legislatures, government services, and public sector undertakings. This aim has been to bring tribes closer to the state and the larger Indian society through

measures such as reservation in politics, education, and government employment. However, the attempt was most unsuccessful precisely in the area meant to protect tribal culture and tradition, crucial to the ethos of integration advocated as the national tribal policy by scholars and administrators. Protection of tribal land has also been a failure, but at least there has been some tangible effort in this regard both in terms of legislation and implementation, even though the latter has been highly unsatisfactory.

This volume seeks to address the questions emanating from the state agenda for tribes in postcolonial India. After all, much of what has been witnessed among the tribes in postcolonial India has more to do with the state's role and policy than with other factors. In it, I seek to assess the impact of this agenda on tribes and the tribal peoples' responses to it. Both the effects and the responses are diverse and complex, and it is not possible to engage with them all here. Hence only a few of the most important issues are examined in a critical and reflective way.

The book comprises 10 chapters. The introductory chapter examines the evolution and use of the concept of tribe in India. The term was initially used to refer to a wide range of groups but later came to be restricted to specific groups. The shift was a result of greater clarity about the criterion or criteria that came to be associated with the concept. Nevertheless, the concept suffers from a certain inadequacy. This is most evident in its inability to grapple with the actual empirical social reality. The mismatch between the concept as it is understood and the groups and communities described in India as tribes is a reflection of this inadequacy. Hence there is a general uneasiness among scholars over the use of the term or category 'tribe' in India. The second part of the introduction deals with the question of state policy and agenda-making for tribals and outlines some of the critical issues emerging from these developments and initiatives. The critical issues dealt with here include land, forest, administration, reservation, language, and religion.

Since the changes among tribes go well beyond interventions by the state, whether colonial or postcolonial, Chapter Two discusses the nature of tribal transformation in India. The transformation of tribes in India has been studied primarily from three perspectives, namely caste, peasant, and social

differentiation. Of these, the most pervasive and dominant has been the perspective on the transformation of tribe into caste. The chapter critically examines the existing literature. It problematizes the concept of Sanskritization, which scholars have used widely for understanding this transformation. The relative effectiveness of the terms and Hinduization and the place of language in the acculturation process have been subjected to scrutiny. The distinction between culture and structure, which has been generally overlooked in the discussion on tribal transformation, has been discussed. Through the critical deployment of these terms and a critical assessment of the processes involved, the assertion of the process of tribal transformation into caste is questioned and problematized.

There has been much dissatisfaction with the use of the term or category tribe. Scholars have considered alternative terms and categories, all of which have been found wanting in one sense or the other. One of the terms or categories that has received wide currency and recognition is adivasi, or indigenous peoples. Yet the use of this category is not without problems, at least in the Indian context. Chapter Three looks at the problems that arise from the employment of the category of indigenous peoples in the Indian context. It examines the arguments advanced in favour as well as against this usage. It looks at why the use of this category has become such a contentious issue in India in recent years, though the term in its Sanskritic version, namely adivasi, has been in wide use among politicians, social workers, administrators, and even social scientists. Indeed, the term adivasi or indigenous peoples has become an important marker of identity among tribal people in India today.

After India attained independence, there was a major shift in the values and ideology of the country. It moved away from the ideology of inequality towards equality, at least in the public domain. The conferment of citizenship rights on all irrespective of caste, class, religion, or race has been the culminating point of the of equality. Chapter Four examines the impact of this on tribes in terms of the conferment of civil, political, and social rights, and sees in this a means of incorporating tribes into the state structure. It points to the unequal terms of trade between citizenship rights conferred by the state and the economic rights held traditionally by tribes.

In return for citizenship rights, the state takes away the most precious rights hitherto enjoyed by tribes, namely the rights over land and forest.

The Indian Constitution has provided safeguards for protecting and promoting the interest and welfare of tribal people, thus also providing space for their empowerment. These constitutional provisions include reservations and special administration in the form of the Fifth and Sixth Schedule areas. In addition, special legislative measures were also adopted to prevent alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes. However, the constitutional provisions have certain limitations, especially in respect of the needs and aspirations of tribal people. Frustration with these limitations led to the demand for greater autonomy, either in the form of a separate state or in the more effective control of resources. The formation of separate states or regional/district councils, or even village councils under the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act (PESA), has been explored against this backdrop. These issues have been examined at length in Chapter Five.

The tribals' response to the constitutional provisions and to other state agenda-making practices has been examined in Chapters Six to Nine. One of the ways in which tribals have responded to state policies and programmes has been through various movements. Chapter Six examines the nature of some recent movements in tribal societies and looks critically at some broad generalizations made about them. Most of these movements have been concerned with such issues as culture, language, identity, land, forest, social mobility, and autonomy. Of these movements, the autonomy movement has been subjected to a detailed inquiry since it has been one of the most widespread and well-articulated struggles of tribal people in India. These movements are examined in a comparative perspective not only in relation to movements in north-eastern India but also in relation to the rest of the country.

Chapter Seven deals with the issue of tribal identity in the context of culture, particularly language and religion. It discusses the state policy and state administrative practice towards tribes with respect to their languages and religions, and shows how these (the constitutional provision of protection notwithstanding) have affected the distinct identity of tribal people. The response of tribal people to state policy and state administrative practice has been explored in terms of the increasing demand for recognition of their distinct languages and religions. Before examining this area, the chapter outlines the broad social science perspectives on tribal society in India.

The other issue emanating from the constitutional provision of protection is the question of reservations. Chapter Eight takes this up for critical discussion. It explores the extent to which tribes have been able to make effective use of this provision in the domains of politics, education, and employment, and compares the situation of tribes with that of the scheduled castes. The chapter also examines why the scheduled tribes have not fared as well as the scheduled castes in availing the provision of reservation and provides some tentative explanations.

In view of the damage caused to the ecology and the environment by modern society, there has been a renewed interest in ecological and environmental concerns, in turn prompting a renewed interest in the study of tribal society, since tribes are seen as living in close harmony with the natural environment, and hence as natural conservers of the ecology and the environment. It is against this backdrop that Chapter Nine examines the relation between tribes and forests. It examines this at two levels existential and cultural—and points to an orientation of rational adaptation rather than rational mastery in the tribal people's relation to the natural world. The chapter then looks at the political economy of forests and discusses the forest policy pursued during the colonial and postcolonial periods in India and the effects this has had on tribes and on their means of livelihood as well as on the ecology and the environment. The chapter also deals with more recent concerns of environmental protection and forest conservation and the effects of these on tribes, especially in relation to their survival and livelihood.

Tribal society has become considerably differentiated and certain forms of inequality have emerged. Of the forms of inequality in tribal societies, the most striking is gender inequality. Chapter Ten looks at this issue, beginning with an examination of the position of women in traditional social settings and then discusses their situation in the changing context of social formations and social differentiation witnessed in tribal society, especially in post-independence India. The issue of gender inequality is a

subject of heated debate in many tribal societies today, especially those that have become considerably differentiated. The chapter analyzes the critical issues involved in the debate.

#### References

- Bara, Joseph. 2002. 'Tribe—Beast or Man: Case for a New Concept of Tribe.' *Social Action* 52 (2): 121–33.
- Béteille, André. 1986. 'The Concept of Tribe with Special Reference to India.' *European Journal of Sociology* 27 (2): 297–318.
- ———. 1993. 'Myth of Indigenous People.' *Times of India*, 5 January.

Desai, A. R. 1960. 'Tribes in Transition.' *Seminar* 14: 19–24.

Dumont, Louis. 1998. *Homo Hierarchicus*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Elwin, Verrier. 1944. *The Aboriginals*. Bombay: Oxford University Press.

- ———. 1960a. *A Philosophy for NEFA*. The Advisor to the Governor of Assam, Shillong.
- ———. 1960b. 'Issues in Tribal Policy Making.' *Seminar* 14: 25–28.

Ghurye, G. S. 1963. *The Scheduled Tribes*. Bombay: Popular Prakashan.

- Government of India. 2001. *Report of the Working Group for Empowering the Scheduled Tribes During the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002–2007)*. New Delhi: Ministry of Tribal Affairs.
- Government of India. 2001. *Report of the Steering Committee on Empowering the Scheduled Tribes*. New Delhi: Planning Commission.
- IIPS (International Institute of Population Studies). 2000. *National Family Health Survey.*
- Khubchandani, L. M. 1992. *Tribal Identity: A Language and Communication Perspective*. Shimla: IIAS.
- Pathy, J. 1988. *Ethnic Minorities in the Process of Development*. Jaipur: Rawat Publishers.
- Ray, Niharranjan. 1972. 'Introductory Address', in K. S. Singh (ed.), *Tribal Situation in India*. Shimla: IIAS, pp. 3–24.
- Risley, H. H. 1903. *Census of India Report*. Simla: Government of India Press.
- Roy Burman, B. K. 1994. *Tribes in Perspective*. Delhi: Mittal Publications.
- Sengupta, N. (ed.). 1982. *Fourth World Dynamics: Jharkhand*. Delhi: Authors Guild Publications.
- Singh, K. S. 1993. 'The Problem in Marginalized Tribals.' *Seminar* 412: 1–7.
- Vidyarthi, L. P. 1982. 'Research on Tribal Culture of India', in P. K. B. Nayar (ed.), *Sociology in India: Retrospect and Prospect*, edited by P. K. B. Nayar. Delhi: B. R. Publishing Corporation, pp. 351–438.