# 16

# **The National Party** System

Mahendra Prasad Singh

o far there is hardly any comprehensive scholarly analysis of the new Indian party system that emerged in the 1989 Lok Sabha elections and was maintained by the 1991, 1996, 1998, 1999, 2004, and 2009 Lok Sabha polls. We know that a new party system is now in operation in India. The old system which was earlier variously called the "Congress system" by Rajni Kothari, a "one-party dominant system" by W.H. Morris-Jones, A "predominant party system" by Giovanni Sartori, is no longer in existence.<sup>1</sup> It is a new party system. This new party system has to be adequately conceptualized and adequately analyzed. To begin with, We introduce the major phases of the evolution of the Indian party system after Independence. One can talk about at least six-party systems in India after Independence. The first phase may be called the "Congress system" in Rajni Kothari's terms and may be dated from 1952-69. This was a phase of one-party dominance, as only the Congress was voted time and again with an overwhelming parliamentary majority on plurality (not majority) of vote in democratically contested elections. It coincided with the Nehru premiership, the Shastri premiership and the premiership of Indira Gandhi. The second party system was a brief spell of multi-partisan configuration following the 1969 Congress split between the Indira faction and the Syndicate faction when the Indira Gandhi government was reduced to a minority status and survived with the support extended without formally joining the government by the leftist and some regional parties. The third party system may be called the Indira Congress system of one-party dominance. It may be dated from 1971-77. The fourth phase is the phase of bipartisan tendency. For the first time in India, a twoparty system appeared and it was in existence from 1977-79 when only two parties, the Janata and the Congress accounted for over 80 per cent of both votes and seats. The fifth phase of the system may be called the

Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi phase of Congress restoration. It may be dated from 1980-89. The sixth is the phase of multi-party system. It formally took effect in the 1989 Lok Sabha elections. It had a very bumptious, unstable start, a very precarious existence for about a year. Then, a mid-term election was held. But the mid-term election in 1991 again brought about a "hung parliament". Now, today, of course, there is a large number of political parties in the system not only in numerical terms, but also in terms of systemic relevance. Indian elections, indeed, have always been multi-party elections. But the nature of the party system has varied over time. It has sometimes been a one-party dominant system, sometimes a two-party system, and so on. It is now a multi-party system. The two major parties or cluster of parties that today lend dynamics to the system, in addition, of course to a number of smaller parties, are the Congress and its allies (AIADMK, National Conference, and some other parties in the North-East India) in the United Progressive Alliance and the BJP and its allies, like the Akali Dal and a member of other smaller parties in the National Democratic Alliance.

## **Transitions in the Party System**

India's transition from the one-party dominant system (very different from one-party system) or the 'Congress system' to the multi-party system has been slow, but steady. Broadly speaking, it has taken the country nearly four decades to decisively cross the threshold at the national level. India's political stability in the early decades after Independence has been generally described and explained either in terms of the one-party dominant system under the aegis of the INC or in terms of a delayed industrialization in the country, leading to an absence of the class formation and competition typical of industrial societies. The routinized Congress dominance of the early post-Independence decades rested on the laurels of the political hegemony built up during the anti-colonial nationalist movement whose bedrock was a bourgeois peasant alliance, albeit complicated by religious, linguistic and caste cleavages. Additionally, with the accession to power by the Congress, its political dominance was also buttressed by patronage and the extremely weak and fragmented opposition parties in divided India. These factors favourable to the Congress gradually diminished in efficacy. They were quite seriously eroded at the state level by the time of the 1967 general elections and at the Centre by 1977. The restored Congress dominance under Indira Gandhi was also eroded in the wake of the JP movement, the Emergency regime, and the 1977 Lok Sabha elections, which witnessed the formation of the first non-Congress government in New Delhi by the Janta Party, a centrist party, like Congress, but with a rural and 'other backward castes' (OBC) bias.

The premature fall of the Janata Party government led by Morarji Desai in 1979 paved the way for the return of India Gandhi's Congress in 1980. This held the fort until 1989 under Gandhi and, after her assassination, under her son Rajiv Gandhi. However, the restored Congress rule faced several challenges from electoral reverses in Assembly elections: in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh in 1983, in Punjab in 1985, from state autonomy movements in Punjab and Assam, along with agitations over religious and linguistic issues that tended to turn secessionist with encouragement from foreign powers.

#### **The Post-1989 Party System**

The 1989 Lok Sabha election proved to be a decisive turning point when the Congress government initiated an era of coalition and minority governments in New Delhi. The endemic instability since 1989, nine governments in almost as many years, can at least formally be described as the failure of the party system for, on the surface, it would appear that a democratically disciplined party system has been the institutional mechanism through which parliamentary or parliamentary federal governments have attained and ensured political stability anywhere in the world. From this perspective, the lack of any serious thought or action on the part of the political class on the issue of electoral and party reforms would appear to be an inexplicable death wish.

The structural contours of the post-1989 Indian party system can be synoptically conceptualized and theorized in a manner akin to the model of Kautilya's theory of *rajamandala,* consisting of a series of concentric circles of friendly allies (*mitra*) and unfriendly adversaries (*ari*)*.* <sup>2</sup>In the innermost circle of the post-Congress system are the two major pivot parties, the BJP and the INC, neither of them reaching the majority mark, but being the two largest single parties, together accounting for 49.09 per cent of votes and 60.65 per cent of seats in 1996. The comparable figures for the 1978 Lok Sabha elections are 51.35 per cent and 59.37 per cent respectively.

Until the 1996 Lok Sabha elections, there were three pivot parties at the core of the system. Besides the Congress and the BJP, there was the Janata Dal. The Janata Dal, however, has been so decimated through regional fragmentation and electoral reverses that the party that appeared to be the historic alternative to the Congress in 1977 remains only a pale shadow of its past and potential glory. The party has suffered a precipitous decline over the years. Its predecessor, the Janata party, bagged 41.2 per cent of votes and 54.42 per cent of seats in 1977. The corresponding figures for the Janata Dal were 18.70 per cent and 26.15 per cent in 1989, 15.20 per cent and 11.78 per cent in 1991, 3.24 per cent and 0.10 per cent in 1996, and 8.27 per cent in 1998. In 1999, its two splinters got 3.10 per cent and 3.90 per cent (JD-U) and 0.91 per cent and 0.20 per cent (JD-S) respectively. Since 1977, the Janata Party/Dals have been plagued by unending splintering and feuding, just like a *judayi* (separation)-prone peasant family in the rural-urban milieu. We now have the Samajvadi Janata Party, the Samajvadi Party, the Haryana Vikas Party, the Haryana Indian National Lok Dal, the Rashtriya Janata Dal,Janata Dal (United) which, despite its name, is just a rump in the house of mirrors that goes by the name of the Janata *parivar* 

(family) parties. Despite the souring of the Janata dream of offering itself as an alternative to Congess, the Janata Dal (along with some of its splinters) continued to be central to the National Front and United Front minority coalition governments in New Delhi between 1989-98. Both the National Front and the United Front included the Janata Dal and some major regional parties, like the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), the Telugu Desam Party (TDP), the Asom Gana Parisad (AGP), the National Conference, and the Tamil Maanila Congress. Indeed, besides these parties in the executive (cabinet) coalition of the National Front and the United Front, there were other parties in legislative coalitions extending support to the minority governments from the parliamentary floor without joining them.<sup>3</sup> This included parties as diverse as the Communist parties and the Hindu nationalist BJP in the case of the National Front, and the Congress in the case of the United Front. The Communist Party of India directly joined the United Front cabinets, but the Communist Party of India (Marxist) only joined the Co-ordination Committee of the ruling front and extended support to the government from the parliamentary floor on the strategic preference of not joining a coalition government in which it did not have a decisive voice.

The Janata Dal, thus, served as the pivot party for both the National Front and the United Front. However, the finest hour for the Janata (then Party rather than Dal) was in 1977 when it formed the first non-Congress government under Prime Minister Morarji Desai and Party President Chandra Shekhar with the blessings of its patriarch Jayaprakash Narayan. In 1989, when it headed the National Front government, it had lost its Hindu right Jan Singh constituent, but roped in the Communist parties whom Prime Minister V.P. Singh described as the Janata Dal's 'natural allies' who campaigned together, but did not join the government. Both the Communists and the BJP separately extended issue-based support to the government, but the latter withdrew support from it when the BJP's Somanath to Ayodhya *rathayatra* (chariot drive) was halted in Bihar with L.K. Advani's arrest. In the two Union Front governments headed by H.D. Deve Gowda and I.K. Gujral, the Communists moved even closer to the Janata Dal, with the CPI joining the cabinet itself and the CPI (M) joining the Steering Committee of the ruling front (but not the cabinet). Besides, the Congress extended issuebased support to both these governments from the parliamentary floor.

The National Front government was bedeviled by internal bickering, especially between Prime Minister V.P. Singh and Deputy Prime Minister Devi Lal. Personality clashes between the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister also developed ideological glosses over time: there were feuds over the impulsive implementation of reservations for OBCs (other than Scheduled Castes [SCs] and Scheduled Tribes [STs]) by V.P. Singh without any consultation with his colleagues. However, the immediate cause of the fall of the United Front government turned out to be the issue of communal mobilization by the BJP, the legislative ally of the government. The two successive United Front government managed their internal policy and personality differences remarkably well, thanks to the more amicable premierships of both Deve Gowda and L.K. Gujral (in comparison to the domineering and impulsive Singh) and mediation between the centrist Janata Dal, the leftist policy preferences of the Communists and regional susceptibilities of the state-based parties in the coalition by an active Steering Committee headed by the Prime Ministers and convened by the TDP Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu. What brought the two United Front governments down prematurely was the withdrawal of support to them by the Congress President Sitaram Kesri: first on the issue of the replacement of Deve Gowda by Gujral for the alleged insensitivities of the former to Congress party interests, which was grudgingly conceded; and then on the Congress Party's insistence on dropping DMK ministers from the government following the indictment of its leadership in the Jain Commission's interim report inquiring into Rajiv Gandhi's assassination. The United Front refused to yield to Congress pressure in the second instance. This, however, proved to be the undoing of the government. Kesri's plans for an alternative coalition government headed by the Congress and possibly supported by the United Front and others backfired, with the President finally ordering elections instead. The United Front proposal for a Coordination Committee with the Congress would probably have eased the tension. The Congress, true to its authoritarian style, preferred to give a free hand to its President, who, in turn, was unceremoniously asked by his partymen to make room for Sonia Gandhi, ignoring his pleas to let him relinquish office in a more regular way at an All India Congress Committee (AICC) session.

The failure of the Janata-led National and United Fronts by 1997 turned attention to two other pivot parties, the BJP and the Congress. From the outset in the post-Congress phase, however, both these parties suffered serious disabilities as rallying poles for alternative all-India governing coalitions: the Congress on account of its association with the authoritarian Emergency regime and its excesses, and the BJP from its alleged Hindu religious 'communalism' and the unwillingness of other mainline ('secular') parties to do business with it. Indeed, 'non-Congressism' had long been in gestation, and was, even before the Emergency, a trend in opposition politics. The three major watermarks of non-Congress opposition unity were: (1) non-Congress coalition governments in the aftermath of the 1967 General Elections; (2) the formation of the Janata Party and its victory in 1977; and (3) the rout of the Congress Party led by Rajiv Gandhi in the 1989 Lok Sabha election. On two of these occasions, 1967 and 1977, the non-Congress unity included the Hindu right but excluded the Communists. However, on the eve of the 1989 elections (and subsequently), the National Front and United Front increasingly tended to remain equidistant from both the Congress and the BJP. Indeed, the non-Congress sentiment came to be overshadowed to some extent by non-BJPism, for in the intervening period the BJP, with a more aggressive Hindutva platform, made rapid electoral headway: in the hung Parliaments of the 1990s it outpaced the Congress to become the largest single party, and thus a potential pivot party for putting together a probable coalition government.

In contrast to the Janata Party/Dal, the BJP and the Congress have been less naturally inclined to take to the politics of coalition governments. They first preferred to go it alone in search of the one-party dominance of the good old days. However, disappointed owing to repeated failures since 1989 in their preferred strategy, they finally opened up to the politics of coalition. However, their moves in this direction have often been hampered by the negative aura of 'non-Congressism' and 'non-BJPism'. Nonetheless, with the passage of time, the impact of the negative factors has been diminishing in inter-party relations.

The BJP's moment of coalitional power, as well as of impotence, came after the 1996 Lok Sabha elections when President, Shankar Dayal Sharma, invited its leader, Atal Behari Vajpayee, in the hung Lok Sabha, to form a coalition government and prove majority. The political 'untouchability' of the BJP, as also its pragmatism, were dramatically demonstrated when, after fruitlessly trying to muster a majority following the delivery of a fairly moderate Presidential address on behalf of the government to the opening joint session of the Parliament Vajpayee resigned in desperation after a valiant speech in the Lok Sabha at the end of the debate on the confidence motion. The Presidential address spelling out the policies of the BJP government, and before it the Prime Minister's broadcast to the nation, were more conciliatory than the 1996 election manifesto of the party. Several controversial items of the manifest, like the emphasis on construction of Ram temple in Ayodhya, a common civil code for all religious communities, and the repeal of Article 370 of the constitution regarding Jammu and Kashmir, were omitted in the later addresses. Moreover, the Prime Minister used his good offices to persuade the Shiv Sena-BJP Chief Minister of Maharshtra to restore the Shri Krishna Judicial Commission inquiring into the Bombay riots. This commission had been instituted by the previous Congress government, but disbanded by its successor.

It was this evident moderation, coupled with the fall (in quick succession) of the two United Front governments that were formed in the 11th Lok Sabha following the ignominious exit of Vajpayee, that brought about a sea change in the political scenario for the BJP on the eve of the mid-term 1998 Lok Sabha elections. In the months before the election there was an evident surge in favour of the BJP, both in the political class as well as among the public. A number of parties and prominent individuals, especially from the Congress, rushed to align with or join the BJP. In public opinion polls, Vajpayee moved ahead of other possible candidates for premiership, like Gujral, Deve Gowda, Jyoti Basu and Sonia Gandhi (although Sonia Gandhi quickly moved ahead of the rest, being next only to Vajpayee by the end of the 1998 campaign). This development in favour of the BJP was preceded by a consistent increase in its electoral and parliamentary strength. From the low of 7.40 per cent of votes and 0.37 per cent of seats, it had nowhere to go but up, yet it had remained chronically short of the majority mark: 11.50 per cent and 15.84 per cent in 1989, 20.10 per cent and 22.09 per cent in 1991, 20.29 per cent and 29.65 per cent in 1996, and 25.59 per cent and 33.52 per cent in 1998. In 1999, it more or less maintained its individual position with 23.75 per cent and 33.50 per cent, but improved the position of its National Democratic Alliance as never before.

The patterns of the realignment of parties with the BJP reveal two broad features, both geared towards overcoming two weaknesses in the pivot party's support base. The BJP has been historically deficient in recruiting leaders and in mobilizing voters from the regions beyond the Hindi heartland. It has also been a typically upper-caste, especially Brahmanical Hindu party. Its new allies mainly came from non-Hindi rimlands, that is, the AIADMK and its regional allies in Tamil Nadu, the Samata Party in Bihar, the INLD in Haryana, the BJP in Orissa, the Trinamool Cogress in West Bengal, Lok Shakti in Karnataka, and the Akali Dal in Punjab, among others. After the elections, at the time of the formation of the BJP-Ied coalition government, the Telugu Desam in Andhra Pradesh also deserted the United Front and moved closer to the BJP alliance to enable it to form a minority government in the hung Lok Sabha. However, it did not join the cabinet. The TDP MP, Balayogi, was elected the Lok Sabha Speaker. Besides, another feature of the new allies, at least of some like the Samata Party and the INLD is that they bring to its fold the support of middle-caste peasant leaders and voters. This is, in fact, in line with BJP's own new strategy of 'social engineering' a euphemism for political recruitment among OBCs and Dalits. The ideologue behind this is K.N. Govindacharya, one of the general secretaries of the party and a Brahman from Tamil Nadu. Its most prominent mascots are the former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Kalyan Singh and Union Minister Uma Bharti, both Lodhs, an OBC group, a Dalit leader from A.P. Bangaru Lakshman to top the OBC and Dalit vote banks. Though the Mandal applecart of the Janata Dal has largely upturned at the national level, its regional splinters in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, the Samajvadi Party of Mulayam Singh Yadav and the Rashtriya Janata Dal of Laloo Prasad Yadav hold sizeable influence with the OBCs. Even in Karnataka, the BJP's recent electoral gains are at least partly attributable to its alliance with Lok Shakti, led by Rama Krishna Hegde, a former Janata Dal Brahman. In Gujrat, the BJP's strategy to 'Mandalize' itself suffered a setback owing to the desertion, in 1994, of the predominantly OBC faction led by Shankarsinh Baghela to form a regional party, the Rashtriya Janata Party, resulting in the fall of the BJP government there. In the latter part of the 1990s, a new national party, the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), led by the Dalit duo Kanshi Ram and Mayavati has risen to prominence. This has turned out to be free-floating coalition partner, alternately aligning and breaking with parties as diverse as Samajvadi Party, the BJP and the Congress, and has formed coalition governments in Uttar Pradesh, first with the Samajvadi Party and then with BJP. However, both attempts have been abortive due to caste contradictions, that is, OBCs versus Dalits in the former instance and castes versus Dalits in the latter.

The political alignments among parties since 1989 have broadly crystallized into a tripartite configuration: the two largest parties, the BJP and the Congress, and their respective allies represent the two poles, while the middle ground is held by the third force comprising the Janata Dal, the Left Front, and some regional parties. After the rise and fall of the BJP-led coalition government in the 12th Lok Sabha, some new alignments among the parties were evident. The most important changes included: the virtual disintegration of the United Front; the Left Front becoming more receptive to the Congress then to the Janata Dal; and the Samajvadi Party and RJD forming the Rashtriya Lok Mancha (RLM), though the two subsequently fell apart. These formations, along with the AIADMK led by Jayalalitha (deserting the BJP alliance) united to bring down the BJP-led coalition government in mid-April 1999. The BJP coalition tried to survive the vote of no-confidence by winning over the DMK and the INLD, the former from the ranks of the opposition and the latter a piqued ally of the ruling coalition, but this was insufficient to keep it afloat. However, those trying to topple the government attempted to form another government supported by Jayalalitha of AIADMK and others from outside. The RLM preferred a coalition government of all those who voted against the Vajpayee government during the confidence vote. The Left Front offered to lead a coalition government headed by West Bengal Chief Minister, Jyoti Basu (CPI-M), but the Congress (I) was lukewarm to the idea. Mulayam Singh Yadav of the Samajvadi Party voted the Congress proposition, although his RLM ally Laloo Prasad Yadav of the RJD broke ranks to support the Congress (I). The Congress torpedoed the other two alternatives. Barely a year after the 1998 mid-term elections, India faced another mid-term poll in 1999.

Within a month of this turmoil (by mid-May 1999), the Congress (I) itself faced a split. Three members of the Congress Working Committee, Sharad Pawar, P.A. Sangma and Tariq Anwar, questioned Sonia Gandhi's eligibility to be the Prime Minister on account of her foreign birth and suspected dual citizenship, as well as her evident political inexperience, although they welcomed her continuing as the party's President. Sonia Gandhi's mass appeal is unquestioned, though its extent remains to be tested again. In any case, the trio also suggested, pre-empting the critique of some opposition parties that the Congress (I) itself should propose in its election manifesto that, as in leading Western democracies, the Indian constitution ought to be amended to the effect that only an India-born citizen should be allowed to hold the highest political executive post in the government.

In a week-long melodrama, Sonia Gandhi resigned as Congress President, but was persuaded by loyalists to reconsider her decision. The three rebels were promptly expelled from the Congress, and subsequently formed a new party, the Rashtravadi (Nationalist) Congress Party, with promise of regional support in Maharashtra and the North-east, the home turfs of Pawar and Sangma. The former is a Maratha Hindu and the latter a tribal Christian with secular images and following. Pawar had been Chief Minister and Union Minister with considerable number of followers among the prosperous Maratha peasants in the sugar belt of Maharashtra. This independent power base was resented by Sonia loyalists who repeatedly tried to cut him down to size. Sangma, a former Chief Minister, acquired something of a national stature as the Speaker of the 11th Lok Sabha. Anwar, a Biharian Muslim, lacked evident mass support, but was expected to make some dent into the RJD Muslim vote bank in Bihar where Laloo Yadav thrived on the Yadav-Muslim vote bank in Bihar, but failed to groom any prominent Muslim leader in his party. Anwar was also expected to divert some of the then evident indications that the mood of the Muslim voter everywhere was to turn towards the Congress (I). This split in the Congress (I) could also help revive the dwindling hope of the Third Force, which was in disarray, as the Nationalist Congress Party made it clear that it intended to remain equidistant from both the Congress (I) and the BJP. It could also provide more comfortable company to former Congressmen in the All India Trinamool Congress, which had split from the Congress (I) in the recent past due to lack of internal democracy in the parent party. The TMC was then in the orbit of the Third Force, but its ally in Tamil Nadu, the DMK, moved closer to the BJP alliance around the time of the fall of the Vajpayee government. The TMC stayed with the BJP coalition, but often took a critical stance vis-a-vis the BJP in deference to its not negligible Muslim vote bank in West Bengal. As it happened, most of these prospects failed to materialize, except for a Congress-Nationalist Congress Party coalition government in Maharashtra in the aftermath of the 1999 elections.

Indian party politics has been getting messier by after day, without much indication of a polarization of political forces. The post-1989 party configuration appeared simultaneously to be a mix between Sartori's categories of multi-party systems of 'moderate' and 'polarized pluralism' with some tendency towards what he calls 'atomization'. While mainline parties have, over the years, tended to become moderate, especially in the crucible of coalition and minority governments, parties on the peripheries, especially those fuelled by ethnic and class militancy, exacerbate forces of polarization and atomization.

The parliamentary system of government and plurality (first-past-thepost) as a system of elections in single-member constituencies that are generally supposed to encourage the development of the two-party system have failed to produce the expected outcome in India. There was initially a one-party dominant system and there is now a highly regionalized and fragmented multi-party system, with only a brief interlude of a tendency towards a two-party system, during 1977-80 when only two parties, the Janata and the Congress, accounted for a sizeable of votes and seats. This tendency, however, did not turn into a trend. This is explained partly by the extreme social and regional diversity in India and the federal component of the government along with the parliamentary system, both initially held in check by the past momentum of the freedom struggle and the charismatic leadership of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty. The upsurge of the forces of regionalism and ethnic particularism has engendered the trend of federalization in India's predominantly parliamentary regime, but with a very unstable headstart. National parties have tended to fragment, regional parties have tended to mushroom, and even smaller parties have acquired a vested interest in maintaining a separate existence due to the possibility of acquiring power disproportionate to size and of playing a balancing role in shaky coalition governments.

Neither the fall of the BJP-Ied government in 1998 nor the unstable track records of the Janata Party, or the National Front and United Front governments warrant the writing of an epitaph for the experiment in federal coalition/minority governments in India. For one, we seem to have got stuck with hung Parliaments that only countenance coalition dispensations. For another, stable coalition governments alternating in power in Kerala appear to be a fairly hopeful lighthouse to the ship of the aggregate federal Indian state from the high sea of uncertain governance. In terms of modem and traditional social and cultural divisions, Kerala is a miniature India, and shows the way to India today.

Why have not the federal coalitions attained the kind of cohesion and solidarity that is displayed by CPI (M)-led Left Democratic Front and the Congress-led United Democratic Front in Kerala? The reason seems to be the lack of will and ability of the political class to learn and generalize from the empirical experience and praxis. This is partially because politics has become the breeding ground for crooks and undesirable elements. A modem profession which originated in democratic and egalitarian patriotism and social service in India has turned into one underpinned by patronage, fiefs, personal pelf and power and plunder. Parties and coalitions in India display some instinct to swim or sink together only when in power. Both the Congress and the Janata Party/Dal disintegrated at the slightest hint of being in the political wilderness. Yet some new signs of coalitional solidarity are also apparent. The United Front preferred being voted out by the Congress (I) to abandoning the DMK in the wake of the Jain Commission Report on Rajiv Gandhi's assassination. Similarly, the BJP coalition refused to budge before the AIADMK insistence on making George Fernandes the scapegoat for the ineptly handled issue of the sacking of Admiral Vishnu Bhagwat.

Where did the Indian party system stand after the Lok Sabha mid-term polls in 2004? The system continued to be fragmented and heavily regionalized. There was no majority party in the Lok Sabha. The two largest parties, the BJP and the Congress, together accounted for 52.05 per cent of votes and 54.50 per cent of seats, but individually each was in a minority. The rest of the national or all-India parties, two Communist parties, two Janata Dals, and the BSP, were way down both in terms of votes and seats. Due to this seven-way fragmentation, the over 67 per cent of votes and seats commanded by national parties did not mean much.

Even if we discount smaller state and registered (unrecognized either as national or state) parties, there were 18 major state parties, together accounting for 26.93 per cent of votes and 29.10 per cent of seats. Within their own respective states, these regional parties were reasonably well-placed, but nationally they presented a picture of extreme political fragmentation and regionalization. However, in the context of coalition or minority governments at the Centre, state parties become crucial players as balancing forces in competing coalitions. Though this openness of the coalitional system to even smaller parties promotes integration of the political system through an accommodation of regional and ethnic forces, it also acts as a factor leading to unprincipled compromises and governmental instability and drift.

In terms of electoral and parliamentary groupings in 2004, the party system presented a two-fold division. There was the BJP-led NDA consisting of parties, like BJD, TDP, INLD, JD(U), Shiromani Akali Dal, Shiv Sena, Trinamool Congress, etc., which was in opposition; and there was the ruling United Progressive Alliance led by the Congress and consists of Lok Jantantrik Party, RJD and CPI.

The foregoing pattern of party fragmentation more or less continued in the 2009 Lok Sabha elections, although the situation slightly improved for the Congress-led UPA, which, again, formed the government. It consolidated itself considerably as its strength jumped from 215 seats in 2004 to 261 seats in 2009. The Congress improved its position from 145 seats to 201, thus making it less vulnerable to internal blackmail by coalition partners. BJP-led NDA went into further reverses, its representation going down from 186 to 159 seats. BJP's own tally went down from 138 to 121 seats. Parties outside these two alliances got their own seats reduced from 136 in 2004 to 124 in 2009.

As to the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections in 2014, the Congress-led UPA appears to be in precipitous decline, mired in unprecedented corruption, policy, paralysis, and unbearable inflation. The meteoric rise of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) in Delhi Assembly elections of 2013 has projected a vision of 'alternative politics' wedded to control corruption and criminalization in politics and intra-party democracy. It promises to make a national splash, but its impact beyond Delhi is still uncertain. Most of the regional parties outside the two competing coalitions are making repeated attempts to form a third front with the Left parties noting for a non-congress and non-BJP coalition with alternative policies. But these efforts have not yet yielded any front or a common Prime Ministerial candidate. The Congress too has stopped short of declaring the heir apparent Rahul Gandhi, Congress Vice President, its prime ministerial candidate; he is nominated as the head of only the congress campaign, with the UPA allies being in a state of disarray.

#### **Reforms**

The decade-long spell of governmental instability at the Centre has made it amply clear that urgent reforms are called for in the arenas of electoral, party and coalitional systems of governance. Even without the infrastructure of electoral reforms by a reluctant Parliament (under discussion since the 1970s), the activism of the Election Commission under T.N. Seshan and his successors has made a palpable difference in the conduct of elections in the 1990s. The judicial organ of the state as well as civic action on the part of some grassroots movements have also contributed to the limited transformation of the political atmosphere. However, pervasive and durable reforms can follow only from purposive political action. The proposals of the Election Commission appear to be rather limited and timid. Indeed, unless Parliament introduces substantial legislation, the Election Commission must make do with cosmetic changes in the party political processes. To be fair to the Election Commission even the limited reforms proposed by it often go unheeded by the governments in New Delhi and in state capitals. The Election Commission has recently gone on record to express its concern at frivolous party formation. But the measures proposed by it to remedy the situation are as ineffectual as the media and police campaign against children playing with Diwali crackers. The question that we need to pose seriously is whether any organization can be recognized as a party unless (besides contesting elections) it has: (1) a regularly elected organization at the national/state/grassroots levels; (2) a minimum number of enrolled members (not just voters); (3) transparency in funds and expenditure, with legally mandatory public auditing of accounts and filing of tax returns; (4) identifiable policies and programmes to be adhered to at least pending a mandate; and (5) a probability of survival as an organization beyond the period of its founders. Both Parliament and the Election Commission must grapple with the institution of the above concepts defining a party. Not many Indian parties neither the major ones at the centre of the ideological spectrum nor the category of new regional parties can fulfill all the above criteria. *Ad hoc* and personalized organizations are particularly typical of the post-Nehru Congress, the Janata Dal, the TDP, the HVP, the RJP, the BJD, and the RJD, to mention only parties of national and regional stature.

The Law Commission, in a comprehensive review of election-related laws, had recommended in 1999 a 25 per cent increase in Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha seats, with the new Lok Sabha seats (138 in number) to be filled through the list system on the panels of prospective legislators furnished to the Election Commission by political parties. In apportioning these seats, parties with less than 5 per cent of votes should be eliminated. Old territorial constituencies should also continue, but their number should stand frozen at 550 until the year 2025. If thus reconstituted, the Lok Sabha would have a total of 688 seats. This reform, in the view of the Law Commission, is necessary to rectify the anomaly arising out of the freezing of Lok Sabha seats since the 1971 Census. Moreover, the Law Commission also recommended bringing political parties within the purview of law by amending the Representation of People Act, 1951, requiring parties to constitute executive committees in every three years, with specific powers being granted to local party units in decision-making, and with elections by secret ballot within the party, as well as regular maintenance of accounts.

The practice of parliamentary federal politics in the era of coalition/ minority governments has demonstrated that neither a highly-centralized party nor assortments of personalized state parties are appropriate structures of political ambition in the federal arena. We need to examine the type of experiments that the Canadians have made to democratize and federalize their national political parties. Canada, like India, is socially and regionally diverse. It has adopted a parliamentary federal constitution. The Canadians also elected their prime ministers, like in India, that is, through elected MPs belonging to the party in power. Early in the 20th century, however, they adopted the American practice of national party conventions to elect presidential candidates. The Canadian national parties hold a federal leadership convention to elect the leader who will lead the party concerned to the hosting and in the Parliament. This sets into motion a federal aggregation process in parties before, during and after the elections in the glare of nationwide visibility and debate. The difference between the American party conventions and their Canadian counterparts is that the delegates in the former vote *en bloc* as states, whereas those in the latter vote as individuals. The Canadian system is a good mix of parliamentary as well as federal principles. India will do well to emulate it. Given the centrality of parties in the electoral and legislative arenas in ensuring governmental stability in a parliamentary federal system, we may consider introducing this reform through a parliamentary legislation or through the Election Commission's power under Article 324 of the constitution.

Another weak link in coalitional governance in India has been a perfunctory approach to the Coordination or Steering Committee. A coalition government in a system like ours cannot be effectively managed by the cabinet alone. The pre-eminence of the cabinet cannot be formally questioned either in a one-party government or in a coalition cabinet. However, if the cabinet in a coalition situation is not to become a hopelessly divided house bereft of collective responsibility, the prime minister and his colleagues must learn to promote reconciliation of conflicting policies and ambitions in two forums, one outside Parliament and the other inside. These are the multi-party Coordination Committees of the governing coalition and the all-party Parliamentary Committees on the floors of the parliamentary chambers. Given the multi-layered nature of Indian coalitions, with some parties joining the cabinet while others extend support only from the parliamentary floor, the Parliamentary Committees may be used as additional *foci*  of sharing power. This can be done by empowering these committees to summon documents and witnesses and to challenge the government on the parliamentary floor by changing the confidence convention in parts. The Coordination Committee also needs to be strengthened by imparting greater seriousness and regularity as a sounding board for policies in broad terms to be worked out in detail by the cabinet. This will avoid the embarrassment of the rolling back of cabinet/ministerial decisions, notorious for its frequency during the BJP-led coalition government. In ruling coalition's in New Delhi since 1989, the Coordination Committee of the United Front was *prima facie* more efficacious than its counterparts in the National Front and BJP coalitions. An indicator of the efficacy of the two United Front governments under H.D. Deve Gowda and I.K. Gujral, respectively, was the frequency of meetings and the ability to forestall crises which could have placed the continuance of the coalition governments in jeopardy. On the other hand, Coordination Committees of the National Front and the first BJP-led coalition governments failed to avert the major crises which posed serious problems for coalition maintenance, precipitated by the V.P. Singh-Devi Lal feud in the case of the National Front and the tantrums of the AIADMK supremo, Jayalalitha, in the case of the BJP-led alliance. However, the second BJP-Ied coalition government, the National Democratic Alliance formed in 1999, and the UPA government formed in 2004 has managed to develop a different style of conflict resolution at the top. The supreme leaders bilaterally negotiate with the partners, practically sidelining the Coordination Committee. The Congress-led United Progressive Alliance governments (2004-09 and 2009-14) also followed a similar style of top leaders addressing conflict resolution in a UPA council chaired by the Congress President Sonia Gandhi. She also headed a National Advisory Council on policy and legislation largely consisting of civil society members and activists. It created dual power centres led by the party President and the Prime Minister as the head of the government.

## **Notes and References**

1. The first post-Independence phase of the Indian party system has been termed the 'Congress system' by Rajni Kothari (Kothari 1970: ch. 5); the 'One-party dominant system' by W. H. Morris-Jones 1978: part 3); and the 'Predominant party system' by Giovanni Sartori (Sartori 1976: 192-216). This type of party system is defined in terms of one-party dominance with appreciable margin from contesting smaller parties in the system that legally coexist with the majority party without alternating in power for a considerably long time-at least for three successive elections according to Sartori. The potential of them forming the government some day is improbable but never impossible. Such party systems typically emerge in conditions of a national liberation struggle or of civil war, or in conditions of exceptional homogeneity in a state of a national liberation struggle or of civil war, or in conditions of exceptional homogeneity in a state of external or inter-regional polarisation. Such a party system has existed in contexts as diverse as post-Independence India and post-World War II Japan, and at various points in time in Canada (both nationally and provincially), Mexico, Uruguay, pre-proportional representation Switzerland, and Sweden.

 The one-party states in post-colonial Africa are, of course, in a different genre for they are basically authoritarian. Also different are the totalitarian one-party systems of the Communist and Fascist varieties.