# Introduction What is Indian political thought?

Post-independence India has failed to throw up either a major political theorist or significant theoretical works on such subjects as social justice, the specificity of the Indian state, secularism, legitimacy, political obligation, the nature and structure of political argument, the nature of citizenship in a multi-cultural state, the nature and limits of the law, the ideal polity, and the best way to understand and theorize the Indian political reality. There is little attempt even to test the major ideas and categories of Western political theory against the Indian political experience, and to show their ethnocentric biases and limitations. Although some work is beginning to be done in some of these areas, it remains isolated and patchy. Indian political theorists often do not take each others' work seriously enough to comment on it, and the questions raised and the concepts developed by one are not generally taken up by the others. As a result there is no cooperative engagement in a shared form of inquiry, and as yet no sign of the development of an Indian tradition of political theory (Parekh 1992: 545; see p. 25 of this volume).

## Motivation

Just over 15 years separate the appearance of this volume on Indian Political Thought and the publication of Lord Bhikhu Parekh's powerful and provocative essay on 'The Poverty of Indian Political Theory' (Parekh 1992). Has anything changed in the interim? In his essay (see Chapter 1 of this volume), Parekh specifically indicated crucial problems arising out of the nature of the Indian state post independence, and laments that these problems had yet to be adequately theorized. He points to Indian secularism, communalism, and caste-related policy; reflection on what Parekh refers to as 'India's national political philosophy', which is to say, the commitment to modernization and ingraining the scientific temper; interrogation of the application of the modern nation-state model to India, including all the ancillary problems such as sovereignty, power, and state violence; and, finally, queries on legitimacy, law, legal obligation (duty), rights, and disobedience (ibid.: 553; see p. 27 of this volume). Let us leave to one side whether Parekh's judgement is correct1 that these fundamental political themes had been inadequately treated between 1947 (independence) and 1992 (the appearance of Parekh's essay), and instead turn our attention for a moment to work appearing in these areas in the last 15 years or so.

There is certainly no need to lay out a comprehensive bibliography here, but as a foretaste, we might evoke some names and texts that have begun to set standards; that have begun – to employ Parekh's expression – to signal the development of an Indian

tradition of political thought. We present them loosely following the same order in which Parekh enumerates the untreated themes in his article:

- Sudipta Kaviraj's *Politics in India* (1997), while oriented toward political sociology, contains valuable articles on social structure, refigurations of power, caste and class, and state crisis, while his *Civil Society* (2001) takes up the task of  $-$  again recycling Parekh's expression – testing 'the major ideas and categories of Western political theory against the Indian political experience, illustrating at times their ethnocentric biases and limitations' (Parekh 1992: 545; see p. 25 of this volume).
- Rajeev Bhargava's titles speak for themselves: *Multiculturalism, Liberalism, and* Democracy (1999); Civil Society, Public Sphere, and Citizenship (2005a); Secularism and its Critics (2005b); What is Political Theory and Why Do We Need It?  $(2010)$  – Bhargava's writing, which reflects upon and appraises the work of his colleagues like Ashis Nandy and T. N. Madan, flies in the face of Parekh's remorseful claim that Indian political theorists do not take each others' work seriously enough to comment on it, and that the questions raised or concepts developed by one are not taken up by others.
- Neera Chandhoke has diligently applied herself to theorizing the problem of collective rights (Beyond Secularism: The Rights of Religious Minorities, 1999) and the catchphrase 'civil society' (*The Conceits of Civil Society*, 2003), and is currently struggling with a conundrum of post-independence India's politico-constitutional dispensation, *secession*.
- Secularism is now becoming exhaustively treated, apparent from occasional works such as T. N. Srinivasan (*The Future of Secularism*, 2006) through to the prolific writings of Ashis Nandy (e.g., *Creating a Nationality*, 1995), who has also systematically struggled with what Parekh called India's national political philosophy, modernization and the scientific temper, as well as numerous other themes of peculiar relevance to the political climate of post-independence India (*Bonfire of* Creeds: The Essential Ashis Nandy, 2004).
- While a 'coherent and systematic' treatment of caste and theorization of caste politics in contemporary India is still lacking, due to many complicating factors, among which must be included the continued sensitivity of the topic, brilliant sporadic attempts have appeared, such as Dilip M. Menon's *The Blindness of Insight:* Essays on Caste in Modern India (2006), which reflect on and transcend the work of the previous generation (captured, e.g., by Andre Beteille and Dipankar Gupta).
- There is also clearly an urgent need for more 'systematic and rigorous' approaches to legal theory and the nexus of legal and political philosophy in India (as Upendra Baxi himself points out in Chapter 17 of this volume). Nevertheless, there certainly are 'patches' of illuminating work related to justice, constitutionalism, human rights, and other similar areas, from Upendra Baxi's own vanguard studies dating back to the 1980s (The Indian Supreme Court and Politics, 1980; The Crisis of the Indian Legal System, 1982) right up to today (*Human Rights in a Posthuman World*, 2007), and Ratna Kapur's feminist approaches to theorizing law and legitimacy in India and beyond (*Erotic Justice*, 2005), as well as Rajeev Bhargava's recent foray into this field in his edited volume *The Politics and Ethics of the Indian Constitution* (2008).
- Finally, in his 1992 article, Parekh had acknowledged the pioneering historiography of the subaltern studies group, but expressed a doubt on whether they could make the transition from historiography to political theory (ibid.: 547; see

p. 25 of this volume). Partha Chatterjee's oeuvre should serve to ameliorate that doubt. The development of his reflection from the early Nationalist Thought and the Colonial World (1986) and The Nation and its Fragments (1993) through to A Possible India (1997) and the more recent The Politics of the Governed (2004), illustrates beautifully what Parekh longed for: the development of an Indian tradition of political theory.

These advances, however, appear to have proved altogether insufficient to Parekh, who repeated in 2006 elements of the same 1992 critique. He writes even in 2006 that several political concepts still cry out for a 'rigorous theoretical investigation' in the post-independence context,

such as the ideas of majority, minority, community, nation, development, tradition, modernity, equality and secularism. Each of them raises difficult questions, contains deep ambiguities, and rests on several muddled assumptions that have distorted our political practice. One would have thought that during the half a century that these concepts have dominated Indian political thought and practice, its political philosophers would have subjected them to a critical scrutiny. They certainly have, but it is somewhat patchy, tentative, either too abstract or patently partisan, often driven by political crises rather than a quest for theoretical clarity, and in general, does not add up to a coherent and comprehensive philosophical articulation of Indian political experiences.

(Parekh 2005: 454)

Parekh's 1992 assessment is surely more fair and accurate than his 2006 recapitulation, as visible even from the brief list of recent works on topics in political philosophy provided above. The profundity and volume of contemporary writing available on political themes such as community, modernity, or secularism, for example, are far from 'patchy, tentative'; nevertheless, rather than expending energy in attempting to discredit Parekh's judgments, we would suggest that it is far more profitable to try to learn from him.

Therefore, taking the cue from Parekh's critique, the present collection serves to lay a cornerstone for the construction of an authentic, vibrant tradition of Indian political thought, a step that would satisfy even those most difficult to please, such as Bhikhu Parekh himself. For scholars, we aim to establish a reference point, a canon of names and work to serve as a touchstone for deepening research within the broad thematics. But it is intended that this collection should also be useful for students, providing them with a valuable overview of the current state of the art. We are aware of the dozens of Indian Political Theory courses taught throughout Indian universities that lack a primary sourcebook. It is worth mentioning that Parekh sees ostensibly minor shortcomings, such as the paucity of quality sourcebooks in Indian universities, as one of the major causes of the poverty of Indian political theory.

Succinctly stated, we believe that contemporary Indian political thought is not in fact as impoverished as Bhikhu Parekh holds, but rather that there is a sufficient quantity and quality of material to demand the publication of a representative reader. But on the other hand, granting the thrust of Parekh's argument that deeper and more systematic work is urgently required, we believe that taking first steps to carve out a canon could serve to kindle and promote this work in a manner consistent with Parekh's apparent aims.

## Clarification

At a certain point in his essay, Bhikhu Parekh notes that India 'still awaits its Bodin and hopefully a Hobbes' (Parekh 1992: 539, n 5; see p. 29 of this volume). By evoking European authors from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Parekh accidentally undermines the explicit problematic of his paper, which is not only to prove that postindependence Indian political theory is impoverished (sections 1 and 2 of his paper), but also to uncover the causes of this neglect (section 3 of his paper) (ibid.:  $536-59$ ; see pp.  $20-29$  of this volume). Parekh provides three main factors responsible for the underdevelopment of Indian political theory: (1) the status of the social sciences in Indian universities post- independence; (2) the hegemony of Nehru's modernization paradigm that serves even now as the indisputable national political philosophy; and, (3) the inscrutability of the contemporary Indian political reality (ibid.:  $549-59$ ; see pp. 26-29 of this volume). Obviously, these factors relate to the poverty of *contemporary* Indian political theory and not to Indian political thought *simpliciter*. Thus, Parekh should have restrained his temptation to state that India had never produced a Hobbes, keeping within the historical scope of the paper, which is Indian political theory since 1947; or, otherwise, he should have extended the genealogical reach of his investigation back into the causes of the neglect of political theory in India for centuries preceding independence.<sup>2</sup>

But we mention this complication only to move into a certain clarification of the scope and nature of the present book. Through the title *Indian Political Thought*, we intend for the last term, *Thought*, to convey contemporaneity. We really do mean 'contemporary', not even merely 'post-independence'. For each of the authors represented herein is living; the pieces have all been composed within the last decade or two. This, we believe, allows us to better face up to the provocation of Bhikhu Parekh. That is, we concentrate specifically on the contemporary precisely because it is the contemporary that has received insufficient attention. This is abundantly clear through contrast with the magnitude of writing  $-$  monographs, anthologies, and so on  $-$  available on 'modern' political thought. There is no shortage of work on Raja Rammohan Roy, M. K. Gandhi, Maulana Azad, B. R. Ambedkar, Jawaharlal Nehru, et al. Their writings have been anthologized, serialized, canonized, sacralized. It is the work of their successors in political philosophy that remains dispersed and in need of collation and dissemination.

This book is unique, then, because it prioritizes the current state of the art over the  $tradition(s)$  – whether recent modern, or early modern, or further back, medieval, or back further still, ancient – that *in some way* gave rise to it. It presents a snapshot of a continuous process of transmission, where the wisdom of tradition is or may be present, but where it gets freely refracted through innovation and insight, and touches off the possibility of developing a new tradition or traditions of *contemporary* Indian political thought, what we shall later characterize as a 'journey'.

We have now thus briefly addressed the third word of the title of this book – *Indian Political Thought* – by distinguishing the *contemporary* from the modern (the latter being that which primarily receives the academic attention), but with reference nevertheless to tradition. The traditions that have served to give rise ('in some way') to contemporary Indian political thought are distinctively important in clarifying the second term of the title: 'Indian'.

Bhikhu Parekh mentions in his article that by 'Indian political theory' he intends 'works on political theory written by Indian writers irrespective of whether they live in India or outside it, and exclude the works of non-Indian writers on India' (1992: 535;

see p. 19 of this volume). Succinctly put, he is stating that he refers to theory by Indians, not theory *about* India. This, however, does not speak to our query; in fact it begs the question. Who, precisely, qualifies as an 'Indian' writer? We do not seek analytic precision here, but only wish to get an overall sense of what we mean by the term.

Following Parekh, living in India does not seem to be an essential criterion for 'Indian' – and thankfully so: only half of the authors represented here reside in India. Indian citizenship seems equally problematic; it would surely not be necessary, although it might, on the other hand, arguably be sufficient. But to speak less at the formal level and more at the substantive level, what seems to especially characterize the *Indianness* of Indian political thought is the way in which it is infused by Indian tradition $(s)$  – whether to accommodate, assimilate, sublimate, or even negate. Wrestling with the tradition(s), evoking the tradition(s), evading the tradition(s), these are all characteristics useful in delimiting the notion of 'Indian' within the context of Indian political thought.

Thus, more than formal considerations of citizenship, residency, or even hollow ethnic considerations, most substantively, contemporary *Indian* political thought carves out a determinate space for itself by means of ascribing value to  $-$  evaluating  $-$  the relevant literature of the tradition(s) that preceded it. To turn this coin over, we might mention that Western political philosophy can be held in contradistinction to Indian political philosophy by the *general exclusion* of any reflection on material from the Indian tradition(s), whether in the form of a work like the *Arthashastra*, or the life and work of moderns such as Gandhi or Ambedkar and so on. In sum, the bearing, or the burden, of tradition seems to be a necessary element (albeit not a sufficient one) in concretizing the meaning of the term 'Indian' within the phrase 'Indian political thought'. This is why we chose to begin the book with a section specifically illustrating contemporary Indian political philosophers' *evocation* of founders of independent India, like Gandhi, Ambedkar and Tagore.

As for the second term, there is nothing novel or exceptional about our conception of the term 'political', which, as everyone already knows, derives from the ancient Greek *polis*, or city. 'Political' referred originally to anything city-related; that is, referred to dispensations, decisions, organizations, institutions, and other bodies or entities or acts existing by virtue of the existence of the *polis*. Naturally, people were forced to interrogate all these dispensations, institutions and what not, query their origins, their authority, their legitimacy, their status, and even their future(s). These were all, and still remain, essentially political questions.

What would seem to require some explanation, however, is why we have decided to include the work not only of political scientists, or people working in departments of politics, but also the work of anthropologists, historians, sociologists, psychologists, philosophers, and jurists. Firstly, in point of historical fact, *the political* has never really been the exclusive domain of political scientists. If we reflect on the classical Western tradition, the most significant and influential political writings that have appeared e.g., Plato's Republic, Aristotle's Politics, Machiavelli's Prince, Hobbes' Leviathan, and the work of Locke, Rousseau, Hegel, Marx – predate political science as a discrete discipline. Even the salient political theory of the twentieth century - including such notables as Hannah Arendt, Raymond Aron, Carl Schmitt, Leo Strauss, Eric Voegelin, Michel Foucault, Jürgen Habermas, John Rawls – has been articulated in an entirely cross-disciplinary framework, and with no exclusive rights granted to political scientists.

Irrespective of the departmental affiliation of the authors, we have selected the writings of contemporary scholars whose work bears heavily upon, and has consistently impacted,

political thought. There are, for example, certain historiographical considerations that cannot be ignored when reflecting upon contemporary political ideas. The same is true for certain juridical, or social, or psychological considerations, provided, of course, they are not over-coded, but articulated in a manner comprehensible to and consistent with the broad horizon of the discourse of political theory or political philosophy.

The phrase just deployed, 'political theory or political philosophy' brings us back around once again to the final term in the title, 'thought'. We frequently interchange 'thought' with the word 'theory' or 'philosophy'. While we would certainly hesitate to equate 'thought', 'theory' and 'philosophy' in all cases (we would hesitate to equate any two of the words, let alone all three), in the specific instance of *political* thought, we do think the occasional synonymization of 'thought' with 'theory' or 'philosophy' is justi- $\text{fied} - \text{always with the caveat that we intend contemporaneity. As for configuration of the}$ latter two terms (theory and philosophy), the distinction seems to arise only in relation to the academic department involved. That is, the same content or syllabus might be called 'political philosophy' if it is taught in a philosophy department, but called 'political theory' if it is taught in a political science or politics department. The terminological difference is in this case external to the substance.

But what, then, do we really mean by *thought* in the title, and how to distinguish this canon of Indian political thinkers from other writers/forms of writing on broadly political topics? In his book *What Is Political Theory and Why Do We Need It?* (2010), Raieev Bhargaya identifies six essential features of theory, and then goes on to characterize political theory in light of these six enumerated requisite features:

(a) conceptual sensitivity, (b) rational structure, (c) aspiration for a humanly achievable truth and objectivity, (d) generality, (e) an explicit mandate to unearth assumptions and presuppositions, (f) strong non-speculative intent  $-$  the need not to bypass results of micro-enquiries into the particular. [Theory] is not identical to any one feature but must possess all six. Thus, a theory must be distinct from ad hoc reflections, speculation, empirical enquiry into the particular, rich insights, imaginative but fictive prose and other related narratives. It must also be distinguished from ideology, world-view and cosmology.

Political theory then is a particular form of word-dependent systematic reflection (with each of the six features mentioned above) on any or all of the following: (a) the general condition of human kind or a particular society, (b) the collective power to take decisions about the good life of a community, (c) the mechanisms by which power is exercised by one group over another, (d) the use of state power to achieve the good of the community or to exercise power by one group over another and finally (e) the values by which the entire human kind or a particular community governs its life (ibid.).

Without wishing to commit ourselves to Bhargava's exposition in its entirety, we would underline certain criteria related to the distinctiveness of theory that we have abided by, while employing the word *thought*, in the present collection. To wit, *political thought* differs from ideology, although there are of course overlapping elements, and it differs, for basically the same reasons, from cosmology. As Bhargava would argue, ideologies or cosmologies exhibit some of the six features of theory, but not all of them together. The same would hold for ad hoc or aphoristic reflections, nationalistic or ethnicist propaganda, political party platforms, and so on. *Indian Political Thought* provides a

set of exemplary writings which entail or at least engage with Bhargava's six criteria, work which is elevated to the status of theory, and – and this is important – not work that aspires to be representative of the expansive range of quotidian political positions in contemporary India.

## Justification

So far so good. But why precisely these texts and not others? That is, granting that all of the works appearing here conform to the determinations we have set out with respect to the terms 'Indian', 'political', and 'thought', the question may still be posed as to the criteria of selection within the admittedly large pool of work that fulfills these requirements.

In the first place, for anyone familiar with contemporary political theory in India, there are a handful of names that naturally come to mind, such as Sen, Bhargava, Nandy, Kaviraj, and others. Then, thinking thematically, if we wish to address the concepts and conundrums listed by Bhikhu Parekh in both his 1992 and 2006 writings on Indian political theory, then, again, we are obliged to select works pertinent to these areas. Putting together the foremost names that come to mind along with the broad thematic areas which we seek to have represented produces the (rather impressive) result to be found in the table of contents of this reader.

It would be disingenuous, however, to deny that there have been arbitrary components active within the decision-making processes. Generalizing from what is visible in the available international literature along similar lines (discussed further below), it would seem to be inevitable. Nevertheless, we beg for some indulgence and a sympathetic reception. After all, we do not aim to close the book on contemporary Indian political thought; we aim to open it. Other methods of organization were possible, as were other selections of source material – and indeed, by setting the precedent of trying out one format, we are eager to encourage the appearance of alternatives.

Among the inspirations for the conception of this volume, in addition to Bhikhu Parekh's provocation, are Will Kymlicka's well-known book Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Introduction (2005), and Goodin and Pettit's now classic anthology Contemporary Political Philosophy (1997). While Kymlicka's masterpiece is organized thematically (with just seven chapters: 1. Introduction, 2. Utilitarianism, 3. Liberal Equality, 4. Libertarianism, 5. Marxism, 6. Communitarianism, and 7. Feminism), Goodin and Pettit's enormous volume consists of some 48 chapters representing a huge array of classical essays, conceptual chapters, and excerpts of technical discussions of fine points within larger theoretical debates. And yet, as encompassing as Goodin and Pettit's volume is, there is a rub: a total lack of international representation. For example, French thought receives about five pages of attention (out of a book of some 770 pages) by means of an excerpt from Foucault. Similarly, German thought receives about five pages of attention through an excerpt from Habermas. And, more predictably, the only Indian name to appear is that of Amartya Sen. Everyone else involved, and every other topic (coming to the remaining 755 pages of this 770-page book) is Anglo-American. And yet, the book is entitled simply Contemporary Political Philosophy – no reason to bother delimiting the title; apparently there is no world beyond of any relevance to political thought. Kymlicka's title is no more modest, although there is such an element of economy in its table of contents that one would fain rather not to raise the point of its parochialism.

From across the Atlantic, the German volume Politische Philosophie des 20. Jahrhunderts (Political Philosophy of the 20th Century) (1990) is as exclusive as the Anglo-American ones. French thought appears in about 15 pages (in a book of some 325 pages) through a chapter on Raymond Aron. Ironically – that is, it is ironic when juxtaposed with the Goodin and Pettit volume – Anglo-American political philosophy gets a chapter of only about 20 pages. Needless to add, even Sen does not make an appearance in this one. The remaining 300 pages go to Germans – but neither do they feel compelled to delimit the title of the book in any way, by addition of an adjective like *German* or even *Western*. The situation is precisely the same for a recent French book, *La pensée politique (Political Thought*), which features almost exclusively French political philosophers (with a perfunctory tip of the hat to Rawls and Habermas), without any compunction to add the adjective *French* to the title.<sup>3</sup>

Reading these and similar publications from around the world naturally motivate international or comparative political philosophers to take some corrective measures, however insufficient. Moreover, goaded on as we Indian political theorists have been for so long by the likes of Bhikhu Parekh, there seems no choice but to stiffen the upper lip and step forward. We hope that *Indian Political Thought* will serve as a source of inspiration and recognition for the many scholars of Indian political theory/ philosophy who have been trying, against the odds, to inaugurate and cultivate a new tradition of Indian political philosophy in recent years.

#### Chapterization

We mentioned above that the book begins with a section specifically illustrating the evocation of traditional Indian thinkers – more precisely, it is Part II, *Evocation*, that does this, and it contains essays evoking the thought, work, and activity of M. K. Gandhi, B. R. Ambedkar and R. Tagore (Part I, 'Provocation', presents the touchstone essay of Bhikhu Parekh, 'The Poverty of Indian Political Theory, which we have already discussed in some detail). Specifically, in Chapter 2, 'Gandhi's Ambedkar', **Ramachandra Guha** aims to put the Gandhi–Ambedkar debates into a wider historical and simultaneously narrower personal framework, thereby serving to establish the legitimacy of both positions. In not only polemical but even political writings since Independence, scholars  $-$  as Guha points out, usually divided along caste lines  $-$  have exhibited a partiality for one of these men always at the expense of the other. Guha argues, against this tendency, that in the contemporary political climate, it would seem that these two great founders and pioneers of twentieth-century Indian self-identity may have a *complementary* role: 'Whereas in their lifetime Gandhi and Ambedkar were political rivals, now, decades after their death, it should be possible to see their contributions as complementing one another's' (see p. 38 of this volume).

The subsequent two chapters take up Gandhi and Tagore, respectively.

In Chapter 3, 'The quest for justice: Evoking Gandhi', **Neera Chandhoke** explores the method of Satyagraha as an answer to political deadlocks in plural societies and in tackling the encounter with the 'other' in socio-political space. As Chandhoke points out, a dialogue cannot happen in a vacuum; there are pre-conditions, such as a common space, which create the possibility for dialogue in spite of natural apprehension towards that which is different and unknown. What stands at the core of Gandhian Satyagraha is a very peculiar notion of truth, and this serves as the reference point for dialogue. It derives largely from the Jaina theory of *svadavada*, of the

multi-facetedness of truth. An individual's moral journey defines his pursuit of truth and creates a common ground for discourse. Truth, however, remains partial; one can never access it in its entirety. This creates sensitivity towards other perspectives and at the same time allows one to bracket suspicions. An essential element of Satyagraha is non-violence, a spirit which again facilitates communication and inhibits any sense of alienation. Satyagraha is thus a method to create space for discourse, to negotiate disagreements and generate solutions to the problems facing the profound plurality found in Indian democracy.

In the final chapter (4) of Part II, 'Tagore and his India', Amartya Sen turns towards Rabindranath Tagore, Gandhi's perhaps most intimate critic. He presents the remarkable contrast between these two leading contemporaries of the twentieth-century political scene. Despite his reverence for 'the Mahatma', Tagore differed with him on critical matters: liberal humanism versus parochial nationalism, industrial innovation versus indigenous economy, pursuit of modern rationality and science versus conservative traditionalism. His 'passion for freedom' went beyond the question of colonial liberation to the desire for the absolute freedom of mind, hence his recurring emphasis on education. Sen ends with the discussion of Tagore's hypothetical appraisal of the present society, a story of the realization of envisioned India or its betraval.

We had earlier referred to Bhikhu Parekh's claim that several political concepts continue to demand 'rigorous theoretical investigation' in the context of post-independence India: 'minority, community, nation, development, tradition, modernity, equality and secularism' (2006: 454). If Part II can only be said to have obliquely addressed 'tradition', in subsequent sections, notions such as secularism (Part III), community (Part IV), and modernity (Part V) receive 'rigorous theoretical investigation'.

In Chapter 5, **Romila Thapar** asks and answers the question, 'Is secularism alien to Indian civilization?' Thapar avers that pitting secularism against religion, as Hindutva supporters tend to do, restricts the debate on secularism to only a fragment of orthodox Hinduism. This generates a lopsided view because it ignores the richer and more extensive expressions of religion that have been witnessed in India and which would permit us to acknowledge what Thapar calls 'proto-secularism' within popular Indian traditions, such as the Guru-Pir, early Buddhist, Jain, and Islamic practices.

T. N. Madan's 'Secularism revisited: Doctrine of destiny or political ideology?' (Chapter 6) problematizes the notion of secularism, and sets it within the recent his- $\text{torical context}$  – as opposed to Thapar's far wider historical context. Madan argues that through the Indian struggle for independence, secularism was instated as the indispensable condition for a just social order. Yet the peculiar cultural framework of India was not ready to embrace the 'decline of religion in human affairs' (see p. 87 of this volume). The onus was to carve out an indigenous model of secularism and this led to evolution of several uses of the term. One of these was reverence for plurality and inter-religious sympathy. Religious differences, however, continued to create mistrust between communities. It is now necessary to nurture a well defined pluralistic notion of secularity based on principles of dignity, equality, freedom and acceptance in our peculiar socio-cultural landscape.

In Chapter 7, however, **Rajeev Bhargava**  $-$  in 'The distinctiveness of Indian secularism' - argues that the Indian conception of secularism is already distinctive and attuned to the exigencies of the Indian context. Through a carefully reasoned presentation of what he calls 'principled distance' and 'contextual secularism', Bhargava suggests that far from being inappropriate or suffering from shortcoming compared to

secularism in Western nations, 'a good hard look at Indian secularism could also change the self-understanding of other western secularisms' (see p. 116 of this volume).

With **Dilip M. Menon's** powerful and provocative Chapter 8, 'The blindness of insight: Why communalism in India is about caste', we transition from secularization (Part Three) to communalization (Part Four) – which Menon sees as intimately related to one another and to caste. Menon suggests that while the hierarchical and inegalitarian aspects of Hinduism are widely acknowledged, academic discourse turns a blind eye to the violence perpetrated against low-or out-caste Hindus. Consequently, he believes that 'what we need to explore is the inner violence within Hinduism as much as the violence directed outwards against Muslims and acknowledge that the former is historically prior. The question needs to be: how has the employment of violence against an internal Other (defined in terms of inherent inequality) i.e. the Dalit, been displaced as one of aggression against an external Other (defined in terms of inherent difference) i.e. the Muslim. Is communalism a deflection of the central issue of violence and inegalitarianism within the Hindu religion?' (see p. 123 of this volume).

In Chapter 9, Mushirul Hasan – in his essay entitled 'In search of integration and identity: Indian muslims since independence' - documents the tension between the need for communal identity and the lofty ideals of secularism. According to Hasan, in contrast to Bhargava, Nehru's vision of a progressive, democratic and secular framework for post-partition India was largely unsuccessful: a surge of communal forces have drowned attempts at secularization. In weaving the history of Indian Muslims struggling to integrate into the secular Indian fabric, Hasan poignantly illustrates the contradiction of values witnessed by the community: embracing secularism was arduous for a tradition which did not permit one to be aloof from religion and which was entrenched in doctrines of religious fundamentalism. Muslim conservatism insisted on preservation of the religious identity which secularism was portrayed as threatening. The result, as Hasan puts it, was the 'alienation' of a community and its inability to integrate or identify with the mainstream.

Chapter 10, **Harjot Oberoi's** essay, 'Sikh fundamentalism: Translating history into theory', parallels in many respects the previous chapter. Although Oberoi frames his topic within the purview of fundamentalism, he uses that concept to reflect more broadly upon 'issues of Sikh identity, the crisis of agrarian development, class antagonisms, and the process of state formation in India, including popular resistance to this process' (see p. 151 of this volume). According to Oberoi, it is useful to peg these considerations to the question of fundamentalism, because today when much of the Sikh population query their identity, how they should understand themselves and the world around them, many of the answers emerge from what we would refer to as a 'discourse and ideology of fundamentalism'.

Part V moves from communalization to modernization, another concept which  $\text{Parekh had} - \text{we believe quite mistakenly} - \text{referred to as untheorized in contemporary}$ Indian political thought (2006: 454). Beginning with Akeel Bilgrami-in 'Gandhi, Newton and the Enlightenment' (Chapter 11)  $-$  Part V displays three ways of reflecting on modernity, each distinctively related to Indian thought, tradition, history and practices. Bilgrami attempts to understand Gandhi's critique of modernity in relation to critiques arising in Newton's own time to his idea of matter and nature as 'brute and inert', breaking with earlier conceptions of nature as 'shot through with an inner source of dynamism, which is itself divine' (see p. 165 of this volume). Even during the dawn of the Enlightenment in the seventeenth century there were dissenters who accepted

Newtonian science but protested its underlying metaphysics; thus, the concerns of the 'radical enlightenment' were in a sense recapitulated later by Gandhi. According to Bilgrami, both Gandhi as well as these earlier thinkers argued that in abandoning our ancient, 'spiritually flourishing' sense of nature, we simultaneously abandoned the moral psychology that governs our engagement with the natural, 'including the relations and engagement among ourselves as its inhabitants' (see p. 166 of this volume). This essay, then, is one of Bilgrami's many recent experimental reinterpretative essays, where he innovatively attempts to apply the critical method of analytic philosophy to Gandhi's life and work, albeit in a sympathetic vein (Bilgrami 2002, 2003, forthcoming).

In Chapter 12, **Meera Nanda's** 'Scientific temper: Arguments for an Indian Enlightenment', the architects of modern India are presented as secular humanists who saw science and modernization as a means not just toward industrial development but for fostering an overall critical rationalism in the face of caste and gender inequalities sanctified by superstition and religion. Nanda presents the 'full cast' of secular humanists, founding fathers of independent India, and argues that they held 'that scientific demystification of fundamental beliefs about the natural order would lead to a genuine change in the normative order of Indian society, or in simpler words, change in mind would lead to a change of heart' (see p. 175 of this volume).

In the final chapter (13) of Part V, Sudipta Kaviraj's 'Outline of a revisionist theory of modernity' offers a *tour-de-force* critique of the dominant conceptions of modernity, and attempts to sketch a revisionist one within which the post-colonial world would not find itself in a time-lag, with its future constituted by the west's past. Indeed, Kaviraj goes a step further, albeit cautiously, when he concludes that, despite the West's military dominance, its 'historically *declining imaginative power* ... makes it unlikely that diverging trajectories of the modern in other parts of the world can be folded back into recognizable Western patterns—that people can be persuaded to force their futures into versions of the Western past' (see p. 197 of this volume, emphasis added).

In Part Six, we move toward a domain of Indian political thought that perhaps moves beyond the horizon of Parekh's notion of political theory, insofar as his conception is entrenched in a sort of self-confessed, albeit minimal, eurocentrism. While entitled *Reconstruction*, it is akin to Kaviraj's *revision*, and could just as well have been called *deconstruction*<sup>4</sup> or something else better serving to indicate its simultaneous immanent critique of eurocentrism and attempt to reconstruct a sort of Indianness apposite to (contemporary) Indian (political) thought that is neither purely savage (in Nandy's terminology), nor romanticized (as Prakash cautions), nor conceived as immaculate or free from hybridity (as Bhabha discusses).

**Ashis Nandy's 'Reconstructing childhood: A critique of the ideology of adulthood'** (Chapter 14) strikes an atypical chord in the discourse about the ethics of politicization, of the evolution of desirable social ideals, and the simultaneous construction of a valueloaded narrative. Nandy constructs a unique analogy in the form of a parallel discourse where the idea of 'bringing up' children is concurrent with the colonial ambition to 'civilize' the third world. The 'ideology' of adulthood is thus a mirror image of political ideology. The child becomes the locus of the trials of history, being branded, as Nandy puts it, as an 'inferior version of the adult', and consequently, being a victim of adulthood. This victim in turn becomes the icon of a critique that problematizes the very notion of normalcy, and what it is to be 'rational' and 'productive' in modernity. The roots of this ideology permeate even societies originally free from such an approach. creating indigenous adaptation of the Western conception of childhood. Nandy's contention remains that modernity's pretension of a homogenous world must be unveiled in order for the right of the diversity of cultures and of their existing and flourishing as alternative philosophies.

Nandy's chapter strikingly illustrates how political psychology provides a unique insight into the psychopathology of politics. That which is dominant projects itself as an ideal and in doing so defines the *telos* for everybody else: the child must grow up to be an adult, the uncivilized third world must be civilized, the periphery ought to move towards the centre. Thus notions of 'normalcy', 'rationality', 'acceptability', 'productivity', etc. are constructed. It might be fruitful to read Nandy's chapter alongside Parekh's, and see what new light this may shed on the latter's exhortatory appeals and usage of terms like 'poverty' and 'development'.

Chapter 15 - 'Subaltern studies as postcolonial criticism' - is descriptive of a movement of Indian historiography, Subaltern Studies, that has by now spread throughout the 'third world' and has ripened into a profound theme of contemporary post-colonial critical thought. Gyan Prakash eloquently charts the origin, development, present and even speculates on the future of Subaltern Studies, and in so doing, clearly illustrates the scope and relevance of this influential and still-radical, critical but ultimately (re) constructive approach to political thought.

In the final chapter of Part VI, **Homi Bhabha** defends 'The commitment to theory' from the 'damaging and self-defeating assumption that theory is necessarily the elite language of the socially and culturally privileged' (see p. 227 of this volume). In the process, Bhabha articulates and illustrates some of his most subversive concepts, most importantly, 'hybridization'. This brilliant, path-breaking essay has now become a classic of post-colonial studies, and serves to round off this section of the volume that demonstrates not only that Indian political thought is far from impoverished, it is rich in innovation, originality, and insights – insights that may lead to a reconstruction or reconception (or who knows, perhaps even recuperation) of Indian thought that supersedes the regnant epistemology/ontology that lies behind Parekh's censure.

In Part VII, 'Emancipation', we find on the one hand indications of picking up the torch where the work of reconstruction from the previous section began (especially through the contributions of Kapur and Spivak) but on the other hand, the persistence of a Parekh-type skepticism toward the actuality of any as-yet distinct or mature Indian political thought (as apparent through Baxi's remarks). In Chapter 17, Upendra **Baxi's** essay 'The justice of human rights in Indian constitutionalism', challenges Indian political thought for neglecting to thematically address the problematics of justice within constitutional thought and praxis. India has an active (and activist) judicial system which daily adjudicates, pontificates, even legislates  $-$  all in the name of justice; and yet, there is no significant Indian political theory critically examining or even attempting to address this justice industry and its (binding) output. Beyond these challenges, at the theoretical level, Baxi asks whether we have any theories regarding the justice of human rights by means of which we could evaluate the justice of constitutional arrangements? Additionally, assuming that we had, how could these theories/conceptions be put to work in relation to judicial praxis in a manner that overcomes what Baxi refers to as the 'foundational'-'reiterative' dichotomy?

If Baxi had posed a challenge to the adequacy of Indian political thought, in 'Emancipatory feminist theory in postcolonial India: Unmasking the ruse of liberal internationalism', feminist legal theorist **Ratna Kapur** (Chapter 18) exposes the false universalism and predatory nature of the liberal internationalist paradigm, through an analysis of the work of Martha Nussbaum. Kapur first faithfully presents Nussbaum's position, highlights its reliance on the work of Amartya Sen, and then attempts to show that Nussbaum's position  $-$  and the sort of liberalism it represents  $-$  fails to engage with or account for how power actually operates *in situ* vis-à-vis political and legal practice(s), or even in theory, with respect to the formation of liberal values and rights: 'Nussbaum fails to pay attention to the subtle operations of power and how liberal feminism cannot begin to bring about political repair through the application of one simple antidote – inclusion' (see p. 260 of this volume). A second defect Kapur identifies is Nussbaum's failure to engage with postcolonial and subaltern feminist theory, which Kapur spends a great deal of time elucidating and characterizing in order to intimate the subtle and profound ways they bear upon and serve as a critique of and corrective to basic assumptions of liberal internationalism. Kapur then suggests – and here seems to try to extricate Sen from her accusations against Nussbaum - that the presence and resilience of alternative (intellectual) traditions, especially Indian and subcontinental traditions, indicate that there may be different viable options for achieving the desired emancipatory ends that do not suffer the insurmountable (practical and onto-epistemological) defects of liberal internationalism.

Emancipatory talk and practice also receive reflective and critical treatment in Chapter 19, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak's 'Righting wrongs', an essay quite characteristic of the author's polyphonic technique of simultaneous self-reflexivity and wide-ranging scholarship, deconstruction and activism. Spivak, like Kapur, seeks to lay the ground for more authentic, localist techniques of addressing inequalities - her focus, true to her vocation, is through a radically reconfigured understanding and practice of *pedagogy*.

In the final section, Part VIII, of *Indian Political Thought*, the conclusion reflects or rather refracts the provocation of Part I. **Partha Chatterjee** turns the tables by exposing 'The poverty of Western political theory: Concluding remarks on concepts like "com*munity*" *East and West*'. This is not some knee-jerk tit-for-tat, but rather a well-considered evaluation and expose of the profound parochialism that inevitably surfaces when any single concept of Western political thought is isolated and interrogated, especially against a non-Western background or context. As an illustration, Chatterjee focuses on the concept 'community' as it was theorized within the debate in Anglo-American academia between liberals and communitarians. Chatterjee remarks, 'one feature of this debate that particularly struck me was the narrow and *impoverished* concept of *community* that was being employed on both sides' (see p. 288 of this volume, emphasis added).

This is not to suggest, however, that the concept received more adequate treatment in the Indian discourse: 'The theoretical terms had been set by the categories of Western social theory; apparently, all that non-Western thinkers could do was fill up those categories with a different cultural content and then play out the same arguments in a different national arena' (see p. 290 of this volume).

Chatterjee, then, in his conclusion teases out of this dialectics of the 'poverty' of *both* Indian and Western political thought, the task that squarely faces Indian political theorists: 'to find an adequate conceptual language to describe the non-Western career of the modern state not as a distortion or lack, which is what inevitably happens in a modernization narrative, but as the history of different modernities shaped by practices and institutions that the universalist claims of Western political theory have failed to encompass' (see p. 291 of this volume).

In this  $-$  as should already be clear from the above brief descriptions of the chapters - Chatterjee merely makes general and programmatic what had already been expressed, at times tacitly, other times explicitly, by Chandhoke (Part II), Madan (Part III), Menon (Part IV), Kaviraj (Part V), Nandy and Bhabha (Part VI), and Kapur and Spivak (Part VII) - that is, Chatterjee lays bare what had already been adumbrated throughout the diverse themes (tradition, secularism, communalism, modernity, revision, justice) addressed by authors of every section of this volume. What Chatterjee calls 'the incomplete universalism of modern political theory', or 'the poverty of modern social theory' – which he illustrates by means of 'community' as one example – seems already to have been recognized and problematized by contemporary Indian scholars working across various interrelated themes of political thought.

This is, of course, just another way of saying that the intuition which Bhikhu Parekh had himself had and which he articulated so provocatively, was perhaps far more widely shared than he had ever realized, but that this widely-shared intuition was responded to in less polemical and more subtly (re)constructive ways across the wide spectrum of the emerging contemporary Indian political discourse(s).

With a resonance of Parekh's own aspiration, Chatterjee writes: 'This, I am suggesting, is one of the principal tasks of political theory today: to provide a conceptual map of the emerging practices of the new political societies of the East' (see p. 297 of this volume). Chatterjee, less committed to the form of Western political theory than Parekh, however, prefers to describe the charting of that map as a 'journey'; as he concludes his essay: 'In the course of that journey, political theory as we have known it for so long will also get rewritten' (ibid.).

To put it simply, then, our aim in *Indian Political Thought* is not meant just to reveal the error of Parekh's judgment that 'there is no co-operative engagement in a shared form of inquiry, and as yet no sign of the development of an Indian tradition of political theory' (Parekh 1992: 545; see p. 25 of this volume). That is anyway too easy. Rather, more constructively, we seek to provide readers with some of the contours of the emerging conceptual map about which Chatterjee speaks: to document a few of the paths that have already been explored in contemporary Indian political thought along this continuous and certainly arduous journey of rewriting political theory.

#### Notes

1 More fundamentally, we also put to one side whether Parekh provides any justification at all for the suppositions behind his value-conceptions *in toto*. For, in the first place, it is apparent even from the short passage cited above that Parekh assumes the perfection of the form of Western political thought – Indian political theory is not necessarily impoverished in terms of *content*, but in terms of *form*. His recurrent mantra – 'although some work is beginning to be done in some of these areas, it remains isolated and patchy' - reveals that Parekh values not an (isolated) work of extraordinary insight or genius, but a network or system of interrelated (perhaps even mediocre?) texts and treatments. (This dyad, 'isolated and patchy', used to describe thematic work in Indian political theory, elides into others throughout the essay: elsewhere, Parekh uses 'it is patchy and lacks rigour'; then, it is 'unable systematically and rigorously' to address the theme; later, it is not 'coherent and systematic'.) Notice the trope in the opening line cited: 'Post-independence India has failed to throw up either a major political theorist or significant theoretical works'; why did he not write 'a significant theoretical work' to match his 'a major political theorist'? Parekh's tacit and unjustified assumption that value lies in a network over a work bleeds into a second-order problematic: that the absent network he bemoans structurally relies upon another network; that of the interrelation of

capitalist ('knowledge') economies and academic research, writing, and publishing. At both orders, Parekh assumes – as we all do from time to time – the modernist, progressivehistorical paradigm, which from the time of its inception, through to its grandest formulation in Hegel (and final reformulation in Fukuyama), has always been fuelled by … thought, or better, the realization of thought (in Hegel's terms, the concretion of the universal, in Fukuyama, its institutionalization, and in (at least early) Marx, conversely, the poverty of thought lies precisely in its lack of concretion/institutionalization, its inability to 'transcend itself'). Thus does Parekh seamlessly resort to the metaphor of 'development' (as in, 'developing countries'): 'Reasons for what I will call the underdevelopment of political theory vary from country to country' (see p. 19 of this volume). The 'underdevelopment' and 'poverty' of India as conceived within the onto-epistemology of current liberalism is then the horizon within which Parekh locates the 'underdevelopment' and 'poverty' of Indian political theory. We can hear the echo of the increase-the-size-of-the-pie development economist's conundrum, How can such a resource-rich (both natural and human) nation remain so underdeveloped and impoverished? in Parekh's 'I intend to concentrate on post independence India, and to explore why … a rich tradition of philosophical inquiry has not thrown up much original political theory' (ibid). However, Parekh argues, against the presentation in this note, that his notion of political theory 'is not or only minimally open to the charge of ethnocentrism or universalizing its Western form' (see p. 20 of this volume). 'Minimal ethnocentrism', whatever it means, is a fascinating category. But one may like to believe that the space – both ontologically and epistemologically – that separates not ethnocentric from minimally ethnocentric is not merely situated on a horizontal axis, where the zero-point is 'not ethnocentric', 'minimally ethnocentric' is 1, and then gradations of ethnocentrism stretch on out into infinity.

- 2 Parekh, it seems, does intend to limit his critique only to post-independence political philosophy, and not to Indian political philosophy simpliciter, apparent from passages such as this: 'Indian political theorists have a great opportunity to theorize … on the rich heritage of political philosophy left behind'. See Parekh (2006: 455).
- 3 It should be mentioned that this radically parochial approach is more or less unique to Anglo-American (including Australian), German, and French publications. For (counter) example, works on contemporary political philosophy from Italian publishers which treat preponderantly the writings of Italian theorists, would definitely feature the adjective Italian in their title.
- 4 This is true insofar as Derrida refers to deconstruction in terms of 'restoration' (remonter) rather than 'demolition'. See Derrida (1985: 4).

# References

- Ballestrem, Karl and Ottmann, Henning (1990) Politische Philosophie des 20: Jahrhunderts, München: R. Oldenbourg.
- Baxi, Upendra (1980), The Indian Supreme Court and Politics, Lucknow: Eastern Book Co.
- —— (1982) The Crisis of the Indian Legal System, New Delhi: Vikas.
- —— (2007) Human Rights in a Posthuman World, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Bhargava, Rajeev (1999) Multiculturalism, Liberalism, and Democracy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- —— (2005a) Civil Society, Public Sphere, and Citizenship, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
- —— (2005b) Secularism and its Critics, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- —— (2008) The Politics and Ethics of the Indian Constitution, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- —— (2010) What is Political Theory and Why Do We Need It? New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Bilgrami, Akeel (2002) 'Gandhi's integrity: the philosophy behind the politics', Postcolonial Studies, 5(1): 79–93.
- —— (2003) 'Gandhi, the philosopher', Economic and Political Weekly, September 27.
- —— (forthcoming) 'Value, disenchantment, and democracy', Economic and Political Weekly.
- Chandhoke, Neera (1999) Beyond Secularism: The Rights of Religious Minorities, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.