# 10

# Development StuDieS in inDia

#### R.R. Prasad

# **Introduction**

Development is an extremely complex phenomenon and an even more complex process. It is a multifaceted concept having different connotations. 'Development' is a term which embraces a wide range of interpretations stemming from the multiplicity of disciplinary perspectives, differing ideological premises, and varying usages by development agencies—international and national. Different disciplines have given different denotations to the expression *Developmen*t. Almost all the available writings on development-related issues suggest that the concept of development itself has become an issue of considerable debate; a contentious question subjected to a variety of interpretations.

Development, generally, denotes progress—social, economic, educational, cultural, scientific, and technological—brought about by planned/programmed efforts to inaugurate an era of orderly and peaceful transformation of a society in a desired direction. In other words, social transformation has been a priority concern in the initiatives of economic development and social change, particularly in India.

Development, in its varied dimensions, has been a subject of intense and absorbing interest for social scientists. The burgeoning social science literature on 'development' has already fathomed the depth and deepening diversities of development debate. It has been amply demonstrated that 'development discourse' has no defined boundaries, no definite pathways and no universal approaches and strategies. During the period 1988–2003, so much was written and so much was said on the 'development question' that even an encyclopaedic volume might not be able to capture all the ideas, assumptions, and averments. The mountain of writings on development broke open the floodgates for competing and conflicting viewpoints, each claiming superiority over the other.

 'Development Studies' has been a fluid area of research in Indian social science. Valuable studies on development related issues have been produced not only by sociologists, and social anthropologists, but also economists, historians, public administration specialists and political scientists. Diverse disciplinary orientations and the use of different conceptual frameworks and research techniques have enriched the studies on development. Thus, it is not an easy task to prepare a survey report on research studies on 'development studies' within the domain of sociology and anthropology.

# **The Development Debate during the Reference Period**

The development debate during the period under reference took several sharp turns, indicating radical departures from five decades old development theories, most of which talked of economic development as the central focus of all development endeavours. When the economic model of development caused greater disillusionment, the focus of the development debate shifted to the social, cultural, political, technological, and environmental aspects of development, each with its own rationale and recipe. Accordingly, an amazing variety of scholarly writings surfaced which argued in favour of adopting new paradigms of development suited to the socio-cultural and politico-economic conditions prevalent in a given society. The critiques of the modern development theory have not been restricted to alternatives but are based on normative search for a more satisfactory and indigenous form of development, much different from the dominant Western paradigm (Kothari 1988). By the late 1960s and early 1970s the optimism of the Western view of development began to fade in the light of the experience gained in the developing countries. One thing became very clear: the development theories based on the Western model of economic growth were found profoundly inadequate, and as such, were subjected to fundamental questioning.

The development debate, especially after the 1970s, and more particularly after the 1980s, offered strong critiques of all those models of development that emerged supreme following the industrial revolution, and after the Second World War. These models laid emphasis on industrialization, on science and technology, on ruthless exploitation of natural (environmental) resources, and on liberalization of the market forces. These models initially captured the attention of non-Western economists and development planners, because the models sold the dream of prosperity and argued that once there was robust growth of the GNP/GDP, development in other areas would follow. The non-Western economists and political elites in the Third World countries unquestioningly adopted these models and tried to implant them in the development planning processes of their respective countries.

The attractiveness of these alien Western models of development did not last long. Soon, many eminent economists and social scientists in the developing countries not only challenged the economic bias of these models, but also rejected several strategic formulations which were presented as recipes for the development of the Third World countries. The UNESCO publication, *Asian Rethinking on Development* (Atal 1976), summarizes this debate as it relates to the Asia-Pacific region. Even some of Western scholars joined the chorus and called for an end to the ideology of growth. The argument raised was basically, and still is, that the concept of development should not be equated with growth alone, regardless of the fact that both are sequentially related. The consensus appears to have centred on the view that mere growth of the economy should not be designated as a process of development.

The fallout of the economic growth model has not been peculiar to India; it was true for many Third World countries. There was an emerging concern that we had gone wrong somewhere along the line and there was a need for a fundamental reconsideration for India's development strategy. Such a realization was rooted in the fact that in spite of the moderate rates of economic growth in the country, a very large segment of the population still lived in utter poverty. The increased GNP benefited the top echelons whereas the rest of the population remained largely unaffected. Development experts recognized that while growth is necessary, it is neither the sole nor a sufficient condition of development. Faced with growing contradictions, the development planners tried another approach, namely, 'growth with social justice'. This too created a little ripple in the sea of immiserization. The development path that was pursued for long a time basically remained wedded to economic growth, favouring the strong and depriving the weak.

The development debate in the early 1980s shifted to the social aspects of development. The progressive replacement of the more conventional 'economic development' by 'social development' and the linking of it to notions of 'human needs' and 'quality of life', however, is indicative not only of a change in fashion; it also represents a paradigm shift (Dube 1988). The development debate also ventured into examining how development affects culture and with what results. Sociologists and anthropologists dwelt on the cultural context of development (see, for example, Atal 1990). This was so because of the sweep and momentum generated by a highly technocratic model of development which undermined the cultural ethos. It emerged that the search for modernization and a homogeneous process of development during the reference period has been accompanied by a deepening erosion of cultural identities. The Western paradigm of development has adversely affected the cultural distinctiveness of the developing countries. The modernized version of development has led to the establishment of the cultural hegemony of the West and has made it difficult to safeguard the cultural heritage that these countries were proud of. The forces unleashed by the technology-oriented model of development have mounted a massive assault on native cultures, which are fast adapting to Western cultural value patterns in complete disregard of indigenous values, customs, traditions, and lifestyles. Modern communication technology has brought about an unprecedented change of far-reaching consequences. The print and electronic media, under the impact of breathtaking innovations in technology, has greatly altered the indigenous and established ways of life, promoted an ethic of consumerism, and led to the perversion of culture by moulding it to the crass materialistic values of the Western world. The mass communication agency, or the culture industry, is promoting the culture of advanced industrial societies. The electronic media is catering to violence and the vulgarization of much of what people once thought was valuable or sacred. And all this is being done in the name of IEE—information, education and entertainment.

The issue of cultural change also became an important item in the agenda of the development debate in that as it concerned itself with examining the linkage between development and culture. S.C. Dube (1994) examined the issue with greater clarity. He did not subscribe to the notion that the failure of the development strategies in the Third World countries is because of their immutable and unchanging traditions. He rejected all those Western admonitions and exhortations that said that traditions and social institutions have to be changed if they stand in the way of attaining the objectives of economic growth. He asserted that not everything in tradition is evil, and, as such, there should not be unnecessary haste to reject them in order to facilitate the safe passage of the forces of gross materialism which emphasizes personal consumption at the cost of social justice. Culture,' he said, cannot be dispensed with to promote growth, for, it has critical functions, and development does not offer adequate replacement for it. The policies of economic growth and development have to learn to live with culture, he emphatically observed. Tradition and modernity, he said, can coexist and a happy convergence of tradition and modernity is not impossible. He warned that a sudden loss of tradition can lead to anomie, rootless-ness and alienation. He argued for a rethink on many traditional values and institutional patterns and called for assigning them the place they richly deserve in the scheme of the alternative future we visualize.

Several other Indian sociologists, like D.P. Mukherjee, Ramakrishna Mukherjee, Radha Kamal Mukerjee, to name only few, have echoed their thoughts on certain great Indian traditions and values which place a premium on pluralism and diversity, tolerance and responsibility, non-violence, solidarity, equity, equality, and social justice. These, they said, should not be sacrificed at the altar of the new religion called modernity. It would be a real tragedy if India were to lose its cultural moorings in the frantic pursuit of economic growth or the free market economies of the highly industrialized West, they opined.

The crux of the problem of cultural development and the attendant valuedisorientation lies in the attempt to catch up with the West in a world being transformed by fast global economic and technological change. The question, then, is where do we begin our search for cultural development and how do we safeguard our distinct and societally significant values against the onslaught of outside influences (S.P. Srivastava 1998)?

The development debate in the traditional societies of the developing nation-states now acknowledges that social systems and values which promote permissiveness, bolster consumerism, and ignite ignoble desires for the pursuit of worldly goods created by economic growth models, particularly the North American version, are not necessarily the appropriate models for our version of development. We need cultural alternatives to the dominant Western paradigm of development. Sheer pursuit of industrialization and modernization devoid of the consideration of the social and cultural ethos would not only hamper economic growth, but also leave us rootless, alienated, and without any sense of a distinct identity. The writings of D. P. Mukherjee (1986) and Ramakrishna Mukerjee (1991) warn against the dangers of Westernization and make a fervent plea for paying due regard to the historical, social, and cultural context of our society. Strategies of development should therefore be suitably modified and adjusted to our own cultural ethos and cultural factors should be an integral part of all strategies designed to achieve a balanced economic, social, and technological development.

But the issue of culture is not as simple as one often tends to believe. In conceptualizing the problems of development in the light of the values one cherishes and the goals one wishes to attain, there arise number of issues on which there is no clearly laid down policy at the moment. The relevance of cultural policy, says Yogendra Singh (1994), assumes significance in this context. He says that the policy should meet the challenge of cultural change unleashed by market capitalism, information technology, the and pressures of global cultures. Such a policy, he says, will have to be organically linked with policies of our social and economic development. Broadly, such a policy framework must take into account the need to enrich and protect local and regional cultural values, practices, and identities in the process of cultural exposure to mega-institutions of mass communication and marketization.

During the period under review a lot of literature has appeared on social development and the subject was discussed at length in the World Summit on Social Development held in March 1995 at Copenhagen. The documents arising out of the summit underscore the fact that social development, while being an old concept (Dube 1994: 83) has acquired new meanings and messages. It is apparently more comprehensive than economic development; it subsumes the latter, but it specifically aims at the attainment of wider social objectives. Dube (ibid.), however, laments that these objectives have not been precisely defined and the concept has not been rigorously codified. He notes with some satisfaction that the overt and covert dimensions of the concept are now a subject of academic debate and that some tentative formulations of the indicators of social development, as well as the quality of life, have begun to emerge.

The development discourse during the period under reference in India also voiced extreme concern about the distortions of development, especially concentrating upon environmental degradation and the development-displacement controversy. Environmental protection and the sustainable use of natural resources occupied prominent position in the writings on development. The development debate was also concerned with the adverse ethical, moral, and social impacts of the great advances of science and technology; the sociological perspectives on socio-economic development; the evolution of the concept of human development; and the socio-cultural dimensions of the Gandhian model of development. A good number of research studies explored the dynamics of human development with special reference to government expenditure in India, whilst discussing the concept of human development, its evaluation, issues, and contours. Some research studies also took a critical look at the Gandhian social thought and made a case for an alternative paradigm of development.

Other areas of priority concerns for the social scientists have been sustainable development, the participatory approach in the transfer of technology for ecologically and environmentally sustainable development, and the Indian perspective on technology and economic development. The concept of sustainable development arising out of the environment-development debate naturally constituted the core issue for scholarly writings. It was argued that a transparent environmental and economic policy, backed up by a strong political will, is needed to realize the goals of sustainable development. A good number of scholars also reviewed the role of technology in economic development, and cautioned that an in-depth understanding of technology-induced structural changes is necessary before the developing countries jump on the bandwagon of Western technology.

In the context of paradoxes of development, several scholars drew attention to the population dimension to the development debate. It was emphasized that the rising numbers have to be viewed with extreme anxiety; and that interlinkages between environment and development will have to be carefully examined. Unbridled population growth, scholars argued, not only cancels out the gains of development but also perpetuates poverty and pauperizes the environment. Equal emphasis was also laid by the social scientists during the reference period on the problem of environmental pollution and the environmentally insensitive industrial development. The arguments conveyed a sense of great unease with the current policy perspectives which have remained indifferent to taking a holistic view of the paradoxes of technocratic development.

The political dimensions of development, examining inter alia the role of state initiatives in development, a wide variety of political issues, such as democracy, social integration, human rights, human security, globalization, structural adjustment, etc., which inevitably entered into the informed debate on development, also assumed significant importance in social science research. Besides amplifying these and allied issues in relation to the historical interface between the nature of the state and the paths of development pursued, it also examined some of the salient perspectives on the contemporaneous role and responsibilities of the state in the developing world. Scholars also studied the impact of development initiatives on the participation of the scheduled castes in the political process.

How development has caused newer forms of deviance and how it has resulted in the displacement of marginalized sections from their natural habitats, rendering them as ecological refugees, has been another area of concern of the social scientists. They made an attempt to bring to centre stage the 'development–deviance' theme, mainly with two objectives: first, to expound the diverse facets of the development–deviance relationship; and, second, to reiterate the interdependence of one upon the other. In addition, they also examined the development–deviance nexus and underlined the need for development-oriented criminal justice planning. They outlined the contours of an integrated approach to developmental planning in which the aspect of crime prevention and criminal justice also found an emphasis. Some anthropologists examined the development and displacement perspective, and argued that the development debate in the country can no longer afford to ignore the question of displacement. Studies in this area focused on the plight of the poor persons displaced due to development projects and highlighted the rehabilitation problems of the evacuees in the light of the National Policy for Resettlement and Rehabilitation.

The development debate during the period also argued that since human development is at the centre of all development, people's participation in development has to be ensured at all costs. The scholars who showed interest in this area expounded the social mobilization model of development with three salient features: mass sharing of the benefits of development, mass contribution to the development efforts, and people's place in the decision-making process. It was argued that the mass mobilization model of development brings about qualitative changes in the distributional process, eliminates discrimination and structurally determined exploitation, and results in the creation of a climate conducive to a more equitable distribution of the benefits of development. Some scholars also tried to expose the rhetoric and reality of participatory development with people's participation as its hallmark. The scholarly contributions cited examples of how development programmes based on the people's participation paradigm lost their momentum due to the deep-seated aversion of decision-makers and power brokers to meaningfully involve the people (the beneficiaries) in the conceptualization, planning, implementation, monitoring, and management of development projects.

Having moved from a GNP/GDP-centred approach to economic development, and having upheld the notion of social development, the development debate voiced a new concern—the degradation of the environment, the preservation of natural resources, and the search for alternatives to the present preoccupation with over-exploiting the exhaustible and often non-renewable natural resources. Efforts were made to build environmental concerns into the basic thinking on developmental strategies (Kothari 1988:45). The concept of 'sustainable development'—as proposed by the World Commission on Environment and Development (The Brundtland Commission) in its report (1987) *Our Common Future—*occupies considerable space in the present-day development debate. 'Sustainable development is a development that meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs' (ibid.).

The development debate moved further to examine the impact of science and technology on development policy and planning. The question raised in the debate essentially is: 'Can we adopt such technologies that are capital intensive and that destroy jobs, displace human beings, snatch work from people, benefit only a tiny well-off section of society, meet the luxury or comfort needs of the rich, produce ecological risks, consume enormous energy, accelerate wasteful ways of human consumption and produce goods and services that are not required for the basic needs of the millions of poor people in our midst?'

The development debate also recognized the symbiotic relationship between economy and polity. It reaffirmed and reiterated the point that development has to be achieved through planned and programmed policies of the state. The debate recognized that the course of development is decided by the nature of the state and the ideology of growth it pursues. The course of development is also affected when political regimes change. But one viewpoint which emerged supreme is that the management of development policies is essentially an exercise of political management and the role of the state and the political elites is of paramount importance. Many development issues are necessarily inside the purview of politics, more so in the developing countries where the state wields immense power over the life of the people.

In sum, it can be said that the development debate during the reference period presented a panoramic view of development, discerned and dissected lacunae and loopholes in the rationality of the arguments raised, and finally offered viewpoints to make 'development' meaningful, satisfying, and sustainable in the social, economic, and environmental sense.

# **Sectoral Review of the Development Studies**

#### *Demography and Health*

There has been a strong belief that the primary goal of sustainable development is to achieve a reasonable and equitably distributed level of economic well-being which can be perpetuated continually for many generations. Many demographers believe that an increased working-age population, accompanied by adequate developmental activities and improvement in sectors such as health, education, and so on, would ensure a decline in both fertility and mortality. These investments, in turn, would spur economic development and could even lighten the burden of the rising population in the years to come.

Satish K. Sharma (2003) maintaines that population growth is a matter of concern on account of its negative consequences. A rapid rise in the population increases the pressure on the existing resources as it disturbs the balance between the size of the population and the productive potentials of the ecosystem. Deterioration of environment and ecological balance are unavoidable consequences of the rise in human population. An expanding human population strains the service sector. Slums and poverty are the challenges thrown up in the wake of unprecedented population growth. A sustainable relationship between numbers, resources, and the environment deserves expert scrutiny. Sharma makes a plea for the study of the relationship between population growth, urbanization, and environment. The optimum size of the population needs to be fixed in terms of identified materials and a non-material base essential for the survival of the urban population and environment. Care has to be taken to avoid strains on infrastructural facilities. Measures to protect the local interest have to be taken. The shape of the desired urban social order is to be determined in order to facilitate exchange control and the distribution of urban resources. Protection of the environment needs to be accorded a place of salience.

The Problems and tensions of urban life have been discussed by Yogendra Singh (2003), and he argued that urban decay is a matter of concern for the developing countries and requires suitable steps to ensure equilibrium among the forces of tradition and modernity. Social intervention is necessary to contain the aberrations triggered in the wake of unplanned urban growth through the proper reorientation of the institutional structures. Urbanization is an index of development as it facilitates economic growth and helps in promoting orientation favouring democratic norms and civic culture. It is naive to dismiss it as parasitic as it ushers in prosperity. The socio-economic transformations accompanying urbanization are impressive. Technological transformation leads to large-scale sustaining growth with the talent and resources available in the urban centres. Singh stresses the need to study the adaptive responses of the society while encountering the forces unleashed in the wake of urbanization. Urban conflicts and tensions are problems that need redressal. These manifest the incongruence between the rising aspirations and the chances to attain them.

The population issue engaged the attention of a large number of social scientists including anthropologists and sociologists. Population was viewed as a major developmental problem facing the country.

#### *Poverty and Rural Development*

A vast majority of India's poorest people are located in rural areas. The core problems of widespread poverty, growing inequality, rapid population growth, growing and rising unemployment find their origins in the stagnation and often retrogression of economic life in rural areas. Most social and economic indicators consistently show that rural areas compare unfavourably with urban areas. It is at the rural level that the problems of hunger, ignorance, ill health, and high mortality are most acute. Therefore, if development is to take place and become self-sustaining, it will have to be rooted and concentrated in the rural areas.

Development of rural areas has been at the core of the planning process in the country. Therefore, research studies on the reduction of poverty and unemployment have been one of the most avowed themes of the social scientists. Rural development is a broad, inclusive term, which includes in its ambit the socioeconomic and political development of the rural areas. There are no universally accepted approaches to rural development. It is a choice influenced by time, space, and culture. The term 'rural development' connotes the overall development of rural areas to improve the quality of life of the rural people. In this sense, it is a comprehensive and multidimensional concept and encompasses the development of agriculture and allied activities, village and cottage industries and crafts, socioeconomic infrastructure, community services and facilities and, above all, human resources in rural areas. As a phenomenon, rural development is the end result of interactions between various physical, technological, economic, social, cultural, and institutional factors.

The basic objectives of rural development programmes have been the alleviation of poverty and unemployment by giving basic social and economic infrastructure training to rural unemployed youth, and to provide employment to marginal farmers/labourers to discourage seasonal and permanent migration to urban areas. Rural development also includes measures to strengthen the democratic fabric of society through the Panchayati Raj institutions. It is expected to provide the vast rural multitude with 'voice and choice' apart from measures to improve the rural infrastructure, enhance the income of rural households, and better the delivery systems pertaining to education, health, and safety net mechanisms. Poverty alleviation is a key component of rural development.

High poverty levels are synonymous with poor quality of life, deprivation, malnutrition, illiteracy, and low human resource development and hence high population growth. Eradication of poverty, therefore, engaged the attention of a majority of the social scientists as an integral component of the strategy for population stabilization in India. The estimates of income, expenditure, savings, poverty, and other social sector indicators during the survey period were validated with other directly or indirectly available estimates by several scholars. The estimates of per capita income were also validated with the corresponding estimates available from other surveys conducted in this regard.

Poverty in India has been an intensely researched subject. While the estimation of economic inequality is a controversial issue, several studies have highlighted the inter-regional and inter-temporal variations of poverty. Das and Barua (1996) provide an interesting example of inter-regional disparities in India. They mention that Punjab has 2.5 per cent of the total national population and contributes 4 to 5 per cent of the aggregate net state domestic product (NSDP), while Bihar has 10 per cent of the population and contributes only 6 to 7 per cent to NSDP.

The Indian states are diverse in terms of geographic, demographic, and economic characteristics. The central and western states of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Maharashtra are largest in land area, and the eastern states of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh have the largest populations. Between 1961 and 1991, five of the lagging regions remained among the poorest, and regions with above average per capita incomes remained above the average (Cashin and Sahay 1996). Other studies highlighting regional disparities in India include Bhat et al. (1995); and Das (1993); Nair (1993); Pal (1995); Tendulkar and Jain (1995); Tewari (1985). There is adequate evidence to suggest the existence of, and increase in, regional disparities in India. Prof. Ashish Bose coined the acronym BIMARU which stands for Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, to describe the dismal demographic scene in these states.

#### 456 R.R. prasad

Fernando (1999) reviewed the domestic aspect of poverty in India during the 1980s when a significant decline in poverty was achieved. He points out that with the onset of liberalization there was a retrieval affecting the poor. He states that the poverty trends indicate three main periods. The first period form 1950 through 1967: was characterized by frequent fluctuation as the head count ratio indicates. The second period from 1970 through 1990 was characterized by a reduction in poverty rates in both rural and urban poverty. From 1990, alongside the liberalization process, poverty figures have been constantly rising. As a result, poverty among certain groups, particularly among Dalits, tribals, and women, is increasing. Therefore, Fernando suggests allocating an adequate share of resources to intermediary political bodies to increase the opportunities for nonfarm employment.

Shah (1998) argued that the new paradigm of rural development hinges primarily on three interrelated concepts: low external-input agriculture, common good, and empowerment of people's organizations which seek changes; central among these is the idea of the common good. It is argued that common access/ ownership, rather than state ownership of land, water, forest, education, health, services, and, above all, genetic material , would be the key to ensure the sustainable use of these resources on the one hand, while creating decentralized local organizations, on the other.

As a follow-up to the World Summit for Social Development, held in 1995 in Copengahen, Yogesh Atal edited and published a series of books under the auspices of UNESCO. The one *Poverty and Participation in Civil Society* (1997), *Perspectives on Educating the Poor* (1997a), and *Poverty in Transition and Transition in Poverty* (1999). His long introductory essays to these three volumes, and some other essays on the general theme of poverty, are reprinted, *The Poverty Question: Search for Solutions* (2002). Atal underlines the point that reviews of past development efforts acknowledged the persistence of poverty in all countries irrespective of their economic development. The World Summit for Social Development made the commitment to eradicate this scourge and invited all countries to join hands in the struggle against poverty. This has occasioned a rethink on the entire issue of poverty. Highlighting the multidimensionality of the phenomenon of poverty, Atal has built a case for a holistic and culture-specific approach to the solution of the problem. Written for different audiences and at different times, the essays brought together in this book (Atal 2002) clearly outline the author's approach, and raise challenging questions.

Rural development has remained a priority concern among the social scientists. Several research studies have revealed that schemes to transform village life have failed to remove poverty and provide employment to those who are in need of it. The uneven spread of prosperity in the rural areas indicates the lapses in the planning and execution of programmes for rural development. The sections of society in need of priority attention continue to remain neglected. The initiatives taken are not in tune with the rising aspirations of people seeking upliftment. The elite appropriate most of the resources, leaving the poor in utter distress. Poor-specific orientation of the state is weak and implementation insincere. While the functionaries entrusted with the task to ensure downward percolation of the benefits of development are to be properly sensitized, there is an urgent need to encourage bottom-up initiatives for change and capacity building. In order to be people-centred, development requires identification of the constraints and hurdles in its path. The socio-economic context has to be properly understood to facilitate the successful implementation of development programmes and activities. Sachchidananda (2003) has pointed out that without precise and in-depth understanding of the social realities, schemes for rural development are doomed to fail. People have to be involved as success hinges on their level of participation in the execution of the programmes for rural development.

J. V. Raghavender Rao (2003) points out that rural poverty has been responsible for the migration of large sections of the population to urban areas. Rural migrants find their means for survival in the manufacturing and service sectors. The socialculturally fused and synthesized life of the cities constitutes the pull factors and leads to the concentration of people in urban areas. Unplanned growth of cities and an undeterred flow of the population from villages and small towns seem to have strained the available infrastructural facilities. The overflow of rural poverty to metropolises has led to overcrowding resulting in ghettoization. The deprived living in slums and shanties remain uncovered by the amenities and services. There is no safe drinking water in the slums which have poor sanitation, and no easy access to medical facilities. Gastro-enteritis and other similar water-borne diseases are common among slum dwellers. Industrial waste, noise, and pollution are unavoidable health hazards. Rao pleads for imaginative insights to reverse the trends of unplanned urban growth and mend the weaknesses of rural economy.

D.M. Diwakar (2003) has observed that the studies of the operation and impact of poverty alleviation programmes indicate that these initiatives have favoured those who have the resources and skills to appropriate them. Since the low and ignorant are unable to manipulate the inputs in their favour, rural poverty remains pervasive and entrenched. The semi-feudal relations of production tend to be resilient, favouring the exploitation of the poor. Landless labourers are kept in bondage in spite of legislations seeking its removal. Schemes to reduce poverty have been indifferently implemented. States' mechanisms to ensure delivery of succour to the needy are weak and insincere. Studies of rural development programmes conducted by Diwakar point to the need to ensure people's participation. Sources of employment must be diversified and implementation of land reform measures ensured without loss of time. The public distribution system needs to be made functional. Such sections as have no tradition of education deserve priority attention. The poor and neglected have to organize themselves to assert their rights and avail themselves of the state-sponsored inputs of development.

Sachchidananda (2003) describes the operation and impact of a self-reliant system seeks to ensure effective and optimal management of land in an integrated manner. This is aimed to reduce poverty by promoting a cyclical system of investment. It seeks to strengthen a model of development which derives strength from local initiatives. The strategy thus developed is described as cyclical as the benefits from one investment turn into capital input for use in other sectors. Instincts to help others are harnessed to ensure survival of the collectivity. Equitable distribution of the outputs generated is ensured leading to the desired reduction in incidents of social conflict.

Poverty alleviation schemes for their successful execution require the support of non-governmental organizations (NGOs). These have to be effective partners in state initiatives for development and poverty eradication. The challenges of rural development have to be encountered with people-centred initiatives in the third sector. Special concerns for the socio-economic conditions of the marginalized sections of the society are in fact being expressed in the proliferation of independent voluntary organizations willing to shoulder responsibilities for upliftment and empowerment. V.S. Upadhyay and R.U. Ahmed (2003) examined the role of some NGOs in the implementation of programmes for the upliftment and development of the socio-economic conditions of the rural people in Bangladesh and the impact of the same on the target population. They point out that working among people for their development has brought about changes of unprecedented magnitude. The inhibitive constraints of inertia and insulation are removed with the fostering of instincts to participate and contribute. The spirit of togetherness, when inculcated, empowers people to resist deprivation. Instead of waiting for outside support people seek locally available solutions to their problems. Upadhyay and Ahmad maintain that sustained development requires inclusive strategies for participation. In order to eradicate poverty, development has to be integrated to pool together initiatives to ensure a well-rounded perspective.

R.G. Singh (2003) used data from selected studies in order to portray the condition of affected poverty groups which are struggling in different locations for their survival, betterment, and empowerment. They are seeking alliances and securing them from similar groups in order to achieve their life goals. In addition, networking with voluntary organizations and social action groups is being done with a view to enlarging the political and social space and securing social justice and equity through participation. The implications of these local initiatives have been discussed in terms of changes in social policy, organization of social programmes, and their implementation in order to reduce or prevent exclusion. It has been observed that while economic marginalization has been reduced in some cases, there are huge deficits in the area of social development.

#### *Social Sector*

Social sector development and anti-poverty programmes have been integral elements of India's development strategy. Several programmes have been in operation over the years focussing on the poor as the target groups. These include programmes for the welfare of the backward classes, weaker sections, and women and children, as well as a number of special employment programmes for self- and wage-employment in both rural and urban areas. This is a well-researched area.

Anil Kumar Vaddiraju (1999) has argued that the absence of the Green Revolution and the rapid development of the productive forces such as irrigation are the main reasons why the dominant castes could not strengthen their hold between 1960–96. On the other hand, the backward classes and the lower castes emerged to take political power for precisely the same reasons. The recently introduced electoral reservations, following the 73rd Constitutional Amendment, also strengthened the backward and lower caste claims to power. Thus, both structural as well as political tendencies worked in favour of the emergence of the backward castes at the grass-roots level (village and *mandal*). The emergence of the backward castes, however, in the nascent stage and is limited to the grass-roots level only. The present chapter argues that further consolidation of the backward and lower castes' struggle for power needs another round of land reforms which would reduce the disproportional power held not only by the upper castes but also by some backward castes.

A. K. Lal (2003) has argued that the concluding decade of the twentieth century represents an important stage in the political modernization as it witnessed the unprecedented rise of the middle-range castes as the locus of power. This rise of the section intermediate between the upper castes and the scheduled castes is not a 'flash event'. The struggle for parity with the superior in the social hierarchy is an old concern of these people 'who sought horizontal cohesion to ensure corporate status elevation in the traditional stratification system. Emancipation was aspired to claim parity with the clean at the apex in the caste hierarchy. The urge to acquire the markers of superior status in the traditionally legitimized social order and the orientations favouring the inculcation of rituals, ideologies, and the behavioural patterns wedded to reform led to initiatives for the anticipatory socialization to the culture of the superior. However, appropriation of the traditional symbols of status could not provide them the space proximate to the superior in Brahmanical Hinduism. Networking of identities with shared common disabilities was rendered difficult on account of 'competing claims for superiority' among the cognate caste group opposed to the privileged twice-born. Unable to lift themselves to a superior location in the traditional stratification system, this mobility-seeking social category used the strength of their numbers to find their due in the emerging political system. The emphasis shifted from struggle for superiority in the ritual hierarchy to control over sources of power. The consolidation of forces low in the hierarchy of caste turned out to be the most impressive in the wake of their struggle for entitlement of benefits under the schemes of protective discrimination.

Andre Béteille (1999a) has argued that, by and large, the scholarly discussion of empowerment has been context-driven rather than theory-driven. Indian society is notoriously hierarchical. It is not that nothing has changed, but that the change has not measure up to the expectations aroused at the time of independence. The vehement style of public discussion in India tends to obscure the changes that have taken place in the last 100 years. Many of the proposals for empowerment are very broad and general, but others are quite specific and concrete. Among the latter are those that seek to bring about empowerment through a radical change in the social composition of the strategic institutions of society. This approach to empowerment has evoked much public discussion in India.

### *Decentralized Governance and Panchayati Raj*

The present structural framework of democratic decentralization aims at a wider dispersal of the power-seeking empowerment of the weak and marginalized. Its emergence as the prime mover to spur the execution of development activities through participation of the people, low and high, is a step towards capacity building for self-development. Innovative bottom-up interventions constitute the strength of the arrangement thus evolved. Social audit and the right to recall are powerful checks against distortions.

S.K. Singh (2003) has detailed the achievements of the democratic decentralization process and advocated careful nurturing and expert guidance to ensure the downward percolation of power and responsibilities. The Panchayati Raj institutions have to be made more functional take care of the needs of the people.

Mathew (1999) has argued that in terms of numerical strength and operational reach, voluntary agencies (VAs) cannot be compared with Panchayati Raj institutions (PRIs). In many villages and small towns there are no VAs at all. The programmes of recognized VAs rarely cover all districts in a state. Where strong local groups have been set up; for example, for natural resource management such as the joint forest management committees, water users groups, etc., their coverage is restricted to a few hamlets and villages.

#### *Education and Human Resource Development*

Education is a critical input in human resource development and essential for any country's economic growth. Though it is generally believed that the major indicators of socio-economic development, namely, the growth rate of economy, birth rate, death rate, infant mortality rate, and literacy rate, are all interconnected there is little doubt that an improvement in the status of other indicators is largely dependent upon literacy. There is strong evidence to suggest that a high literacy rate correlates with low birth rate, low infant mortality rate (IMR), and increase in the rate of life expectancy. Hence, illiteracy and elementary education programmes are necessary not only to ensure social justice, but also to foster economic growth, social well-being and social stability.

Education offers the greatest opportunity for employment and economic returns and, thus, reduces poverty. These issues are especially important for the developing countries where it is well documented that education achieves reduction in poverty and that equitable distribution of education has the largest impact on growth. Several scholars have tried to document the progress of education in India by comparing all the alternative data sources. They have taken stock of the current conditions and explored options for future developments in the educational sector. The research studies during the survey period presented a detailed educational profile of both rural and urban people in India, and examined the educational levels of the people and interaction with the levels of living and also the impact of macro and meso-policies on their educational attainment. Many scholars have tried to clarify a number of issues facing the educational sector in India like the reasons for low enrolment and the high dropout rate. Survey evidence shows that just the lack of interest on the part of both child and parent is the major reason for the high dropout and low enrolment rates. Education being the prime mover of social development and social change, there are a large number of publications focusing on different aspects of education from primary to non-formal education and the educational development of different sections of the people. Notwithstanding the disparities between men and women in different regions in the educational field, the disparities in the enrolment rates of boys and girls in schools, and the disparities in the dropout rate of boys and girls from the schools coupled with the lack of infrastructure in the schools premises, most of the authors have arrived at more or less similar conclusions, that while there is a significant increase in the overall literacy rate, it is lower among the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, and among disabled persons and women. Some have also pointed to a significant increase in the literacy among SCs / STs which has been attributed to the reservation policy followed by both state and Central governments, the establishment of Ashram Schools in the tribal belts, and other facilities such as SC/ST hostels, free books, free uniforms, etc.

Varshney and Hemant Kumar (2002) analysed the trends in the literacy rate at both national and state levels using the census of 1991 and 2001. They found that the gap between male-female literacy was 18.30 per cent in 1951, which increased to 26.62 per cent by 1981; it showed a declining trend in 1991 and 2001 from 24. Eighty-four per cent to 21.19 per cent. The authors observed that at the state level too there has been an increase in the literacy rates for both sexes over the period of study. They pointed out that male literacy is higher than female literacy. According to them, Kerala with 90.92 per cent literacy, holds first rank, whereas Bihar with 47.53 per cent literacy holds a very low rank as per the 2001 census.

Gandhi and Geeta (2002), Pradeep Kumar (1999), Usha Nagar (2000), and Ramachandran (2002), have indicated that the rate of literacy varies between sexes, SCs/STs and the general population. They have also observed that as a result of numerous efforts and heavy resource inputs by the government, the number of girls in primary education increased from 5.38 million in 1951 to 48.30 million by 1998–99; at the secondary level, it had gone up from 0.53 million in 1951 to 16.30 million by 1998– 99. Naganadhan et al. (2000) have shown that the literacy rate of females in Tamil Nadu has improved steadily over these periods, from 16 per cent in 1951 to 64 per cent in 1991, which is higher than the national average of 52.1 per cent. The District Primary Education Programme (DPEP) is given credit for this improvement in the literacy profile of women. The authors further point out that all the schemes, along with the provisions of various concessions like free bus passes, books, slates, uniforms, and midday meals, have had a significant impact in terms of lower dropout rates and high enrolment rates.

T. Lakshmaiah and E.C. Jayakumar (1994), in their study in Meghalaya, reported that women's literacy among Khasi tribe has an edge over the education of tribal women of other regions. The authors have attributed this trend to the fact that Khasi society is matrilineal. The study has also revealed that the mission schools perform better than the government schools. Pulist (2000) examined the attendance of different sections of society in programmes of distance learning. He tried to locate the factors for the minimal registration of the disadvantaged segments in distance education programme. He observed that although there has been an increasing trend in literacy since 1951, it is not as encouraging among the SCs/STs and the disabled.

Venkataramana (2000) examined the achievement levels of literacy of learners in the Total Literacy Campaign (TLC) and identified the strengths and weaknesses of the programmes and offered suggestions to *zilla saksharata samitis* (ZSS) to improve the situation. Information was collected from 7,404 learners of eight blocks situated in 100 *gram panchayats* in Kalahandi district of Orissa. The author pointed out that in the 1991 census the literacy percentage of the scheduled tribes in Kalahandi district was 18.54. More women were enrolled under TLC as the female literacy rate was low. Of the total enrolled, a 36 per cent sample comprised the scheduled tribes, 59.3 per cent scheduled castes, and 4.7 per cent the general category. This shows that TLC improved the literacy rate of the scheduled tribes. In reading, writing, and arithmetic (the three Rs), there was not much difference between students of scheduled tribes (ST), scheduled castes (SC), and the general category. The scheduled tribes performed better in reading than the scheduled castes and others in the general category. In arithmetic, the performance of the scheduled tribes was almost equal to the general category. Electrifying the literacy centres, appointing more women instructors for better participation of the women folk, encouraging ST learners by providing incentives, catalysing the role of *mahila mandals* and self-help groups in motivating women learners were the major suggestions offered.

There are several reports regarding the problems faced by literacy campaigns in urban areas. The case of Pondicherry, a high literacy region with four districts, is quite illustrative. Sundararaman (1991) reported that the degree of participation in village committees was in inverse proportion to their geographical distance from the seat of government. In Mahe, Yanam, and Karaikal, both administrative and community support was forthcoming. In the outer low literacy blocks of Pondicherry the response was low, but in the nearer semi-urban areas and in urban Pondicherry proper it was the lowest. Political/administrative counter pressures, a lower degree of sense of community, and consequent difficulties in evolving decentralized organizational forms with acceptable local leadership are stated as reasons for this phenomenon. Sustained outreach to subgroups through college students is suggested as a solution, especially in urban areas.

In a survey of three districts in West Bengal—Burdwan, Birbhum and Bankura—Debabar Banerjee (1989) identified a lack of response and sometimes resistance to the literacy campaigns in the urban areas of these districts. Officials attributed this to a lack of interest and time among casual labourers, indifference of the municipal councillors, and the lumpenization of sections of slum-dwelling workers. In addition, the author draws attention to the comparative lack of social cohesion among migrants to cities and towns, organizational difficulties with respect to workers in the informal sector, and the alienation of the urban middle class from the issues that affect the poor.

In a study of women in a literacy project in a resettlement colony in south Delhi in 1991, Dighe (1995) found that mobilization efforts had led to extensive enrolment and a high degree of motivation. However, only 16 per cent of the sample learners who had completed the three primers were able to attain the required levels of literacy for various reasons—socio-economic, organizational, and patriarchal.

Ahmed (1999) argued that an empirical analysis of the underlying causes of child labour had shed considerable light on the policy approaches to be followed to bring an effective and lasting end to the employment of child labour. Contrary to expectations, his empirical results clearly confirmed that poverty is only a minor explanatory factor behind the incidence of child labour. It ranked last among the seven determinants of child labour in terms of their respective explanatory power. School enrolment is a major explanatory factor but this relationship is somewhat blurred as some children could combine work with education and because of the possibility of exaggerated official school enrolment statistics and high school dropout rates. However, the negative relationship between school enrolment and child labour, and between adult literacy and child labour confirms the double dividend that can be reaped from free compulsory universal primary education in both the short and long terms. Ahmed argued that economies with very unequal income distribution and with a high dependence on agriculture have higher rates of employment of child labour.

Children from poor families, or without families, are exploited on account of their helplessness. Their deprivations tend to be distressingly cumulative. Economic necessity forces them to work for low wages in inhuman conditions. State and society, in spite of being aware of the magnitude, remain least effective in encountering this undesirable fallout of the initiatives for development and growth. National and international concern for the elimination of child labour does not seem to have produced the intended consequences. Nadeem Mohsin (2003) recommends sincere attempts to identify child labour. Steps are needed to seek people's support in promoting education and providing shelter to these children. Specific programmes aimed at improving the conditions of this section of the society are needed to supplement the schemes for the eradication of poverty. The State needs to articulate its strategies indicating the source and support to stem the rot. Without the involvement of people, a solution to social problems remains elusive. Mohsin makes a plea for an effective partnership between the state and the civil society.

# *Rural Drinking Water Supply*

A nation's per capita renewable water supply is not just an accounting measure of an important natural resource. The availability of and access to clean water and sanitation are among the most important determinants of the health of individual human beings. Without sufficient water, economic development becomes virtually impossible and conflict over scarce resources inevitable. Long-term sustainability requires a shift from non-renewable to renewable supplies of fresh water, a new sense of urgency about water conservation, and ultimately, stabilization of population size.

In India, a very large population is even today deprived of safe water facilities. The sanitation coverage continues to be extremely low. About 70–80 per cent of diseases are water and sanitation related. According to an estimate, 1.5 million children below the age of five die and 200 million human days are lost every year owing to water-related diseases. Most of these deaths occur due to diarrhoea and jaundice and unless the incidence of these two diseases is reduced, the IMR and morbidity rate cannot be reduced. One of the basic requirements is, therefore, to have a large conglomeration approach to address adequately the unmet needs of basic services/goods such as primary health care, nutrition, safe drinking water, and proper hygiene and sanitation in order to achieve population stabilization to a level which can provide a decent quality of life to all citizens rather than to only a small percentage of the urban elite. Several studies have been carried out on the issue of access to safe drinking water in the rural areas.

#### *Malnutrition and Public Distribution System*

Despite having achieved economic growth to a considerable extent, the nation continues to lag behind in health performance as compared to many other developing countries. Having gone through a period of health transition, India is far away from its objective of attaining better health as one-third of its population is poor, illiterate, malnourished, and without proper health facilities. However, there is an improvement in the health status due to a shift in focus from family welfare programmes to maternal and child health. The introduction of schemes like Universal Immunization Programmes (UIP), Child Survival and Safe Motherhood (CSSM), Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS), and their emphasis on the poor and vulnerable sections has improved the health of mothers and children. But it is evident that progress in health indicators has been slow. This is due to an array of factors such as widespread poverty, illiteracy, and low income. Several researchers have made an effort to study the relationship between morbidity, cost of treatment, and utilization of health-care facilities.

Despite substantial improvement in health and well-being, malnutrition remains an important problem in India, where more than half of the children under four years are malnourished, 30 per cent of newborns are significantly underweight, and about 50 per cent of women are anaemic. According to reports, malnutrition costs India in terms of lost productivity, illness, and death. It seriously retards improvements in human development and halts further reduction in childhood mortality. While mortality has declined by half and fertility by twofifths, malnutrition has only come down by about one-fifth in the last 40 years.

Gupta and Gumber (1999) have argued that government-run rural health services in developing countries, including India, are highly centralized with very little local autonomy either over programmes or over resources. This centralization is commonly cited as the source of several typical problems: (a) services are unresponsive to local demands and needs, partly because the population has few alternatives; (b) in spite of low overall coverage of services, there is excess capacity in infrastructure with corresponding shortages of supplies and sometimes of staff; (c) staff are assigned, rotated, and paid with no relation to output of services or client satisfaction besides being quite often inadequately or under-trained, illequipped, and clandestinely doing private practice; and (d) referral systems do not work.

In contrast, NGO-run services are almost totally decentralized. This is often mentioned as the reason why they are preferred by clients who find them more satisfactory and are willing to use them despite higher fees. However, it is difficult to disentangle the effect of decentralization from that of greater resource availability in explaining which services work better.

The inescapable conclusion is that further progress in human development in India will be difficult to achieve unless malnutrition is tackled with greater vigour and improvement is more rapid in the future than it was in the past. Malnutrition rates in some parts of the country are highest among children and women, due primarily to inadequate food intake, illness, and such harmful childcare practices as delayed complementary feeding. Underlying these are household food insecurity, inadequate preventive and curative health services, and insufficient knowledge of proper care. Widespread malnutrition is a major barrier to a further reduction in maternal and infant mortality rates. Malnourishment can also significantly lower cognitive development and learning achievement during the pre-school and school years, and subsequently result in lower productivity. Nutritional anaemia is implicated in low physical and mental performance.

In recent decades, India has established a framework of programmes with the potential to combat malnutrition, including a Public Distribution System (PDS), an Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) programme, a National Midday Meals Programme (NMMP), and several employment schemes providing food for work. But these programmes have failed to meet the needs of the poorest because of ineffective targeting, implementation, and coverage. There have been a considerable number of good research studies on malnutrition, public distribution system, integrated child development services, mid-day meals programme, etc., during the survey period.

Jha et al. (1999) in their paper, 'Real Consumption Levels and Public Distribution System in India', examined the rationale for the current allocation pattern of rice and wheat through the PDS in India and found it wanting in at least one important respect: the allocation pattern appears to ignore the structure of consumption demand in the country.

#### *Liberalization, Privatization, and Globalization*

The economic reforms started in 1991 held the promise of considerable improvements in the living standards of the country's 300 million poor. During the last few decades, India's inward-looking and public sector-driven industrialization strategy resulted in rates of growth and poverty reduction far more modest than those witnessed elsewhere in the world, particularly in South-East Asia. The economy has responded well to the reforms and the government has made it an explicit objective to accelerate the development of the country's human resources. By maintaining its commitment to economic liberalization and redirecting towards infrastructure, health, and education the large resources that are now absorbed by subsidies for *inter alia,* power, irrigation, and fertilizer, India can give its long battle to reduce poverty a new impetus. A good number of research studies on liberalization, privatization, and globalization have been published during the survey period, particularly in the *Economic and Political Weekly*.

Shiva et al. (1999) argue that there are high social and ecological costs linked to the globalization of non-sustainable agriculture, which have been experienced in all commercially grown and chemically farmed crops in all regions. While the benefits of globalization go to the seeds and chemical corporations through expanding markets, the cost and risks are borne exclusively by the small farmers and landless peasants. While the commercial private seed supply system needs strong state regulation, farmer seed supply should function free of state interference with strong community control and public participation. A strong bio-safety regulation with public participation is both a democratic and an ecological imperative.

In the pre-liberalization period, especially since the early 1970s, the safety net for the poor consisted of the various poverty alleviation programmes. A tremendous level of co-option of the 'left behind' was achieved at a political level via these 'schemes'. At present the safety net for the poor and the unorganized in India is very weak. The poor have to fend for themselves; they are at the mercy of nature, the market, and the government. In this kind of a situation, those sectors of the economy where labour is surplus, unskilled and uneducated will not be able to face competition. This does not mean that they are incapable of efficiency. Rather, it means that they need some kind of positive discrimination at an economic level before they can face competition. People who are in a hurry to liberalize are in effect asking certain sections of the population to make sacrifices for others. Besides the moral question of why one section of the population must sacrifice for other sections, at the practical level it may not even work. Historically, many shortterm sacrifices have been forced from people for the sake of a glorious future. In most of these cases, the glorious future never came; in fact, economic conditions always worsened. Politically, it is essential to maintain stability in the economy so that the liberalization process may continue.

R. Radhakrishnan and Alakh N. Sharma (1999) have argued that rural labour in India has been orphaned in the wake of liberalization, globalization, and the dominance of the market. Their study book also presents fascinating analyses of the changing realities in the rural labour market pre- and post-economic reforms. The authors argue that diversification of the workforce was the major factor behind rising real wages, and reducing poverty before 1991, and the reverse process has led to deteriorating conditions for rural labour after 1991.

Tulpule (1997) has argued that it 'needs to be recognised that conceding supremacy to the free market in economic affairs makes the very concept of society's development strategy meaningless. For, development or lack of it then becomes the outcome of the interplay of market forces, too complex, imponderable and unpredictable to be brought within a policy frame. Welfare, social justice and environmental conservation can be meaningfully pursued only to the extent a society has the will and strength to curb and regulate the market.' Thus, even at a conceptual level, dependence on a free global market does not appear consistent with any definite strategy even for economic development, much less so for development in the full sense of the term.

Sudipto Mundle (1993) has argued that there have been many references to the proposition that in developing countries economic liberalism is not compatible with political liberalism or that there is a trade-off between democracy and development. He further argues that these propositions are of course not equivalent but they do suggest that a hard state is a necessary condition for development.

Krishna Bharadwaj (1990) has argued that a commodity-centred approach to the study of economic development lost sight of the tremendous changes taking place in the economic conditions of labour, and pleads for the analytical reconstruction of the macro dynamics of development.

Pranab Sen (1991) attributes the employment problem to the lack of jobs in the organized sector despite a rapid growth of output. The organized sector in recent years, argues Sen, has shown negative employment growth. This implies that the shift from relatively labour-intensive to capital-intensive technologies was not confined to the new units, but that retro-fitting of existing capacities was also

#### 468 R.R. prasad

taking place. On the other hand, the unorganized sector has shown a fairly rapid and sustained growth in employment. The author feels that there should be deliberate propagation of the unorganized sector through government policies.

#### *Gender and Social Inequalities*

Indian social scientists have carried out a good number of research studies on gender and social inequalities. These studies have amply demonstrated that while there is clear evidence of gender and social inequalities in rural India, other inequalities that are seen in many developing countries do not appear in acute form in India. Economic inequality varies little from the poorest regions to the more affluent, and it has also remained remarkably stable over time. This however, blurs the social reality of a nation where social stratification based on caste, ethnicity, and gender acts to impede mobility.

The status of women has been the theme of many studies. Attempts have been made to locate the dimensions of change and continuity. Evidences available indicate that women are a deprived lot in the absence of the resources to facilitate their rise from their traditional location. Sahid Ashraf (2003) has reviewed selected works on the status of women to present the reality in this regard. Studies discussed point out that women remain confined to their homes, as situations are not conducive to outside employment. The labour market favours men over women as the division of labour within the occupation is highly sex-biased. Work done by the latter is considered inferior and subordinate as gender-based wage discrimination continues. Their empowerment tends to be elusive in the absence of land rights. Women are much more disadvantaged in their access to employment and earnings than men. The status of women tends to be low on account of the slow spread of education among them. Little education impairs the quality of life and leads to high morbidity. The gender gap in health and survival is high. Deprivation of women tends to be high in the midst of prosperity. Prejudices against them continue to be endemic.

Ranjana Kumari (1998) has argued that a woman's work participation would determine her status enhancement. The high rate of women's work activities is considered a necessary outcome of the development process. It is interesting to note from the data that districts with high levels of development show low rates of women's work participation. The least developed districts reveal high rates of women's work participation. The sample depicts that nearly 29 per cent of the women provide family labour, which implies that their work remains unpaid. Another 41 per cent do domestic work, which is not considered 'work'. Eight per cent are wage workers, 3 per cent are self-employed, while a good number of them a employed in household production exclusively. In all, 51 per cent of the women are engaged in agriculture. The major activity they perform is cutting and threshing. Only 42 per cent of the wage workers could work for more than 183 days a year. Therefore, for most of the women, their work remains secondary, unreported, unpaid, undervalued, and invisible.

Women are marginalized within the process of development. In fact arguments emerged in support of the concept of the feminization of poverty which may be seen in three contexts. First, work opportunities tend to decrease for wage workers; scheduled caste women bear the brunt of 'involuntary unemployment; upper castes withdraw their women from employment as development occurs. Second, women in the study had almost no access to means of production. Even if they had ownership, they were 'powerless' in exercising control. Third, technology has greatly increased the cost of agriculture. It has increased the misery of femaleheaded households in terms of workload and utilization of costly technology.

Bela Malik (1999) has argued that while it is true that Dalits in general are oppressed, Dalit women bear a disproportionately higher share of this burden. Given the division of labour within the household, women have to suffer more from the lack of access to water, fuel sources, and sanitation facilities. Dalit women face discrimination. Issues of childcare and health are relegated to the background in a struggle for subsistence. The problem of being marginalized, and therefore discriminated against, is worsened by the practice of untouchability. Sharecropping, for example, is not extensive among Dalit families due to the observance of ritual purity by caste groups. The grim reality of untouchability appears inescapable. The fear of indignity, humiliation, and rape is always present.

Vardan (2000) examined the functioning of the female households and the problems they face in the society at large. His study suggests that this special segment of women needs the priority attention of policy makers for their social upliftment.

C. Lakshmanna (2003) has analysed the status of women in India in a historical perspective. The author maintained that the discrimination against women is the outcome of the continuous erosion in the society's orientation towards women through the ages. There has been a gradual but continuous dent in the status of women since time immemorial. The inferior standing reflects a marked shift from the ideal of equality between men and women. Deprivation and denial seem to have made them dependent. Strict provisions are in place to keep them insurrogate status. Lakshmanna points out that society's interaction with different faiths and diverse regimes led to a situation where women were to be an insular entity. Exploitation of women has been resisted under the forces of modernization. Legislations have been enacted to favour their inclusion as equal partners of men. There has been significant progress as old barriers are crumbling and elevation of their status constitutes a priority concern of the modernizing society.

Schemes for the development of the poor and weak have better chances of success if the people's participation in their execution is ensured. This, in turn, is possible only when the schemes are oriented to serve the priority needs. Sincere intentions to serve the people in order to be successful require intimate knowledge of the needs and aspirations of the target group. Constraints in the execution of the programmes will persist so long as the people at whom these are directed remain indifferent to their implementation. D. Sundaram (2003) maintains that measures have to be taken to ensure the formulation and execution of the programmes. Social disposition of the target group is accelerated if the development functionaries reciprocate the initiatives at the grass roots. He makes a plea for reorientation in the perspective of the social sciences. Value-neutrality and non-interference do not make social sciences useful to the needs of the society. Sundaram believes that participatory research is necessary in the planning and implementation of the schemes of economic development and social transformation.

Rajni Kothari (1998) has argued that the Indian model for the accommodation of unassimilated identities and rising aspirations has been rendered weak in the wake of large-scale politicization of the masses and diffusion of democratic norms. The pressure on the macro framework for conciliation tends to be immense as it involves structural and distributive issues. The neglect of priorities seeking redressal, therefore, has led to the marginalization and exclusion of the masses. Ethnic assertions and movements reflecting the unease of the excluded and peripherialized segments tend to proliferate as institutions and mechanisms for redressal are rendered irrelevant. The earlier inclusive democratic model for nation-building seems to be struggling to survive in spite of forces wedded to seeking its demise. Kothari emphasizes the need to assign an important role to bottom-up initiatives to re-order political spaces in favour of the poor.

Walter Fernandes (2003) argues that fundamentalism is a political strategy which seeks to perpetuate the structure of traditional dominance. It is resorted to resist the rise of the weak and excluded. The rise of the low in the social order is considered a threat. Cruelty against Dalits and tribals manifests the intolerance of the forces opposed to erosion of the traditionally legitimized arrangement. Christians are attacked to prevent the deprived classes who are the main components of the faith from acquiring an autonomous space. 'Not only those who claim the apex location in caste hierarchy but even those who are located in the middle are not prepared to tolerate loss of control over the population kept in subordination' since time immemorial (ibid.). Old centres of power as well as the ascendant intermediate castes want to exploit them for their own interest. Fernandes points out that the commercial impulses of the colonial regime did not favour equality in the caste system as the rulers remained indifferent. Sections thus deprived and forced into exclusion turned to Christianity to seek redressal. Their conversion to the new faith ensured for them social equality and upward mobility. This did not have the endorsement of caste Hindus who turned hostile.

S. Tripathi (2003) argues that the deprived feel neglected as the redistributive mechanism of the state fails to favour them. The top-down approach of development leads to marginalization of the depressed. The capital-intensive model of growth does not favour their empowerment. Imported knowledge, borrowed wisdom, and foreign capital produce consequences unfavourable to the poor. Investments made and expenditure incurred have enabled the rich and prosperous to enhance their prosperity. Steps to eliminate the inadequacies and distortions are required to ensure the dispersal of inequality through people-centred development. Tripathi maintains that this task is difficult as the contemporary policies of development are against the interests of the poor. The recent technological advances and the rising clout of neocolonialism have further aggravated the situation. He makes a plea for insulation of tribals from the negative impact of liberalization.

Jose Kananaikil (1993) examined the impact of the changing contours of the economy on the marginalized groups. He argues that the state has been insincere towards the marginalized and exploited. Schemes to lift them from degradation have failed to make any significant dent. The new economic initiatives are loaded more in favour of the rich. These have become means for the ruthless economic exploitation of the weak by the resourceful. Commenting on the plight of the poor in India, Kananaikil feels the need for initiating direct poverty alleviation programmes. The purchasing power and income of the deprived will have to be augmented to enable them to withstand the onslaughts of the forces of exploitation.

The limitations of and the success in reforming and reconstructing the traditional Indian exploitative social order constituted the theme of R. G. Singh's study (2003). Singh pointed out that the revival of the indigenous model of socioeconomic development has led to a weakening of the liberal democratic model.

Prakash Louis (2003) has opined that such contexts of deprivation require empowerment of Dalits to demand for an end to their exploitation.

K.D. Gangrade (2003) studied in retrospect the enactments and implementation of provisions meant to rid the scheduled castes of the stigma of untouchability. He argues that there is scope for improvement in the laws enacted to eradicate untouchability. However, the ultimate success, he say, lies in ushering in orientation alteration. Untouchability, he maintains, owes its origin to the norms and values nurtured for its existence. Since prejudice against the scheduled castes is an old phenomenon, it perpetuates itself even in the absence of any legimacy. Such a situation seeks transformation in the socio-economic structure. Commenting on the recent proliferation of movements of the scheduled castes demanding emancipation, he points out that these mark only the beginning as much remains to be done. Constitutional safeguards and special socio-economic programmes notwithstanding, society's attitude towards untouchable continues to be atrocious.

S.P. Srivastava (1998) has argued that there is a need to provide a comprehensive solution to the problems of the scheduled castes. He feels that in spite of being concerned with the plight of these sections of the society, effective and enduring solutions to their problems tend to be elusive. He describes in detail the nature and extent of oppression Dalits face to indicate the factors favouring discrimination and prejudices against them. So long as tradition remains resilient

#### 472 R.R. prasad

the impact of policies seeking the eradication of untouchability will not be spectacular. Legal measures do not work in a hostile social milieu; retrograde religious ethos needs more than legal enactments.

Uneven development of the scheduled castes is a challenge which deserves expert scrutiny. N. Sudhakar Rao (2003) argues that in spite of the laudable contributions made, much requires to be done to locate the variables leading to such unintended consequences. The context of unequal development requires in-depth studies to evolve empirically substantiated theories. He postulates that the castes least dependent on upper-caste Hindus have benefited most from the special programmes of the state. The dominant castes do not favour their independence.

The presence of the largest number in scavengers of the world in India is attributed to a culture of exploitation. It is perpetuated by the lack of an effective and sincere programme for the removal of the practice of carrying night soil as head loads. Pamela Singla (2003) has shown that eliminating this practice is difficult because of the reluctance of the scavengers themselves who regard it as their only means of livelihood. She has recommended suitable training programmes for the scavengers and adequate financial support to help them find alternative means of livelihood. S.N. Chaudhary (2003) has analysed the changes in their status as a result of state initiatives to reserve some positions for them in the occupational structure that emerged in post-independence India. In spite of the limited success of the initiatives for change, some mobility is visible in them.

Shyamlal (2003) analysed the organization, operation and impact of caste associations among the people associated with the profession of scavenging. An organization with the explicit intention of promoting educational development, social reform, and the spread of democratic norms among the scavengers was first launched in Mumbai. This helped in the formation of the larger forum with the aim of spreading awareness among the scavengers. Efforts were made subsequently to have a federation of such organizations in other parts of the country. A strong pressure group to take care of their the plight was set up. The leadership that emerged stressed the need for the spread of education and political aspirations. The organization has since been wedded to these goals. Lal points out that the Safai Congress, which represents a federation of the organizations devoted to the interests of the scavenging community, has helped in narrowing the intra-community cleavages. The organization remains under the influence of the Congress Party to the extent that its leaders work to further the interests of the party. Concentration of power at the apex is reported to have favoured the old at the cost of the young and educated, and the wider interests of the community remain unattended on account of the indifferent leadership.

A.K. Lal (2003) has detailed the initiatives and strategies for the empowerment of Dalits in post-independent India with a view to identifying the strides made and constraints encountered in this regard. Evidence indicate that the exploitation of the Dalits continues. Policy intentions to provide succour tend to be ineffective, as the forces opposed to change remain resilient. Institutions meant to facilitate their empowerment are neither activated properly nor utilized purposefully to ensure delivery of benefits. The third sector initiatives are also oriented to soft priorities.

Nandu Ram (2003) has elaborated in detail the contribution of Gandhi and Ambedkar in providing solutions to the problems of the Dalits. He makes a plea for a neutral assessment of these two important crusaders as there now exist plenty of distorted elaborations written more in praise than as critical scrutiny. Nandu Ram points out that Gandhi was wedded to reforms in tradition for the upliftment of the downtrodden while Ambedkar sought reforms to empower the Dalit to resist and oppose exploitation. The conciliation and gradualism of Gandhi appeared least attractive to Ambedkar's radical rationalism. He maintains that neither Gandhi's approach of moral persuasion nor Ambedkar's approach of legal opposition can solve the problems encountered by the Dalits. The solution of their problems lies in combining the best from Gandhi and Ambedkar. Legal enactment, in order to be effective, requires the support of the society. State resources are necessary to emancipate Dalits from economic bondage. Ambedkar's frame of thought and action appears to guide the present-day assertion.

Scheduled castes are the weakest component in the semi-feudal production relation. Economically deprived, the Dalits are further distressed on account of the uneven dispersal of benefits of development. The perpetuation of poverty among these sections is mainly on account of the fact that land is sparse among them. Jagdish Prasad (2003) maintains that land reform has to be an important strategy to ensure transition to an egalitarian social order. The state has to be sincere and effective in its efforts to ensure the enforcement of the legislative provisions favouring reforms. While ensuring availability of land, efforts have to be made to strengthen them financially and technologically.

B.D. Sharma (2001) presents a historical perspective and the grand vision of the country's founding fathers. He critically analyses the great confusion that has prevailed since independence, as also the stark unconcern of the rulers and the callous dereliction of duty on their part. Even constitutional bodies have faltered in their assigned tasks. This has caused irreparable damage to many people. Some of the weakest groups are on the verge of extinction.

K. Mohan Rao (1999) has argued that a proper understanding of tribal communities, continuous dedicated fieldwork, guidance, the adoption of a bottom-up strategy with total transparency, participatory management, and genuine empowerment of local tribal groups are essential for making tribal communities equal partners in the prosperity of the nation.

#### *Role of NGOs in Development*

The role of voluntary agencies in the development of rural areas is to supplement the governments efforts for the upliftment of the poor and needy, disseminate information about development schemes and programmes of the government to the rural people, make people aware of the consequences of female foeticides and imbalance in the sex ratio, mobilize financial resources from the community, help in the upgradation of the skills of rural youth for self-employment opportunities, facilitate the formation of self-help groups and micro-finance, ensure the protection of women's and children's rights and abolish the ills of child labour, and, make available technologies in a simpler form to the rural poor. The work of voluntary agencies has been considered complementary to that of government in offering the rural poor a range of choices and alternatives at low cost and with greater participation. Indian planning strategy has provided scope for the active involvement of NGOs in the planning process, and sufficient funds have been allotted for a wide range of anti-poverty and minimum needs programmes. There are several research studies on the role of voluntary agencies in rural development during the survey period.

# **Emerging Trends**

One of the interesting outcomes of the present survey of development studies is that there are a great number of research studies on the evaluation and impact of development programmes, and little or almost no emphasis on the role of socialcultural factors in development. Similarly, the role of people's institutions and organizations in development been relatively ignored. Further, it is noticed that community engagement in mobilizing the people sustainable development has also not engaged the attention of sociologists and anthropologists. This is an area which must be given adequate attention in the years to come, given the new paradigm of participatory development.

#### *Development is Growth Plus Social Change*

The early notion of treating development on a par with economic growth could not withstand the test of time as is evident from the serious challenge the GNP conception received from those who exposed the lack of correspondence between economic growth and the satisfaction of basic human needs. In this context, Seers (1979, as quoted in Shukla 1987) writes that 'economic growth (may) not merely fail to solve social problems and political difficulties, certain types of growth can actually cause them'.

Many social scientists, including developmental economists, have argued that economic growth cannot be achieved unilaterally without corresponding changes in the social, political, and cultural facets of a given society. Thus, of late, it has been realized that development is not merely a measurement of economic growth; it is 'Social Change plus Growth' (Sharma 1986: 35). This has resulted in the reinterpretation of development as an endeavour to provide for the basic needs of the people. The principal component in this perspective is the fulfilment of the basic needs, measured in terms of the provision of necessary services or an increase in the life chances of people. The scope of economic development, thus, has been redefined in terms of redistribution with growth.

The ultimate purpose of development, as mentioned earlier, is to provide increasing opportunities to all people for a better life. Therefore, development is a human process of transforming men and societies leading to a social order in which every human being can achieve moral and material well-being. This new conception criticizes those views that define development merely in terms of mechanical or technological progress. Development does not mean the construction of physical structures, installation of complicated machines, or adoption of the latest sophisticated technology. Development is not only economic development but also social and political development.

#### *Development is Liberation from Dependency and Exploitation*

Of late increasing attention is being focussed on the dependency of less developed countries in view of the fact that the resources at the disposal of developing countries are limited. As a result, the term development is perceived of as liberation from dependency and exploitation, and measured in terms of enhanced opportunities for the deprived masses to obtain their just share of resources. This view regards development as a means to liberate the masses from dependence on the dominant classes for their survival. Accordingly, development is defined as the enhancement in the overall quality of life encompassing as well as the physical, the psychological, the social, and the cultural aspects of life.

On the whole, development is perceived as a planned, stimulated movement of all sectors of a social system in the direction of the overall desired goals set by a society. It also facilitates relative comparison among countries and helps judge where one stands in relation to the other. Lastly, each aspect of development political, social, economic, intellectual, and emotional—should be given equal importance at the stages of the conception, formulation, and implementation of development plans.

The survey of research studies during 1988–2002 has revealed huge shifts in the very concept of 'development'. The vision of 'development as economic growth' ruled unchallenged for decades and the countries of the North were acknowledged as being at the 'cutting edge' of development experience. The expansion of economic output was seen as a panacea for all the ills that afflicted humanity. It became an article of faith for people and governments that economic growth was the key to universal prosperity. The last decades have seen several challenges to the 'growth as panacea' model: increasing numbers of people in the countries of the South were faced with dehumanizing poverty, collapsing ecological systems, and deeply stressed social structures. While governments and the international development bureaucracy were operating on the assumption that these crises were isolated and transient phenomena, NGOs and civil society groups in the countries of the South were exposing the dismal human realities behind the statistics, and raising their voices to challenge the accepted paradigms of development. Civil society coming together in global movements made it impossible to ignore the crisis of development: the development community began to acknowledge that what was needed was not growth but transformation in the institutions and values of development. In 1990 the first of the UNDP human development reports brought these voices to the attention of the world and articulated a people-centred vision of development.

The human development reports (HDRs) offer a new vision of development; one that puts people at the centre of growth, that respects the potentials, possibilities, needs, and interests of different groups, that allows people to develop their capabilities and put them to use in building their own lives. This vision has received a ringing endorsement from the NGO community in India as in other countries.

#### *Culture and Development*

K.C. Alexander and K.P. Kumaran (1992) have argued that development is multidimensional, and apart from increase in wealth it involves factors such as control of diseases, improvement in health, reduction in fertility, and improvement in environmental and personal hygiene. These require knowledge to pursue appropriate kinds of action, and values emphasizing their pursuit. For example, if fertility reduction is to be achieved, there should be both the knowledge to practise fertility control measures and the values emphasizing small families.

A variety of factors, like natural resources, capital, technology, knowledge, values and social organization, contribute to the development of an area. Culture, comprising knowledge and values, constitutes one of these factors rather than its sole determinant. Economic development can be pushed through the use of other means also, but its pace can be quickened if the cultural component is harnessed and integrated with the overall development process. To cite a concrete example, while executing an irrigation project, attention is generally given only to its technological and, to some extent, its agronomic aspects, rather than creating appropriate values and knowledge among the people using the irrigation facility. If the latter aspect is also covered, the utilization of irrigation facilities, the productivity of the farms, and the earnings of the farmers and, therefore, the overall effectiveness of an irrigation project are likely to be greater. Culture being a component of the socio-economic system, its pattern has to be in coherence with other aspects of the economy and society. This has been the central hypothesis of the study of Alexander and Kumaran (ibid.) and, based on this, it was postulated that the pattern of culture in areas with different levels of socio-economic development would vary. It is likely to be characterized by greater knowledge and more rational values in developed areas and less developed areas. The authors have argued that the pattern of culture in an area is in congruence with the level of socio-economic development of that area, and this implies that culture is the component of the production system, influencing the pattern of production as well as being influenced by the pattern of production.

## *Cultural Change Under the Impact of Modernization*

An important item in the agenda of development debate, the issue of cultural change under the impact of modernization, has concerned itself with examining the linkage between development and culture. S.C Dube (1994) examined the issue with greater clarity. He did not subscribe to the notion that the failure of the development strategies is because of their immutable and unchanging traditions. He rejected all those western admonitions and exhortations that say that traditions and social institutions have to be changed if they stand in the way of attaining the objectives of economic growth. He asserted that not everything in the tradition is evil, and, as such, there should be no unnecessary haste to reject them in order to facilitate the safe passage of the forces of gross materialism, which emphasizes personal consumption at the cost of social justice. Culture, he said, cannot be dispensed with to promote growth, for, it has critical functions, and development does not offer adequate replacement for it. The policies of economic growth have to learn to live with culture. Tradition and modernity, he said, can coexist. He warned that a sudden loss of tradition could lead to anomie, rootlessness, and alienation. He argued for rethinking on many traditional values and institutional patterns and called for assigning them the place that they richly deserve in the scheme of an alternative future.

Several other Indian sociologists (D.P. Mukherjee, Ram Krishna Mukherjee, Radha Kamal Mukerjee, to name only few) have echoed their thoughts on certain great Indian traditions and values that place a premium on pluralism and diversity, tolerance and responsibility, non-violence, solidarity, equity, equality and social justice. These, they said, should not be sacrificed at the altar of the new religion called modernity. It would be a real tragedy, if we lose our cultural moorings in the frantic pursuit of economic growth or free market economies of the highly industrialized west, they opined.

The crux of the problem of cultural development and attendant value-disorientation lies in our attempt to catch up with the West in a world being transformed by fast global economic and technological change. The crux then is that, where do we begin our search for cultural development and how do we safeguard our distinct and socially significant values against the onslaught of outside influences?

The development debate in the traditional societies of the developing nation-states now acknowledges that social systems and values that promote permissiveness, bolster consumerism and ignite ignoble desires for the pursuit of worldly goods created by economic growth model, particularly of the North American version, are not necessarily the appropriate models for our version of development. We need cultural alternatives to the dominant western paradigm of development. Sheer pursuit of industrialization and modernization devoid of the consideration of the social and cultural ethos would not only hamper economic growth, but would also leave us rootless, alienated and without any sense of distinct identity. Writings of D. P. Mukerjee and Ram Krishna Mukerjee warn us against the dangers of Westernization and make a fervent plea for paying due regard to the historical, social, and cultural context of our society. Strategies of development should, therefore, be suitably modified and adjusted with our own cultural ethos. Cultural factors should be an integral part of all strategies designed to achieve a balanced economic, social, and technological development.

But the issue of culture is not simple, as we often tend to believe. In conceptualizing the problems of development in the light of values we cherish and the goals we wish to attain, there arise a number of issues on which there is no clearly laid down policy at the moment. The relevance of cultural policy, says Yogendra Singh (1994: 10) assumes significance in this context. He says that the policy should meet the challenge of cultural change unleashed by market capitalism, information technology, and pressures of global cultures. Such a policy, he says, will have to be organically linked with policies of our social and economic development. Broadly, such a policy framework must take into account the need to enrich and protect local and regional cultural values, practices and identities in the process of cultural exposure to mega-institutions of mass communication and marketization.

# **Summing Up**

There are a number of research studies by sociologists and anthropologists and other social scientists in the survey period to understand the factors that would ensure basic needs and equal opportunities to all. Various research studies clearly show that we India has moved forward in areas of food security, industrial infrastructure, and science and technology. Still, the nation is confronted with serious problems related to poverty, unemployment, malnutrition, social and economic disparities, and regional imbalances. The research studies have also demonstrated that a substantial change has taken place in the developmental initiatives, emphasizing the role of market and reducing state intervention. This has been debated vehemently by both the sides, one side arguing the gains of liberalization, and the other indicating the uncertainties.

Given the social and economic inequalities and the unsatisfactory conditions of life for a substantially large section of society, the social science discourse on development paradigms conceived social development as a true indicator of human development. The preferred vision of development suggests that human development should occupy centre stage and should emerge as an ultimate goal of development planning. A large number of social science writings have shown preference for that vision of development that results in the enhancement of the quality of life (both moral and material), especially for the resource-poor sections of society whose basic needs often remain unmet and whose social and economic empowerment is an avowed objective of development planning.

The development discourse discerned from the survey of the literature during the period under study has voiced concern on the distortions of development, especially about environmental degradation and development-displacement controversy. Herein, the need for and significance of sustainable development have been emphasized. Environmental protection and the sustainable use of natural resources have become key concerns. The approach to intermix developmental considerations with environmental considerations has highlighted the need to preserve, protect, and prevent environmental damage.

The development debate has also been concerned with the adverse ethical, moral, and social impacts of the great advances of science and technology. There is overwhelming evidence that the imprudent recourse to science and technology has caused considerable damage to the social fabric of Indian society. There has been strong criticism of certain technology-induced developments and an equally strong demand for designing and developing policy instruments of reason and restraint.

The development debate has taken several sharp turns, indicating radical departures from celebrated notions of development, emphasizing the centrality of economic development. The focus of development, of late, has shifted from economic dimensions to non-economic dimensions of development and there is equal, if not greater, emphasis on social development, human development, and sustainable development.

Social scientists have explicated and expounded the social mobilization model of development, mass sharing of the benefits of development, mass contribution to development efforts, and people's place in the decision-making process of development. The mass mobilization model of development brings about qualitative changes in the distributional process, eliminates discrimination and structurally determined exploitation, and results in the creation of a climate conducive to a more equitable distribution of the benefits of development.

The concept of development is not purely a matter of economics. It is a matter touching upon history, culture, and society. Hence, the developmental measures undertaken in any particular period are time-specific and also society-specific. Any developmental strategy will have to harmonise 'tradition' and 'modernity'. That means the strategy in the main will have to be based on tradition, and modernity has to be the additive. The strength of traditional beliefs and lifestyles should not be minimized in any developmental strategy, and must be adequately captured by the social scientists in their research studies. The policy-making on globalization and liberalization needs to be reviewed from this perspective and in the background of Eastern values rather than merely Western values. What development requires is good governance and public intervention which supplement rather than supplant the market mechanism.