24

## **Secularism: The Search for a Theory**

*Bibekbrata Sarkar* 

**I** n recent times, we have witnessed a polarization of political debate between communalism and secularism in India. While the discourse on communalism has already reached intensity and sways that demands startled attention, the case for secularism has so far lacked the necessary momentum. Conflicting interpretation of India's culture, political legacy and history are being pressed into service to strengthen the case of both communalism and secularism. There seems to be no doubt that in the near future new controversies will develop around the aspects of India's nationalist past. Two points need to be mentioned here in connection with secularism and nationalist politics. When Gandhi became the supreme leader of the Indian National Congress in 1920, one of his most important priorities was to unite the diverse population of India into one political community in order to be in a position to challenge effectively the modern political framework set up by the colonial government, as well as to simultaneously lay the foundations of a future Indian polity. The Congress was made the model of a miniature political community. It offered a platform and a political context with nationalism as its ideological mooring within which a variety of political groups could meet and work together for a common political goal without having to merge their independent identities. To this end, the Gandhian Congress allowed everyone a membership of more than one organization, and negotiated with the leadership of other representatives organizations outside the Congress, like the Muslim League, the Hindu Mahasabha, the Scheduled Castes Federation, etc. However, as the decade of the thirties advanced, it became increasingly clear that the desired unity of the anti-colonial struggle was already impaired by exclusive, contending mobilizations on the basis of religion, caste, and tribe. Communalism emerged as the single-most important factor disrupting the formation of an effectively unified political community of all Indians.

## **442** ✽ CHAPTER 24

To advocate secular stance under such circumstances was, therefore, only natural for a party, like the Congress. But, though secularism remained at a policy level and was an article of faith for some of the most popular Congress leaders, it never became the subject matter of a popular discourse. Secular ideas and values did not become the focal point of the Congress Party's nationalist preaching.

In the colonial period, there was an absence of a "secular" disclosure per se simply because 'nationalist' discourse was thought of as all-encompassing, and it was believed that it included in it "secular" discourse as well. It was also felt that the 'nationalist' discourse was capable enough to neutralize communal appeal. Hence, the absence of a separate secular discourse from the Congress. Communists also assumed that Marxism could take care of communalism through its stress on class struggle. The Socialists, however, thought that communalism should be tackled specifically at the political level. In recent times, the old "nationalist" discourse has lost its legitimacy and, hence, the capacity to counter "communal discourse". This is mainly due to:

- 1. Loss of legitimacy of "nationalist elites".
- 2. Fading memory of both partition and nationalism.
- 3. Crisis of political institutions leading to breakdown of channels of communication in the political arena which defines the political community. This has inevitably led to the growing appeal of sectarian politics at the grassroots level.
- 4. The old idea of nationalism itself is facing problems. An attempt has been made in recent times by the BharatiyaJanata Party and its allied organizations to redefine nationalism in terms of '*Hindutva*'*.* On the other hand, the Congress, which continues to regard itself as the heir to the heritage of the freedom struggle, has not yet tried to formulate an alternative view of nationalism under changed circumstances. The emotional and idealistic fervour of the freedom struggle is no longer present to lend strength and credence to the nationalist ideas of those days.

As a result of the growing inability of old nationalism to counter the new communal discourse, a need has been felt even by the ruling elites to put together a secular discourse even though secularism is a principle and policy of the Indian state. This discourse and the public language used by the Congress party now is no more than a condemnation of communalism. It is not a coherent thesis on the political credentials of secularism. It is at best a secular discourse by proxy.

In India, secularism could not come as a result of historic struggles as in the West, but was introduced as a principle of state policy for a heterogeneous society. Secularism could have drawn sustenance from the religious, universalist, rationalist, and humanist works of eminent Indians, like Raja Rammohan Roy, Akshay Kumar Dutta, the early writings of Syed Ahmed Khan, Swami Vivekananda, and others. These 'cultural-ideological' movements were directed against certain aspects of the traditional social structure, like caste, religion, marriage, family, education, language as well as colonial culture and westernization.<sup>1</sup>

Before any of these trends could bring about significant advances towards the development of a secular consciousness, new political urgencies came to the forefront. The rise of mass movements and modern politics brought with it the desire on the part of interested groups to arrive at political equations of accommodation and maximum advantage in the emerging political scenario. There was parallel or 'counter-mobilization' on the planks of religion, caste, ethnicity or cultural distinctiveness of Hindus, Muslims, Scheduled Castes, and the tribals to increase respective bargaining power with the Congress and the British government. Such primordial appeals were highly emotive and 'identity-defining'. The prodding of the colonial government was a major factor in bringing into existence forces and claims that divide nationalist ranks. The desire to protect religious identity and integrity as well as the desire to resist colonial cultural onslaught sharpened the emphasis on sectarian mobilization thus marginalizing the rationalist and universalist traditions of the 19th century socio-cultural movements.<sup>2</sup> At the same time, both Nationalists and Marxists tended to ignore the cultural components of politics, political movements, and consciousness. Consequently, the masses that joined the anti-colonial struggle were socially and culturally grounded in non-secular or anti-secular values.

Even though Gandhi's political programmes included cultural movements, like removal of untouchability and temple entry of the Harijans, these were seen as extensions of his Hindu religious outlook. Gandhi's religious symbolism, singing of devotional songs at meetings, the concept of 'ashram' life and non-violence rather firmly implanted his image as the supreme leader of the Hindu nationalist movement designed to establish Hindu political domination over Muslims and domination of the upper castes over scheduled castes and the tribal population. It was apparently a convenient excuse to ignore Gandhi's secular credentials as a political leader, as an individual, and the concept of secularism he represented. In a sense, it was the biggest failure of the anti-colonial struggle.

Gandhi was a religious man and his secularism flowed from the belief that all religions are paths to the 'supreme being' and 'truth' and so claim to equal respect and treatment by all, including the state. This was a view that pleads for the religious amity or a high degree of mutual toleration in a multi-religious society. At the same time, there is demarcation of distinct social groups on the basis of religion.

Jawaharlal Nehru, the chief architect of India's secular state politics after 1947, was more outspoken and less misunderstood than Gandhi. Nehru's efforts at curbing communalism and helping the growth of a secular temper in India was more rationalist, modernist, and extensive than those of perhaps any other leader. In a decade and a half, during which he led the country and shaped its politics, Nehru created the discourse, framed policies and directed its administration to spread the ideas of a secular society and politics indirectly. In the process, no doubt, he was also consciously preparing the ground for the acceptance as well as smooth functioning of the Nehruvian mode which he had set before the country. Nehru tirelessly campaigned against communalism, casteism, and sectarianism of every kind and urged people to inculcate scientific temper and a modern outlook. His exhortations were path-breaking and undoubtedly valuable, but not an unmixed success. One of the reasons is that it is not easy for people to give up a pattern of confined thought when that is perceived to constitute the basis of social identity and consciousness of a person. This does not show the futility of discourse, but highlights the need for a more appropriate public language backed up with action to make it more effective. True, these are aspects of the social structure that are hard to change. But selective aspects can be reformed, or their rigorous impact can be considerably diminished through a combination of discourse and action. This has happened in the past. Even when movements for reform failed, they still become and remain a cause to champion. One of the surely unintended offshoots of the Nehruvian policy of protecting the sensitivities of religious minorities was to strengthen a tendency on their part to remain an exclusive group with a conceptually distinct and, therefore, separate, religio-cultural entity of their own.

Since the conflicting demands of religious, caste, and tribal groups for a share in the emerging power equation of post-freedom India could not be amicably settled within a framework of common understanding during the colonial days, the sectarian political scene. For a while, however, these lay submerged under the surging tide of expectations following independence.

By the end of the sixties, as the euphoria of independence gave way to despair because of sharp economic disparities, traditional caste, linguistic, religious, regional, tribal clan and kinship loyalties re-emerged with a vengeance to put pressure on the state for a share in the fruits of development threatening to disrupt all that was still in the pressure of being built with expectation and hope, like national integration, political democracy, economic welfare, and the reduction of socio-economic disparities.

As the pressure on the system increased, the levels of commitment and sincerity dwindled. Representative and pluralist democracy gave way to populism, emotional demagoguery, and increased repression by the state at all levels. The inability or unwillingness on the part of the state to tackle the sharpening distribution crisis prompted more and more people to move out of the ambit of institutional functioning and organize for independent action for redressal of grievances. Such action took place on varying scales and at different levels of society. Although the root cause is almost always economic, they manifest themselves in different ways, increasingly eroding the credibility and reach of the state. In such circumstances, institutions become largely dysfunctional and the state's legitimacy is sharply compromised, especially as one moves into the countryside where money, caste, class, patronage as well as poverty and desperation are most easily translated into violence, and yet, as long as the situation continues, institutions can neither be renewed or replaced by new ones, forcing the state to resort more and more to problem-solving devices as well as trying to divert people's attention in a variety of ways.

Rebuilding of institutions and reinforcing institutional functioning require redefinition of social goals and matching discourse to familiarize people with new goals which can instil hope and bring back a reasonable degree of social peace, the terrain on which institutions can function.

The legacy of mutual suspicion and rivalry, as mentioned above, prevented the emergence of a unified political consciousness in those days when the settings was that of anti-colonial struggle in which every group was interested. As a result, we were left with a social consciousness which was itself fragmented in terms of beliefs and rivalries of locality, customs, caste, and creed.

After independence and with the onset of parliamentary democracy, the type of political consciousness that emerged was not more than the extension of this fragmented social consciousness inherited from the past. Consequently, a distinct political consciousness, which is identifiable separately from social consciousness, is hard to find.

That makes politics in India a vehicle of conflicting primordial loyalties in this country. Another contributory factor is the uneven development of the civil society in India. Crass commercialism thrives in friendly cooperation with semi-feudal attitudes and structures. The natural consequences of this state of unevenly developed civil society are:

- 1. The absence of a civic code of behaviour, and
- 2. The blurring of the distinction between the priorities of the private and the public spheres often resulting in a spelling-over of one into another.

Our code of behaviour primarily consists of the norms we are taught to practice within the nuclear and the extended family. But as soon as we go out into the larger world where the family norms are no longer applicable, we are at a loss to decide as to what should be the norms for the public sphere of life. This kind of a confused response to the impersonality and competitiveness of the larger society (i.e., public life) frequently creates anarchic situations.<sup>3</sup> In the West, secularization of social relations helped to stabilize social mobilization in favour of modernization. There could be, however, difference of opinion on the desirability of modernization on western lines.

Culture theorists have opposed the western version of secularism on the basis of certain arguments that need to be carefully examined. Ashis Nandy explains that secularism as known to a westerner means that religious tolerance can come only from devaluation of religion in public life and from the freeing of politics from religion.<sup>4</sup> We propose a qualified acceptance of the second part of the above statement. The qualifications to bear in mind will be made to explicit later. As far as the first part is concerned, lets draw attention to the fact that in the West and elsewhere in the world, liberation theology is not only making waves in the civil society, but is certainly contributing to the linking up of religion with public affairs. There are other efforts also by religious personalities to take active interest in matters of public concern.<sup>5</sup> In recent times, such activities have been most prominent in Nicaragua, Brazil, and parts of Africa. Nandy feels that secularism stops all "dialogues between the public and the private within a person, and between politics and culture", and that "culture is frozen in time."<sup>6</sup>Since there is a proposing of secularization of the political community,<sup>7</sup> and not of the entire civil society, there is no need to stop all dialogues. But, even if there is secularization of the whole society as in the West, it is difficult to accept that the creative world of the private person would cease to interact with the larger reality outside. Again, the Indian concept of secularization expects the Indian state to follow secular policies, and it has not so far tried seriously to secularize the society. It has also not banished religion and ethnicity from society,<sup>8</sup> Nandy says that nation-states are by definition "suspicious nature."<sup>9</sup> In fact, culture is being extensively used in support of nation-states today. Nandy's assertion that official secularism attempts to limit the democratic process by truncating the personality of the citizen<sup>10</sup> does not appear to be well-founded. A look at the spate of religious and ethnic mobilizations in India, today, should dispel any such idea. As long as religion is allowed to influence the symbols and language of political interaction, it should be expected that a political leader or an ordinary citizen who is not secular and does not share the morals of Gandhi will use religion for maneuvering public sentiments in his preferred manner.

T.N. Madan argues "in the prevailing circumstances, secularism in South Asia as a generally shared credo of life is impossible, as a basis for state action impracticable, and as a blueprint for the foreseeable future impotent."<sup>11</sup> From the above, one could get the impression that both Madan and Nandy have taken their assertions as unalterable facts. People in India are perhaps not as intensely religious in their everyday behaviour as implied above. Religious and cultural tolerance are evident in popular culture as it is in the market-place.

It may be useful here to put the problem in the form of a specific question. Are we obliged by nature, habit of thinking, or conviction to allow emotive manipulation of large numbers of people in the name of religion, ethnicity or culture? Such mobilization is frequently used to secure political goals. So, if our reply to the question posed above is negative, then secularization of the language and symbols of politics constituting all forms of communication is a necessity. Unlike in the West, where secularism as a principle of state policy and as a way of life came about as the result of historical struggles, in India secularization of the political sphere will have to be brought about by designed, without intervention in other areas of civil society. This is possible if state-policy does not discriminate between religions, and is combined with a sustained discourse.

Among those who have recently expressed their views on secularism, Badrinath Chaturvedi says that "contesting polarities" of the kind that religion and secularism represent are alien to the Indian mind.<sup>12</sup> He proposes a version of secularism which is based on India's '*dharmic*' tradition, beginning with a "secular analysis of everyday experience" to "draw our attention to the transcendent reality that manifests itself through everyday life". This, in his opinion, will end the alienation of Indians from their own heritage.<sup>13</sup> The problem with such prescriptions is not the concept of '*Dharma*' which is materialist and consists of philosophical generalizations drawn from everyday experience, but the acceptability of a Hindu concept by other religious communities.

That, in a way, poses the problem. Civil society in India is rapidly coming under the pressure of exclusive mobilizations, religious, ethnic, and tribal groups are not only organizing themselves on sectarian lines, but are also assuming increasingly militant postures. A situation like this does not come up all of a sudden. Over the years, nationalism of pre-independence vintage has become completely devoid of its force and appeal. The Nehruvian as well as the post-Nehruvian promises of making a significant dent in the disparity of income is no longer regarded as a target to be achieved in the foreseeable future. The sustained decay and devaluation of established procedures have deprived the ordinary citizen of much of the sense of certainty, and dependence on the force of law. All these, together, have helped to bring to the forefront movements and mobilizations based on primordial loyalties, popular, and democratic struggles reflecting a variety of grievances. This leads to the breakdown of the social and political community, of the consent manufacturing processes within the civil society, which, in turn, leads to the absence of decisive majority for any political party, to coalition governments, and crises of governability. The commotion in the civil society and the eventual breakdown of the channels of regular communication among social groups and of social groups with the power canters is made particularly complex and intractable when primordial loyalties assume dominance. Hence, the need for secularization of the political community.<sup>14</sup>

## **Notes and References**

- 1. K.M. Panikkar, *Culture and Consequences in Modem India,* PPH, New Delhi, 1990, p. 35.
- 2. See Bipin Chandra, *et.al., India's Struggle for Independence,* 1857–1947, Penguin Books, 1989, p. 90.
- 3. Public Language is found in Indian Media, official writing and intellectual expressions and include term like casteism, communalism, parochialism, provincialism, obscurantism with of course neagative cannotaion.