### **Location and Linguistic Affiliation 1009**

# **REFERENCES**

- Bernus, E. (1981). *Touaregs Nigeriens: Unite d'un peuple pasteur*. Paris: Editions de l'Office de la Recherche Scientifique et technique de l'Outre-Mer.
- Casajus, D. (2000). *Gens de Parole: Langage, poesie et politique en pays touareg*. Paris: Editions la decouverte textes a l'appui/anthropologie.
- Claudot-Hawad, H. (1993). *Touareg: Portrait en fragments*. Aix-en-Provence: Edisud.
- Claudot-Hawad, H. (1996). *Touareg et Autres Sahariens entre Plusieurs Mondes*. Aix-en-Provence: Edisud.
- Decalo, S. (1996). *Historical dictionary of Niger*. Lanham, MD, London: The Scarecrow Press.
- Figueiredo, C. (1996). Identite et concitoyennete. La reelaboration des relations entre hommes et femmes aux marges de la societe Kel Adagh (Mali). In H. Claudot-Hawad (Ed.), *Touareg et Autres Sahariens entre Plusieurs Mondes* (pp. 113–137). Aix-en-Provence: Edisud.
- Keenan, J. (1976). *Tuareg: People of Ahaggar*. New York: St. Martins Press.
- Murphy, R. (1964). Social distance and the veil. *American Anthropologist, 66*, 1257–1274.
- Murphy, R. (1967). Tuareg kinship. *American Anthropologist, 69*, 163–170.
- Nicolaisen, J. (1961). Essaie sur la religion et la magie touaregues. *Folk*, *3*, 113–160.
- Nicolaisen, I. and Nicolaisen, J. (1997). *The pastoral Tuareg*. Rhodos, Copenhagen: The Carlsberg Foundation.
- Norris, H. T. (1975). *The Tuareg: Their Islamic legacy and its Diffusion in the Sahel*. Wilts, England: Aris and Phillips.
- Norris, H. T. (1990). *Sufi mystics of the Niger desert*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Porch, D. (1984). *The Conquest of the Sahara*. New York: Knopf (Random House).
- Rasmussen, S. (1991). Lack of prayer: Ritual restrictions, social experience, and the anthropology of menstruation among the Tuareg. *American Ethnologist, 18*, 751–769.

- Rasmussen, S. (1994). Female Sexuality, Social Reproduction, and the Politics of Medical Interventions in Niger: Kel Ewey Tuareg Perspectives. *Culture, Medicine, and Pshchiatry*, *18*, 433–462.
- Rasmussen, S. (1995). *Spirit possession and personhood among the Kel Ewey Tuareg*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Rasmussen, S. (1997). *The poetics and politics of Tuareg aging: Life course and personal destiny in Niger*. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press.
- Rasmussen, S. (1998a). Ritual powers and social tensions as moral discourse among the Tuareg. *American Anthropologist, 100*, 458–468.
- Rasmussen, S. (1998b). Only women know trees: Medicine women and the role of herbal healing in Tuareg culture. *Journal of Anthropological Research, 54*, 147–171.
- Rasmussen, S. (1999). The slave narrative in life history and myth. *Ethnohistory, 46*, 67–108.
- Rasmussen, S. (2000). From childbearers to culture-bearers: Transition to postchildbearing among Tuareg women. *Medical Anthropological Quarterly, 14*, 242–270.
- Rasmussen, S. (2001). *Healing in community: Medicine, contested terrains, and cultural encounters among the Tuareg*. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Rasmussen, S. (2002). Betrayal or affirmation? Transformation in witchcraft technologies of power, danger, and agency among the Tuareg. In H. Moore & T. Sanders (Eds.), *Magical interpretations, material realities* (pp. 136–160). London: Routledge.
- Rodd, F., Lord of Rennell. (1926). *The people of the veil*. London: Anthropological Publications.
- U.S. Department of State. (1994, July). *Background notes. Niger*. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- Weaver, M., Wong, H., Sako, A. S., Simon, R., & Lee, F. (1994). Prospects for reform of hospital fees in sub-Saharan Africa: A case-study of Niamey National Hospital in Niger. *Social Science and Medicine, 38*, 565–574.
- World Bank. (1989). *World development report*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Worley, B. (1992). Where all the women are strong. *Natural History, 10*, 54–64.

# **Wape**

### **William E. Mitchell**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Wapei, Wapi.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Wape live on the large island of New Guinea located just north of Australia. Their country, Papua New Guinea, occupies the eastern half of the island; Sandaun Province, where the Wape reside, is situated in its northwest corner bordering Irian Jaya and is one of the country's poorest and the least developed. "Wape" is a term given by Westerners to the culturally similar Olo speakers. It is derived from the Olo word *metane wape*, which denotes a human in contrast to a spirit. Olo is one of the 47 languages of the Torricelli Phylum that is provisionally divided into 7 stocks and 13 families. Olo is classified within the Wapei Family, 23,378 speakers, and the Wapei-Palei Stock, 31,770 speakers (Foley, 1986; Laycock, 1975; McGregor & McGregor, 1982).

Most of the men, many children, and an increasing number of the women speak Tok Pisin (Melanesian Pidgin), the *lingua franca* (Mihalic, 1971). Tok Pisin is a post-contact language, the vocabulary of which is 80% English origin (Foley, 1986). Tok Pisin and English are the country's two official languages. English is the language of instruction of the village primary schools, but as attendance is not compulsory, only a minority of the Wape are fluent.

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The approximately 10,000 Wape live in the rain forests of the Torricelli Mountains located between New Guinea's north coast and the sprawling swamps of the Sepik River to the south. The average yearly rainfall is 264.16 cm. They occupy 55 villages between 396 and 853 m above sea level with a population density of approximately 50 people per square mile. Germany claimed the Wape area in 1885 but there is no evidence that they had any direct contact with the people. After World War I, the area became part of a mandated territory under the aegis of the League of Nations and administered by Australia. The first government patrols probably entered the Wape area from the coast in the early 1920s, but no stations were established. In 1926, when the first scientist, zoologist E. A. Briggs (1928, 1929) from the University of Sydney explored the area, it had received only a few visits from labor recruiters and prospectors.

Foreigners, including Brigg's student and explorer–writer A. J. Marshall as well as gold and oil prospectors, continued sporadic incursions into the area during the 1930s and with few exceptions were received peacefully. In 1935, a disastrous earthquake ripped through the Wape area taking an unknown number of lives. It destroyed houses and gardens, and created landslides that dammed rivers and streams (Marshall, 1938). During World War II, both the Allies and Japanese sent patrols into the area impressing local men as carriers. The Allies also used local labor to build a small military airstrip near Lumi village in the heart of the Wape area. Some Wape men went to work as laborers for the Allies at their base on the coast near Aitape. When dysentery broke out on the coast in 1944, many men fled back to their villages carrying the disease with them and the resulting epidemic took many lives. After World War II, in 1946, the eastern half of New Guinea became a trust territory of the United Nations under Australian administration. In 1947, two Franciscan priests from the coastal Aitape mission opened a mission station by the abandoned airstrip in Lumi and the mission remains active today. In 1948, the government established a patrol post nearby and a small hospital was built soon afterwards. In 1973, the territory was given internal self-government status and in 1975, gained full independence as Papua New Guinea.

Christian Brethren missionaries have been active in the area since 1951 and in the 1980s an indigenous evangelical church began winning some adherents. Although many Wape are nominal Christians, most continue to follow the rituals of their ancestors. Throughout the years of foreign contact, the government and missions have introduced numerous economic schemes for the Wape (Taru, 1977). None have enjoyed much success and the Wape remain subsistence farmers practicing slash and burn agriculture with limited access to money. To obtain money to buy coveted imported commodities, Wape men formerly worked as indentured laborers in other parts of the country. With this work no longer available and no town in the immediate area, there is an increase in the number of families moving to the coastal towns to find work. Unlike large parts of the highlands of Papua New Guinea where tribal warfare is still practiced, the Wape live at peace with each other and neighboring groups. In the past as at present, villages have no internal government except that of kinship although they participate in regional council, provincial, and parliamentary elections.

Villages traditionally were situated on ridges for easier protection and, as today, population is usually several hundred people. In the village center is a dirt plaza where children play and community rituals are performed. Wape houses are made of forest materials but where they formerly had a single earthen floor room, today they are more often built on stilts with several rooms serving different domestic functions in the Western fashion. Parents, today as traditionally, live together with their children in their own home. At puberty, sons move into a separate dwelling with other youths and unmarried men. Some villages still have a separate men's ceremonial house where ritual objects are stored and rituals are enacted. Wape do not enter each other's homes unless they are close kin, but most

#### **The Context of Health 1011**

dwellings have a front verandah or an area beneath a raised house where neighbors and relatives gather to visit.

Dwellings have no electricity, telephone, or plumbing, and access to most villages is by narrow footpaths. In the 1980s, the government built a rough dirt road connecting the Wape to the coastal town of Wewak, but the heavy rains, scarcity of transport, and occasional blockades by landowners seeking toll along the route makes its use problematical. Regarding work, women cook, fetch water, and firewood, make string bags, process sago, and forage. Men hunt, prepare gardens, cut down the sago palms, and make tools and ritual objects. Men and women both participate in childcare, weeding, and harvesting.

The most important social and economic unit in Wape society is the patrilineage whose members usually live contiguously in a single village along with several other patrilineages. At birth a child becomes a member of her or his father's patrilineage and remains so until death. Patriclans are composed of several patrilineages from a number of villages. Clan ties provide access to others in times of hardship but the proviso to assist is not as stringent as among patrilineage mates. Inheritance of land and food trees is patrilineal. Marriage with a member of one's patrilineage and patriclan is forbidden, but it is sometimes violated among patriclan members. Today, women usually marry by choice and the groom's family pays bridewealth in the form of money to her patrilineage. A woman goes to live with her husband at marriage and, in the unlikely event of divorce, she returns to her village while the children should, but do not always, stay in their father's village. Plural marriage is permitted but uncommon.

One of the most striking aspects of village life is its placidness, a feature also observed by early visitors to the area (Marshall, 1938). Physical aggression is disapproved and seldom occurs and while verbal aggression is allowed, it too occurs infrequently. The customary response to an aggressive act is simply to turn away and ignore it. Men and woman live relatively harmoniously together and spousal abuse is unusual (Mitchell, 1999). Male ethos is egalitarian and the elaborate and pervasive reciprocal exchange system of pig meat, sago, and valuables among relatives in different villages mitigates against the accumulation of individual wealth (Mitchell, 1978). The gambling dice game *satu* is played by many men and is another important way of leveling wealth (Mitchell, 1988).

Wape traditional religion is animistic, with beliefs in ghosts, demons, witches, and sorcery that are intimately involved with ideas about health, sickness, and healing. Unlike many New Guinea societies that center their ritual and ceremonial life around harvests or male initiation, the Wape center theirs on healing.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

The Wape live in very broken forested country with generally thin and poor soils subject to landslides by the heavy rains, and the many steeply banked streams and rivers, which bisect the forest, contain few fish. The men are avid hunters but population density and the introduction of the shotgun (Mitchell, 1973) has depleted the wild game, for example, pigs and cassowaries. Because of the crime problem in some parts of Papua New Guinea since Independence, shot guns, always limited to one or two in a village, are now difficult to obtain and there are reports that wild game is increasing in number. As the Wape area is economically undeveloped, the people have restricted access to money for the purchase of food commodities such as tinned fish or rice from a local trade store. Some villagers keep a pig or two who, foraging for themselves, are fed just enough to prevent them from becoming feral. As pigs are raised primarily for ceremonial exchanges, the meat is distributed only periodically and is not an enduring source of protein. Men to the south occasionally bring smoked fish and pig into the area, but its availability is also random and undependable.

Most of what villagers eat is raised in their unfenced slash and burn gardens, for example, bananas, coconuts, sweet potatoes, taro, breadfruit, and *Gnetum gnemon* tree leaves, or processed from sago palms planted in swampy areas. As a result their diet consists primarily of sago starch, a notoriously poor nutrient, augmented with garden produce. With the absence of important amounts of fish and game in the diet, vegetables are their main source of protein. Consequently, the Wape diet has a negative effect on their health and maturation resulting, in part, in low birth weights, delayed growth, and malnutrition.

The introduction of health services by the missions and government in the 1940s was an important accomplishment of the colonial era. However, after Independence many of the expatriate health workers returned home severely shrinking the country's health resources. Unfortunately, the local training of replacement workers continues to lag. As a Third World country with limited economic resources, Papua New Guinea currently concentrates its health expenditures in the towns where the new indigenous elite live. The comparatively isolated Wape suffer accordingly with limited access to health as well as other services. Although a service may exist on governmental paper, staff and supplies are frequently inadequate to meet urgent rural needs.

# **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

### **Indigenous**

The Wape recognize three types of part-time indigenous practitioners who diagnose and/or treat sicknesses, none of which use trance or an altered state of consciousness (Mitchell, 1990). A *numoin* (Olo), the most feared and powerful, is a male shaman-witch who receives his healing prowess by magically killing persons whose ghosts give him his healing powers. In Tok Pisin he is called a *sangumaman* and is found in other parts of New Guinea as well as among some of the Australian aborigines. A *sangumaman* supposedly can fly and make himself invisible and his services are used only when a person is seriously ill. If the patient recovers, the *sangumaman* receives the credit. If not, further treatment is sought. Today there are few, if any, *sangumaman* practitioners among the Wape, but the less contacted groups to the south still have them and they are sometimes resorted to.

A *wobif* (Olo) does not have the supernatural powers of a *sangumaman* and is not feared by villagers. He learns his healing skills from an another *wobif* and is given a small fee or gift for his services. The third type of practitioner is a *glasman* (Tok Pisin) whose skills were brought into the area by men returning from contract labor work on the coastal plantations. He is solely a diagnostician and does not offer treatment. As a clairvoyant he determines the cause of the illness by looking "into" his patient and asking questions. Having specified the cause on the basis of an indigenous differential diagnosis he then prescribes an appropriate treatment that may include consulting a *wobif* or *sangumaman*. He too receives a small fee or gift for his services.

### **Introduced**

The grassroots practitioner of modern medicine is the aide post orderly or *doktaboi* (Tok Pisin). These men have training in first aid procedures, hygiene, and the treatment of common illnesses and injuries including acute respiratory and alimentary tract infections, malaria, common skin diseases, burns, and wounds. Aid posts are found in strategically located villages and are the most important medical service in terms of the number of patients served. If a health problem is beyond the aid post orderly's competence, he refers the patient to the small regional hospital situated in the midst of Wape territory. The hospital wards are coed except for one reserved for mothers and babies. As patients must provide their own food, they are usually accompanied by relatives who cook for them. Hospital orderlies provide basic patient care and are supervised by several nurses and the medical officer. Some of the most frequent presenting cases include acute upper respiratory tract infections, malnutrition, skin infections, birth confinements, malaria, anemia, gastroenteritis, tropical ulcers, and wounds. Only minor surgery is performed. If transport can be arranged, major surgery cases and other cases demanding sophisticated medical skills and technology are taken out to the coastal hospital in Wewak.

At one time nurses regularly held maternal and child health clinics in each village but staffing shortages have made these more episodic. The work of these clinics is to examine pregnant and nursing mothers as well as infants and small children, give immunization shots, and provide instruction on diet and hygiene. When the clinics are active, the hospital census of childhood malnutrition cases increases.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Although many Wape have a rudimentary understanding of the biomedical theory of sickness in terms of, for example, a penicillin injection's attack on invading bacteria, it is seldom persuasive. It is the theories of their own culture intimately conveyed in myth, ceremonial, and everyday events that offer a more satisfying understanding of sickness and dying. The Wape believe in a complex set of unseen spirit forces that affect them in both positive and negative ways (Mitchell, 1987; Waisi, 1982). While these can, for example, cause an earthquake or inflict illness and death, with the proper rituals they can enhance life as well.

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 1013**

The spirit forces most frequently causing illness are ghosts and demons. Each patrilineage owns tracts of land wherein reside the dreaded ghosts of recently dead relatives who will attack their closest kin as well as others. Also in residence are ancestral ghosts who can bring sickness to trespassing individuals or to those in conflict with their descendants. Finally, there are the vengeful and unpredictable demons residing in places of unusual or strange appearance like a waterfall, landslide, or still pond. Any of these forces may cause sickness or injury by entering into an individual and seizing a vital organ, shooting foreign objects into the body or, for example, may cause an injurious fall when climbing a coconut tree. Such attacks may be of the malevolent force's own volition or at the direction of a member of the related patrilineage. Some of these forces also may be appealed to for help, for example, the *mani* demon when hunting or a long dead father's ghost is asked to protect the home while the family is visiting kin in another village.

An attack by a *sangumaman* is the most feared cause of illness; once a person is assaulted and made ill, rectification is considered rare. A *sangumaman* may attack on his own volition or is hired to attack one's personal enemy. Although the details of the form of the assault vary with the informant, the procedure is roughly as follows. The victim is attacked and rendered unconscious by choking after which small incisions are made in the skin and bits of flesh removed. These are later put in little packets for sale to facilitate hunting. The wounds are magically closed without scaring and the victim is brought back to consciousness. Confused and dazed, the victim is told to return to her village, that she will have no memory of the attack and will die after a specified number of days. Consequently, any person returning to the village in a dazed or feverish state is considered a possible victim of *sangumaman*.

Sorcery is another cause of illness. Many villagers know spells for affecting the physical and emotional life of others. To bring sickness or death, a spell is performed with a bit of the victim's exuviae. For this reason most individuals are careful about when and where they defecate and take care to destroy their hair and fingernail cuttings.

In the treatment of illness, the Wape have recourse to a variety of therapists and therapies including their own pharmacopoeia consisting mostly of plants. For a persisting malady they are likely to try a number of therapies before they return to health or die. Self-treatment is usually the first form of treatment intervention. For a headache, a tight band may be tied around the forehead;

an aching leg may be superficially cut to let out the hot blood; a boil may receive a leaf poultice or, if ripe, lanced. Judged by the premises of Wape culture these actions, like those by biomedical practitioners, are palliative, not curative, in nature. They treat the noxious symptoms but in etiological terms do not treat the *cause* of the symptoms. If self-treatment does not help and the suffering increases, the afflicted person will probably seek the diagnostic cultural skills of a *sangumaman*, *wobif,* or *glasman*.

A *sangumaman* is adept at the magical removal of small objects, for example, stones, thorns, and slivers of bamboo, that a forest demon or another *sangumaman* allegedly shoots into their victim causing sickness. After probing his patient's body to locate the offending object, he magically removes it, sometimes shows it to his patient, and is paid a small fee. The treatment specialty of the *wobif* is the use of massage to mend skeletal breaks caused by malevolent spirits and magically sucking from the body bad blood and bits of taboo food eaten by the victim that caused the illness.

The cause of an illness is frequently attributed to one of the taboo demons living in the forest, rivers, and streams. As a particular demon is related to a patrilineage's land, the afflicted person must go to one of the lineage mates who know the demon's secret name and ask to be exorcised. Such requests are never refused. These exorcisms are a common occurrence in the village and often one of the first therapies attempted. The exorcism is informal and simple. Lightly brushing the afflicted area with some ginger leaves, the exorcist inaudibly appeals to the demon by his secret name to leave his victim in peace. Embarrassed by the chastisement, the spirit readily departs. Of course if the illness worsens, then the diagnosis was wrong and a new diagnosis must be made and another treatment tried.

Some of these demons, for example, *niyl*, *poril*, and *mani*, are the center of curing societies whose exclusively male membership cuts across lineage lines. Men initiated into a society learn the requisite secret name and are responsible for performing exorcisms and carrying the demon's mask in a curing festival. The *niyl* curing festival is the largest and is months in preparation. Its climax features a parade of the sacred masks, all-night traditional dancing, and a dawn exorcism rite. All of these activities are intimately articulated with the Wape's elaborate exchange system. Although a curing festival is held to exorcise specific victims, others previously afflicted by the demon also may participate. Rubbing their skin against the sweaty body of a mask carrier, they receive a kind of booster immunization shot as an inoculation against future attacks.

The Wape tolerate erratic and strange behavior in fellow villagers as long as it is not threatening or, if aggressive, episodic in nature. Some men, but not women, are especially prone to episodes of threatening manic behavior. If the behavior becomes chronic, a man will be forced to leave the village and made to live in the forest where his actions are not a constant threat to village tranquility. Whether an individual is benignly mad or berserk, the cause is the same; possession by a demon or ghost, an event sometimes precipitated by the chewing of betel nut. A person exhibiting crazy behavior is not blamed for her or his crazy actions but, being possessed, is perceived as similar to a horse controlling its rider.

There are a number of ways to cure a person from her or his madness. The most common is to exorcise the demon or ghost by appealing for it to leave its victim as previously described. If this is unsuccessful, two other treatments are intended to drive the spirit out. A possessed man acting aggressively is grabbed from behind and, as he is held, other men rub and beat his body with a special type of ginger plant to force the invasive spirit out of him. The other treatment is performed when a victim is not agitated and can cooperate with the treatment. The victim goes to a bamboo grove with family members and, lying down, is completely wrapped in several dried palm flower sheaths. The bamboo is lighted and explodes in loud reports whereby the victim breaks loose from his confinement and, running away, the offending spirit runs away too.

Villagers view the two therapeutic systems, one indigenous and the other introduced, as complementary, not competing and may utilize both when ill or injured. The indigenous one offers culturally compelling explanations of illness and related treatments. While the introduced biomedical system's explanation of illness is exotic and conceptually irrelevant, nevertheless it provides some powerful forms of therapy they gladly take advantage of.

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Sexual intercourse between a man and a woman is not a carefree activity. Like childbirth and menstruation, it is associated with female sexuality and is ritually polluting. A woman's vaginal area, especially when she is menstruating, is contaminating to men. During her period she eats and sleeps by a separate fire in the back of the house and, if her husband eats her food, his hunting will be luckless. A husband who wishes to continue to hunt will prepare the family's food. Sexual intercourse may occur in the house or in the forest but not in the gardens; a demon angered with smelling the sexual secretions could ruin the plants. For the same reason a menstruating woman cannot go into the forest or a demon would make her sick. Her period over, she washes her vaginal area and resumes her regular activities.

If a man intends to maintain his strength and health, sexual intercourse must be carefully regulated. If he has intercourse too frequently—about every four days is appropriate—he will lose weight, his skin will droop in folds like an old man's, and he will become soft like an overripe banana. Semen is conceived as energizing; by its discharge into a woman, a man becomes weaker with its loss as she gains strength. Although today some Wape are aware of the scientific explanation of conception, the traditional belief is that it takes many acts of intercourse to create a baby. Regarding family size, there is no special desire to have a large family. Many couples are content with two or three children because finding sufficient food for a large family, including the meat children cry for, is a losing battle.

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

## **Pregnancy and Birth**

According to one study, Wape women have an average of 4.1 live births with 2.7 remaining alive (Wark & Malcolm, 1969). A newly pregnant woman wishing to abort the fetus can perform magical spells to expel it. A pregnant woman continues her regular tasks best she can until parturition. Birth usually occurs in her house while attended by one or two female kin. Delivery is in a squatting position and after the baby is cleaned, the umbilical cord and placenta are buried in or near the house. If there are complications during the birth, the husband, kin, and friends gather and various exorcisms are performed and indigenous practitioners consulted. In an intractable case, she might be transported or carried to the area's hospital (J. Mitchell, 1973). Within a day or two after birth, she appears publicly with the baby carried in a sling.

A wife and husband should refrain from intercourse from the time she is pregnant until their new baby can walk, usually about 18 months. An admittedly difficult

### **Health through the Life Cycle 1015**

ideal to achieve, if they violate the taboo, the child may be too weak to stand up.

## **Infancy**

The mean weight of the Wape baby at birth, 2.40 kg, is one of the lowest on record (Malcolm, 1973). Malaria is holoendemic and one of the main causes of high infant mortality. From birth until about a year old, an infant subsists on its mother's milk and premasticated sago paste. Nursing babies usually double their birth weight within 3 months and treble it just over a year. From between about 8 months and 1 year, infants may be offered premasticated taro and a green shoot when seasonally available. However green vegetables in the form of boiled *Gnetum gnemon* leaves are not offered until a child is walking and completely toilet trained, about 2 years old. As a result, by the age of 6 months, a baby is most likely deficient in both caloric and protein intake. After a year, more solids are occasionally added to the diet including sago grubs and breadfruit providing additional protein. As the Wape also have little access to meat, and fresh fish is taboo to babies, malnutrition is not an uncommon problem among babies and toddlers.

Although a mother has the main responsibility for her infant, the father will remain in the village with the baby in a sling on his body when his wife is in the forest making sago flour. If a baby cries to nurse, it is not unusual for a father to offer his own breast as a pacifier. Other children and relatives also carry the baby from time to time; until it can crawl it is in almost constant physical contact with one attentive caregiver or another. Weaning is a gradual process with the toddler returning occasionally to the breast until it is dry.

## **Childhood**

Unless there is a school in the village or close by, children are left much on their own to play with their age mates in the central plaza or shadow the activities of their parents. Boys, more than girls, go into the forest and forage for small game and other food. Children sleep in the same house as their parents and take their meals there too. Dining is a private family affair. Overt signs of malnutrition are not as common among children as they are among toddlers and infants. Parents are affectionate to both their male and female children and to viciously strike or whip a child is almost unheard of.

When a toddler does not get its way, he may lie on the ground and kick and scream but the response is to ignore him. A sibling may be posted nearby to keep the child from hurting himself but he is left to cry it out, learning at an early age that tempestuous behavior has no rewards. Children are susceptible to the usual childhood diseases, especially upper respiratory tract infections; some younger children appear to have a constant cold, and mucous smeared noses are common. Just as infants are unusually small, children in comparison to their European cohorts are too. At some point while still a child, every Wape boy and girl is taken to a river for a ritual washing by the mother's brother to assure its growth. The mother's brothers, by cultural definition a succoring person, performs the ritual during a *niyl* curing festival.

### **Adolescence**

Chronic undernutrition appears to be a factor in the comparatively late onset of secondary sexual characteristics. One study (Wark & Malcolm, 1969) notes the onset of menarche in girls at 18.4 years. The onset of puberty in boys including the lowering of the voice is correspondingly delayed in comparison to European populations. Unlike some New Guinea societies, the Wape have no special ceremonies marking puberty. While toddlers and younger children play together, adolescent boys and girls tend to separate into gender-determined groups. Girls take an important role in helping their mothers in the family's food quest, but the small birds and animals obtained by boys are usually reserved for themselves.

## **Adulthood**

Premature aging has been observed in many New Guinea societies and the Wape are no exception. Measurements of adults show a marked decline in height with age from 2 to 3 cm and there is a concomitant loss of weight. The average age of death for both men and women is the midforties. With physical maturity coming late and death coming early, Wape adulthood is of limited duration for many.

## **The Aged**

There are few aged in Wape society. It is an exception for an adolescent to have grandparents. An old person usually lives with her or his son's family. The elderly help with looking after babies in ways that their health and strength permit. Unlike others who move actively in and out of the village, the aged, thin and fragile, are more likely to spend most of their time in the village. Their knowledge about the past is valued by adults who consult them, for example, regarding past exchanges, kinship relations, and ownership of land and food trees.

## **Dying and Death**

Most individuals die in the village under the care of their immediate family members. As death is not considered natural but due to a malevolent cause, various indigenous diagnoses and treatments are attempted until a person is near death. Recourse to the aide post's therapies are utilized but unless a patient is strong enough to walk to the hospital, it is usually considered too costly to have him or her transported by a group of carriers. The almost obsessive last minute attempts at treatments in some cases may be attributed to the family's affection for the patient as well as an attempt to insure against the predations of a vengeful ghost. At death, a person's spirit departs the body via the anus and becomes a dangerous homicidal ghost. Only in time is it becalmed and joins the patrilineage's ancestral ghosts and demons deep in the forest.

# **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

A general point about Wape culture is that it is defensively oriented. Ever on the defense against a world of hostile spirits, the Wape have centered their ceremonial life around pacifying malevolent ghosts and demons who strike them down with sickness and death. A deeply religious and conservative people concerned with culture stability and continuity, they have dedicated much of their intellectual, affective, and behavioral energy to the social elaboration of a therapeutic system that features curing practitioners, male curing societies, and curing rites and festivals with extensive social and economic intervillage ties. This passionate concern with health and curing is probably one of the main reasons for the Wape's easy adoption of the biomedical therapies introduced by the government and missions in the 1940s. These new secular therapies do not challenge their own ritual ones in terms of explaining sickness and death but, perceived as effective palliatives, significantly augment their therapeutic armamentarium.

**1016 Wape**

Whereas sickness may be alarmingly disruptive in some societies, the Wape, by placing it at the core of their culture have, as it were, turned sickness on its head and organized a way of life around it. This may, however, be changing. Recent reports allege that some villages are abandoning their curing festivals. What this purports for the future of Wape health patterns, only further research can reveal.

# **REFERENCES**

- Briggs, E. A. (1928). New Guinea—land of the devil devil. *Australian Museum Magazine, 3*, 265–273.
- Briggs, E. A. (1929). The black heart of New Guinea. *Australian Geographer, 1*, 38–40.
- Foley, W. A. (1986). *The Papuan languages of New Guinea*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Laycock, D. C. (1975). The Torricelli phylum. In S. A. Wurm (Ed.), *Papuan languages and the New Guinea linguistic scene, 1*, 767–780.
- Malcolm, L. A. (1973). *Growth and development patterns and human differentiation in Papua New Guinean communities*. Prepared for the IXth International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences, August–September 1973, at Chicago, IL.
- Marshall, A. J. (1938). *The men and birds of paradise: Journeys through equatorial New Guinea*. London: William Heinemann.
- McGregor, D. E. (1982). *The fish and the cross* (2nd ed.). Goroko: Melanesian Institute.
- McGregor, D. E., & McGregor, A. R. F. (1982). *Olo language materials*. Canberra: Australian National University (Pacific Linguistics, Series D, No. 42).
- Mihalic, F. (1971). *The Jacaranda dictionary and grammar of Melanesian Pidgin*. Brisbane: Jacaranda Press.
- Mitchell, J. (1973). Life and birth in New Guinea. *Ms. Magazine, 1*(11), 21–23.
- Mitchell, W. E. (1973). A new weapon stirs up old ghosts. *Natural History, 82*, 74–84.
- Mitchell, W. E. (1978). On keeping equal: Polity and reciprocity among the New Guinea Wape. *Anthropological Quarterly, 51*, 5–15.
- Mitchell, W. E. (1987). *The bamboo fire: Fieldwork with the New Guinea Wape* (2nd ed.). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Mitchell, W. E. (1988). The defeat of hierarchy: Gambling as exchange in a Sepik society. *American Ethnologist, 15*, 638–657.
- Mitchell, W. E. (1990). Therapeutic systems of the Taute Wape. In N. Lutkehaus, C. Kaufmann, W. E. Mitchell, D. Newton, L. Osmundsen, & M. Schuster (Eds.), *Sepik heritage: Tradition and change in Papua New Guinea* (pp. 428–438). Durham: Carolina Academic Press.
- Mitchell, W. E. (1999). Why Wape men don't beat their wives: Constraints toward domestic tranquility in a New Guinea society. In D. A. Counts, J. K. Brown, & J. C. Campbell (Eds.), *To have and to hit: Cultural perspectives on wife beating* (pp. 100–109). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
- Taru, L. (1977). Causes of lack of development in the Lumi Sub-Province of the West Sepik Province between 1945 and 1955. *Yagl-Ambu, 4*, 314–328.