# **French**

#### **Michelle Lampl**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

France, French Republic, Republique Française.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

At slightly less than twice the size of the state of Colorado, France is the largest Western European nation. The French boundaries cover approximately 547,000 km<sup>2</sup> in Europe and its overseas administrative divisions add approximately another 600 km<sup>2</sup> . With about 3,400 km of coastline on its western border, France is a boundary of Western Europe, from the Bay of Biscay in the Southwest to the English Channel in the Northwest. France is located between the present-day countries of Belgium and Spain, it is Southeast of the United Kingdom, and borders the Mediterranean Sea on the Southeast, situated between the borders of Italy and Spain.

French is the national language, with a rapid decline in numerous local dialects and languages (e.g., Provençal, Breton, Languedoc, Alsatian, Corsican, Catalan, Basque, Flemish).

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

With a population estimated at 59,765,983 in July 2002 (ratio of 0.95 males/females), the demographic structure is comprised of 18% aged 0–14 years (1.05 male : female ratio), 65% 15–64 years (1.00 male : female ratio), and 16% 65 years and over (0.69 male : female ratio). The population growth rate is 0.35%, with a birth rate of 11.9 births/1,000 population, death rate of 9.0/1,000 population, and a net migration rate of 0.64 migrants per 1,000. Immigration has increased since unification of the European Union in 1992, creating increasing social tensions in a country already faced with significant unemployment at that time. The life expectancy at birth is 79 years, with females averaging 83 years and males 75 years. The fertility rate is 1.7 children born per woman.

The HIV prevalence rate was 0.44% in 1999 and estimated at 130,000 individuals living with AIDS.

Literacy, defined as reading and writing over 15 years of age, is said to be 99%.

Having suffered extensive losses in terms of manpower and economic well-being during World Wars I and II, France is one of the most modern countries in the world and a leader among the European Union. Since 1958, it has had a presidential democracy which has provided greater stability than its previous parliamentary democracy. It is a republic, divided into 22 regions, including the territorial collectivity of Corsica and is subdivided into 96 departments. France includes four overseas departments (French Guyana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and Reunion) and three overseas territorial collectivities (Mayotte, Saint Pierre, and Miquelon). In addition, there are approximately 12 dependent areas over which France has transnational disputes of sovereignty. There are numerous political parties in France of opposing values, with a president elected by popular vote for a five-year term.

France is an ethnically heterogeneous population, representing peoples from North Africa, Indo-China, the Basque region, Celtic, Latin, and Teutonic populations, and nomadic Gypsies. France is presently predominantly Roman Catholic (85%), with Muslims comprising about 5–10% of the population and Protestant, Jewish, and unaffiliated sects equally apportioned.

France's economy is composed of historically extensive government ownership, much of which is presently undergoing privatization. Unemployment has been high over the past decade. Steps to improve this include mandatory retirement with an extensive and expensive pension system. France's economy suffers from a 35 hour work week, lengthy paid vacations, and national medical care. These expectations incur high taxes. The labor force is comprised of 70% in services, 25% industry, and 4% agriculture. Approximately 23% of the population are white-collar workers and 30% of the working population are manual workers.

France was the world's fourth largest economic power in the mid-1990s and the world's number one

#### **Medical Practitioners 647**

destination for tourists. Its industries include automobiles, machinery, metallurgy, textiles, food processing, and tourism. Seventy-seven percent of its electricity is nuclear generated. Its agricultural products include wheat, cereal, sugar-beet, potatoes, wine grapes, beef and dairy products, and fish. It exports 61% of its products to the European Union and 9% to the United States. France is a trans-shipment point for, and consumer of, South American cocaine, Southwest Asian heroin, and European synthetics.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

In its geographic position in the midst of industrial Europe, France faces major environmental issues with health consequences at the present time, including forest damage from acid rain, air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions, water pollution from urban wastes, and agricultural runoff. Its beaches receive garbage from dumping grounds off the coast by numerous neighbors and it was within reach of air-borne radioactive waste from Chernobyl.

France has a state-subsidized medical system in which people are free to choose their own providers and are reimbursed up to 85% of most costs. Doctors are concentrated in the cities, leaving many rural areas underserved with facilities that are inadequate. The health profile in France follows its economic and social position in the industrial world in which the principal causes of death are cardiovascular disease and cancers.

The modern-day country of France consists of numerous small communities, each with long histories of self-identity. Historical geopolitical disputes notwithstanding, these are expressed in regional specialties in terms of consumable products from bread and chocolates to wines and cognacs. Salts from a particular coastal area, prunes from Agen, cheeses whose flavors reflect what sheep, goats, or cows find to eat in a particular region all reflect the unique features of local natural environments. In 1986, a French doctor turned archeologist recorded his medical observations from 20 years of medical work in the Berry countryside (Allain, 1986). In these memoirs, he outlined the influence that social and geographic location had on patterns of health. He emphasized what an intimate relationship between man and animals, both wild and domestic, had on people's understandings of their own illness and health. Speaking from the viewpoint of a physician in need of understanding his patients, he wrote about his experiences learning to simply read his patients' anatomy, so that he could provide medical care. When they said they had a pain in the "name of the father," and two nerves, jumping one under the other, they meant that they had a pain in the forehead and a musculoskeletal joint problem. Some of them had "nerves stronger than the blood," referring to a disequilibrium between two antagonistic forces that referred to a polymorphic assortment of maladies ranging from psychologically based digestive troubles to menopause. Local diagnoses were based on the color and fluidity of the blood, and bread and wine were thought to generate the force of the blood—but not if the bread was toasted.

Local remedies included those for bloody noses and menstrual bleeding, a premier occupation in their health world. Some of the remedies were considered to be magic formulas. Oral ulcerations in infants prompted treatment by sympathetic magic, employing a herb with white spots on its leaves, visually similar to those evident in the mucosa, cooked and tied to the head of the infant's bed. While secret remedies have a long history, they were banned by decree in 1926 (Warolin, 2002). However, while no doubt this created a point of conflict between urban and rural settings as regulations were enforced in towns, the ancient remedies did not disappear by decree. While pharmacists took over the role of dispensing remedies in urban environments, rural peoples did not change their treatment plans to follow (Lafont, 2002). In the absence of alternative medical care—the alternative being biomedicine—traditional remedies shared a place with pharmacists for many years. Today, local pharmacists are themselves facing an increasing share of their work being taken over by international pharmaceuticals, in an increasing international arena since 1992.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

French medical practice focuses primarily on physicians who undergo traditional biomedical training. In contrast to the United States, where four years of medical school follow four years of undergraduate work, in France, medical training is initiated immediately after secondary school education is completed. Competition is intense for positions in this field. Physicians may become either generalists or specialists, with foci on individual body functions (e.g., neurology, cardiac and renal specialties, rheumatology), age-related care (e.g., pediatrics), and surgical versus non-surgical approaches (e.g., internal medicine) in accord with international biomedical practice. Medical licensure examinations are given and extensive clinical training is the norm.

Chiropractic medicine is not regularly practiced in France, where historically homeopathic approaches became more acceptable in the early part of the 20th century. Some individuals choose to specialize in homeopathic treatment approaches and undergo further training. These physicians are not seen as practicing or offering alternative medicine: homeopathy is a moderately mainstream medical approach.

Individuals specializing in musculo-skeletal problems, known as kinesotherapy, are popular and are often sought by individuals with back problems, in particular. Somewhat the equivalent of physical therapists, they share with other non-medically trained practitioners a more narrow focus on functional aspects of the body. Pharmacists have historically had a wide range of abilities to prescribe treatments, and a number of medications that require prescriptions in the United States are available over the counter in France.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Biomedicine provides the primary construct of illness and health in France. In the midst of the increasing internationalization of scientific knowledge and medical care, there remain differences in concepts of what constitutes a disease and its treatment. There are diseases whose symptom complex is uniquely culturally constructed, and there are symptoms and signs that are not yet culturally constructed in the medical domain. In the first category is the uniquely French disease, spasmophilia; in the second, osteoporosis among elderly French.

Spasmophilia has been called a polymorphic disease with numerous symptoms. But the overwhelming one is fatigue: there is never enough sleep and individuals awake in the morning exhausted. Difficulties in temperature regulation, ranging from feeling too cold or too hot; difficulties in eating from anorexia to overeating; sensations from nervousness to great anxiety; and being barely able to breathe are all typical complaints of spasmophilics. Muscle cramps from the throat to the extremities, headache, lightheadedness, and Reynaud's sensations are often reported, in addition to heart palpitations, digestive problems, hypoglycemia, and allergy. People who have spasmophilia take care to watch for the signs. The scientific question is: What could be biologically responsible for all of these signs and symptoms? Are they of psychogenic origin or do they reflect a metabolic disturbance? Some researchers suggested that it was a problem at the level of mineral salt exchange at the cell membrane and treatment included calcium supplements. More recently, it has been suggested that the symptom complex is a synonym for hyperventilation syndrome (Delvaux, Fontaine, Bartsch, & Fontaine, 1998) or, alternatively, similar to chronic fatigue syndrome or fibromyalgia (Maquet, Croisier, & Crielaard, 2000) and may reflect magnesium imbalance (Durlach, Bac, Durlach, Bara, & Guiet-Bara, 1997).

Alternatively, there are signs and symptoms that people exhibit that are not necessarily considered a disease or treatable entity in France, in contrast with the United States. An example is osteoporosis, which has been viewed merely as the normal process of aging—and untreatable. When do the processes of aging become treatable clinical categories and how is cross-cultural scientific information filtered? The high incidence of osteoporosis is evident from walking down any French street: numerous elderly women and men exhibit the so-called "dowager's hump," characteristic of vertebral compression resulting from bone loss. The statistical incidence in France is presently unreported. It is not a disease. It is not a condition in need of identification or treatment. In fact, one study identified that few general practitioners investigate the presence of osteoporosis (less than 6% in one study), and correct treatment was carried out by less than half (Laroche & Masieres, 1998). This is notable in a population where several studies have reported rather high prevalence of vitamin D deficiency in both the general adult population (Chapuy et al., 1997) and elderly women in particular (Cals et al., 1996). Aging of the skeletal system is to be expected and is not medicalized at this time.

Health is not something that comes merely as the result of a doctor's visit on the occasion that one does not feel well. It is not something to reflect upon because of a lab report indicating a high cholesterol level. Bodily wellbeing is a part of daily lifestyle. Taking care of oneself

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 649**

is not necessarily goal-oriented toward "health," but "well-being" is often a goal that has the side-effect of serving health. Teas, wines, and cognacs bolster and ameliorate; month-long vacations and rests at thermal baths rejuvenate. Social class has an important influence on daily life in France, and influences who has access to information, facilities, and cultural capital—but there are many aspects of lifestyle that cross these boundaries in modern-day France. National health insurance covers the greater part of payment for most culturally acceptable treatments.

Personal theories of health and well-being focus on all manner of daily practices. The importance of consumables set the background for a strong presence in France of a reliance on remedies in lieu of antibiotics. Too much to eat and struck by a "liver crisis" (crise de foie)? Try some champagne, it is also very good for a hangover. "Water? I have heard that some people drink it." Oysters are good for children weakened by disease, and are part of the sea cures. Indeed, oysters are filled with mineral salts—calcium, sodium, magnesium, iron, zinc, and copper—proteins, lipids, and vitamins A and B.

The body is constructed in a distinctly French manner, or habitus as Bourdieu put it (Bourdieu, 1990a, 1990b, 1999). Unlike the mechanically based approach of American medicine, where fixing the objectified body machine is the goal, whether through antibiotics, surgery, or therapy in the midst of a distinctive Cartesian dilemma, the French tend to their bodies outside of the biomedical domain on a daily basis as a lived experience. To be sure, the French access doctors and hospitals when called for, in a superb medical milieu where some of the great breakthroughs have occurred—from radiology and vaccines to HIV. But there is also a level of everyday bodily experience that involves responding to sensations in terms of culturally appropriate alternatives through which the French take care of their sense of well-being, their bodies, and in some cases, their "health."

There is an underlying sensibility that it is only natural for the body to become susceptible to discomfort as normal experience displaces the body's balance. From overeating and drinking, from stress to aging, people experience discomfort and require care. In an ancient society, food can poison people, weakness of the body is to be expected, and it is important that one knows what to do for these life experiences oneself.

Some people share in the sense of control over "health" as medically conceived and attend to physical exercise—there are parks filled with weekend runners and fitness centers that welcome people for work-outs. There is a strong influence of American lifestyle in these activities, and, thus, they are not shared by all people. It is entirely acceptable to claim that you are "allergic to exercise" and continue to enjoy a fine foie gras when it is available, regardless of one's last LDL blood level. C'est la vie.

What is called psychoneuroimmunology in the United States stands in stark contrast to a value system that involves life at a slower pace. One suspects that the reputed health benefits referred to by the "French paradox" (Perdue, 1992) and included in the "mediterranean diet" are more than merely drinking red wine and eating foods with olive oil. There are small reference texts that document the appropriate choice of wines—not to match the food, something every good wine purveyor can assist with—but to match bodily needs and contribute to health (Saint-Clair, 1993). Researchers have identified the potential chemical benefits of wine and epidemiological studies verify a correlation between daily wine consumption and decreased cardiovascular disease risk among middle-age and elderly men in France (Renaud, Gueguen, Schenker, & d'Houtaud, 1998). But, it is difficult to disentangle the direct effects of the wine from the lifestyle in which it is consumed. It is unlikely that these effects would be mimicked by extracting chemicals and taking them as a pill, transforming the French wine effects to an American lifestyle. Attention to details that keep people in touch with their senses and the natural world around them cross economic boundaries. Differences in social class notwithstanding, at the present time it is almost a cliché to say that for the French food consumption is more than eating. Much of health is grounded in gastronomy.

Depending on one's bodily state, a meal can be prepared to match sensations from head discomfort to stomach uneasiness based on the appropriate collection and sequence of herbs in the dish or liquid consumed. Infusions can be brewed to alleviate urinary troubles, joint pains, or lift the spirits, calm the nerves, and encourage sleep. Daily personal experience of the body can dictate subtle choices following the evening meal. There are a number of fermented fruit and herb-based drinks, each a specialty of a particular region, with a long history of local production and common consumption. Today, some are said to be best consumed before a meal, as they aid in relaxing the individual and assisting in the transition to a calm after work, and an enticement of the appetite. Others are known to aid in digestion. Some of these eau de vie (literally, water of life), or digestifs, may be so named not merely by chance. While the grand cognacs are enjoyed on special occasions, more modest eau de vie are consumed regularly. Some are reserved for specific needs for example, when the meal may have contained a questionable food item. Numerous brandies and eau de vie are part of family heritage as being the *specific* amelioration for individual circumstances. To make an aperitif at home: macerate medicinal plants, add spices and aromatiques, ferment. During the harvest season, substitute fruit—each has a focal effect on the body's well-being. These practices are part of people's lived experiences.

At more than 100 natural hot springs, there are sites that serve as therapeutic centers, available to accommodate individuals with symptoms ranging from respiratory difficulties, skin diseases, gynecological disorders, arterial problems, and psychosomatic ailments. The water therapy may involve bathing, inhaling the vapors, drinking the waters, or application of the waters to the ailing body site. The daily consumption of mineral water from various locales, such as "Perrier," "Vichy," "Vittel," "Badoit"—each slightly different in terms of the minerals that it contains—speaks to the common acceptance of this approach. Each of the water sources is as distinctive as the result of its geological context. Containing different concentrations of local minerals, each of the spas is seen as benefiting distinctly different bodily conditions. For arthritis one might choose the conditions of the baths at Ax-les-Thermes, whereas problems of infant development might be better treated by the salts in the water found in Jura. These practices tie people to the earth and the correspondence of bodily sensations to regional distinctiveness in mineral baths conforms to a mind-set oriented toward choosing regional wines for the character each uniquely possesses due to the soil and climate conditions in the locale of origin.

French scientists have asked, "Do these water therapies really work?" One conclusion is that it is difficult to say. In their review of a number of research studies, Schilliger and Bardelay (1990) noted that very few have been prospective case–control studies with objective outcome criteria. This includes a large-scale prospective study conducted by a branch of the national medical service of more than 3,000 patients. The demographic profile of the people in this study is useful, providing insight into who seeks these treatments. Three groups were included in the study. The first had a mean age of 36 years (a group of children 5–15 years with their parents, 30–65 years), nearly evenly divided by sex, presented for treatment of chronic sinusitis and bronchitis, asthma, and recurrent ear infections. A second group of men, average age of 62 years, were treated for arterial problems, and a third group of women, mean age of 51 years, were treated primarily for urinary problems. The results of the study stated that more than 80% of these people reported being helped by the end of their first cure. However, no control groups were used and no quantifiable criteria of improvement were employed.

One of the few studies meeting objective research criteria was conducted at the Royat Spa, which receives 25,000 people annually. A prospective study of 140 people with a mean age of 57 years focused on a clinical versus control sample with vascular problems of the leg. They reported that more than half of the clinical sample experienced amelioration during the treatment by objective criteria (Fabry, Pochon, Trolese, & Duchêne-Marullaz, 1985).

Schilliger and Bardelay (1990) note that a number of negative effects have been reported from spa visits, ranging from exacerbation of symptoms to contagious respiratory outbreaks. Critics question their utility (Brockliss, 1987; Weisz, 2001). Nonetheless, national health insurance continues to support these options, and surveys report that many people say they feel better. Those who do not are not necessarily respondents.

In summary, the lived well-being of the body occurs largely outside of the medical domain for many French. Taking a cure and healing a discomfort is not merely an outcome, it is an ongoing process, a lifestyle of bodily experience. In a world filled with media regarding the health effects of smoking, drinking, and fat consumption, a study of more than 13,000 hypertensive French men in 1999 and 2000 found that fewer than one in four followed the recommended lifestyle changes of weight loss, decreased salt and alcohol consumption, and increased physical activity in order to lower their blood pressure (Tilly, Guilhot, Salanave, Fender, & Allemand, 2002). Physicians prescribed medications appropriately only two thirds of the time, and more than one fourth of these included a potentially contra-indicated drug. The study concluded that it was necessary to increase communication between healthcare administrators and clinicians to better educate patients to take responsibility for their health. It will be interesting to see if the French lifestyle will change for health, when so much of well-being is based on lifestyle. Will cultural values and ideas about the nature of

human life alter, or are the outcomes of the well-lived life, well, simply, la vie?

### **Homeopathy**

Homeopathic physicians are trained in the same way as all other physicians in France and then undergo further specialization. They learn the unique diagnostic and treatment approaches of homeopathy, first developed by Hahnemann in 1810 (Hahnemann, 1991). It is necessary for the homeopathic physician to get to know the patient, for even the same symptoms of disease may require different treatment depending on the personality of the patient. The diagnosis is fundamentally the treatment in homeopathic medicine. By identifying an individual's temperament, much can be ascertained about immune function and, with time, the appropriate chemicals will restore balance to an individual and, thus, one's sense of well-being. Each individual is treated in accord with his or her internal milieu. It is critical during the initial interview to identify the nature of this temperament. This requires a long conversation with the patient, directed toward the identification of his/her individual responses to temperature, stress, foods, and daily life. The homeopathic physician develops a profile of the patient based on a typological classification. While the reason for an individual seeking medical attention matters, it is not the core of the homeopathic interview. This is at first glance a singularly culture-bound diagnostic approach, and contrasts with the checklist approach posed by many doctors, where diagnosis follows a rote pattern, and treatment is focused on scientific prescription and crisis management. Homeopathic approaches follow a style that works quite well in France for a number of people.

The central tenet of homeopathic treatment is similarity, or like treats like: remedies are chosen to match the distinctive features of plants or minerals with the characteristics of the individual patient and his/her disease/ discomfort. For example, herpes simplex virus of the lips (HSV II), results in chronic cold sores that are notoriously recalcitrant to treatments in biomedicine. This is treated homeopathically with success by small doses of *rhus toxicodendrum*—a derivative of poison ivy—a treatment chosen because the effects of the plant mimic the disease that is being treated. Additionally, several chemicals may also be prescribed to an individual apart from anything directed toward the presenting complaint. The goal of this further treatment is to improve the patient's mental and physical well-being and help him/her to avoid disorders for which he/she may be constitutionally and temperamentally predisposed (Vannier, 1992).

Homeopathic treatment involves small balls, approximately 3 mm in diameter, that are packaged in blue plastic vials (about 50 mm long by 15 mm in diameter). The vials have carefully constructed openings that permit only a single round pill to escape at one time. The pills must be deposited under the tongue, directly from the vial with no contact from the hands for maximum efficacy—and not taken in proximity to eating mints, drinking coffee, or brushing the teeth.

The principle of homeopathic treatment is microdoses, and traditionally is based on molecular-level ingredients. The packaging permits people to carry them in their pocket or purse and use them when they feel the need. The contents are chemicals, ranging from plant extracts to most of the elements of the chemical chart. Many people have a *Family Guide to Homeopathy* (such as Horvilleur, 1981) which they can consult for information on appropriate treatments for minor aches and pains of daily life. The blue homeopathic vials are available without prescription at homeopathic pharmacies. In consultation with a homeopathic physician, an individual can learn about his/her own temperamental type and self-medicate as life occurs.

There has been significant scientific debate regarding whether or not homeopathic remedies really *work* (reviewed in Poitevin, 1987), with numerous critiques matched by reports of efficacy in clinical trials (Kleihnen et al., 1991) with patients who suffer from symptoms as diverse as allergy (Reilly, Taylor, McSharry, & Aitchison, 1986) flu (Ferley, Zmirou, D'Adhemar, & Balducci, 1989), and anxiety (Benzecri, Maiti, Belon, & Questel, 1991). Like water therapy, there are people who simply feel better taking homeopathic treatments. Does this make homeopathy an example of the placebo effect? The people who take it say, "No, and anyway, does it matter?" Since often physicians do not know the underlying cause of people's symptoms and, therefore, how to treat them, why worry?

Homeopathic treatment often helps where allopathy fails. One woman reported that she had had recurrent sore throats prior to taking homeopathic remedies. After two years of seeking help from traditional physicians, she saw a homeopathist. She feels better: her discomfort "*was* in her throat, not in her head." This is a case where general practitioners did not know precisely what was wrong with the patient because a causative pathway has yet to be established to explain her experience.

There is an underlying sensibility that it is only natural for the body to be pushed off balance from overeating and drinking, from stress to aging; people expect to experience discomfort. In this sense, homeopathy is not an alternative medical system, a non-mainstream approach to cure. It is not likely that it can be exported and fill the gap where biomedicine leaves people's needs unmet more generally. It is tied into an essentially culturally distinctive lifestyle of individual and social experience. A culturally based experience of everyday life based in feelings and bodily senses inform our perceptions of health and ill-feeling, and our attempts at sensory alleviation or intensification. Small doses make sense in a society where local historical traditions design reactions to subtle sensibilities. It would be less likely to be effective in a society where "bigger is better" and "if a little is good, a lot must be better," which drives many people to take mega-doses of vitamins, for example, in the United States.

Homeopathic diagnosis gives voice to people's personal concerns and their theories about what is bothering them. They do not have to fit a biomedical conceptual category to be validated and receive treatment. The sensations experienced by the body are not reconstructed into a medical paradigm. Homeopathic treatments permit the individual—who knows himself or herself best—to maintain a sense of privacy regarding one's well-being and sensations. The over-the-counter availability of the blue vials further permits a person to respond to body fluctuations on a daily basis with an acceptance of individual strengths and weaknesses. The self remains private.

Perhaps, also, homeopathy finds agency because it continues a long tradition of home-based treatments, from foods to waters. It upholds the values of individual privacy in intimate matters, and the belief that health and well-being change with the natural order of life. The homeopathic interview fits into the social mores of polite interaction.

In terms of health-seeking, it has been reported that homeopathy is mainly used in mental, infectious, and rheumatological disorders where it is a useful alternative and avoids the abuse and adverse effects of sedatives, antibiotics, and anti-inflammatories (Colin, 2000). Some studies have shown that women use homeopathic treatments more than men (Bancarel et al., 1988), but the reasons are not clear. Perhaps this may be related to women seeking more healthcare than men in general.

In the year 2000, an investigative overview (Chaufferin, 2000) identified that the price of homeopathic products was only a quarter of the average cost of all health expenditures from insurance for reimbursable medicines. The total reimbursement for allopathic products, by contrast, was three times more than homeopathic. These figures were not explained by patient profile or diseases treated. Overall, homeopaths' annual financial outlays were one-half of general practitioners'. In terms of patient satisfaction, 87% of the patients whose physicians prescribed a homeopathic treatment did not seek a second opinion or further treatment. It is notable that since the patient is the decision-maker regarding treatment, issues of compliance are not significant in homeopathy.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Sexuality is a normal part of the life cycle and both advertising and social norms accept the body as a source of enjoyment. On average, sexual activity begins in adolescence and while a responsible and healthy emotional state of individuals is a stated concern, there is no requirement that love and marriage either precede or accompany sexual activity. While marriage is the expected social domain for child-bearing, a number of young French couples live together and have children prior to marriage. While many French would question women who never marry, but take occupations in lieu of child-bearing, this status is quite acceptable and the role of women in powerful positions depends greatly on the work domain and socioeconomic class.

The French have a strong sense of privacy in matters of their personal life. They are also quite tolerant of the right of individuals to choose a lifestyle that is best suited for themselves. Extra-marital affairs are not uncommon, although they are expected to be discretely managed.

The fundamental right to contraception was first affirmed in a public campaign in 1981–82. In 1992, a second national campaign was launched as the result of AIDS and focused on public education regarding condoms. In recognition of the 25th anniversary of the law establishing the fundamental right to contraception, a third national campaign was launched in 2000. With the slogan, "It is up to you to choose your contraception" appearing in advertisements on TV, radio, and in the press, the combined efforts of the Department of Health and the minister of education aimed to educate adolescents on sexuality. The goal was designed to inform teenage girls and women of the availability of state-funded contraception options,

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 653**

including the morning-after pill. The goal was to reduce the abortion rate among adolescents in France and in women in the French protectorates. For example, in the mid-1990s, in Guyana, 10% of births were to minors and 1% those were girls less than 15 years of age. The number of voluntary interruptions of pregnancy ranged from 73% in Guadeloupe to 30% in Guyana.

While great controversy from parents surrounded the reforms of 2000, 66% of the population supported them. A pocket guide to contraception was distributed to high school students and France lifted requirements for females under 18 to have parental consent for abortions or a morning-after pill. The timing of legal abortions was extended from 10 to 12 weeks to bring France in line with other countries in the European Union, and pills became available without prescription in pharmacies across France.

Presently, between the ages of 20 and 44, more than two out of three women use contraception. This is one of the highest rates in Europe. However, the Demographic Institute at the University of Bordeaux has identified that there is great regional and social inequality in access to contraception. For example, only 17% of public facilities propose RU 486 to women, compared with 60% of private facilities.

The effectiveness of these campaigns has been followed: while only 8% of women chose to use condoms in 1987, as a result of numerous advertising campaigns, 87% of young women and those not in permanent relationships chose this method in 1998. This is replaced by the pill in a stable relationship. However, about 15% of young women have no protection during their first sexual encounter. In fact, of women aged 20–24, 56% stated they used nothing if their first experience was at ages 14 –15; and 23% if the ages were 18–19. The average age of first sexual experience is about 17 and it is estimated that about 10,000 young women each year have an unwanted pregnancy.

In 1994, two out of three women between the ages of 20 and 44 used contraception. The pill was the most common choice, and 58% of younger women (aged 20–24) were the primary users. Sterilization was the second choice overall (16%), chosen primarily by women between the ages of 35 and 44. The third choice was condom use (5%) and 31% used nothing (source: Demographic Institute of the University of Bordeaux).

According to a popular survey published in the magazine *Marie Claire* in 1999, while 8 out of 10 women believe that contraception is a liberty, one in three does not want to take the pill because she believes that the pill makes women fat. Only 4 in 10 young girls and 2 in 10 women were aware that the pill was available without prescription. Four out of 10 women responded that they believed withdrawal to be an effective mode of contraception, and 2 out of 10 thought that temperature taking was effective in preventing conception.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

In the mid-1990s, there were 220,000 voluntary interruptions of pregnancy per year for 730,000 pregnancies. On average, each woman has had an accidental pregnancy in her life and one in two was interrupted (Demographic Institute, University of Bordeaux, 1994). These statistics prompted the increased efforts at public information regarding contraception, as noted.

For couples who want to have children but are having difficulties with infertility, France is one of the most advanced scientific communities and in vitro procedures are available. These, however, are confined to urban areas on central medical research teams.

Pregnancy is a normal event in a woman's life and is respected, supported, and culturally valued. Women do not hide their bodies and clothing that aims to follow fashion is available. Women follow the advice of their female relatives and friends regarding their health and well-being, and like other biomedically oriented countries, seek prenatal care for the best interests of their infants. With national health insurance, this care does not discriminate on economic grounds and is more readily available in urban areas than rural areas. Public health campaigns identify the risk to the fetus of AIDS, but fewer campaigns identify smoking or alcohol as potential risks.

Hospital births are the norm at the present time, with women speaking out against the medicalization of birth in recent years. Citing that medical interventions in France were the highest in Europe in 1998, with 85% of pregnancies employing the medical arsenal, feminists are now demanding greater consideration of midwifery and personal choice in birthing (perinatalite.chez.tiscali.fr).

### **Infancy**

The birth rate in 1995 was about 12/1,000 individuals in France. As a modern European country, most births occur in hospital with medical attention and women are discharged approximately three days later, returning with their infants to their homes. For the predominantly Catholic population, this is an opportunity for family and friends to celebrate the arrival of a new family member and a christening follows. Godparents are chosen for the child from amongst family friends and relatives, and depending on the economic circumstances of the family, a party with various levels of decorum occurs. A popular mark is the distribution of candy-coated almonds—pink for girls and blue to announce a boy. Small shops exist that specialize in this confection for births, weddings, and other formal celebrations.

Infants are valued as small, dependent, and temporarily incompetent members of society who need to be cared for and who deserve patience while gaining the ability to learn how to become contributing members of society. They receive care from both parents, as well as doting grandparents, who often contribute significantly to caretaking. Infant feeding follows contemporary industrial countries' notions of what is best, with breastfeeding supplemented by infant foods within the first 6 months the most common pattern at the present time. Weaning normally occurs by one year of age and toilet training follows as soon as the child can manage. Social class differences, based on ethnic background and economic levels, affect the early patterns of care-taking and expectations, but appropriate behavior is valued in the larger society and children receive strong negative reinforcement for public displays of emotion beginning at early ages.

The primary health problems of infants follow other industrial countries, with ear infections and upper respiratory complaints at the top of the reasons for seeking medical care. Asthma and allergies have recently been noted to be on the rise.

### **Childhood**

French children are expected to adopt appropriate behavior and customs from an early age. Moderate physical and negative verbal discipline are the norm as demands for children to conform to behavioral rules are clarified. A narrow range of individual liberties are tolerated as cultural values are inculcated.

Health problems of French children parallel industrial countries at the present time, with infectious diseases leading the common cause for pediatric consult. Childhood cancers of both tissue and blood are significant chronic diseases. French children seem to have poor eyesight diagnosed at an earlier age than their counterparts elsewhere, but it is unclear if this is due to diagnostic concerns or biological predisposition.

A cultural preference for males is sometimes reported, but is not universal. At times of economic/food shortage, meat, when available, was preserved for the boys and men who need it for strength, said one woman of her childhood. Girls received broths and vegetables while the heartier foods were saved for the males. No overt sex biases are evident in child-rearing practices and child abuse has not received any large measure of public health attention.

### **Adolescence**

By the age of 12, French adolescents are mature young adults, with expectations of taking on fully adult roles in a short time. They are in training for their future jobs with a choice already being made in terms of the schools that they attend. Adolescents take responsibility in the home and family and are learning about the larger sociopolitical sphere in which they live. They are becoming sexually active and part of the school curriculum is designed to provide public health information about safe sex practices. Adolescents are expected to behave like adults, although parents are not surprised to find them having difficulties at times in this role.

### **The Aged**

Aging is culturally reinforced by mandatory retirement at the age of 60. Seen as a socially responsible action to provide jobs for the younger generation, this practice moves an active individual into a category of retiree and forces them to adjust their lifestyle to new economic and social circumstances. For some people, this is a "new" time of life, a socially approved change of job and focus and an opportunity to explore new experiences. For others, this can be a serious economic hardship and the severing of ties with work-related social contacts can be isolating. While no formal epidemiological studies have been undertaken nationally to investigate the health consequences of taking retirement, it would be interesting to follow patterns of alcohol consumption and depression amongst the aging population.

There are a number of retirement homes that accept individuals as they become infirm. Many families, however, take care of their aging relatives themselves, with

#### **References 655**

primary responsibility falling on eldest daughters as caretakers. Respect and consideration of aging family member's wishes is a priority in many families.

### **Dying and Death**

Death is a natural part of the life process and the importance of religious faith in many people's lives helps them through the grieving process. A predominantly Catholic society, the church organizes death rituals and modern mortuary practices are followed. Each small community has its local cemetery, where people return to be buried with their families, and where their graves are visited by surviving family members. While appropriate grieving periods are socially expected, a surviving spouse is not expected to forfeit his or her remaining life in memory of the deceased. Re-marriage occurs frequently and is encouraged. With a history of a century of significant losses in war, each small village has a memorial to the dead from each battle in the center of town. These are carefully tended by local residents.

## **REFERENCES**

- Allain, J. (1986). *Anatomie, physiologie et pathologie du Berrichon vu par lui-meme.* (pp. 17–22, pp. 30–35).
- Bancarel, Y., Blanc, M. P., Charrin, G., Chastan, E., Coldefy, J. F., Cottes, L. et al. (1988). Study of drug consumption in a working environment in France. *Fundamental Clinical Pharmacology, 2*, 37– 46.
- Benzecri, J.-P., Maiti, D.-D., Belon, P., & Questel, R. (1991). Comparaison entre quatre méthodes de sevrage après une thérapeutique anxiolytique. *Les Cahiers de l'Analyse des Données, 16*(4), 389–402.
- Bourdieu, P. (1990a). *The logic of practice*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Bourdieu, P. (1990b). *Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Bourdieu, P. (1999). *A critical reader* (R. Shusterman, Ed.). London, UK: Blackwell.
- Brockliss, L. S. (1987). Taking the waters in early modern France: Some thoughts on a commercial racket. *Soc Soc Hist Med Bull (Lond), 40*, 74–76.
- Cals, M. J., Bories, P. N., Blonde-Cynober, F., Coudray-Lucas, C., Desveaus, N., Devanlay, M., et al. (1996). Reference intervals and biological profile in a group of healthy elderly population in the Paris region. *Annales de Biologie Clinique (Paris)*, *54*, 307–315.
- Chapuy, M. C., Preziosi, P., Maamer, M., Arnaud, S., Gala, P., Hercberg, S. et al. (1997). Prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency in an adult normal population. *Osteoporosis International, 7*, 439–443.
- Chaufferin, G. (2000). Improving the evaluation of homeopathy: Economic considerations and impact on health. *British Homeopathic Journal, 89*(Suppl. 1), S27–S30.

- Colin, P. (2000). An epidemiological study of a homeopathic practice. *British Homeopathic Journal, 89*, 116–121.
- Delvaux, M., Fontaine, P., Bartsch, P., & Fontaine, O. (1998). Tetany, spasmophilia, hyperventilation syndrome: Theoretical and therapeutic synthesis. *Revue Medicale de Liege, 53*, 610–618.
- Durlach, J., Bac, P., Durlach, V., Bara, M., Guiet-Bara, A. (1997). Neurotic, neuromuscular and autonomic nervous form of magnesium imbalance. *Magnesium Research, 10*, 169–195.
- Fabry, R., Pochon, P., Trolese, J. F., & Duchêne-Marullaz, P. (1985). Variations du périmètre de marche et des index de pression avant et après épreuves de march mesurés à un an d'intervalle chez 140 artériopathes traités á Royat. *Cahiers d'artériologie de Royat, 12*, 78–82.
- Ferley, J. P., Zmirou, D., D'Adhemar, D., Balducci, F. (1989). A controlled evaluation of a homeopathic preparation in the treatment of influenza-like syndromes. *British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 27*, 329–335.
- Hahnemann, S. (1991). *Organon of Medicine* (J. Künzli, A. Naudé & P. Pendleton, Trans.) London: Victor Gollancz.
- Horvilleur, A. G. (1981). *Guide Familial de l'Homéopathie*. Paris: Hachette.
- Kleijnen, J., Knipschild, P., & Riet, G. (1989). Clinical trials of homeopathy. *British Medical Journal, 302*, 316–323.
- Lafont, O. (2002). Medicines for towns and medicines for countrysides. *Rev Hist Pharm (Paris), 50*, 211–220.
- Laroche, M., & Masieres, B. (1998). Does the French general practitioner correctly investigate and treat osteoporosis? *Clinical Rheumatology, 17*, 139–143.
- Maquet, D., Croisier, J. L., Crielaard, J. M. (2000). Fibromyalgia in the year 2000. *Revue Medicale de Liege, 55*, 991–997.
- Perdue, L. (1992). *The French paradox and beyond*. Sonoma, CA: Renaissance.
- Poitevan, B. (1987). Le devenir de l'homéopathie. Paris: DOIN Ed.
- Reilly, D. T., Taylor, M. A., McSharry, C., & Aitchison, T. (1986). Is homeopathy a placebo response? Controlled trial of homeopathic potency, with Pollens in hayfever as a model. *The Lancet, 18*, 881–886.
- Renaud, S. C., Gueguen, R., Schenker, J., & d'Houtaud, A. (1998). Alcohol and mortality in middle-aged men from eastern France. *Epidemiology, 9*, 184–188.
- Saint-Clair, M. (1993). *Vins medicinaux et elixirs de santé*. Colmar: S.A.E.P.
- Schilliger, P., & Bardelay, G. (1990). *La cure thermale*. Paris: Editions Frison-Roche.
- Tilly, B., Guilhot, J., Salanave, B., Fender, P., & Allemand, H. (2002). Management of severe hypertension in France in 1999 and 2000: Intermediate results of a health insurance intervention program. *Archives des Maladies du Coeur et des Vaisseaux, 95*, 687–694.
- Vannier, L. (1992). *Typology in homeopathy* (Marianne Harling, Trans.). Beaconsfield, U.K.
- Warolin, C. (2002). Secret remedies in France until abolition in 1926. *Rev Hist Pharm (Paris), 50*, 229–238.
- Weisz, G. (2001). Spas, mineral waters, and hydrological science in twentieth-century France. *Isis, 92*, 451–483.