31

# Terrorism, Public Order, and Human Rights

Jaytilak Guha Roy

The struggle to preserve, protect, and promote human rights is as old as human civilization. Sadly, even more than six decades after the United Nations proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (10, December 1948), the struggle for human rights not merely continues but becomes intense too. Every day, in country after country, human rights are now being violated, irrespective of whether a country is developed or developing, whether it is governed by a totalitarian or a democratic regime. To quote Martin Ennals, former General Secretary of the Amnesty International

Each violation of human rights, wherever it occurs, is a threat to the welfare and dignity of the entire human family. The protection of human rights, therefore, is a worldwide responsibility which transcends all racial, ideological, and geographical boundaries.<sup>1</sup>

# ☐ GENESIS AND GROWTH OF TERRORISM IN INDIA

#### **British Period**

India has a long history associated with terrorism. During the British rule, the revolutionary freedom fighters were labelled as terrorists. They had either martyrdom or suffered imprisonment for the emancipation of their motherland from bondage, and were, therefore, loved and respected by their compatriots. Moreover, unlike the present-day terrorists, the freedom fighters of British India did not indulge in indiscriminate violence against common Englishmen, but resorted to violence only against their adversaries

or exploiters, such as the English bureaucrats, judges, police officials, and their native associates. The sixteen-year-old martyr Khudiram, for instance, repented when he came to know after his arrest that he and his associate had killed Mr and Mrs Kennedy instead of Mr Kingsford, the then District and Sessions Judge of Muzaffarpur, whom they actually wanted to kill. Yet, as Chari has observed forthrightly, "Freedom fighters could be seen as rebels, extremists, or separationists, and national liberation movements could be described as insurrections depending on perceptions and whether the question is addressed by those who question the regime in power or are sympathetic to the regime in power."<sup>2</sup>

#### **Post-Independence Scenario**

The transformation of our polity from *rajtantra* to *prajatantra* could not restrain violence. On the contrary, the bankruptcy of our political leadership of the post-independence era has resulted in a phenomenal rise in gangsterism and mafia rule in the political process, increasing role of money and muscle powers in the electoral process, and glaring distortions in the notion of an impartial law-enforcement machinery. No wonder, the developmental exercises by such bankrupt political leadership have generally increased the hiatus between haves and have-nots and ultimately given rise to socioeconomic inequalities, regional disparities, and the problems of identitycrisis and national integration. Over and above, growing unemployment and frustrations of youths, all pervasive corruption, evils of consumerism, cancerous growth of casteism and communalism, ethnic, linguistic and regional conflicts, scourge of insurgency and terrorism, desperate onslaughts by the Naxalites, threats from separatist, secessionist, and disruptive forces and various other problems of a turbulent society as ours have made the world's largest democracy extremely difficult to survive. Thus, the problem of terrorism and its growth in independent India have to be understood in the broader context of our socio-political milieu.

The peasants' movement in Telangana led by the communists in the late forties marked the beginning of a new era of terrorism in independent India. During this movement in 1946-50, 659 persons were killed, 347 houses burnt, and 470 attacks were made on police and armed forces by the terrorists. On the other side, 400 terrorists were killed and 8000 arrested in police action.<sup>3</sup>

The second phase of terrorism in free India started in 1967 in the form of Naxalite violence. Inspired by the Maoist tactics of guerrilla warfare, the Naxalites unleashed a reign of terror in West Bengal and other parts of India for nearly five years in between 1767-72. In West Bengal alone, 1711 persons including 153 policemen were killed by the terrorists, while 384 terrorists were killed and 6000 interned under such "draconian laws" as the Prevention of Violent Activities Act and the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA) between 1969 and 1972.<sup>4</sup>

The march of terrorism in India took an extreme turn in the early eighties with the rejuvenation of Khalistan movement in Punjab under the leadership of Bhindranwale. Many of us have forgotten today that the thesis "Sikhs are a nation", and the slogan of Khalistan was first inspired and encouraged by the theoreticians of the British imperialism to weaken India and her freedom movement in the same way as were the thesis of "Muslims are a separate nation" and the slogan of Pakistan.<sup>5</sup> External factors apart, various internal forces and factors including heightening of the feeling of relative deprivation were responsible for the rejuvenation of the Khalistan movement in Punjab. What is still more distressing, the success of green revolution could not quench the feeling of relative deprivation, but rather resulted in its further acceleration. Nevertheless, the problem of terrorism in Punjab, as in Kashmir, was more a creation of religio-political forces than anything else. To quote Surendra Nath, a former Governor of Punjab, "For a long time a certain section of the religio-political leadership in Punjab has been articulating the perceived injustice with Sikh community which has led to serious disorientation among the Sikh youths and a large number of them now think that a separate sovereign state is the answer to Sikh aspirations."<sup>6</sup>

In Kashmir, too, the same strategy was adopted, by the religio-political forces to arouse religious animosities among the ignorant civilians. As H.N. Singhal, a retired Major-General has observed forthrightly, "It is argued that the three million Muslims of the valley have been alienated and no longer want to be part of India. We used to hear the same argument from the prophets of doom about Sikhs in Punjab. With the establishment of peace and recourse to the democratic process normalcy prevails there. Similarly, in Kashmir alienation is temporary since independent Kashmir have voted eight times as Indians, during a period when Pakistan was reeling under military dictators of various hues. The free will of the Kashmiri's has been exploited by fundamentalist's propaganda."<sup>7</sup>

The recent incidents in Kashmir, however, reveal that militancy has taken a virulent turn in that state due to Pakistan-sponsored trans-border terrorism. The 1994-95 annual report of the Government of India's Ministry of External Affairs noted that "in addition to training, equipping, funding, and guiding militants, Pakistan has stepped up its trans-border terrorism.<sup>8</sup> By injecting mercenaries from other countries into the Valley, especially Afghan and Sudanese mercenaries. Consequently, the level of cruelty and perversity has only been on the rise. The type of torture and brutality inflicted on victims and frequency of beheading, hanging, and rape of innocent women "far surpasses that in either Punjab or the North East."<sup>9</sup> Even the holy shrine of Charer-e-sharif, which is a symbol of secular Islam taught by Sufi saint Nooruddin Noorani (Light of the Faith), also known as Nand Rishi, had been burnt into ashes by these pro-Pakistan militants on the holy day of Idu'l Zuha on 11th May 1995."

Nuclear terrorism or terrorist access to nuclear weapons may pose an unprecedented threat to our national security in near future. The 1994-95 report of the Ministry of External Affairs noted further that Pakistan has continued to "pursue its nuclear weapons-oriented programmers, its clandestine procurement of material for this purpose and its acquisition of sophisticated weapons and arms technology far beyond its legitimate defence requirements."<sup>10</sup> Of late, some American Senators have also expressed their concern for the Pakistan's endeavour to increase its nuclear-weapon storage.

There are reasons, therefore, to assume that in near future militants and foreign mercenaries operating in the valley would have access to nuclear weapons through Pakistan.

# ❑❑ **Terrorism and Public Order**

In *Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab*<sup>11</sup> 1994, the Supreme Court observed that terrorism and public order are conceptually different "not only in ideology and philosophy but also in causes, the manner of its commission, and the effect or result of such activity. Public order, as the Court has elucidated further, is well understood and fully comprehended as a problem associated with law and order. Terrorism is a new crime far serious in nature, graver in impact and highly dangerous in consequence. One pertains to law and order problem whereas the other may be political in nature coupled with the unjustified use of force threatening security and integrity of the state." Whatever be the conceptual difference, it hardly needs to be emphasized that the law enforcing authorities have to observe the rule of law while dealing with public disorders of any nature. The observance of rule of law is, in fact, the basic requirement of a civilized society. Violations of human rights by the authority of the state are, therefore, detrimental not only to the rule of law but also to the very existence of a civilized society. Unfortunately, such violations are quite common in India, the holy land of Buddha, Ashoka or Gandhi. But before we discuss this problem, it is necessary to explain briefly what human rights really mean.

# ❑❑ **Conceptualization of Human Rights**

Since the concept of human rights is "an idea with a history, an idea that changes in both content and social function,"<sup>12</sup> there is still immense disagreement as to the meaning and contents of human rights. Without getting involved in such conceptual controversies, human rights may be said to be those rights which are essential for the dignified and decent human existence as well as for the adequate development of human personality. To speak more broadly, human rights are those "fundamental rights to which every man and woman inhabiting any part of the world should be deemed entitled by virtue of having been born a human being."<sup>13</sup>

Human rights, thus, conceived, constitute two categories of rights: (1) rights which are essential for the dignified and decent human existence, *viz.,* the right to have basic human needs like food, shelter, clothing and health, and the right to work; and (2) rights which are essential for the adequate development of human personality, such as, the right to education, the right to freedom of culture, the right to freedom of speech and expression, and the right to free movement.

Human rights, therefore, no longer imply merely civil and political liberties for the individual, conceived some kind of protection or safeguard against state power by the classical as well as contemporary western liberal scholars from John Stuart Mill to John Rawls. The bearers of human rights in contemporary societies, and more particularly in developing societies, must have an implicit right to be and remain human.14 They must have some autonomy of choice in planning their own survival. They must not have merely the right to life, but rather the right to subsistence, this is, in fact, the new trend in human rights thinking which results in growing recognition of the idea that economic and social rights are a prerequisite of the enjoyment of civil and political rights. However, for our present discussion, we are concerned only with human rights as a safeguard against state power.

# ❑❑ **State Violations of Human Rights**

Certain countries have now waged a relentless propaganda war in various international forum against India for alleged violation of human rights by police and armed forces in Jammu and Kashmir, although their own records of human rights are not at all satisfactory. In one of these countries, barbaric, and inhuman punishments under the religious laws are still in existence, violating all standard norms of human dignity including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This is by no means enough for our complacency. We should not deny that violations of human rights by the state apparatus have been taking place in India, and more so in Jammu and Kashmir, because of certain practical problems and evil necessities, so common for any democratic system of governance. These are, briefly, as follows:

- 1. Just as totalitarianism is an ideal condition for the growth of state terrorism, political democracy is an ideal system for the growth of anti-state terrorism. In a parliamentary democracy such as ours, liberal laws and lenient criminal justice system make punishment difficult, sometimes impossible. This is more so when a reign of terror is let loose by terrorist groups.
- 2. The terrorists in the valley, as elsewhere, have successfully and surreptitiously provoked the state to use indiscriminate mass-violence and have thereby been able to win sympathy, though temporarily, from the community.
- 3. Our law enforcement agencies often had to operate under the constraints of the dilemma so common for a democratic state, since "under-action would expose it as vulnerable while over-action and indiscriminate repression would bring out the loss of popular support and legitimacy."<sup>15</sup>

- 4. Lack of community-support and co-operation and also a lack of faith in the existing judicial system have often provoked the police and armed forces to use wrong and repressive methods.
- 5. In Punjab, Kashmir, and the North-East, a large number of police and security personnel have been killed by the terrorists and militants during the last several years. Such killings often had provoked the forces to retaliate.
- 6. In a developing country such as ours, there is bound to have a wide variation in the perception of human rights issues and the concern for human rights not only in respect of functionaries of the judiciary and the police but also within the force itself. For, the educational, cultural, and family backgrounds of a policeman at a lower level are altogether different from an officer at the higher level. As one Indian observer has observed very poignantly: "Applying western standards to developing countries which have inherited the police, judicial, and jail systems from their colonial rules are apparently fraught with some risks."<sup>16</sup>

The above facts and arguments have been put forth to appraise the ground realities and real-life situations in the terrorist-ridden Kashmir and other parts of India, rather than to justify or condone violations of human rights by policies and security personnel. In fact, the vast majority of the people of India are of the view that human rights violations need to be condemned and halted, whoever the perpetrators-whether they are centres of political, economic, military power or terrorists. The former Chief Justice of India, Justice P.N. Bhagwati, has, therefore, said that "it would be wrong to look at the problem only from one side", and advocated "a fair and even-handed approach". He is firmly opposed to allowing any fact-finding mission to visit Kashmir or any part of India. As he says very poignantly, "India should stoutly resist any such move as this would amount to interference in India's internal affairs by foreign elements". However, this does not mean that we should allow the situation in Kashmir or elsewhere to drift. On the contrary, he says, "We must set right our internal affairs by our own moral authority and strength."<sup>17</sup> In fact, some monitoring mechanisms have since been evolved in India, the world's largest democracy, through judicial activism, free press, and human rights bodies which provide checks and balances on state terrorism.

# ❑❑ **Judicial Activism**

The Human Rights Committee (HRC) of the United Nations while examining the second periodic India's report (submitted on 12th July 1989), welcomed the important role the Supreme Court played in defending human rights. Several members of this Committee had evinced great interest in Public Interest Litigation (PIL) and asked how it was being used to protect such rights. This is indeed, a great compliment for the apex court of India, because the HRC is a prestigious international body of 18 experts from a wide range of legal systems which forms the treaty body established under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to supervise implementation of the Covenant.<sup>18</sup>

As a matter of fact, the Supreme Court of India have made commendable innovative exercises, in the process of adjudication of PIL, to evolve new remedies, devise new procedures, and invent new reliefs for the protection of human rights. As part of this enthusiastic judicial movement, the Supreme Court not only liberalised the traditional rule of *locus standi* in order to liberate itself from the "shackles of procedural limitations", but also attempted to provide judicial remedies even *suo moto,* as in Asiad<sup>19</sup> and Salal Hydro Electric Project.<sup>20</sup> Judicial activism in India, therefore, is not confined to police brutalities and excesses, but rather extends to covends to cover any violation of human rights by any public authority.

Of late, the Supreme Court has made another landmark innovative exercise in *Saheli v. Commissioner of Police,*<sup>21</sup> 1989 Delhi*.* The Delhi Administration was directed to pay ` 75, 000 as damage to the parents of a child who died in police custody because of beating and assault by police officers. The Delhi Administration was further directed to take appropriate steps to recover the amount or part thereof from the officer or officers who would be found responsible. This is a glaring instance of our judicial innovation in the area of public law. For, under the common law system which is operative in our country, the concept of individual accountability does not exist. Our Supreme Court has, in fact, borrowed this concept from the continental law system operative in France and innovatively applied it in our legal system to ensure accountability of individual public functionary for abuse of authority or violation of human rights. Following the footsteps of the apex court, the High Courts are also increasingly applying this concept of individual accountability for protection of human rights.

### ❑❑ **Role of Free Press**

In India, radio and television are yet to be liberated from governmental control. Nevertheless, India is fortunate to have a very powerful free press which contributes considerably to the protection of human rights. It is, indeed, due to the free press that most of the state violations of human rights have been brought to the notice of the voluntary activists, parliamentarians, jurists, and all those who are concerned with preservation and protection of these sacred rights. On a number of occasions, voluntary actions, parliamentary debates or judicial activism were based on the press reports.

Let us consider, for instance, a recent case of police excesses in which the Punjab police were involved in tattooing the four alleged female pickpockets on their foreheads while they were in illegal police custody in Amritsar. This gruesome act was initially reported in the local and national newspapers, and then, referred to the Punjab and Haryana High Court which ordered a CBI inquiry into the case and directed the state government of Punjab to pay `50000 as interim compensation to each woman. The former Director, Research and Medical Education, and ex-head of the Department of Plastic Surgery, Rajendra Hospital, Patiala, Dr. K.S. Thind, was asked by the court to supervise the treatment and conduct plastic surgery to remove the marks.<sup>22</sup> This single most instance is more than enough perhaps to appraise the role of free press in India as the protector of human rights.

### ❑❑ **Concern of Human Rights Groups**

The human rights movement in India, in its present shape, owes its origin to "the political milieu of the national emergency imposed by Indira Gandhi for about eighteen months between 1975 and 1977."<sup>23</sup> The movement is yet to gain adequate numerical strength. However, the quantitative shortcoming is somewhat compensated by the quality and dedication of its activities cadre, consisting of students, teachers, scientists, etc. "In a sense the division within the movement on the question of priorities", says an eminent civil rights activist, Ray, "has enabled a better optimization of the benefits of the thinly-spread movement based on ideological proclivities and availability of talent in each of the organizations-between sixty and seventy-spread in the various parts of the country, and, in many instances, leaving scope for coordinated joint action when desirable and possible."<sup>24</sup> A glaring instance of such joint action is the report on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots in Delhi, "Who are the Guilty", brought out by the joint investigating team of the People's Union for Democratic Rights (PUDR) and the People's Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL). A number of other organizations, *viz.,* Committee for the Protection of Democratic Rights (Bombay), Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee (Hyderabad), and Association for the Protection of Democratic Rights (Punjab) are active in defending the democratic rights of such social groups as the tribals, the "untouchables", unorganized labour in urban areas, women children and ethnic minorities, who are either not conscious of their rights or incapable of defending them against violation.

The human rights activities in India are criticized by the state authority and also by some eminent personalities like Justice P.N. Bhagwati for their concern with violations by the state authority only. As Justice Bhagwati has observed very poignantly, "When terrorists kill innocent persons, they are definitely violating human rights and they must be condemned. I do not agree with human rights activists who condemn only violations by security forces. Otherwise, terrorists will derive strength from these activists and make capital out of their criticism."<sup>25</sup> But Justice H.R. Khanna belongs to the group which feels that issue of human rights arises only when the official apparatus of the state does something violative of these rights. Violations by the terrorists cannot be treated in the same manner. However, about the state action against terrorists, Justice Khanna says, "No one takes exception to dealing firmly against militants within the domain of the law."<sup>26</sup>

### ❑❑ **Governmental Response**

The Government of India has already constituted the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) under the chairmanship of Justice Ranganath Mishra. The composition, functions, and powers of NHRC have been clearly enumerated in the protection of Human Rights Act, 1993. Under this historic legislation, the NHRC has been given certain powers including the power to appoint its own investigation staff to probe violation of human rights.

Despite these powers, the NHRC is nothing more than a recommendatory body. It cannot take any penal action against a public servant for violation of human rights by misusing or abusing his authority. The Act also provides for constitution of State Human Rights Commissions. Since the NHRC has started its functions not long ago, it is too early to evaluate its performance. It is expected that the state governments will soon constitute HRC in their respective state. Despite the limitation of powers, these statutory bodies can play a significant role as protectors of human rights depending upon the attitude, approach and dynamism of the persons who would be involved with them.

## ❑❑ **Concluding Observations**

Our foregoing discussion centres round the problem of terrorism in India and its consequent impact on human rights. Violations of human rights by our state apparatus have been discussed from a realistic perspective with a focus on Indian socio-political realities. The concluding part of the discussion highlights the various monitoring mechanisms that have been evolved in India to provide necessary checks and balance on state-terrorism. However, these mechanisms need to be strenghtened further to preserve, protect and promote human rights and democratic values in the world's largest democracy.

#### **Notes and References**

- 1. Martin Ennals, "The Struggle for Human Rights", in A.R. Desai (ed.) *Violation of Human Rights in India,* Vol. I, Bombay, Popular Prakashan, 1986, p. 3.
- 2. P.R. Chari, "Etiology of Terrorism": Its Indian and Regional Portents" in S.C Tiwari (ed.), *Terrorism in India,* Delhi, South Asia Publishers, 1990, p. 34.
- 3. B.K. Tripathi, "Terrorist Challenges in Punjab" in S.C Tiwari (ed)., *op. cit.,* pp. 152–153.

- 5. Satyapal Dang, "Terrorism in India" in S.C. Tiwari (ed.), *op. cit.,* p. 116
- 6. *The Hindustan Times,* 29th December 1991.
- 7. H.N. Singhal, "Human Rights Trap", *The Hindustan Times,* 26th April 1994.
- 8. *The Times of India,* 4th April 1995.
- 9. *The Times of India,* 2nd June 1994
- 10. *Supra,* n. 8.

<sup>4.</sup> *Ibid.,* p. 153.