#### **Overview of the Culture 971**

## **REFERENCES**

- Abdel Rahim, M. (1973). "Arabism, Africanism, and self-identification in the Sudan." In D. Wai (Ed.), *The Southern Sudan: The problem of national integration* (pp. 29–47). London: Frank Cass.
- Bell, H. (1999). *Frontiers of Medicine in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan 1899–1940.* Oxford: Clarendon.
- Deng, F. (1972). *The Dinka of the Sudan*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Eltayeb, A. (1964). The changing customs of the Riverain Sudan. *Sudan Notes & Records, 45*, 12–27.
- Evans-Pritchard, E. (1976). *Witchcraft, oracles, and magic among the Azande.* Oxford: Clarendon.
- Faris, J. (1972). *Nuba personal art.* London: Duckworth.
- Habermas, J. (1971). *Knowledge and human interest.* Boston: Beacon Press.
- Inter Press Service. (1997). *Sudan health: UN issues call for emergency aid.* Feb. 18th. (Doc. No. 970218)
- Kenyon, S. (1991). *Five women of Sennar: Culture and change in central Sudan.* Oxford: Clarendon.
- El-Guindi, F. (1996). *El Soubu: Egyptian celebration of life. Film Study Guide*. Los Angeles: El Nil Research.

- Mazrui, A. (1973). "The Black Arabs in comparative perspective: The political sociology of race mixture." In D. Wai (Ed.), *The Southern Sudan: The problem of national integration* (pp. 47–83). London: Frank Cass.
- Modawi, O. (1982). Traditional practices in childbirth in Sudan. In Taha Baasher (Ed.) *Traditional practices affecting the health of women and children.* Alexandria: WHO Technical Publication No.2.
- Shazali, H. (1982). Nutritional taboos and traditional practices in pregnancy and lactation including breast-feeding. In Taha Baasher (Ed.). *Traditional practices affecting the health of women and children.* Alexandria: WHO Technical Publication No.2.
- Sudan Country Study. Available online at http:// LCWEB2.loc.gov/ cgi-bin/query/frd/CStudy
- Sudan Demographic & Health Survey. (1991). Maryland: Micro International Institute.
- Swar Eldahab, A. (1996). "Contraceptive use and fertility of women in Urban Sudan." *The Ahfad Journal 13*(2), 12–31.
- United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF). (2001). *The situation of children and women in the Sudan.* Khartoum: United Nations.
- World Health Organization (WHO). (1999). Fact Sheet. Geneva.

# **Thai**

#### **Chris Lyttleton**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Siamese, replaced in 1939.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Thai live within the Southeast Asian nation-state of the Kingdom of Thailand which consists of five regions characterized by distinct landforms: the northern ranges and plateaus, the central fertile plains, the southeast coastal seaboard, the arid northeast plateau, and the Southern humid plateau. The Thai live in all regions but predominately in the central plains. The Thai are one of many *Tai*-speaking peoples inhabiting mainland southeast Asia. Thai is the official national language (often called Central Thai) and is gradually replacing other *Tai* dialects in regional parts of Thailand.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The *Tai* peoples moved down from Southern China roughly a thousand years ago to populate most of the central portion of the Indochinese peninsula. Over many centuries, a Thai culture, civilization, and identity has emerged as a product of interaction between the *Tai* and prior inhabitants such as the Mons and Khmers.

The population of Thailand was 62.31 million in 2001. The Thai (Siamese) are the majority population living within the Thai borders and number more than 30 million. Other *Tai* ethnic groups also live within the Kingdom of Thailand, the most prominent being the ethnic Lao (*Isan)* with just over 20 million, however due to the impact of national administrative and development policies, ethnic differences are slowly being dissolved and Thai culture is becoming dominant throughout the country. Although the following summary of social, cultural, and economic aspects of health is focused on the Thai, statistical data (cited from MOPH, 1999 unless noted otherwise) is gathered at the national level and therefore includes other minority populations who nowadays regard themselves as politically Thai. Most national surveys identify all *Tai*speaking peoples as Thai if they live within national borders—it is thus common to see reports that cite more than 80% of Thailand's population as ethnically Thai.

The Siamese emerged as a dominant regional identity during the 13th and 14th centuries when Khmer authority was defeated and the independent *Tai* Kingdom of Sukhothai was established in and around the central plains. By the 16th century a characteristically Siamese culture became associated with the styles, tastes, and values of the new court based at Ayutthaya that slowly distinguished itself from neighboring *Tai* kingdoms in the north and east (Wyatt, 1982). In the 18th century the capital of Siam was moved to its present day site in Bangkok and by early 1800 had extended the rule of Siam to cover much of mainland Southeast Asia.

Thailand is the only nation in Southeast Asia that was not colonized as successive Siamese monarchs preserved their right to independent rule with great political acumen. The current borders were formally established in 1896 when the French took control over all Siamese/Lao territories east of the Mekong River. In 1932, King Rama VII accepted that the country would be best served by a democratic government and a constitutional monarchy. In 1939, Prime Minister Phibun changed the name of Siam to Thailand to emphasize Thai characteristics of national identity (rather than the economically dominant Chinese) and as a gesture of solidarity with other *Tai*-speaking peoples within national borders. Since then there have been frequent changes of governments (53 cabinets) and military coups (11), however, a new constitution was promulgated in 1997 that enshrines far more rigorous controls on the electoral process. It is widely considered the "first constitution of the people."

Since the 1960s, the Thai have rapidly transformed from being a largely subsistent and agrarian, primarily rice-growing, population into an export-oriented industrialized society. They are now a highly urbanized and modernized society that, at the same time, still utilizes social and cultural understandings from pre-modernist ideologies and belief systems. The combination creates a complex mix of behaviors that influence illness and healing practices. From the early 1980s until the late 1990s, Thailand had one of the fastest growing economies in the world fostering rapid social and economic development. By 1996, 97.5% of the 70,000 villages nationwide had electricity, by 1997, 98.27% of households had sanitary latrines and by 1998, 95.47% of households had access to clean drinking water. A major impact of this economic transition has been the expansion of the urban sector. Rapid industrialization has promoted large-scale internal migration—more than 40 million Thai live in rural villages but a huge percent spend extended periods working in cities or larger agricultural provinces with serious impacts on the cohesion of the family unit. Bangkok has grown from 1.5 million in 1960 to over 9 million in the 1990s (Osborne, 1995). A further consequence is a growing disparity in income. By 1990, Greater Bangkok had 1,404 slum settlements housing over 1.2 million people (Pasuk & Baker, 1996). From 1960–90 the proportionate contribution of agriculture to the GDP dropped from 40% to 12% even though it still employed roughly 60% of the populace (Medhi, 1992). While overall poverty levels have declined, the gap between rich and poor has increased and the vast majority of those below the poverty line are farmers. In 1997, the "bubble" economy crashed and high levels of unemployment sent many urban workers back to their rural homes, average incomes dropped, poverty incidence increased, and health expenditure declined (Tangcharoensathien et al., 2000). In 2000, poverty incidence ranged from 0.3% in Bangkok to 50% in the poorest provinces, with a national average of 14.2% (UNDP, 2003).

Almost all Thai are Theravada Buddhists.

## **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Thailand's population growth rate dropped from 3.2% in 1970 to 1.16% in 1997. It is projected to decrease to 0.53% by 2020. Between 1964 and 1996, life expectancy rose from 55.9 to 69.97 years for males and from 62 to 74.99 years for females. It is projected that Thailand's annual birth rate will be approximately 15–16 per 1,000 population for some years to come or approximately 900,000–1,000,000 births per year (Pramote, 1998). The crude death rate in 1998 was 5–6 per 1,000. It is expected to rise over the coming years as the population's age structure changes. The infant mortality rate (deaths per 1,000 live births) has dropped from 84.3 in 1964 to 26.1

#### **The Context of Health 973**

in 1996; however, the rate in urban areas is consistently lower than in the rural sector. The rate of low-birth weight infants (less than 2,500 g) dropped from 9.3% in 1991 to 7.9% in 1996 but it rose again to reach 8.9% in 1998. Maternal mortality rates dropped significantly from 374.3 (per 100,000 live births) in 1962 to only 10.6 in 1997. Many vector-driven disease threats to health have been reduced. The widespread immunization program has caused vaccine preventable diseases to decline dramatically. For example, tetanus, measles, diptheria, and poliomyelitis have all decreased to low incidence. Leprosy has been eradicated and encephalitis nearly so. Malaria incidence and mortality have also dropped markedly (from 200,000 cases in 1991 to 100,000 cases in 1996) except in border areas with large refugee populations where incidence has recently increased primarily due to parasite drug resistance.

Despite such overall improvements, social changes affecting the everyday lifestyles of most Thai have lead to a changing profile of health and illness. Main causes of death nowadays are heart disease, accidents, cancer, and AIDS. Non-communicable diseases such as cardiopulmonary vascular disease and cancer have become the leading causes of morbidity and mortality over the past 30 years; their prevalence generally attributed to changes in lifestyle and dietary habits. Heart disease prevalence rates (per 100,000 population) increased from 56.5 in 1985 to 168 in 1997, while the cancer rate rose from 53.8 in 1987 to 60.4 in 1997. During the same period, lung cancer prevalence rates rose from 3.96 to 14.2 related to both smoking (currently 38.9% of males over 11 smoke) and air pollution. Alcohol and drug use (both licit and illicit) is also considered to be on the rise. Liver disease rates have increased from 4.3 to 12.3 between 1977 and 1997. Alcohol is also linked to a high prevalence of road accidents.

Accidental death is currently the second highest cause of death for the Thai. The vast majority occurs as a result of traffic accidents, although drowning accounts for death rates between 4.4 and 6.7 (per 100,000). Traffic accidents have declined slightly since the economic crash, causing 11,000–13,000 deaths in 1997–98. The main cause of road fatalities is head injuries incurred in motorcycle accidents, despite a 1992 law making crash helmets mandatory.

HIV/AIDS (and associated tuberculosis) is the most rapidly rising cause of ill health and mortality in Thailand. Since 1984 when the first case was detected, it is estimated that just over 1 million Thai have been infected with HIV (nearly 2% of the adult population) and by 2000 more than 200,000 had died from AIDS. In provinces hardest hit by HIV infection there is a projected life expectancy decrease of 10–13 years for young boys and 5 years for young girls (Van Griensven et al., 1998). In 2003, the UNDP listed the life expectancy of the Thai as 68.9 years—a drop of 1.4 years because of AIDS. Acute respiratory diseases have remained important health problems with little overall improvement. Dengue hemorrhagic fevers are persistent threats with periodic outbreaks and no signs of consistent decline. In short, the Thai now face not only the burden of a huge caseload of HIV infected people, and non-communicable chronic and degenerative diseases but also the emergence of new health threats for instance, drug abuse, occupational hazards, and environmental pollution.

The changing complexion of the health status of the Thai can be directly linked to the social and economic changes of the past 40 years. Thailand's rapid industrialization occurred primarily at the expense of the agricultural sector through the provision of an agricultural tax and encouragement of a mobile workforce. Thai farmers are still the world's largest rice exporters, but they face increasing problems from debt required to stay technologically competitive and from diseases related to a reliance on pesticides. Data collected throughout the 1990s shows that 16–21% of farmers has abnormally high cholinsterase levels (pesticide poisoning). Mean-while in the cities, occupational diseases directly linked to the industrial sector have emerged—incidence of silicosis, byssinosis (cotton dust disease), and lead poisoning have increased dramatically. Many studies show that health levels in Bangkok are severely compromised by toxic air and water pollutants. For example, it is reported that in Bangkok 27.4% of children had an average lead content in their blood higher than 10 mcg/dl (the level above which it is regarded as dangerous to the brain and nervous system).

More generally, we can link increased vulnerability (both voluntary and involuntary) to 'lifestyle'diseases with changes in the social and cultural life of the Thai. Forty years ago Thailand was 80% rural; for the newer generations traditional village based life has evolved to one oriented to migration and urban wage labor. In addition to a changed family structures, social values are now more deeply embedded in materialism and consumer consciousness than before. In the absence of adequate controls (as government policies do not immediately replace traditional community sanctions), rapid modernization has lead to a wide array of health damaging behavior, ranging from workplace risks and stress to vulnerability directly linked to forms of material purchase (e.g., road accidents, drug abuse, and risk of sexually transmitted diseases through commercial sex).

As a case in point, since the economic crash, mental illness has received greater attention. Rates of psychoneurosis, hypertension, and stress disorders have been steadily on the rise over the past 15 years, as have rates of suicide (up from 6 per 100,000 in 1978 to 11.7 in 1998). Initially it was felt this was a product of competition spurred by the rapidly growing economy but recent increases are associated with unemployment, retrenchment, and financial difficulties as well as the emotional and physical burdens of widespread HIV/AIDS. Stress relief clinics have recently been opened in 125 public and private hospitals.

Changing consumption practices promote an evolution in nutritional status. The overall development of the economy has improved certain aspects of diet: protein energy malnutrition (from eating mainly rice), anemia, and vitamin A deficiency have diminished to almost negligible levels (although the economic crash has caused cuts in the school lunches program and some families are unable to adequately feed their children resulting in the recent increase in low birth weight levels). Iodine deficiency (goiter) is down to a national average of 2.6%. In contrast, the marked shift to packaged and pre-cooked food has caused new nutritional disorders such as high blood cholesterol. Nutritional surveys in 1986 and 1995 showed increased obesity in all Thai age groups—in the 40–49 age group obesity rose from 19.1% to 40.2%. Greater levels of everyday consumption also lead to inappropriate use of pharmaceuticals, particularly antibiotics and analgesics. The Thai have one of the highest per capita drug consumption levels in the world (pharmaceuticals have numerous outlets including village grocery stores). In 1998, 28.5% of national health expenditure was for the purchase of drugs.

#### **Health Infrastructure**

Health services infrastructures in Thailand include government, non-government organizations (NGOs), and private sector clinics and institutions. Over the past 30 years the government has allocated slightly less than 5% of its annual budget to the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH). Since the onset of the Five-Year Development Plans in the early 1960s, the highly bureaucratized network of State health facilities has been extended across

the country. Gradually patterns of health-seeking behavior have shifted away from self-medication and traditional remedies towards predominant patronage of government services although until the economic crash there was a parallel trend towards private clinics and hospitals where finances permitted. The first three Development Plans (1960–76) concentrated on the expansion of health facilities and trained staff to all provinces. The 4th Plan recognized the ongoing difficulties in the rural areas and proposed more institutional resources, hospitals in all districts and health centers in every sub-district. These goals were implemented in the Fifth Five-Year Plan (1982–86), along with one key change. Bottom-up planning from the village and sub-district level was encouraged to attack poverty and ill health more effectively. Integrating health care with a wider level of rural development, the Thai Government vigorously promoted essential elements of Primary Health Care (PHC) in the villages: health education, nutrition, mother and child health (including family planning), safe water supply and sanitation, immunization, prevention and control of locally endemic diseases, and provision of essential drugs.

As a core aspect of PHC philosophy, local participation in health management has been encouraged through the recruitment of Village Health Workers and Communicators. By 1990, virtually all villages in Thailand had some members trained to assume the liaison role between public health initiatives channeled through the sub-district health centers and their village community. The 6th and 7th Plans (1987–96) aimed to improve public participation towards achieving key WHO benchmarks of reduced mortality and morbidity. Health insurance schemes were begun during this period and the poor issued with health cards that allowed free consultations and care at government facilities. In face of enduring economic difficulties, the Government has recently replaced this with a more efficient and equitable "30 Baht" (U.S. 75 cents) scheme that guarantees subsidized medical treatment for all below certain income levels.

Despite widespread provision of services, analysis of health shows that achievements have not always been forthcoming in all sectors. The lip service given to fundamental social development fuelled by PHC programs is sometimes no more than the manipulation of statistics. This shrouds the enduring factors that promote ill health in a wide array of sectors, as the poverty figures from rural Thailand and the emergence of new forms of morbidity attest. Severe shortages of trained medics in some

#### **Medical Practitioners 975**

rural areas were exacerbated by the economic crash, when budget cuts caused medical staff to seek work in the private sector. Against this backdrop, NGOs throughout Thailand have made attempts to generate more fundamental changes to social and political systems including health. The increased recognition of civil society organizations as a fundamental foundation of a secure social environment has lead to the proliferation of alternative health movements and organizations. Historically such groups have included religious and ethnic welfare organizations. Following the 5th Plan, NGOs received more active support from the Government and a recent survey listed 513 organizations whose activities are related to health promotion. In 2000, 126 organizations applied for MOPH support including advocacy groups, AIDS networks, alternative and traditional medicine groups, consumer's forums, village volunteers groups and so forth (Amara et al., 2001).

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

The Thai practice pluralistic preventive and curative strategies engaging a range of health practitioners. The medical system in Thailand was oriented to traditional Thai health regimens until the late 18th century. Over the past 100 years, Western medical practice has become dominant in terms of government support and local patronage. Health practitioners trained in (cosmopolitan) biomedicine are therefore the most prominent in Thai society.

In 1998, there were 19,500 practicing doctors (a ratio of 1 : 3,136 people, with a disproportionate number in the urban sector). Between 1971 and 1995, the percent of these doctors working in the public sector declined from 93.3% to 76.3% reflecting a move into the more financially rewarding private hospital sector (in 1998 there were 957 public and 473 private hospitals, some of which have become famous worldwide for cosmetic surgery). Since the economic crash this trend has been reversed. In 1998, there were 56,366 professional nurses (1 : 1,073) with the vast majority (roughly 90%) working in the public sector.

A large number of government doctors (and sometimes nurses in rural areas) also run private clinics during out-of-work hours. Here they offer a range of services from general practice to specialist medical services. It is estimated that as high as 69% of practicing specialists have not been certified by the Thai Medical Council. The medical doctors (and nurses) are able to increase their income not simply from their diagnostic services but also from pharmaceutical sales.

Community health workers at sub-district health centers form a crucial link between state policy and village level communities—they initiate government health programs at the village level providing technical support and supervision. In 1999, there were 9,689 health centers covering every sub-district in Thailand, staffed by 39,438 health workers who have received a 2-year tertiary training course in public health. Staff are equipped to handle minor ailments, monitor maternal and child health, and are licensed to prescribe commonplace pharmaceuticals and contraceptives. They supervise Village Health Volunteers who assist with the dissemination of public health knowledge and the distribution of certain pharmaceuticals and health provisions such as painkillers and condoms. The volunteers also monitor the health status of the villagers and report back to the sub-district health centers. They administer certain village organizations, such as drug cooperatives, rice banks, and health card funds.

Pharmacists are another key link in the Western style bureaucratic management of health. Many Thai selfmedicate and pharmacists often provide diagnostic services for particular ailments, selling most pharmaceuticals without a prescription. A common (although lessening) practice in rural areas is the sale of combination therapies. This entails the dispensing of a number of pharmaceutical drugs in one package. Occasionally rural pharmacists will compile and then sell these packages to village stores. At times they include dangerous combinations of stimulants and depressants (Lyttleton, 1996).

Other health practitioners conduct therapies outside of the biomedical framework. After years of marginalization, traditional forms of Thai medical practice are undergoing resurgence as biomedical models are seen as not being the answer to all ills. Although fast disappearing, some villages still have elderly members who practice traditional arts of massage and prescribe herbal medicine therapies. In place of informal training Thai traditional massage is increasingly taught in national institutes, which receive both government and international support. Thai massage is widely practiced throughout the country, albeit with varying degrees of expertise. Traditional herbal medicine is also a form of local knowledge that has received government and foreign support. Traditional Thai medical institutes both train doctors and study plant forms and their efficacy in treating illness. Since the rapid increase in AIDS-related illnesses it is common for HIV/AIDS support groups to both cultivate and prescribe local herbal remedies. International agencies are presently including a number of Thai plants known for their retroviral activity in their drug trials. Village midwives form a third group of alternative practitioners receiving official recognition although after the rapid economic development most village women give birth in local hospitals.

A further group of health practitioners receive no legitimization from government circles, however they form an important component of multiple health seeking strategies. Firstly, there is a large group of healers who utilize spiritual assistance. This is more common in rural areas although some well known 'divine' healers have large urban followings. These healers are usually of two types, those that rely on Buddhist or Hindu modalities of sacred power, and those that communicate with the host of animist spirits that are believed to be ever-present in everyday surroundings. Healing entails divination of causality and prescription of remedial action. Secondly, there are those that illegally practice forms of Western medicine. It is common in more remote rural areas for "injection doctors" to perform injections for villagers. This involves diagnosis, prescription and injection of pharmaceuticals, saline, and/or vitamins. Backyard abortion doctors are also found in both rural and urban areas. A small number use traditional techniques of severe massage intended to snap the fetus's neck along with herbal effusions to induce miscarriage.

## **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Strongly influenced by the Ayurvedic system of medicine in India, traditional Thai medicine classifies forty-two bodily elements into four groups—fire, wind, water and earth. Disease comes from changes in the balance of elements of fire, wind, and water—earth is very stable and seldom causes disease—and correspondingly illness is classified as a disease of either bile, wind, or mucus (Mulholland, 1979). Historic Thai medical texts report wind illness as the most common affliction which, following the Indian humoral theories of medicine, denotes any illness affecting the quality or faculties of movement, including such diseases as leprosy or epilepsy. In practice, it is highly likely that over the centuries a synthesis has occurred between imported Indian medical systems and indigenous beliefs in causes of ill health that include soul loss as the cause of a wide array of ailments. Traditional Thai medical practice is best considered as a continuum from oral folk medicine practiced at the village level and more closely linked to animistic beliefs through to more official elite versions associated with text-based Indian theories of disease (Bamber, nd).

In traditional Thai medicine, diagnosis involves careful consideration of environmental, behavioral, and physiological characteristics. Treatment is determined after considering symptoms, place of birth, age of patient, and time of year and primarily uses medicines concocted from a wide range of plants and occasionally animal and mineral substances (1,500 drug remedies are listed in handbooks). Massage and use of spells can also be enlisted to effect a cure depending on the extent to which malevolent spirits are believed to be involved. Towards the end of the 19th century, the adoption of Western medicine was spearheaded by the Royal Family's interest in "modernizing" indigenous medical practices at a time when cholera epidemics were widespread. The association of Western medicine with scientific knowledge, modernity, and royal patronage led to its rapid domination of the traditional Thai medical practice. It has been described as elitist (in terms of class and status), capitalist, drug oriented, urban centered, and assertive of its dominance over other health practices by means of subordination or exclusion (Cohen, 1989). Biomedicine is almost invariably the first option in seeking medical assistance. A majority of Thai selfmedicate as first choice for minor ailments using pharmaceuticals although a recent study shows that selfmedication has dropped as socioeconomic status has improved (Komatra et al., 2000). If medical expertise is required, private clinics are usually preferred over government health services (just as commercial pharmaceuticals are preferred over government-issue) although this will depend on practical issues of distance and cost.

Even though biomedicine dominates as a paradigm for diagnosis and treatment, many Thai still employ pluralistic explanatory models and therapeutic strategies. Magicoreligious beliefs remain complementary components of health-seeking behavior. They provide answers to "why" an illness has taken place. In a social order strongly predicated on a belief in *karma* as a causal ontology, current situations are frequently interpreted as emerging from prior events. While Western etiology is almost universally accepted as explaining morbidity, spirit doctors might also

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 977**

be consulted to determine whether malevolent spirits were involved in its onset. Buddhist, Hindu, and animist beliefs commonly intersect in the prescribed rites and remedies. Recalling a lost soul is a crucial element both in preventive and healing rites. Persistent diseases or those without a clear pathogen, such as forms of mental illness, are still commonly treated by a divine or "spirit" doctor who will either divine, incarnate, or do battle with, the inflicting forces. Although belief in spirits is declining in favor of pharmaceutical treatment for most diseases, a Buddhist and Hindu background confers legitimacy on traditional Thai medicine that ensures a widespread faith in Thai herbal remedies. These are still widely sold and consumed.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Sexuality for the Thai has often been described as a "fluid" arena where what goes on in private is of less concern than the maintenance of public appearances. This has particular relevance to same-sex practices. Similarly, debates concerning Thai sexuality often draw on the tolerance shown for cross-gender displays and whether the widespread presence of *khathoey* (transgenders/ transsexuals) constitutes an ontological third sex/gender. Despite an arguable lack of fixity in sex/gender identities, normative models of gender and sexuality still strongly shape the sexual and reproductive lives of the Thai.

Gender ideologies, based on predominant bilateral kinship patterns and Buddhist beliefs in the innate karmic superiority of the male, structure ideas about appropriate sexuality. By and large, Thai men are socialized to believe they have a "naturally" greater sex drive that requires consistent relief. Many men therefore have multiple and regular sexual interactions both prior and external to marriage most commonly within the context of commercial sex. As adolescents, male same-sex behavior carries no stigma if the male maintains his role as penetrator. Thai women, on the other hand, are taught to be more conservative and express sexuality solely within the bounds of marriage. These social values are changing rapidly with modernization and young Thai women are more sexually active than ever before. Gender roles have never entirely subordinated women—the Thai have one of the highest levels of female participation in the workforce (over 45% of total workforce) and within the household they have active economic and decision-making capacities including family size. Remnants of the widespread belief that female sexuality is dangerous and polluting still find contemporary manifestation particularly in early HIV/AIDS campaigning that targeted female prostitutes as the cause of its spread.

A direct result of both the prevalence of commercial sex interactions and the liberalization of youth's sexual mores, sexual health is a pressing issue for the health of many Thai. By the late 1980s, sexual transmission had become the major vector of HIV spread and by the late 1990s accounted for 82.6% of AIDS cases. Increasingly women are becoming infected, mostly from their husbands. By the end of 1999 UNAIDS calculated that of the 740,000 adults living with HIV/AIDS, 305,000 or 41.2% are women. In 2000, it was estimated that roughly 50% of new infections in Thailand would be women infected by their husbands or sex partners, 25% through injection drug use, and 20% among sex workers and their clients (World Bank, 2000). Due to effective campaigning, patronage of prostitution has plummeted throughout Thailand. But in its place there has emerged a more complex and ambiguous arena of negotiated relationships in which casual sex takes place. What is of current concern is that condom use frequently does not accompany sexual interactions that take place outside of institutionalized commercial sex raising the threat of continued HIV spread, particularly in light of burgeoning permissiveness and drug use amongst many Thai youth.

The inability of women to insist on condom use, within or outside marriage, highlights ongoing forms of sexual vulnerability. Over the past 30 years Thai women had actively embraced contraception as a means of limiting the family size but this seldom included condom use (average family size has dropped from 5.6 members in 1960 to 4.4 in 1990 and is expected to reach 3.4 in 2015). Easy access to a wide range of contraceptive measures without social or religious stigma coupled with extensive health promotion advocating the benefits of smaller families is behind the high prevalence of contraceptive use. At present, Thailand's total fertility rate, which was as high as six 30–40 years ago, has declined to only 1.9 in 1996. By 1987, 70.5% contraceptive prevalence nationwide had been achieved rising to 72.2% by 1996. The oral contraceptive is the most popular, followed by female sterilization and injectable hormonal contraceptives. These three account for 85% of contraceptive use. Male methods of family planning are almost negligible. Vasectomy is cited by 2.0% of married women of reproductive age and condoms by 1.8% as their methods of contraception (Gray & Sureeporn, 1999).

Declining fertility is also linked to delayed age of marriage and increasing percentage of women who remain unmarried (reaching 14% in 1990 for women between 30–34 years of age). This trend is a product of higher educational levels for women, higher levels of employment in the highly modernized occupational sector, increased urban migration and gender-specific acceptability for men to marry spouses of lower socioeconomic status (Guest & Tan, 1994). For women of higher socioeconomic status being unmarried carries no particular stigma, whereas more pressure is placed on rural women to marry even if the spouse is not a focus of affection.

Between 8% and 12% of women seeking gynecological care in government hospitals are found to be infertile. Adoption is not common amongst the Thai due to beliefs that an orphan has little karmic merit. In the past, particularly in rural communities, divorce has been regarded as a relatively straightforward occurrence (officially, it has increased from 8.3% in 1987 to 20.8% in 1998 although many rural marriages are not registered). In some instances, inability to have children may be an instigating factor in marital separation but I am unaware of any survey of its prevalence.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Biomedicine has taken complete control over the management of pregnancy and birth—subdistrict health clinics provide antenatal care and women give birth in district or municipal hospitals. Cesarean births account for over 50% of all deliveries partly due to the desire to choose an auspicious birth date. For many Thai, marriage is less important than pregnancy in marking female transition into responsible adulthood although these days pregnancy is increasingly postponed as the married couple works to gain some material foundations. Unmarried parenthood is not widespread and if marriage is not feasible, unwanted pregnancies commonly end in abortions (54% of abortions are performed on women under 25 years old). Following biomedical models, miscarriages are understood in physiological terms however rites restoring potential or actual soul-loss are often performed. Both male and female children are valued—males for the karmic merit they can bring the family (particularly through ordination into the Buddhist monkhood) and females for their practical household assistance.

#### **Infancy**

Traditional postpartum confinement rites wherein the mother would lie by a fire in her house for 5 to 9 days, have largely disappeared. Coupled with specific food restrictions geared to restoring humoral balance, this was believed to restore and strengthen her body and soul and complete a first-time mother's transition into mature womanhood (Hanks, 1963, p. 71). Such practices have been dispersed by changing beliefs as to the nature of recuperation, practical issues such as lack of fireplaces in modern houses, lack of time, and the recommendations of doctors who discourage it especially after Cesareans and/or tubal ligations.

Lying by the fire was based on beliefs that females are soft natured/souled and spiritually vulnerable after birth. Such beliefs also apply to the child, and ritual specialists still typically perform soul protection ceremonies shortly after the child is born.

Breast-feeding has declined in favor of bottle and formula feeding in sync with the large presence of many young mothers in the workforce. Public health campaigns have recently advocated breast-feeding as the most desirable option for new mothers. Infants and young children are typically cared for by extended family members and older siblings, as it is common that both parents work. National rates of young children (ages 3–5) enrolled in nurseries and pre-school childcare rose from 39.3% in 1992 to 79.5% in 1998. On the other hand, child abandonment has also increased. A survey of abandoned infants at 40 health facilities showed a rising rate from 90/100,000 to 120/100,000 in 1998.

### **Childhood**

In the past young rural Thai boys and girls would begin to work the fields at around the age of 11 or 12. From some parts of Thailand, teenage girls were sent into the sex industry shortly after reaching puberty. These days such practices are illegal and prosecuted as child abuse. Six years of state-sponsored secondary school education has recently become available nationwide ensuring a later entry into the workforce. Gender roles still strongly influence models of socialization with male qualities believed to be best nurtured through avoidance of strict discipline whereas girls are required to carefully observe parental rules. In early childhood, it is not uncommon for the young boy's genitals to be an item of attention ( joking and tickling), young girls on the other hand are generally taught to be modest and compliant from an early age. Pneumonia is

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 979**

the main cause of death in children under five, although its incidence has dropped from 5.2% in 1995 to 2.73% in 1997.

#### **Adolescence**

The major health problems of youth (10–19 yrs—20% of population) are linked to social behaviors including substance abuse, teenage pregnancy, sexually related health problems (STDs), and mental health issues such as violence and suicide. Maternal mortality is highest in the 15–19 age group often resulting from unsafe and illegal abortions. Thai adolescents face large risks from STDs, in particular HIV/AIDS—47% of STD patients are between the ages of 15 and 24—and in the first decade of HIV spread from 1984 to 1996 single females under 24 years of age were the highest risk group for infection, largely through commercial sex (Pimpawun et al., 2000). Nowadays, for many Thai "safe sex" is as much an issue of *who* one has sex with as it is of using a condom or not. As sexual relations between Thai adolescents take place more commonly, and condom use is not prevalent as these relations are seen as safe because they are not commercial sex. Genital operations, the insertion of small round objects (pearls) under the foreskin, are found amongst a small number of Thai males but it is unclear whether this contributes to the spread of disease. Substance abuse, in particular of methamphetamines (ATS), has also increased dramatically amongst Thai youth. Over 6 months in 1995/96 a nationwide survey conducted a urine analysis of 118,375 students from primary through university level. Of the 79,671 secondary students sampled, 1.1% tested positive to methamphetamine use and 3.8% of the 17,082 vocational students tested positive (Vichai et al., 2001).

### **Adulthood**

As the majority of pathogen-based diseases decline, social factors also contribute to the morbidity and mortality of Thai adults. Many of these can be linked to rising levels of stress. It is not only the youth who are susceptible to substance abuse. One survey reports that more than 300,000 Thai labourers (20%) in Bangkok use methamphetamines as a response to stringent quota demands incurred by the 1997 economic crash. The overall number treated for ATS abuse has risen from a paltry 97 in 1990 to 12,518 in 1999 (UNDCP, 2001). Domestic abuse is widespread. In a recent study (Kritiya et al., 2001) conducted with over 2,000 women in Bangkok and a Northern Province, 44% reported experiencing sexual or other forms of violent abuse from their partner (22% within the 12 months). Male suicide rates are currently 2.8 times higher than that of females and rank 6th in terms of years-of-life lost to premature deaths (AIDS is the highest for both men and women). AIDS also contributes to the socio-economic burdens felt throughout Thailand at the turn of the millennium. Many thousands of HIV-infected Thai women are widows who, having nursed their husbands, are left without economic resources to take care of themselves and their children. Hundreds of support groups throughout the country have come together to provide moral and social support for those affected by HIV and to date their membership is largely women.

### **The Aged**

In accordance with Buddhist ideology the elderly generally have high status within the household; in rural areas they have traditionally resided with the youngest daughter and her husband. Home care is typical for most manageable forms of illness. The most common diseases of the elderly are muscular, tendon and skeletal disorders, followed by peptic ulcers, hypertension, and heart disease. Primary causes of mortality are cardio-pulmonary disease, cancer, diabetes, liver, and kidney disease. A 1995 survey (Chantaphen, 1995) of both rural and urban elderly showed 82.8% of those between 50 and 59 still worked which dropped to 42% for those 60 and over. The most common diagnosed ailment was back pain and 29.1% had been hospitalized in the previous year. Fortytwo percent exercised regularly and 57% meditated daily. Illiteracy is high amongst this group and self-medication, especially analgesics and vitamins, by far the most common form of health-seeking treatment.

#### **Dying and Death**

Where possible, it is considered preferable for dying to take place at home rather than in a medical institution. Terminal patients are often sent home from hospitals in their last stages of life. The dead are cremated and Buddhist rites take place at the local temple and the deceased's residence to ensure smooth passage to the next life and to protect kin from potential malevolence associated with the dead spirit. The remains of the bones will sometimes be stored in receptacles within the temple walls. Although less common these days, distinction between normal and abnormal death is made that corresponds to "natural" versus unexpected, violent or accidental forms of death that prevent the completion of a life cycle. Bodies of those who have suffered an abnormal death will be buried for several years—the remains are subsequently exhumed and cremated—to prevent similar misfortune befalling kin. These beliefs are no longer widespread. There is usually no change to the living arrangements of the remaining spouse with the existing kin.

## **REFERENCES**

- Amara Pongsapich et al. (2001). Current status of civil society organizations in health sector in Thailand, unpublished report, Social Research Institute, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
- Bamber, Scott. nd. *Lom*: A term in association with Illness in traditional Thai medicine, unpublished paper.
- Chantaphen Chupraphawan et al. (1995). *Health survey of Thai over 50 years of age* (in Thai). Bangkok: Health Research Institute.
- Cohen, Paul. (1989). The politics of primary health care in Thailand, with special reference to nongovernment organizations. In P. Cohen & J. Purcal (Eds.), *The political economy of primary health care in southeast asia* (pp. 159–176). Canberra: Australian Development Studies Network.
- Gray, Alan., & Sureeporn, Punpuing. (1999). *Gender, sexuality and reproductive health in Thailand*. Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Guest, Philip., & Tan, Jooean. (1994). *Transformation of marriage patterns in Thailand*, Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Hanks, Jane. (1963). *Maternity and its Rituals in Bang Chan*. New York: Cornell University Press.
- Komatra, Chuengsatiensup et al. (2000). Community drug use in Thailand, unpublished report, Faculty of Pharmacy, Chiang Mai University.
- Kritiya, Archawanichakul et al. (2001). Domestic violence against women: The scale of the problem, its impact and solutions, (in Thai). Research Report, Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Lyttleton, Chris. (1996). Health and development: Knowledge systems and local practice, *Health Transition Review, 6*, 25–48.

- Medhi, Krongkaew. (1992). The reawakening of the Thai economy, paper presented at the Thailand Update Conference, Sydney 16 October.
- Ministry of Public Health (MOPH). (1999). *Health Situation 1997–1998* (in Thai). Bangkok: Ministry of Public Health (English version at http://eng.moph.go.th).
- Mulholland, Jean. (1979). Thai traditional medicine—The treatment of diseases caused by the Tridosa. *The Southeast Asian Review, 3*(2), 29–38.
- Osborne, Milton. (1995). *Southeast Asia: An introductory history*. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
- Pasuk Pongpaichit., & Baker, Chris. (1996). *Thailand's boom*. Chiang Mai: SilkwormBooks.
- Pimpawun Boonmongkon et al. (2000). *Thai adolescent sexuality and reproduction: Implications for developing adolescent's health programs in thailand*. Center For Health Policy Studies, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Pramote, Prasartkul. (1998). Population projection for development planning of Thai children. *Family Planning and Population*, *2*(1), 1–4.
- Tangcharoensathien, Viroj et al. (2000). Health impacts of rapid economic changes in Thailand. *Social Science and Medicine, 51*, 789–807.
- UNDCP. (2001). 'Global Illicit Drug Trends 2001'. Available online at, htttp://www.undcp.org
- UNDP (2003). Thailand Human Development Report 2003. Bangkok: UNDP.
- Van Griensven, F. et al. (1998). *The use of mortality statistics as a proxy indicator for the impact of the AIDS epidemic on the Thai population.* Bangkok: Institute of Population Studies, Chulalongkorn University.
- Vichai, Poshyachinda et al. (2001, October, 3–6). The future outlook of HIV infection among substance abuse population in Thailand. Paper presented at the 6th International Conference on AIDS in Asia and the Pacific, Melbourne.
- World Bank. (2000). Thailand's response to AIDS: Building on the success, confronting the future, (unpublished report), *Thailand Social Monitor V* World Bank: Bangkok.
- Wyatt, David. (1982). *Thailand: A short history*. New Haven: Yale University Press.

# **Tongans**

#### **Barbara Burns McGrath**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Tongans originate from the Kingdom of Tonga, formerly known as "The Friendly Islands." Due to out-migration, there are more Tongans living overseas than within the country, primarily settling in New Zealand, Australia, and the United States. Outside of Tonga, Tongans are included under the more general category of Polynesian or Pacific Islander.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Kingdom of Tonga is made up of 170 small islands, approximately 40 of which are inhabited. These are spread over 700,000 sq km of the South Pacific about two third the way from Hawai'i to New Zealand. They are characterized as high islands formed by geologically recent volcanic activity, and low coral limestone atolls. The climate is sub-tropical with temperate weather and