# 19

# Panchayati Raj

# S.N. Mishra

he contemporary Indian society has been striving for establishing social, economic, and political justice through modernization of its political and administrative institutions. The rising expectations of people and the government's ideological commitment to economic development, democratic political ideals, and administrative decentralization are placing increasing demands on the public bureaucracy to implement socio-economic development programmes more effectively and with greater public participation. Due to this changing socio-political milieu, the local development bureaucracy is confronted with a formidable task of promoting economic development through democratic management, local autonomy, and the joint sharing of responsibilities with people's representatives.

The institutional expression of the policy of "democratic decentralization" in India is identified with "Panchayati Rai." The development needs and concern for democratization of the administrative mechanism determine the role of political and administrative institutions in the country. Any analytical study examining the role of these institutions, therefore, cannot escape the impact of social setting, local political dynamics, development goals, functional dimensions, structural process and relationships, popular support and governmental attitude towards the capacity and from the nature of responsibilities of these institutions. In a rapidly changing political environment, it is difficult to assess the actual contribution of these experiments to the theory of democratic management and control. However, the operational dynamics do present a number of challenging questions to normative as well as empirical democratic theory.

It is, therefore, desirable to identify some of the fundamental questions that will provide the basis for discussion in this paper. Related to the political consequences, the first basic question draws our attention to the problem of conceptual clarity. What does the concept of "decentralization" mean in Indian context? Is there any conflict between "democracy," "decentralization," and "development" as the three basic goals of decentralized democracy? Should the institution of democratic decentralization be treated purely as a "developmental mechanism" or a "power mechanism" providing a hierarchical chain of political offices through which the actual political power can be exercised? What type of relationship should these institutions have with the national or state political organization? Without any organization or party lines, can these institutions serve the function of interest aggregation and interest articulation reflecting the people's aspirations and demands?

Arising out of these questions, the chapter first deals with the conceptual underpinning of decentralization, for comprehending the substantive meaning and nature of democratic decentralization. It then deals with the normative aspects of democratic decentralization by analysing the desirable nature of decentralization in terms of basic unit of decentralization that could be administratively viable and also closer to the people. The chapter afterwards proves the efficacy of the experiment tried in this regard which raises certain questions at this stage, viz., do these patterns of decentralized democracy involve the decentralization of political or administrative powers or do they merely lead to the transfer of certain governmental functions to the local authorities? How far have the institutional organization and administrative arrangements been successful in promoting harmonious working relationships among the officials and elected members of political organs? Has there been adequate inter-institutional, inter-departmental coordination among the different components of the decentralized system to facilitate an effective planning and execution of development plans at the local level? Based on the analysis of all these aspects of the problem the paper finally puts forward, some observations in view of the 73rd constitutional Amendment Act, 1992, and the future challenges would have to be confronted by Panchayati Raj institutions in days to come.

#### **Democratic Decentralization: The Conceptual Context**

The real meaning and significance of democratic decentralization can be understood in the light of the prevailing social, economic, and political conditions that determine the purpose and pattern of democratic process. India has greater diversities in terms of culture, languages, caste groups, and economic stratification apart from authoritarian political tradition. Side by side the demands for eradication of proportion and require massive efforts. This challenging task emphasizes economic priorities and increasing public participation to fulfil the rising expectations of the vast masses. At the same time, aspiration aroused by political freedom requires a widening of the base for political participation. With a view to contain the forces of diversities, the emerging trend is tilting the balance towards decentralization. Thus, a true image of pattern of 'democratic decentralization,' both at conceptual and operational level, can better be visualized in contextual term where the objective and motivation of the political leadership provides a true perspective for understanding the process and problems of decentralization.

The concept of decentralization, as it applies to India, presents a different approach to the decentralization of political and administrative powers. Having its mixed goals of democracy, decentralization, and development, it refers to the programmes and tendencies which implies devolution of governmental power and responsibilities, decentralization of political institutions, development of local leadership and strengthening the efforts for economic modernization.

The Balwant Rai Mehta Report of 1957, however, repudiates the above conceptual development and holds the view that delegation of power does not divest the government of the ultimate responsibility for the actions of the authority to whom power is delegated, this authority is under the control of the government and is in every sense subordinate to it. Decentralization, on the other hand, is the process whereby the government divests itself completely of certain duties and responsibilities and devolves them on some other authority.

However, the real test is not decentralization of political agencies or institutions, but the effective decentralization of responsibilities, powers and prestige or status. Presumably, genuine decentralization involves a significant measure of either deconcentration and delegation or devolution, conferring of real powers on local authorities. Decentralization also implies clear understanding of socio-cultural and legal factors.

Thus, the pattern of decentralization as evolves in India involves both the delegation or de concentration and devolution or transfer of political and administrative powers. Thus, the degree of democratization and decentralization is determined by the politico-economic objective and the operational procedures designed to regulate the administrative mechanism.

#### **Democratic Decentralization in India: The Genesis**

Many efforts in India were made before independence, both by individuals and voluntary associations, for rural reconstruction by decentralizing the political and administrative powers. After independence, Community Development (CD) and National Extension Service (NES) programmes were launched in 1952 and 1953 respectively for the development of rural areas. But, they failed to achieve their development objectives. The review of the working of the CD and NES movement revealed that its attempt to evoke popular initiative was one of its least successful aspects. The proposal of the Planning Commission for the Second Five-Year Plan stressed the need for creating within the district a well-organized democratic structure of administration in which village panchayats would be organically linked with popular organization at a higher level. The proposal was subsequently taken up by the Study Team appointed by the Committee on Plan Projects. The team, presided over by Balwant Rai Mehta submitted an elaborate report in 1957.

The Mehta committee, realizing the importance of popular participation, recommended creation of institutions that were to be statutory, elective, comprehensive in duties and functions, equipped with necessary executive machinery, with adequate resources, and with enough autonomy and freedom. The creation of the Panchayati Raj in 1959, with the object of entrusting the authority and responsibility for rural development to rural people was hailed "not only as an innovation but also as a revolution."

The Mehta committee recommended a three-tier system for self-government at the grass-roots level. Subsequently, when the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) were introduced in early 60s, they were assigned three major tasks viz., developmental, administrative, and political. The Mehta committee had assigned greater importance to the developmental tasks but the three tasks mentioned above were supposed to maintain a mutual inter-relationship. However, non-devolution of sources of revenues proved to be the greatest stumbling block in performance of these assigned tasks. This led to the mounting pressure on the district-level bureaucracy; ultimately, it led to a hostile attitude of the bureaucracy towards these grassroots institutions.

As these institutions took a shape, the Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs), Members of Legislative Council (MLCs), and other politicians came to realize the strategic importance of PRIs and started looking at the representatives of PRIs as the political rivals. Therefore, they seemingly started a non-cooperation movement against these institutions. This inevitably led to a decline of these institutions. The performance and objectives of the PRIs were considerably diluted making them directionless. The declining political support coupled with indifferent attitude of local-level bureaucracy led to further diminution of the developmental and administrative role of the PRIs making the political role more prominent.

The basic philosophy behind the PRIs was to ensure People's participation in development programme, which was expected to unleash the arrested process of change and growth. However, these institutions failed to a great extent on both the fronts due to their non-performance. So much so that during the seventies it created an impression of a god that failed. Nevertheless, it had perceptible impact in terms of galvanizing the average citizen in rural India, and wherever it took its roots, it helped in narrowing the gap between the bureaucracy and the people. At the same time, it also succeeded in devising a development strategy for the people.

#### **Towards a Fresh Look: Ashok Mehta Committee Report, 1977**

After initial enthusiasm and promising performance, when PRIs began to decline rapidly, the Ashok Mehta committee was appointed in 1977 by Janata government for suggesting ways and means of reviving the PRIs.

The terms of reference of the Ashok Mehta committee encompassed all important aspects of the Panchayati Raj as is evident from its extensive 132 recommendations. Diagnosing the ills afflicting the PRIs, the committee pointed out that haphazard programmes, non-performance, rise of vested interests, lack of political will on the part of the central and state governments, lack of adequate financial resources, etc., have positively contributed to its decline. It also felt that the concept of Panchayati Raj itself got lost in the haze of conflicting interpretations. However, the committee hastened to add that failing was not peculiar to Panchyati Raj only. It was only symptomatic of the decline afflicting the entire body politic of the nation.

The major thrust of the Report pertained to decentralization: "the formulation of structural functions and the utilization of financial, administrative, and human resources in Panchayati Raj institutions should, in our opinion, be determined on the emerging functional necessity of management of rural development."

The committee's dominant thinking centres round the functional necessity for decentralization of administration. It was called a "new approach" towards Panchayati Raj. Without going into the details of the Report of the committee, let us look at the major recommendations of the committee and the model suggested by it. It suggests that Panchayati Raj should be viewed as a "government" in its own right at the grass roots level, which means a three-tier structure of federation, instead of two at present.

# **The Model**

- 1. Being conscious of the operational realities of Panchayati Raj Institutions, the committee adopted a flexible approach to the problem and recommended a "two-tier" model of Panchayati Raj. Keeping in view the development necessities, the first point of decentralization below the state was suggested should be the district. Apart from being the basic units of devolution, the district-level should be treated as the unit of planning.
- 2. For the second-tier, the committee thought that in order to be a viable unit, the unit has to be bigger than the existing Panchayats. It, therefore, suggested the creation of "Mandal Panchayat" (which will be the implementing body) consisting of a cluster of villages covering a population of 15,000 to 20,000. The committee further felt that a Mandal Panchayat would alone be able to ensure a balance between technological requirements and possibilities of popular participation in decision-making.
- 3. The committee recommended direct election for both tiers, i.e., Zila Parishad and Mandal Panchayat with reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in proportion to their population and women (two seats) who get the highest number of votes in Panchayati Raj elections.
- 4. It suggested to encourage committee system at both the levels.
- 5. MLAs and MPs should not be "insiders". However, the committee was of the opinion that a committee of the whole Zila Parishad may be constituted for planning purposes and MLAs and MPs should also be exofficio members of this committee. Therefore, in the proposed system

of elections the directly elected component would be larger than the ex-officio and co-opted elements.

- 6. The committee categorically favoured the participation of political parties in Panchayati Raj. This was thought to impart distinct orientation towards programmes and would facilitate healthier linkages with the higher-level political processes. It would also help in providing constructive outlet to opposition parties at the state level who may chalk out their achievement at the district level. Moreover, direct elections coupled with programme based contest would offer greater scope to weaker sections for availing the opportunities offered by the political system.
- 7. The committee suggested that the Zila Parishad would be the first point of decentralization and the basic unit of Panchayati Raj endowed with a comprehensive range of developmental responsibilities. At the grassroots level, the Mandal Panchayat would be the hub of development activities.
- 8. In regard to the functions of Panchayati Raj institution, the committee felt that development being a dynamic process, functions could not remain static; periodic adjustment would be necessary to suit the changing requirements. As such, the committee recommended that all development functions relating to a district, which were being performed by the state government should be entrusted to Zila Parishad.
- 9. So far local level planning was concerned, the committee suggested that there should be a professionally qualified team at the district level for the preparation of district plans.
- 10. With a view to ensure social justice the committee favoured representation of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes on the basis of their population, and social justice committee with the Chairman from weaker sections of the society, it also suggested social audit system.
- 11. An important related recommendation was that all the staff with decentralized functions should be under the Zila Parishad. The Committee thus visualized a separate development administration giving decentralized functions along with a composite Zila Parishad secretariat.
- 12. Since all functions relating to implementation at the district level were to be transferred to Zila Parishad, the committee felt that the funds should also be transferred to Zila Parishad automatically. Administrative expenditure on the salaries and allowances of staff transferred to Zila Parishad should be borne by the government.

In sum, the committee's approach was that the pattern of administration should suit the decentralization of development functions. "A delectable comparison of administration is made with a women's dress. It has to drop well the body politic and has to fit with the contours."

*CAARD Report* (*Committee on Administrative Arrangements for Rural Development*): The committee which was constituted on 31st March 1985, had C.V.K. Rao as its Chairman. In the terms of reference of the committee, apart from other issues, one of the important matters was to study the role of Panchayati Raj bodies and their relationship with the proposed administrative set-up, and to make appropriate recommendations in this regard.

While examining the genesis and role of Panchayati Raj in historical perspective the committee looked into the factors which were responsible for decline in their status. The committee pointed out that decline in the status and authority of Panchayati Raj may be attributed to the reluctance of political leadership at state level to share power with district leadership.

With a view to activate the PRIs the committee gave several useful suggestions. District being the prime unit for overall planning and development, it suggested to strengthen Zila Parishad by introducing a system of sub-committees constituted on the basis of proportional representation. This would encourage and enhance the participatory democracy. Planning, plan-implementation, and monitoring of rural development programmes were suggested to be entrusted to the PRIs at the district and lower levels. It even talked of transferring some of the planning functions at the state level to the district level. In order to appreciate the ideals of participatory democracy, it envisaged the holding of the local elections regularly.

In regard to integration of rural development programmes, one of the suggestions of the committee was that Zila Parishad should be the apex body for the overall planning at the district level. It should be assisted by a District Planning Board (DPB) which should be an advisory expert body with a Planning Cell. The plan should be prepared by the DPB and sent to Zila Parishad for review and authentication. In the model all the rural development activities pertaining to the district should be covered under the purview of district body.

#### **Phase of Hectic Activities (1985-92)**

This is the period in which some serious thinking in favour of giving constitutional status to Panchayati Raj Institutions was given.

L.M. Singhvi, a noted constitutional lawyer and former the High Commissioner in U.K., in his report suggested that to provide viability to the villages, they be reorganized and Panchayati Raj institutions be viewed as institutions of self-government having complete say in development planning and implementation. The committee further observed that Panchayati Raj institutions must transcend the barriers of caste, religion, sex and disparities in wealth and surmount social disabilities and disadvantages. Apart from having a Panchayati Raj Judicial Tribunal, the committee also favoured giving constitutional recognition to Panchayati Raj.

Sarkaria Commission in its report recommended that to rectify the dysfunctioning of the local self-government bodies it was necessary to ensure by legal provisions analogous to this in Articles 172 and 174 of the constitution that elections to, the sessions of Zila Parishad and Municipal Corporation are held regularly, and these institutions do not remain superseded for long periods. The power of enaction of such a law vests under Entry 5, List II, exclusively in the state legislature.

Thungon Committee, in its report, apart from giving constitutional status to Panchayati Raj, suggested three-tier structure for these bodies and favoured the functioning to these institutions with the help of committees. Much emphasis was laid on decentralization of planning and problem of co-ordination. It also suggested reservation of seats for Scheduled Caste/ Tribes as also for women. To provide financial viability to these institutions, the committee recommended for setting up of Finance Commission in every state, and, finally the committee suggested that a model Panchayati Raj Act be enacted by the central government to maintain uniformity.

The Congress Committee on Policy programmes headed by V.N. Gadgil looked into the matter and came out with following precise recommendations:

"There should be three-tiers of Panchayati Raj at village, block and district levels respectively having elected representatives for a fixed term of five years and in case of dissolution, elections must take place within six months. constitutional status with details of role, authority and jurisdiction be given to these institutions. There should be provision of reservation for SCs/STs and women in the range of 30 respectively. Election by Central Election Commissioner and provision for State Finance Commission under Article 280 are some of the important recommendations. constitutional amendment to accommodate such provisions was also recommended by the committee."

#### **Comparative Analysis of the 64th and 74th Constitutional Amendment Bills**

In the light of the experience in the last forty years and in view of the shortcomings which have been noticed, it has been recognized that there is a need to enshrine in the constitution a chapter dealing with the Panchayats. The proposals contained in the constitution 64th and 74th Amendment Bills are important for the development of the Indian polity and a dispassionate analysis of the implication of the Bills is called for. Till date the Panchayats have not been able to develop as responsive people's bodies due to a variety of reasoned including absence of regular elections prolonged suppression, inadequate representation of weaker sections, insufficient devolution of power and lack of financial resources. Here we have examined the provisions of the Bills.

# **Gram Sabha**

The 74th Amendment Bill has restored the pivotal role of Gram Sabhas. It has been recognized that it is the primary source of democratic power in a village. The Bill provides for a Gram Sabha which may exercise such powers at the village level as the legislature of state may by law provide. On the other, the 64th Bill does not mention about Gram Sabha.

#### **Constitution of Panchayats**

The 64th Amendment Bill makes it obligatory for all states to establish a three-tier system of panchayats at the village, intermediate, and district levels. However, states having a population of less than twenty lakhs, would not be obliged to establish panchayats at the intermediate level. Whereas the 74th Amendment Bill provides for a single-tier of panchayats at the village level to be constituted in every panchayats at other level or level.

# **Composition of Panchayats**

According to the 64th Amendment Bill all the seats in a panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the area. However, the 74th Amendment Bill provides that all the seats in a panchayat at the village level and not less than 50 per cent of the seats in panchayat at any other level, if any, shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the panchayat area.

#### **Reservation of Seats**

Both the Bills provide for identical reservation of seats for the SC/ST candidates. They differ on the percentage of seats to be reserved for women candidates. The 64th Bill reserves as nearly as 30 per cent of the total seats to be filled by direct elections in every panchayat for women and allotted by notation to different constituencies in a panchayat. The 74th Amendment Bill provides that not less than 1/3rd of the total number of seats be filled by election in every panchayat shall be reserved for women and allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a panchayat.

According to the provisions of the 74th Amendment Bill, state legislature can reserve seats for Backward Classes in a panchayat.

# **Duration of Panchayats**

Both the Bills provide for a duration (term) of five years for the panchayats. The election to constitute a panchayat when dissolved shall be held within a period of six months; the reconstituted panchayat small function for the remaining period that the dissolved panchayat would have continued.

# **Finance Commission**

Finance Commission has been provided in both the Bills with a difference. The 64th Bill provides that the governor of a state shall constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial position of the panchayats and to make recommendations to the governor who shall cause every recommendation made by the Finance Commission together with an explanatory note thereon to be laid before the legislature of the state. On the other hand the 74th Bill states that there shall be a finance commission in every state to make recommendations to the government of the state and such recommendations shall be laid by the government of the state before the legislature of a state together with explanatory note.

# **Audit of Accounts**

The 64th Bill provides for the form of audit of panchayat accounts. The bill states that the accounts of the panchayats shall be kept in such from as the government may, on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India prescribe and the report shall be submitted to the governor of the state who shall cause them to be laid before the legislature of the state. Whereas the 74th Bill does not provide the form of manner of audit of panchayat accounts.

# **Conduct of Elections**

According to the provisions of the 64th Bill the superintendence, duration, and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the panchayats shall be vested in the Election Commission, whereas the 74th Bill states that the legislature of a state may make provisions with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the panchayats. It does not provide for an Elections Commission.

# **Disqualification of Members**

The 74th Bill provides for the grounds on which a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as a member of the panchayat. This provision does not exist in the 64th Bill.

#### **Interference of Courts**

The 74th Bill provides that the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of seats of the allotment of seats to such constituencies shall not be called in question in any court. The 64th Bill does not bar the courts from interference.

Thus we can conclude that the 64th Amendment Bill had sought to strengthen centralization through holding PRI elections under the supervision of the Central Elections Commission, auditing of PRI accounts by the Comptroller and Auditor General. It has been apprehended that the Central government through governor as its representative intended to have control over Panchayati Raj.

On the other hand the 74th Amendment Bill does not intend the Centre's intervention in the areas connected with panchayats. Each state will appoint its own election commission to supervise elections. The finance commission will also be constituted by the states. Thus the federal structure of the constitution has been maintained and strengthened. Besides, the plenary legislative power of the state legislature under item five to State List of Seventh Schedule has been given due importance and respect in the interest of state autonomy.

Now the Seventy-third constitution Amendment Act, 1992, has added new dimension to the concept of Panchayati Raj by providing enough scope for direct election and for political parties to contest elections and to play effective role, and by giving it a constitutional status.

In the present scenario, the concept of Panchayati Raj has come to be accepted as an extension of democracy up to the village, and has found favour amongst politicians. It is often said that mere exercise of the right to elect representatives to the central and the state legislatures is not enough for the ordinary citizen. In other words, the concept of participation of the people should be considered as an ideological commitment and therefore what is needed is legislative and structural measures to give legitimacy to peoples' participation.

#### **The 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act: Main Features**

The constitutional (Seventy-Second) Amendment Bill was passed with near unanimity by the Lok Sabha on 2nd December 1992, and by the Rajya Sabha on 31st December 1993. After having been ratified by 17 state assemblies, this has emerged as the constitution (Seventy-third) Amendment Act, 1993, and carne into force from 24th April 1993. So this Amendment Act is the culmination of various proposals made by the earlier committees or subcommittees on Panchayati Raj bodies, and thus giving PRIs a viable shape. The salient features of the Act are as follows:

There shall be a Gram Sabha in each village exercising such powers and performing such functions at the village level as the legislature of a state may provide by law.

Panchayats shall be constituted in every state at the village, intermediate and district levels, thus bringing about uniformity in the Panchayati Raj structure. However, the state having a population not exceeding 20 lakh have given the option of not having any panchayat the intermediate level.

While the elections in respect of all the members to panchayats at all levels will be direct, the election in respect of the post of chairman at the intermediate and district level will be indirect. The mode of elections of chairman to the village level has been left to the state government to decide.

Reservation of seats for SC and STs have been provided in proportion to their population at each level. Not less than one-third of the total membership has been reserved for women and these seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a panchayat. Similar reservations have been made in respect of the office of the chairman also.

A uniform term of 5 years has been provided for the PRIs and in the event of supersession, elections to constitute the body should be completed before the expiry of 6 month from the date of dissolution.

The state legislatures have been given the power to authorize the panchayats to levy, collect, and appropriate suitable local taxes and also provided for making grants-in-aid to the panchayats from the consolidated fund of the concerned state.

A finance commission has to be constituted once in every five years to review the financial position of the panchayats and to make suitable recommendation to the state on the distribution of funds between the state and local bodies.

With a view to ensuring continuity it has provided in the Act that all the panchayats existing immediately before the commencement of this Amendment Act will continue till the expiry duration unless dissolved by a resolution to that effect passed by the state legislature concerned. The state legislatures should bring the necessary amendments to their panchayat Acts within a maximum period of one year from the commencement of this Amendment Act so as to conform to the provision contained in the constitution.

So far the Seventy-third constitution Amendment Act, 1992, has only provided the general guidelines for the effective and efficient PRIs in India. It granted the PRIs a constitutional status, some sort of a uniformity by making three-tier system a permanent feature, a regularity by making elections an imperative after the termination of the PRIs after every five years and the state Election Commission to conduct and supervise the election, more financial autonomy with the constitution of the state Finance Commission, etc. But, the major question still remains: how the various states are responding and at what speed they are implementing the Panchayati Raj as envisaged by the constitutional amendment.

It can be said that India is on the threshold of a historic political power to the grass roots with all the states completing the process of enacting fresh legislation on strengthening the PRIs on 23rd April 1994. As many as eleven states pushed through fresh legislation in 72 hours, some of them even in the early hours of 23rd April 1994 to beat the stipulated deadline of 23rd April 1994, the day panchayats became part of the Indian constitution. However, the 73rd constitutional Amendment Act is not applicable to Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Nagaland, and certain Scheduled Area of the country. But mere legislative enactments do not ensure effectiveness and viability of the PRIs in the states. What is more important is their operationalization.

Thus the journey from the "Local Self-Government" idea of Lord Ripon to the "Institutions of Self-Government" concept in the 73rd constitutional amendment took more than a century. This evolution in our federal polity must be underlined.

The essential prerequisites for the Panchayati Raj Institution in order to function as institutions of self-government are: (1) clearly demarcated jurisdiction, (2) commensuration with responsibilities of adequate power and authority, (3) to manage the affairs of PRIs, necessary human and financial resources, and (4) within the federal structure functional autonomy. The new Panchayati Raj must be seen as "third tier of government" as the constitutional Amendment Act opens possibilities for fulfilling these conditions.

#### **Issues Ahead**

In regard to making Pnachayati Raj Institutions functional and effective, there are some scholars who have expressed serious doubts about the wisdom of a constitutional amendment. For example, Nirmal Mukharji raises issues like, (1) can a constitutional provision by itself be an adequate substitute for political will? (2) given the harsh realities of the states, would these statutes be implemented in letter and spirit or would they remain laws on paper only? and (3) is implementing decentralization below the state level through the most centralizing of all conceivable instruments-a constitutional amendment desirable? Beside Mukharji held the view that a constitutional amendment could well mean thrusting a uniform prescription on states which are widely disparate in administrative culture, in historical background, and in demographic size.

The arguments put forward by Mukharji may be valid. But there is no doubt that the constitutional amendment was highly desirable for creating vibrant grass-roots democratic institutions in the country. However, some issues relating to the amendment need to be emphasized here.

The uniform three-tier of PRIs for states having more than 20 lakh population has its own limitations so far structural differences are concerned. And so is the case of states and union territories having less than 20 lakh population. It would have been better had it been left to states' discretion. The constitution Amendment Bill, when introduced, had the provision for direct elections to the post of chairpersons at the village and intermediate level. At the district level it was left to the state legislature to decide. The Joint Committee of Parliament looked into this question, but advocated for the direct elections only at the village level. The Marxist members of the committee had objected to direct elections at any level. But in order to achieve unanimity they suggested that the issue of the election of the chairpersons at the village level may be left to the state legislatures. Without going into the plus and minus points of indirect or direct election, it may be said that direct elections to the post of chairpersons are more in conformity with the presidential form of government and indirect elections with the cabinet form of the government, the later one has been adopted in India.

A major lacuna in the act is the contradictory and inconsistent approach to the idea of Panchayati Raj being the institutions of self-government. The bill had rightly defined the panchayats as an institution of self-government but later, in defining the functions of these institutions, had narrowed them down to developmental functions, as in Article 243 (a) and (b). To our mind without policing (law and order) as a function at each level, no institution of self-government is worth the name. Since the idea of "district-government" or "third-tier of governance" has come into being, its important point is sadly missing. Nirmal Mukharji, in this regard, rightly suggests that this dilution of the concept of institutions of self-governance is flawed thinking and drafting.

The past experience suggests that wherever panchayats have not taken roots or they have been uprooted after brief spells of success, it has been observed that the MPs and MLAs have not been friendly to these institutions. Apart from being indifferent to local governments, they have also been hostile to these bodies. They do not like to see another centre of power emerging as a challenge, nor do they like to see one's existing powers being diluted. In an attempt to assuage their feeling and the pre-emptive of any mischief from them, the MPs and MLAs have been given membership and voting right in the panchayats in the Acts now passed. This will certainly undermine the panchayats which we aim to strengthen. Yet another disturbing feature for Panchayati Raj Institutions is the "MPs' and MLAs' Local Area Development Schemes." Many may not agree with our apprehension, but it is almost certain that these schemes will further strengthen the stronghold of MPs and MLAs over the local community and the basic concept of empowering the grass roots democratic institutions may be forfeited.

A crucial question not yet visible is, with the states being asked by the PRIs to give more powers and departments to them, when the centre devolve more powers to states. This question will have to be answered, if not today, then in the near future.

Reservation of one-third seats and chairpersons for women is a step towards silent revolution. It is our firm belief that a social transformation aimed at women could be achieved by Panchayati Raj institutions. But the task is beset with enormous difficulties for women.

Development of healthy convention in a democratic polity is of immense value. The British parliamentary system is an example of such values. In our society too we have to recognize them as the backbone of our society and polity. The countryside, city, and local government institutions below the state level in the USA have had a satisfactory existence for so many decades and one of the reasons assigned for their sustenance and success is the tradition of democracy that they have preserved with maximum care. However, in our country violation of conventions have been very high. In such context constitutions amendment may not have any meaning.

It is a sad affair for a democratic country like India that the basic ideology behind the Seventy-third Amendment to the constitution of India of making panchayat institutions of self-government had been largely ignored in the recent state legislations. What is required is that the legislators should cut across party lines and implement the laws in true spirit with the implicit purpose of transferring power to the people, and to plug the loopholes in the existing system, only when the tree-tiers of the constitution-the centre, the state, and the local bodies will function with regularity and efficiency, the federal nature of the constitution, the democratic nature of the polity will be preserved. Otherwise, the constitution will become very much distorted in its content as well as implementation. It can be said that the PRIs in India have since their inception, remained "down to earth" without ever taking roots. But the PRIs have survived without regularity in elections show their inbuilt strength and, perhaps, make them the only institutions that live on despite appalling conditions justifying their departure. So what is required is the "will" to make the PRIs a viable democratic institution on which the real democracy will thrive on.

It is notable that the PRIs are the primary institutions of democracy where people from village, block, and district could participate. Except for them none of the other institutions can have direct participation of the local people. Devolution of power has to start here, and this is also where people at local levels got into the mainstream of development as well as public affairs. The PRIs, especially the *Gram Sabhas,* make the concept of direct democracy like that of Greek city-states of Plato and Aristotle days feasible at the present and centuries to come. The *Gram Sabhas* have been designed to be the place where development issues should be discussed, development programme initiated, and beneficiaries of development schemes selected.

It may be added that the prospect of the PRIs would be on increase keeping in the pace of economic liberalization in India. In fact, they would become watchdog bodies to ensure proper implementation of the employment generation programmes like the Jawahar Rozgar Yojana (JRY), poverty alleviation and special programmes like Integrated Rural Development Program (IRDP), Training of Rural Youth for Self-Employment (TRYSEM) and other different Area Development Programmes like Drought Prone Areas Programme (DPAP), Desert Development Programme (DDP), etc. All schemes falling under Minimum Needs Programme (MNP) and several other programmes of this nature of local development work. In fact, the PRIs would play an important role in accelerating socio-economic development in the rural areas.

Thanks to the Amendment Act, the PRIs are going to be vested with a lot of power and money in the coming years. The enhancement of the outlay for rural development to ` 30,000 crore in the Eighth Plan assumes greater significance in the context of this Act. In addition, the panchayats are assured of a regular existence like any other democratic institutions enshrined in the constitution and they will also have adequate powers both administrative and financial for implementing the economic development programmes meant for people living in rural India.

It is quite encouraging that the states are to transfer 36 per cent of their total plan outlay to the sub state level planning bodies from 1994-95. Of the proposed 36 per cent outlay to be earmarked for micro-level planning, 30 per cent will go to sub-state planning bodies through lump-sum grants for expenditure on areas including rural water supply, roads, electricity, education, and any other local schemes. The list of 29 areas included in the Eleventh Schedule of the Act is flexible giving discretion to the PRIs to select schemes depending on local resources and problems. Five per cent of the state's plan outlay will be "united fund"-few transferred to district or village bodies to be utilized at their own discretion. The remaining one per cent will be for poverty alleviation and employment generation programmes which are to be planned and funded at the village level. For the proper implementation of these, the activities and functioning of the PRIs will have to be closely watched and monitored so that they do not overstep their limits and cause irreparable damage to those living in their jurisdiction. What is needed is a consensual and uniform approach of auditing.

It can be observed that the democratization of our pluralistic society cannot be ensured merely through legislative and administrative actions of the state. These enabling provisions will require massive mobilisational support and non-governmental organizations, academics, and professional bodies, political parties and other groups should involve themselves in exerting pressure to restore power to the place where it belongs. For the entire exercise of decentralization, people like school teachers, progressive farmers, social workers, and professionals should be involved. Above all, the PRIs elected representatives should also be trained in rising over their electoral rivalry. They should be made to understand that once the elections are over, the rivalry ends. In fact, elections to the PRls must carry a look of *mela* (festival) to attract massive turnout.

To brighten the prospects of the PRIs in India, some suggestions made are as follows:

The elected representatives of the panchayats should exercise superintendence and control over government officials, *i.e.,* serving the panchayats instead of playing a subordinate role.

An inter-zila panchayat parishad should be constituted in every state with the Chief Minister as its chairman to thrash out legislative, financial, and administrative matters of the panchayats. The planning set-up at the zila level should be headed by the chairman of the zila-panchayat.

The requirements of financial accountability should be designed and supervised by the CAG and the power of dissolution as well as accountability of lower level panchayat units rest with the next higher levels of panchayats and not with government officials in order to establish peer group accountability.

A constitutional amendment for ensuring election to cooperatives is a must because a vibrant cooperative system is important for successful Panchayati Raj.

Here, we may raise the question: Do we seriously believe in success of Panchayati Raj Institutions or is it a mere paper exercise? It can be said that if the problems, both at macro-and micro-level are not solved, if the vested interest and the power brokers are not knocked out of the system, if a half-hearted, uncooked, unplanned exercise is being done for the democratic decentralization, if the financial autonomy conferred with accountability is not improved, we may land up in a situation, which a wise man once put it as "Honey, I shrunk from the Peoples' Participation". If the policy of the government in giving impetus to the Panchayati Raj movement is implemented faithfully and fully, it will surely bring about the political, social, and economic revolution which will not only strengthen the democratic character of our society, but will also prove a perennial source of throwing up energetic leadership which may change the entire face of the country and guide the destinies of the people most efficiently and effectively.

#### **Peoples' Aspirations**

In regard to peoples' aspirations two important questions arise, *viz.,* what are the peoples' aspirations? And how to get them fulfilled? As far as the first question is concerned, it may be said that peoples' aspirations include equity, *i.e.,* social justice, peoples' participation in decision-making, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and sharing the benefit of change and development, representative character of grass-roots democratic institutions, protection of the interest of SCs/STs and other socially deprived sections/including women, maintenance of social harmony, removal of feuds and factions, sense of freedom and equality, etc.

In spite of the best efforts of the policy planners and implementing agencies, right from the CD programmes to the present day we have badly failed in meeting the peoples' aspirations due to the lack of popular participation. The past experience with PRIs also suggest that they had been incapable in harmonising local community, minimizing feuds and factional fightings and protecting collective interest. As such they badly failed in honouring peoples' wishes and aspirations. The political developments in rural areas as a result of electoral process also suggest that PRls inadvertently set forth the process of parliamentary system at the grass-roots level on a wrong track and gradually made these institutions a shelter house for self-seekers and power seekers. The PRIs, in past, failed in setting a sound mechanism of communication, influence, and control from grass-roots level upwards. They also failed in institutionalizing peoples' will.

Further, they did not serve as an instrument of social and economic change. The concept of popular participation, defined in leadership term, also failed in delivering goods. The leadership, which emerged as a result of PR politics did not reflect the aspirations of the people and the question remained unanswered as to how to make both the structure and the leadership responsive to the needs of the people.

There are certain prerequisites for the survival of PRIs. They are as follows:

- 1. There should be commitment to the PR as a political value and the consequent political will to establish it;
- 2. It should not be forgotten that the effort to revitalize PR, in fact, is an attempt to reconstruct Indian polity by way of bringing so far deprived sections into the mainstream; and
- 3. PRIs should be treated as the single agency for development of the rural local levels.

Whatever had been the other reasons for the failure of these institutions, one that is glaring and on which there is unanimity among the scholars, is its inability to protect the interest of the weaker sections of our society. Since this did not happen, the political power at the grass-roots level was unevenly distributed. As a result the weaker sections were not only deprived of the development programmes but in most of the cases they were kept out of development process.

When the PRIs were introduced in late fifties and early sixties; peoples' hopes and aspirations were very high. In certain cases, the PR leadership had been alive to the hopes and aspirations of the people but in absence of adequate financial support and bureaucratic cooperation they found themselves in the state of helplessness. Moreover, whatever, development programmes for weaker sections and rural community were introduced they lacked proper planning and effective popular participation. They had been bureaucratic oriented implemented by local level bureaucracy and far from the hopes and aspirations of the local community. In absence of the real assessment of needs and requirement of local community, they gained routinized character.

As a corollary to the second question that arises is whether the 73rd constitutional Amendment Act will be able to meet the hopes and aspirations of the people? In answer to this it may be said that at least on paper it appears that PRIs will be in a position to meet the hopes and aspirations of the people. Our assumption is based on the fact that the very element of popular participation, which was missing till now, may be ensured by the present Act. As such periodic elections will provide local community enough opportunity to throw young, energetic, and action oriented leadership belonging to all sections of rural community. Reservation of seats for women, SCs and STs and Other Backward Classes (OBCs) will ensure their participation and effectiveness in decision-making. No doubt in initial years elite from the above mentioned category will dominate over the scene but the local community will be in a position to judge them on the basis of their performance. Enough care has been taken to make *Gram Sabha* an effective institution of grass roots democracy. If they are really made effective they can be in a position to remove the self-seekers and partisan elites by the instrument of vote of no-confidence. If it so happens, the Pareto's concept of circulation of elite will come true and there will be gradual and frequent shuffling and re-shuffling of PR leadership which may help in fulfilling the hopes and aspirations of the people. Since district and decentralized planning has been emphasised in 74th Consitutional Amendment Act and district planning councils have been constituted, it is hoped that a need based planning reflecting the hopes and aspirations of the people will be the usual feature. At the same time, they will not remain only on paper but effectively implemented as implementing agency will be the PRls themselves. One may hope that the centrally sponsored developmental and employment generating programmes for the benefit of the local community will also be implemented effectively as they are supposed to be implemented under the direct supervision of PRls. Even identification of beneficiaries is also to be done by them. These brightening provisions under the Act force us to be optimistic in regard to fulfilment of hopes and aspirations of the people. The constitution of State Finance Commission and provision for effective local tax administration in the Act also present a rosy picture about the financial health of PRIs. In past lack of financial resources made these institutions totally handicapped and did not allow them to fulfil the hopes and aspirations of the people.

Moreover, for the last few years there has been a sharp shift in the perception of rural people towards the change in developmental activities. Political and social awareness have also opened the eyes of so far deprived section of the rural society. However, any administrative innovation to bring about deliberate change in PRIs for better results cannot be effective unless devolution of power from the centre to states, state to districts, and districts to panchayat units is rationalized and exercised in true sense. Any talk of power to the people becomes meaningless unless power and political awareness is channelized in the right direction. The 73rd Consitutional Amendment Act further aims at reducing political and bureaucratic interference in rural development programmes. For this many states have redefined and redesigned the role of state bureaucracy in order to facilitate effective functioning of PRIs. It is felt that what Gandhi said in 1946 is going to materialize with the help of the 73rd constitutional Amendment Act. The statement of Gandhiji is as follows:

"Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus every village will be a republic or panchayat having full powers. It follows, therefore, that every village has to be self-sustained and capable of managing its affairs even to the extent of defending itself against the whole world."

He further added:

"In this structure composed of innumerable villages, there will be ever widening, never ascending circles. Life will be a pyramid with the apex sustained by the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre will be the individual always ready to perish for the circle of villages, till at last the whole becomes one life composed of individual, never aggressive in their arrogance but even humble, sparing the majesty of the oceanic circle of which they are integral units. Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wield power to crush the inner circle but will give strength to all within and derive its own strength from it."

While supporting the idea of Mahatma Gandhi and the ideas of some of the revolutionaries of pre-independence era like Bhagat Singh, one may hope that peoples' movement can be launched to demand that the devolution of funds for development works in PR system should first come to *Gram Sabhas* on per capita basis. It would be the responsibility of *Gram Sabha* to decide its needs according to its priorities, how much to keep it for itself, how much to contribute for the intermediate level and how much for the district level panchayats. For example, a particular *Gram Sabha* may decide to have with floods rather than have an embankment. Initially, it would mean lengthy negotiated settlements between *Gram Sabhas* and panchayats at intermediate and district levels and, therefore, slow pace of progress. Then participation of beneficiary and a slow pace of progress are certainly better than the existing non-development and dependence paradigm. Moreover, the whole process, will be geared towards increasing the understanding and raising the consciousness of the masses and activating them.

Let us examine yet another possibility. Either a *Gram Sabha* could, in the interest of unemployed persons (who *ipso facto* are its members) ban the entry of some articles (such as toothpaste, bathing, and washing soaps, etc.) in its area either singly or in combination with the neighbouring *Gram Sabha,* in this process it could encourage village and household industries and generate employment. If such a phenomenon remains confined to a few pockets, it is likely to be ignored. But if it catches the imagination of the people and spreads to a large area, it will hurt the interests of multinationals foreign collaborators and their Indian lackeys, and, finally, the interests of neo-imperialism. Pressure will be mounted to suppress it for the sake of free market commitment. The Indian ruling class, in all probability, will succumb to the pressure. But, the problem is that all other institutions of the Panchayati Raj system can be superseded but not the *Gram Sabhas.* Their existence will always be legal and constitutional. How the struggle will proceed, what course it will take, when it will acquire a revolutionary character, all this will depend on the members of the *Gram Sabhas.* There may be many other possibilities depending on subjective and objective conditions prevailing in different *Gram Sabhas.* But one thing is certain, along with the struggle (whatever be its form) mass consciousness will increase. This is the lesson which history teaches us and increasing mass consciousness is the singular need of the hour.

#### **Concluding Remarks**

While concluding, one more question comes to our mind, which may be everybody's apprehension, as to what would be the fate of PRIs by ad 2020? In regard to this apprehension we are quite optimistic about the future of PRIs as the units of grass-roots democracy. No doubt most of the successes of PRIs will depend upon the political will of the concerned state governments. However, making Panchayati Raj elections a regular phenomenon and giving them constitutional status may ensure their bright future. No doubt the elections at the state and Central level are the regular phenomenon but still we have not been able to take our democratic polity towards a bright future. However, this situation, to our mind, is not going to affect rural political system in a substantive manner; the rural masses are, of course, illiterate and ignorant but very sensitive and capable of taking suitable decisions in the larger interest of the community. Moreover, due to mandatory and periodic elections, this will be in a position to shuffle and reshuffle the leadership of PRIs making them to realize that only those leaders could stay who are committed, non-partisan and take care of development of the village community. Besides, it is our hope that *Gram Sabhas* are going to play a very decisive role in coming years as a result of growing consciousness among the rural masses. In such a way, we hope that by the end of AD 2020 the Panchayati Raj institutions may be deeply rooted in the rural community and become the real vehicle of change and development in the country side. The only danger which, we visualize, is from the side of the state government. This is because of the fact that the 73rd constitutional Amendment has provided latitude to the states to make suitable amendments in their Panchayati Raj Act as and when required and this process has perhaps, already started. And as such, if such negative approach of the state governments continues then it would be difficult to save the Panchayati Raj institutions from the callous attitude of the state governments. Even then, we are optimistic that future of Panchayati Raj looks bright and they shall be in a position to fulfil the hopes and aspirations of the people as the societal norms, social stratification and values are changing very fast as a result of democratic process in the country.

In regard to futuristic trends in Panchayati Raj politics, effectivity of *Gram Sabhas,* changing social relationships and emerging social movements, similar optimism has been expressed by many social scientists. For example, Rajni Kothari is of the opinion that as a system of managing the affairs of the society, the long experienced model of "top down" has failed. And it is against. this failure that the rise of new actors and levels, new forms of political expression and new definition of the content of grass-roots politics acquire significance.

Now the question is who and what are these new actors and definitions? There is, first, the resurgence of the "people" themselves, both in consciousness and in behaviour, asserting their democratic rights and challenging the established order, at local levels affecting the entire social and political order. There is, second, the emergence of a new class of mediators in the political process, generally called the activists-upper and middle class in their social origin but identifying themselves with the lower orders of society-the poor, the oppressed and the segregated, ranging from the untouchables and the destitute among the tribes and ethnic minorities all the way the victims of sexual, ethnic, ecological, and generational discriminations, atrocities and violence. It is in this background that we feel that the rural masses will rise to the occasion and help to see the future of Panchayati Raj Institutions bright, which could fulfil the hopes and aspiration of the people in years to come.

#### **Notes and References**

- Henry Maddic, *Panchayati Raj: A Study of Rural Local Government in India,* London. Longman, 1970, p. 3. Norman D. Palmer describes it as the most exciting experiment in democratic decentralization in any developing country. See his, *The Indian Political System,* Boston, Houghton Mifflin, p. 104. A.H. Hanson and Janet Douglas considered Panchayati Raj as India's distinctive contribution to the theory and practice of local government. See *their, India's Democracy,* Delhi Vikas, 1982, p. 64.
- L.C. Jain, "Future of Panchayats", *The Hindustan Times,* 4th October 1991.
- B. Krishnamurthy, "About Panchayati Raj", *The Patriot,* 21st July 1993.
- "15-Point Programmes for Panchayats", *The Hindu,* 21st August 1994.
- "M.P. Panchayat Bill Passed", *The Statesman,* 31st December 1994.
- *The Economic Times,* 2nd October 1993.
- A. Imbanathan, "Panchayati Raj at the Crossroad", *The Deccan Herald,* 19th November 1993.
- K.K. Sharma, "Finance for Panchayati Raj", *The Financial Express,* 13th September 1993.
- S.N. Mishra and S.S. Singh, *Roads to Model Panchayati* Raj Mittal Publications, New Delhi, 1993.
- T.N. Chaturvedi (ed.), *Panchayati Raj, IIPA,* New Delhi, 1991.
- "My Vision of Village Swaraj", *Harijan,* 26th July 1992.
- R.N. Jathar, *Evolution of P.R. in India,* Institute of Economic Research, Dharmar, 1964.
- B.S. Bhargava, *Panchayati Raj System and Political Parties,* Ashish Publishing House, New Delhi, 1979.
- H.D. Malviya, *Village Panchayats in India,* AlCC, New Delhi, 1956.
- Iqbal Narain *et. al., Panchayati Raj Administration: Old and New Challenge,* IIPA, New Delhi, 1979.
- N.R. Inamdar, *Functioning of Village Panchayats,* Popular Prakashan, Bombay, 1970.
- P.C. Mathur, *Political Dynamics of Panchayati Raj,* Konark Publishers, New Delhi, 1991.
- L.C. Jain, *et.al., Grass without Roots,* Sage Publications, New Delhi, 1985. For the role political expediency has played in stifling the growth of PRls, see Gorge Mathew, PR *from Legislation to Movement,* Concept Publishing Company, New Delhi, 1994.
- Nirmal Mukharji, "The Alternative District Government" in M.L. Dantwala *et. al.,* (eds.), *Rural Development: The Indian Experience,* Oxford, IBH, New Delhi, 1986.
- S.N. Mishra, *Participative Management and Rural Development,* Mittal Publications, New Delhi, 1992.
- Chandra B.P. Singh, "Panchayati Raj: Power to the People" in *Third Concept,* March 1995.
- Pradhan H. Prasad, "Panchayati Raj and People's Movement" in *Mainstream,* 4th March 1995.
- Rajani Kothari, *Politics and the People: In Search of a Humane Governance,* Vol. II, New Horizons Press, New York, 1989.