33

# **Emerging Trends in India's Foreign Policy: Challenges** and **Prospects**

Sanju Gupta

nation's foreign policy is primarily designed to promote its dominant class' interests. However, depending on the resources and the vision of the leadership, it may also aspire for national interests and a global role in search of market and resources by pursuing global interests of peace and development for the hegemony of the ruling classes in the existing world order. The foreign policy of India, ever since its inception, has been an amalgamation of class interests with global objectives. The moving spirit behind this policy has been the concept of Non-Alignment. This all-weather concept was an outcome, not only of our rich cultural and philosophical heritage, but it also reflected the consensual mode of domestic politics of the dominant classes in the post-independence era. This posture was a logical response to the Cold War.

The Cold War and its ideological baggage now appear to be a part of post-war history. Fundamental changes have taken place in international politics in the past two decades. The Soviet Union disintegrated and with its fragmentation, the world entered into the post-cold war era. The plethoric nature of change that occurred was further complicated by the multidimensional character of international regime transformations.<sup>1</sup> The twin processes of globalization and localization have been sweeping across national frontiers. Issues of global concern in the form of peace, disarmament, human development, environment, human rights & democratization dominate the global agenda. Coupled with these changes at the macro level, there have been progressive convulsions at the micro level, within the Indian state. In this changing global and local milieu, new challenges and possibilities have emerged before our vast entity of civilization.

India, like many developing countries, has tried to adjust her foreign policy according to the needs and priorities of the post-cold war world order. There have been numerous challenges and opportunities, and the survival and sustenance has been an adventurism at the maximization of opportunities. To what extent has India shown dynamism and flexibility, so as to cope up with these challenges? What are the evolving patterns of foreign conduct?

This chapter is an attempt at delineating the emerging contours of the post-post-Cold War world and an insight into the preparedness of India, to face the changed global political architecture. However, before attempting an exploration on the transformations through the 1990s, well into the new millennium, it would be apt to briefly discuss the foundational base and basic premise of India's foreign policy.

# ❑❑ **Origins of India's Foreign Policy-Basic Principles and Objectives**

As the Second World War ended and India's independence became a reality, Indians took note of emerging political impulses and strategic orientations in international politics. Several factors were instrumental in shaping the foreign policy. Perceptions of the Indian leadership were deeply influenced by the freedom struggle of India against colonialism. Indian leaders viewed the world through the prism of the political, economic and ideological contradictions, which resulted in two world wars. They were convinced that political contradictions and inequalities could not be confined or compartmentalized in order to prevent tendencies of competition, conflict and violence affecting the entire international community.<sup>2</sup> They were also convinced that international harmony, peace and stability could be achieved through a process of reasoning together; and also the that fact that if foreign relations were to contribute to peace and well being of the international community, then that had to be responsive to the profound aspirations of the common people.

The consequence of Nehruvian approach was a widely shared feeling that India had a catalytic role to play in establishing a moral and just world. It was believed that India should take initiatives to eradicate imperialism and all forms of discrimination. The disintegration of the alliance between the "democratic" and "progressive" forces and the emergence of the Cold War,<sup>3</sup> led by the US and the erstwhile USSR, were disappointments to India. Indian leadership was apprehensive about India becoming subject to extraneous influences, if nations were to take sides in this ideological confrontation. Nehru's assessment was that India should keep away from Cold War politics and should remain committed to its own democratic terms of reference for national consolidation.<sup>4</sup> This approach evolved into Non-Alignment became the guiding principle of India's foreign policy, and ultimately found manifestation in the creation of the Non-Aligned Movement.

These approaches have constituted the core of India's foreign policy. Over the years, successive governments have adhered to the basic premise laid down in the foundational years following independence. However, geo-political realities do not remain constant.

While the international system is constantly an evolving one, factors of time and space affect the nature of change. Furthermore, forces of global change continuously interact with domestic ingredients. It is true that though the driving force of India's foreign policy remained unchanged, yet the changing equations of the international system and complexities of sub-continental security called for the orientation. The War that lasted for well over four decades, ended with the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1989. This ushered in the so-called New World Order. This post-cold war world was characterized by the end of bipolarism, the emergence of the uni-cum-multipolar worlds and the emergence of gee-economics as the primary factor governing politics among states.<sup>5</sup> India's first security concern was to cope with a more complex and competitive international situation. New political relationship had to be established with diversified economic and technological links. As the decade of 1990s has proved, the structured equations and antagonisms of the Cold War were perhaps easier to deal with, than the uncertainties, which the world faces today. Unprecedented changes and challenges confront the nation-states in the new millennium.

# ❑❑ **Changing Contours of The World—The Rising Challenges**

The dawn of the new millennium did not bring disarmament or usher in the widely expected era of stability, cooperative security and wider prosperity; rather, it engendered fresh political, technological and economic rivalries and unveiled new destructive capacities. Trade conflict among powerful states, external interventions in "internal wars" and UN's eroding ability to promote global security have given rise to economic protectionism, aggressive commercial diplomacy, ethnic militancy, nationalism and coercive unilateralism. The advent of the information age and the consequent revolution in military affairs have enhanced the role of technology in combat, deterrence and conflict prevention. The world therefore presents a scenario that continues to be in a state of flux. It would be proper to examine some dimensions of the emerging geo-strategic landscape.

## **Redefining Security: Towards a Paradigmatic Shift**

The concept of security has undergone sea-changes in recent years. A number of significant questions have been raised. These include-What are the dimensions of national security? Can security be defined exclusively in statecentric terms? Are the states more threatened from within than from outside? What are the linkages between the internal and external threats? The realist and neo-realist school of thought, for a long time, provided a state-centric analysis of security. Herein, the Sovereign State was the unit of analysis, the State's behaviour was assumed as rational and the nature of the international system as anarchic.<sup>6</sup> This paradigm informed that an 'anarchic' world order predisposes the construction of a hierarchy between nation and states. An optimization of military power was concomitant with this model, to assure maximum security to the state against external threats.

In this scheme, national security was equated with expansion of military capabilities, acquisition of weapon systems to counter the adversary, quest for nuclear weapons and so on. Though these beliefs were adequate during the Cold War, they are totally inadequate to discover the dilemmas of national security in the post-cold war era.<sup>7</sup> There is now shift from strategic (national) to security studies, having both trans-national and international ramifications. National security, today, is being examined in a broader context including non-military threats and domestic security issues. There is growing consensus that security should comprise political, ethnic, social, economic, environmental, communal and religious strife that embrace the civil society and the citizen. This shift has now reversed the priorities of security studies, away from the earlier central strategic questions, to the emerging security predicament of the third world.

The Third World has been confronting internal security challenges emanating from ethnic conflict, sectarian crises, racial tensions, imbalances of socio-economic development, rising population and the increasing degradation of the environment.<sup>8</sup> The cumulative effect of such pressures led many third world regimes to seek refuge in building huge military establishments. Though the objective was "state security", what they actually achieved was "regime security". The Indian security perspectives, rooted in the geo-strategic context of South Asia, have been a reflection of these third world realities which have been characterized by external challenges to its integrity, as well as the external threats to its sovereign boundaries.

Security studies in India will have to reckon with the arguments on economic and political security.<sup>9</sup> Indian security analysts need to take into account the limits of military and nuclear weapons' power. There is need to shift the focus to a larger holistic meaning of security.

### **Globalization: The World as a Global Village**

The process of globalization, with its obvious implications for foreign policy and defense interests of any nation, remains the subject of an intense debate across the world. The discussion is focused on whether it is good or bad; whether it is a bonding or unsettling factor; whether it fosters prosperity and freedom or allows the dominant players to exploit the market of the weaker players.<sup>10</sup> The world nevertheless has become a part and parcel of globalization, either by choice or by the force of events. Many see globalization as a primarily economic phenomenon, involving the increasing interaction or integration of national economic systems through the growth in international trade, investment and capital flows. One can also point to a rapid increase in cross-border social, cultural and technological exchange as part of this phenomenon. Sociologists like Anthony Giddens defines globalization as decoupling of space and time, emphasizing that with instantaneous communications, knowledge and culture can be shared around the world simultaneously.<sup>11</sup> The left critics of globalization have defined the phenomenon differently. They present it as a worldwide drive towards a globalized economic system, dominated by supranational corporate trade and banking institutions that are not accountable to democratic processes or national governments.

Globalization has led to a sharp rise in the volume of world trade. The free flow of finance capital is another major plank of economic globalization. Communication technology has made it possible to conduct financial transactions across the world. One of the benefits, which globalization has provided to poor countries, can be found in the new employment opportunities it offers. This is owing to the setting up of multinationals in various countries. Many governments have created special export processing zones in order to attract multinationals, and to encourage domestic industries to produce more for the international market. Larger than many host nations, these multinationals are often in a powerful position to dictate terms. A consequence of this growing corporate power can be seen clearly in relation to their foreign investment role. At its best, investment by a foreign company can provide jobs; stimulate growth and offer developing countries the access to key technology and skills. At its worst, these multinationals just exploit the cheap labour or natural resources.<sup>12</sup>

In terms of communications, globalization has been possible through the growth of computer network, telecom, electronic media etc. The military sphere has seen the advent of global weaponry. Intercontinental ballistic missiles and spy satellite for instance, have in certain respects, turned the world into a single realm of battle. Thus globalization has been transpiring through the proliferation and growth of companies, associations and regulatory agencies that operate as trans-border networks. It was assumed that the 'globalization' and 'Iiberalization' process would lead to a drastic altering and reshaping the role of the state in economic management.<sup>13</sup> While it is true that market forces today are shaping economic decisions, it would be an over simplification to assume that the State would have a small or secondary role to play. In developing countries like India, where the State has a primary responsibility in providing basic services, it would be unrealistic to think in terms of a shrinking role for the state.<sup>14</sup> The primary task of economic diplomacy in such countries has to be alert and alive to the changes that are underway in the international economic scenario, so as to react to them and recommend policy courses appropriate to the evolving situation.

## **US Adventurism Vs The World: Resisting Hegemony**

Two events of the early 21st century-the 9/11 terrorist attacks on America and the American attempt at regime change in Iraq through the use of force-are major landmarks in contemporary international relations. These events ushered in a new era, an era that marks the end of the post-cold war era and the beginning of a new, post-cold war era.<sup>15</sup> Two important developments deserve mention here, first, the unfolding of a new unipolar movement in all its fury and vigour; second, the uncertain future faced by the alliance system the US has built in Asia and Europe. As early as 1991, in the wake of the Gulf crisis (Iraqi aggression of Kuwait), America displayed a foreign policy aiming towards a leadership role. According to the American leadership, the unipolar world which had emerged as a result of a victory in the Cold War, following the decline of the Soviet Union, has added to the American responsibility to help structure the new world order.

Critics alleged that this was a scramble for an alternative rationale for US interventionism in the post-cold war and was sought to be advanced by articulating the need for American role in a world-wide movement for democracy. With the emerging contours of the world in the early 1990's still being debated, a school of thought argued that it was unrealistic to announce the world as unipolar. The argument was supported by citing the cases of Russia consciously expanding its relations with China, the increasingly interdependent character of the world, recognizing multi polarity of the international system and the rise of regional powers in Asia, Africa and Latin America. With Europe integrating into a European Union, NAFTA creating an immense trading bloc and APEC attempting to integrate economies across the Pacific, it was believed that the world can at best be described as an uni-cum-multipolar world. This was a world with potential emerging new power centers, though the dominant power variables was still at the command of the US. These deliberations on post Cold War and post 9/11 world were jolted mid-stream, when in March 2003' the US invaded, conquered and occupied Iraq. The reason why was this war imposed, remains a mystery.<sup>16</sup> Clearly,it was not just because Saddam Hussain was unwilling to disclose and destroy his alleged weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Was it all about the control of Iraqi oil? Was the objective guided at regime change or primarily regime ouster? Is the world now irrevocably unipolar or will the process towards multi-polarism be hastened? With numerous such questions looming large, it is clear that the "Operation Iraqi Freedom" has shaken the dynamics of world politics.<sup>17</sup> It has also sharpened the debate between supporters of American unilateralism and the urgency of restoring principles of multilateralism.

The recent American action relate to the consolidation of the so called 'neoconservative' view of the world in Washington. This is the form of neoimperialism, which represents a potential American role in the world that is at once progressive and assertive.<sup>18</sup> The Bush administration had outlined this goal in its National Security Strategy (NSS) released in September 2002. The thinking embodied in the NSS war articulated in the Project for the New American Century (PNAC), which provides for pre-emptive military strikes by the LIS against perceived enemies. It is true that the 9/11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Towers in the US, shook the world and American alike. American could have used this momentum to rejoin the rest of the world by proclaiming that it is with the countries, hurt by similar indiscriminate attacks. Instead, America Americanized the tragedy by visualizing it as an opening to flex its muscles and impose American presence on the world.<sup>19</sup> The US led unipolar movement is well in to the second decade and it is unlikely that this status will change in the next few decades.

# **Technology, Weapons and Transnational Crime: The Challenge of Unconventional Conflicts**

The Cold War coincided in time with the nuclear age, the space age, the affluent society, the post-colonial age and the conflict interdependence of advanced industrial economies. These coincidences brought forth the following changes:

- The technological revolution through which we are living.
- Alterations in the relative weight of power factors as conventionally calculated by states.
- The importance of transnational activities and non-state participants in international relations.<sup>20</sup>

Among many dramatic changes in 20th century technology some of the most spectacular developments have taken place in communication and information. Drawing on the knowledge of electronic and space age, these technologies have reduced distances and penetrated secrecy. In a world with millions of fax machines and personal computers, with direct access to the internet, information flows faster and freer among people and across natural or man-made boundaries. The commercial, cultural, economic, educational, intellectual, military, moral and political repercussions of this are so enormous that the world is still grappling with them.<sup>21</sup> The rapid flow and incredible proliferation of information means that advantage in any field viz., stock brokering, public education, military intelligence, marketing popular entertainment etc., will go to those who have access to the most useful information, and to those who can disseminate this information the fastest to the largest audience. Political authorities are finding it more and more difficult to control or censure the flow of information.

Technological forces are playing a greater role in shaping geopolitics than at any time in history.<sup>22</sup> Technology is being primarily employed to gain military and economic advantage over competitors. High-tech defence systems are relying more and more on commercial technologies. On-going research and development activities suggest that new mass-extermination technologies could emerge in the decades ahead. A new revolution in military affairs (RMA) has already emerged on the horizon. The RMA process, ensuing from the information age, rests on three developments in

#### **580** ✽ CHAPTER 33

military technologies that have serious implication for national security in developing countries:

- The first is the conceptualization and automation of the battlefields; this enhances the ability of countries, armies, commanders and individual weapons to gather, process and use information. This development is proceeding towards a fully automated battle-field.
- The second trend is the development of post-nuclear weaponry.
- The third is the development of non-lethal weaponry comprising precision-guided munitions that temporarily stun adversaries. These weapons are expected to prove handy for fighting terrorist and quelling civil unrest.<sup>23</sup>

It is increasingly apparent that the era of global and large-scale interstate conflict that distinguished much in the 19th and 20th centuries, is passing. Though mankind has lived under a shadow of a nuclear holocaust, the probabilities of the nuclear war are lower than ever before. On the other hand, phenomenon of sub-conventional war, transnational militancy and terrorism has been on the rise. One of the main reasons for this has been to proliferation and diffusion of small arms and light weapon across the world.<sup>24</sup> The basic problem is not that there are sophisticated small arms and light weapons but that the weapons developed and designed for use by the military forces of the state have diffused to non-state actors.

There are symbolic linkages between commercial interest in developed countries dealing with drug traffic, organized crime and arms traffic and the ethno-nationalist upsurge in various developing countries. The present trend of expanding international terrorism is helped by the increased availability of the latest technology to terrorist groups. The extent and reach of terrorism has posed serious threats to world peace.<sup>25</sup> The international community therefore will have to cooperate in sharing timely intelligence about the movements and plans of terrorist groups; and take action against professional mercenary groups which are selling expertise, arms and explosives to them.

# **Foreign Policy Responses—Indian Efforts at a Pragmatic Reorientation**

The changes in the international security environment and the power structure, in the past one and a half decades, have been so revolutionary that most of the foreign policy and strategic establishments including those in India, are still trying to comprehend their emerging contours. India's foreign policy had to respond to three significant challenges:

1. The task of resolving the contradiction inherent in consolidating itself as a pluralistic nation-state through the more difficult, more gradual and rational processes of democracy.

- 2. The task of resolving the contradictions between its sense of self and self-importance, in contrast with the way that the rest of the world perceives India, in terms of its economic and military strengths and strategic motivations.
- 3. The task of reconciling the moral vision on the basis of which we wish the international order to be structured, with the non-moral requirements of real 'politik'.<sup>26</sup>

While meeting the fundamental national interests and adhering to moral terms of reference, India tried to achieve these objectives and has emerged as a responsible and mature country in the world. The events of post 1989 world brought forth new equations and new priorities. India's defence and security experts started gearing up for addressing to the new issues generated by the external events. Deliberations began as to how India could best plan and prepare for the future and how it could position itself to make the most of the changing configurations of global power. As India enters the 21st century many new pragmatic trends have been discernible.

# **Responding to Economic Challenges: Economization of Foreign Policy**

We live in an era in which world trade is expanding at a faster pace than world output, capital flows are overwhelming, daily transactions in foreign exchange are rapidly increasing. The WTO regime is endeavoring to continuously expand the scope of multilateralism, not only in the trade of goods and services, but also in the area of investment. The spectacular progress of information technology has transformed the world financial markets into virtually a single entity. In such a rapid globalizing environment, India cannot keep itself aloof and alienated. Recognizing the crucial link between globalization and economic growth India is revitalizing its efforts to get the best out of the inevitable process of globalization.

In India critical actions like government deregulation, the advent and spread of new information technologies and the gradual opening up of financial market have together played crucial roles. India vigorously adopted liberalization, privatization, marketization and modernization through the 1990's. It was clear that the inability to compete economically in the capitalist world system cannot be compensated by any other power resource. India has identified foreign investment promotions as an important strategy in achieving the objectives of increasing industrial production and creating employment opportunities. A relevant aspect of all these investment related activities are the presence of a large number of transnational and other foreign companies in India. The prevention of the abuse of monopoly power by the MNCs and a reasonably long time, for creating a level playing field to ensure the sustenance of the national firms, is very vital issues in India today.<sup>27</sup>

As India enlarges its share of world trade, its voice in world councils will also gather weight. To this effect India is trying to build up new trade relations and strengthen the existing ones. One such endeavour has been the look-east policy in which South-East Asia, especially ASEAN, has been identified as central to India's policy in Asia-Pacific region. A two pronged approach has been adopted, consisting of efforts at increasing economic interaction (trade, investment, science and technology, tourism etc.) and forging defence links with several countries of this region.<sup>28</sup> As a result of the growing understanding between India and the ASEAN countries, India has been accepted as the full dialogue partner of ASEAN in 1995. Similarly, the launching of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC) is historic for India, as it brings together the countries of Asia, Africa, and Australia. The formation of this trading bloc among the countries of Indian Ocean Rim will provide market access to India's exports. Though India has vital stake in the evolution of SAARC as a full-fledged economic grouping; at the same time, there are attempts at seeking association with European Union (EU) and the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).

A primary task of our economic diplomacy has been the moulding of economic strength, vitality and ability to adopt and adjust to changing scenarios and to further our national efforts with the aim of making India economically strong and less vulnerable to international pressures.

# **Good Neighbourliness: Forging Regional Cooperation in South Asia**

Geographical proximity, common language, common culture and inheritance of common physical and institutional infrastructure are the unique characteristics of the South Asian region. By definition, South Asia includes seven states-Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. However, there has been very little in common between the threat perceptions and security outlooks of India and the other South Asian states.<sup>29</sup> India's largest size in South Asia is accountable for this. Almost all the neighbouring countries suffer from an identity crisis vis-a-vis India. Therefore India's relations with its neighbours have been characterised by a big brother-small neighbour syndrome. In an attempt to strengthen their defences against India, the states of South Asia, especially Pakistan, have invited external powers into the region. One of the challenging tasks of India's foreign policy has been the generation of trust and mutual confidence with its South Asian neighbours.

The most significant development in the subcontinent during the 1990s has been an increased emphasis by India on good 'neighbourly' policies. At the heart of this policy were the efforts of the former Prime Minister I.K. Gujral and his so-called 'Gujral doctrine.'<sup>30</sup> This was a policy of giving unilateral concessions to neighbours and promoting people-to-people contact. Treaties were signed with Nepal, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, as part of this doctrine. In the post-cold war era, three major factors have helped push India into developing a new policy towards the neighbours. First has been the economic imperative. As India and her neighbours launched themselves on the path of economic reform and globalization, the importance of economic cooperation became obvious to most of them. Second was the political imperative. There was a growing recognition in India that aspirations for a global political role would remain unrealized, so long as India was engrossed in regional conflicts. Third has been the balance of power imperative.<sup>31</sup> The smaller neighbours have allowed external powers to checkmate India within the subcontinent. Changing this negative balance of power dynamic called for an initiative based not on absolute symmetry, but on facilitating the development of common interests with each of the smaller neighbours.

India has looked up to SAARC as one of the greatest confidence building measures in South Asia. Its initiatives have been held hostage to political problems and misunderstandings between its members. But that is no reason why avenues of cooperation in trade and commerce, education and culture, sharing resources such as power and water, should not be exploited actively. India has been a persistent supporter of economic cooperation through SAARC. It is India's firm belief that by building common markets and facilitating exchange of human and natural resources, a climate of trust between member countries can become a reality.<sup>32</sup> Political and security problems would then become much easier to resolve.

## **Indo-Pak Relations: Efforts at Building Confidence**

Throughout the last decade India was severely tested in dealing with a newly aggressive Pakistan.<sup>33</sup> It sought to cope with Pakistan in the radically changed context that brought nuclear weapons into the bilateral equation and increased Pakistan's ability to intervene in the disputed State of Jammu & Kashmir, through what has now come to be called cross-border terrorism. The history of INDO-PAK relations since 1990 is a history of ups and downs. From a limited conventional war to many summits that struggled to define a new framework of peace, the canvas has been full. In the ever-volatile environment of the South Asian neighbours, the nuclear dimension was added in May 1998. Both India and Pakistan entered the group of nuclear weapons states. Pakistan may well have restored the strategic balance in South Asia, but in doing so, it embarked on a nuclear weapon race. The logic on either side where the deterrence capacity of nuclearization, wherein the chances of war between India and Pakistan would reduce. However in mid 1999 a limited border conflict erupted in the 150 Km sector of the Line of Control (LOC) in the Kargil area of Kashmir. India accused Pakistan of violating the LOC agreements. Pakistan replied that the infiltrators where the Mujahideens, over which Islamabad had little control. The Kargil episode has raised a question mark on the distinct limits to nuclear power and deterrence. This demonstrates to India, that such low intensity conflicts will be the shape of crises, which are likely to confront the neighbours in this century.<sup>34</sup>

With the congress led Government taking over in 2004, efforts began towards a creative approach to the Kashmir issue. This was in the form of the various confidence-building measures, which the BJP led Government (Lahore declaration, Agra summit, Bus diplomacy) had initiated and the new Government endeavoured to take further. Among the proposals were nuclear CBMs like Indian Pakistan to notify each other before flight testing of ballistic missiles, all captured fishermen to be released, India's suggestion of Kashmiris to be allowed to visit the religious shrines in POK and India's proposal to setting up border trading points for Kashmiris in the LOC.<sup>35</sup> In June 2004 however, the Indian intelligence agencies reported streams of highly trained militants crossing the border. There was photographic evidence that the militant training camps have become active again in the interiors of POK.<sup>36</sup>

Regardless of the negotiating stances of the parties concerned it has to be acknowledged that both the countries have some fundamental objective. While India wants cessation of all violent and terrorist acts, Pakistan considers the acquisition of Jammu & Kashmir as an unfinished agenda of partition. While India and a section of people of Kashmir are convinced that a final solution can be brought through political negotiations, Pakistani militant groups believe in continuing Jihad. Therefore, India cannot unilaterally succeed in building an atmosphere of peace and confidence. Efforts are needed from both the sides.

# **Cultivating the Big Powers: Relation with America, China and Russia**

Whe India found itself on the losing side of the Cold War at the turn of 1990s, she quickly set about the task of reorienting her relation with the great powers. Although the US has been the focus of foreign policy in the 1990s, there have also been efforts at revitalizing relations with powers like Russia, Western Europe, China and Japan. This was owing to the pragmatic approach of maximizing the room for maneuver in the world.

With such objective India is set about building alliances and reviving functional cooperation with Russia. The density of Indo-Soviet economic relationship during the Cold War and the new importance of Russia as the provider of important advanced civilian technologies in the space and atomic sectors made it imperative to build a special relationship with Russia. The recent visit of Russian president Vladimir Putin stands out as a landmark. A new vista of bilateral cooperation has opened up in diverse fields of defence, high-tech, energy security etc. Similarity of views on issues such as role of the UN, international terrorism and combating trends towards unipolarity in world affairs, were reiterated. A significant advance is the formalizing of Russia's, India's and China's trilateral initiative of mutual consultation and coordinated action.<sup>37</sup> This subject was figured for the first time in the Indo-Russian joint declaration.

Another important Indian relationship that had undergone significant political change after the Cold War is the one with China. The Sino-Indian normalization picked up momentum in the late 1980s and has now become a genuine rapprochement. It is true that since the 1962 border war, a number of factors appeared to limit the possibilities for improved Sino-Indian relations. These included the unsettled boundary issue, the Indian fears of the rising position of China and the special relationship between Pakistan and China. It was apparent that China was sustaining support for nuclear and missile programmes of Pakistan. There has been increased political cooperation of China and Indian neighbours to balance India within the subcontinent. Despite these obstacles, since 1980s effort at normalization began in the real earnest. Border talks, the setting up of Joint Working Groups on the boundary question, border trade and numerous agreements for economic cooperation and technology transfer were signed.

The dramatic event of India conducting nuclear tests in May 1998 changed the climate of confidence building. This was especially because China was described by India as a major security threat. Fortunately for India, China's initial reactions did not last for long. China has gradually accepted India's potential as a rising nuclear and economic power. This new thinking was evident in China's attitude of neutrality in the Indo-Pakistan conflict in Kargil in 1999.<sup>38</sup> The changing dynamics of the global and Asian situation has created opportunities for strengthening Sino-Indian relations in the new millennium.

Throughout the last decade of the 20th century, redefining the relationship with the United States has emerged as the principal objective Indian policy. There is agreement that substantive engagement of the US is a critical national goal. The 1980s and early 1990s saw divergence of US and India on security issues like the signing of NPT, CTBT, demilitarization of the Indian Ocean and American military assistance to Pakistan. The United States adopted policies of denial of dual-use technologies to the non-adherents of nuclear weapon regimes.<sup>39</sup> Nevertheless, even during these years the rising potential of Indian economic advance was not missed by America. India's indigenous efforts at technological and military development, India's mastering of critical strategy technologies such as guidance and control systems, navigation systems, ballistic missile programmes, convinced the US that India cannot be ignored or side lined in order to favour Pakistan.

The beginning of strategic partnership became evident in trade ties, economic cooperation and joint army exercises as well as joint naval exercises in the Indian Ocean. The issue of nuclear proliferation still presented a divide. When India joined the nuclear club in May 1998 America's initial reaction was an angered response in the form of economic sanctions. Gradually however, the US is showing a better understanding of Indian capabilities. In the nuclear reality of weaponized deterrence in South Asia, America can moderate the situation by maintaining equilibrium between India and Pakistan and restoring new tests and deployment.

Post-9/11 and post-Iraq, the world has moved into an era marked by end of alliances but beginning of new strategic relationships. Asia today presents enormous opportunities as well as challenges to the US.<sup>40</sup> If the US is the largest economy in the world today; the next three largest economic powers belong to Asia-China, Japan and India. These developments are likely to further enhance India's significance in American policy calculations. The Asian regional agenda is going to be dominated by issues such as ballistic missile defence, American shift of strategic focus from Europe to Asia, future of multilateral institutions etc. Hence the Asia-Pacific region has emerged as a prime area of US concern. This will have direct implications for India. It makes a lot of strategic sense for Washington to befriend India,<sup>41</sup> as there is no direct clash of interest after the nuclear issues have been removed. India's credentials as a responsible power especially with regard to WMD capabilities and India being on the forefront of fighting terrorism, all leads to a greater congruence of interests between America and India.<sup>42</sup>

# **India Enters the Nuclear Club**

Indian threat perceptions have for long time revolved around Pakistan and China. China became a nuclear power in 1964. Pakistan has all along remained important in the strategic game plan of America as well as China. Increasing US and Chinese assistance to Pakistan in the fields of defence and missile technology, as well as nuclear know how, have been apparent. Since 1995, pro-nuclearists started putting forth their logic of deteriorating security environment of India. In the post-Cold War world, nuclear deterrence according to them provided a new rationale of security. Moreover India had rejected the NPT and CTBT on the grounds that they were partial and half hearted measures of arms control and a means of perpetuating nuclear hegemony of a selective few. In this backdrop, India conducted Pokhran II test and crossed the nuclear Rubicon (May 1998). Pakistan did not take long to equal-up. The pro-nuclearists supported the logic of greater security and sufficient deterrence against all possible threats.

The anti-bomb lobby in India feels that the costs of nuclear deployment are much too high.<sup>43</sup> Mere possession of the bomb according to them does not constitute deterrence. Credible deterrence requires the construction and maintenance of a retaliatory second strike capability. This includes the availability of delivery vehicles that can hit the targets designated for punishment. It also entails survivability of a retaliatory force, which includes the spreading out of nuclear weapons, early warning and an effective system of command and control. This would entail enormous expenditure and burden on the Indian state. Technologically, moreover, India is yet not prepared to venture into the construction of the post-nuclear structures. The futility of the deterrence logic has also been put forward. It is stated that though chances of an open nuclear or large scale conventional warfare have been reduced, the chances of limited probe (small wars like Kargil) and controlled pressure (cross-border infiltration, terrorism, vicious political propaganda etc) have increased.

The national security and advisory board has proposed a Nuclear Doctrine for India. The doctrine commits India to a No-First Use of nuclear weapons, a credible minimum (deterrent) retaliatory capability, as well as India's continued commitment to total nuclear disarmament. Newer trends in global economic interdependence and terrorist threats stemming from non-state actors have made it obvious that a nuclear-armed India cannot deter cross-border terrorism.44 Therefore India's nuclear policy must be viewed in the broader international context. India is likely to remain a nuclear-weapon power, until the other nuclear weapon states agree to comprehensive nuclear disarmament.

# ❑❑ **The Road Ahead**

Despite a high level of economic interdependence and the revolutionary technological changes introduced by the information age, the international system depicts the typical characteristics of the sovereign state system. Global politics in this state-centered power driven system clearly works to the advantages of the powerful. With major states assertively promoting their interests and national security considerations overshadowing collective security interests, power and force are going to stay at the heart of international relations. Regardless of the claims for an emerging equitable and fair economic order, the international economic relations are going to be dominated by the industrially and technologically advanced countries. Their aim would be to create a globalized free market economy and to acquire access and control over raw material and natural resources of the world.<sup>45</sup>

These are the broad trends that India's foreign policy would have to deal with well into the 21st century. There is a need for establishing a pattern of relations with important emerging power centers of the world and fashioning a foreign economic policy, which would ensure the necessary financial technological and foreign trade inputs to meet India's developmental needs. The emerging world order has in no way changed the validity and relevance of the Non-Alignment, namely, independence of judgment and action in international affairs. The argument, made in certain circles that with the end of Cold War India should give up Non-Alignment, shows little understanding either inthe meaning of Non-Alignment or of the world situation. The Non-Aligned movement stands committed to securing a restructuring of international economic relations with a view to make these fair and equitable to all.<sup>46</sup>

Today India finds itself in a highly competitive, risky and lethal global strategic environment. There is a need to address the challenges posed by unconventional conflicts. Indirect wars such as covert or proxy wars are gaining ascendancy. Terrorism is another threat, which makes it imperative to develop instrumentalities to curb this transnational crime with the help of pro-active and inert-active diplomacy, both at the regional and global levels. India can take initiative in forging international cooperation against terrorism and use the SAARC forum to combat the problem.

India has begun to experiment with the politics of balance of power in a complex world. This involves efforts to build special relationships at the bilateral levels with most of the major powers. Further, while it remains hesitant about military alliances it might not be averse to become a part of *ad-hoc* coalitions aimed at specific security objectives in the Indian Ocean region and Asia. India will have to exert itself in the Asia-Pacific to help manage its security dilemma. The ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is the most important and active kernel of a cooperative security system for the Asia-Pacific. India must insist on its presence in the forum and to articulate an agenda for cooperation in the extended region. India is also a part of the global ecology. The reduction of the ozone layer, atmospheric warming, the rise of Ocean levels and the depletion of the great rain forests could devastate the planet. The greatest challenge, therefore, is sustainable development. Surely this will require a cooperative and coordinated effort across national boundaries.

India has reiterated its unrelenting faith in the United Nations as a prominent institution of multilateralism. No single nation or group of nations can expect to find a solution to the world's problems. With the American intervention in Iraq in March 2003, the political functions of the UN came under heaviest siege. However, the world is still left with innumerable 'Problems without Passport'<sup>47</sup> threats such as weapons of mass destruction, contagious diseases, chronic starvation, human rights abuse etc. These global challenges can be addressed by the world organization alone. India, therefore, realizes the need for stressing the reform and structuring of the United Nations. With the expansion of permanent membership of the Security Council being suggested, India has also staked her claim.

India with the help of other nations must begin on a thorough going technologically feasible and financially affordable plan that will make nuclear abolition operationally believable. It is necessary, therefore, to go beyond the formulaic stand on nuclear weapons. These emerging trends outline a world where there are more opportunities for rising powers, to play more relevant and independent role. India's current reality and future potential, endows it with a global importance that can grow over the years. India should, therefore, endeavour to develop on these lines in the decades ahead.

# **Notes and References**

1. Shanta Nedungadi Vanna, "India's Foreign Policy in an era of Change", in S.K. Chaube and Susheela Kaushik eds., *Indian Democracy at the Turn of Century,* New Delhi, Kalinga Publishers and Distributors, 1999, p. 281.