# **1 Situating ethics in governance** Citizens and administration

In conventional public administration, citizens remain recipients and hence they hardly have a role to play in governance. Endorsed by the Weberian notion of hierarchical bureaucracy, public administration, in its earlier articulation, did not seem to pay adequate attention to the role that the citizens are expected to play in public governance. Public administration was hardly public in sum and substance. The idea was challenged off and on; and there were changes in the texture and functioning of public administration as history progressed. One of the fundamental changes that was brought about as a result of politicoideological campaigns in various phases of history was about the nature of public governance in which the role of citizens began to be recognized as integral to its functioning. It was made possible in a changed environment where top- down administrative values no longer remained as attractive as before. Instead, the idea of the 'bottom- up' administration, entailing the critical importance of the public in decision making, seemed to have become theoretically far more acceptable. The idea that citizens are important in governance is not new; what is new now is the effort towards articulating this idea in practice. Citizens need to be taken into account seriously while formulating policy decisions: they do not remain mere cogs in a machine, but are actively involved in running the machine in accordance with their ideological priorities.

 Citizens' involvement in decision making is critical to ethics in governance. In order to make administration transparent, the role of stakeholders can never be undermined because it was they who, being faced by the reality, know what is better for their well- being. Only then are administrative decisions likely to be based on an appropriate understanding of the reality, something usually sacrificed given the appreciation of the top- down strategy of public administration. The aim is to create and also sustain an administration that is responsive enough to arrive at effective decisions for public well- being. What is basic here is to evolve mechanisms whereby citizens' views are respected while making decisions pertinent to their well- being both individually as well as collectively. This is an important aspect of governance in India, in its new *avatar* that has attracted immense attention. By concentrating on these instruments of citizens' empowerment in the changed socio- ideological circumstances, the chapter provides an elaborate study not only of these mechanisms but also their contextual roots in

India's volatile political milieu. The fundamental argument that the chapter makes relates to the consolidation of newer devices for citizens empowerment that are being meaningfully utilized to make public governance sensitive to the demands and also requirements of the stakeholders. These instruments seems to have become effective, the argument further underlines, because of a favourable socio- political environment supporting proactive citizens as integral to democratic political processes.

## **Interactions between citizens and administration**

Being a citizen is more than a status; it is about the entitlement to the rights and privileges of a person that ensures a quality life. So, citizenship is more than a set of rights and obligations; it is an innate orientation for the well- being of state and society. The ancient Greeks realized that, and the polity of Athens institutionalized citizenship through its diverse associations, councils and authorities within the urban framework had evolved. In that environment, citizenship, in principle, meant participation in the co- production of policies. At the basis of this participation stood a belief in the 'happy veracity' of man. However, in modern times the status aspects of citizenship are stressed heavily and the qualitative aspects of citizenship appear to be grossly underestimated. In their wake, public administration as a discipline, was, until recently, more focused on the improvement of state apparatuses than on the development of citizenship and the involvement of citizenship in the making of governmental policies.1 This dominant trend is responsible for the alienation of citizens and thus there is an increase in citizens' grievances against administration. Against this background, the present chapter deals with some significant dimensions of interaction between citizens and administration, namely citizens' perception about administration, pre- conditions for citizens' centric administration, people's participation in administration, forms of public accountability and the role of public grievance redress machinery in India.

 In a democracy, the administration–citizen relations are significant because the support and consent of the governed is a prerequisite for the sustenance of representative government. The state and in actual terms the administration has the major responsibility of providing the major amenities of life – education, health, employment opportunities, improved means of transport and infrastructure, etc. All this affects the individual and collective life of a very large number of people concerned. In public administration, two noticeable trends have emerged in recent times. First, there has been a large growth in the size of governmental administration as well as a vast expansion in its powers and activities. Second, in the wake of the spread of general education, and political and social awakening, there has been a rise in the expectations of people of the administration. The relationship between law and public opinion in a democracy was discussed by A V Dicey at about the end of the last century.2 The importance of the subject grew sharply after the Second World War, thanks to the growth of welfare as well as socialist ideologies in the new states. People in affluent societies are growing less concerned about the old concept of liberty than about a love of material comfort and pleasure. The focus of the relationship between state and society has shifted from political liberty to economic prosperity and social justice. The state has expanded its political base through universal adult franchise. Administration has, therefore, of necessity penetrated into every aspect of civic life. The bulk of the citizens who are voters and beneficiaries of state services are more keen to get services supplied than on the subtle aspects of how they get them.3 The position of the citizens from being mere recipients of administrative help and services has now shifted to their being the prime movers in the affairs of governance.

 There are different ways in which citizens interact with the administrative agencies in day to day life. Mohit Bhattacharya illustrates five categories4 of such interactions. These could be in the form of:

- *Clients*: In this form, citizens seek to obtain benefits or services from governmental agencies. For example, a patient visits a governmental hospital for a medical check or treatment.
- *Regulatees*: As a regulatee, the public interacts with many government agencies such as the police, income tax authorities, licensing authorities etc.
- *Litigants*: As litigants, the public moves the court against 'unjust' actions of public agencies. For example, people seek redress from the court when the motor vehicles authority may be delaying issuance of car licenses.
- *Participants*: In this form people become direct participants in decision making in public agencies at different levels. For example, parents become members of a school's guardians' committee or an irrigation project associates the farmers with the different decision- making processes of the project.
- *Cutting edge encounters*: In this form people approach agencies that are responsible for day today primary services and facilities to the public. For example, people approach the municipal employees for water, electricity, and sanitation facilities.
- *Protesters*: besides the above five, there could be another form of interaction – people as protesters. People often interact with government agencies on public policy as protesters, opposing the injustice in government policy and action. For example, people oppose the construction of a dam in their locality.

Thus, the citizens in day- to-day life constantly interact with the administration. The contact may be for varied purposes; for example, it may be for getting basic services such as water, electricity and health services or it may be for getting a driving license or income tax return from the income tax department. Sometimes people get an opportunity to directly participate in policy- making and implementation of a governmental agency or project. When people do not get services in time or are harassed by public authorities, they seek redress of their grievances from the court and when they do not see justice coming from any side they resort

to protesting or criticizing the unjust policy and action of the government. Through these happy or unhappy interactions, citizens form opinions about public administration.

## **Citizens' perception about administration**

Though, ideally speaking, the interaction between citizens and administration is supposed to be trustworthy and purposeful, in reality, it is observed that this is always plagued by conflicts, stresses and strains. Discontent among the citizens, which is due to the result of a wide disparity between the performance of administration and popular expectations, has become a normal feature. The general feeling that persists among the people is that the policies are cumbersome, or the processes of administration are found to be unjust. Yet another important problem is the deterioration in the standards of honesty and integrity in both politics and administration due to corruption. Rigid observance of rules and regulations, non- acknowledgement of complaints and the inordinate delay in the disposal of various matters account for the lack of faith of the public in administration.

 Research findings on citizen–administration relations in India reveal interesting data, and information studies on 'Police Administration' by Davis H Bayley (1969), 'Rural Development' by Rakesh Hooja (1978) and 'Urban Government' by V Jagannadhan (1978) reveal citizens' perceptions about public administration in India. According to Mohit Bhattacharya, the general perceptions of the people about administration that emerge out of these studies include:

- unhelpful attitude of officials especially lower level functionaries
- inordinate delay and waiting period
- favouritism in administration
- need for middlemen (brokers) to get things done
- citizens' ignorance about procedures involved in getting things done
- rich–poor discrimination in administration: the rich having access to administration and the general tendency of officials to avoid the poor and underplay their needs and interests.5

A recent study by the Centre for Media Studies shows that a majority of citizens are not satisfied with the delivery of public services. In seven out of the eleven departments covered by the study, less than one- third of the citizens are satisfied with the services delivered. In fact, in most needs- based services, such as the police, judiciary and municipalities, (which enjoy a greater discretion and power), not even 20 per cent of the households are satisfied with the services. Even in essential services such as the PDS (food distribution system), hospitals, and electricity and water supplies, a mere 30–40 per cent of the households are happy with the services.6

 Thus, administration in India is generally perceived to be unresponsive, insensitive and corrupt. W A Robson observes that

In mind of average citizen, bureaucracy still suffers from traditional defects associated with it. These are an excessive sense of self- importance on the part of officials or an undue idea of the importance of their office, an indifference towards the feelings of the convenience of the individual citizens, mania for regulations, formal procedures and a failure to recognize relations between the governors and the governed as an essential part of democratic process.7

The sixth central pay commission's (2008) comments in this connection are worth noting:

For the common man, bureaucracy denotes routine and repetitive procedures, paper work and delays. This, despite the fact that the Government and bureaucracy exist to facilitate the citizens in the rightful pursuit of their legal activities. Rigidities of the system over centralization of powers, highly hierarchical and top down method of functioning with a large number of intermediary levels delaying finalization of any decision, divorce of authority from accountability and the tendency towards micromanagement, have led to a structure in which form is more important than substance and procedures are valued over end results and outcomes. Non- performance of the administrative structures, poor service quality and lack of responsiveness, and the subjective and negative abuse of authority have eroded trust in governance systems which needs to be restored urgently.8

 In its visits to the states, the second Administrative Reforms Commission (2009) had several occasions to meet and hear from the public and most of the observations by citizens were about the poor quality of services provided by the government, the indifferent attitude of government servants, corruption and abuse of authority and lack of accountability. A common complaint pertained to excessive red tape- ism and the long time taken to get even routine work done. The Commission, in its twelfth report, identifies the following five barriers to citizen- centric administration in India:

- wooden, inflexible, self- perpetuating and inward looking attitude of the civil servants
- lack of accountability of civil servants
- red tape- ism
- ineffective implementation of laws and rules
- low levels of awareness of the rights and duties of citizens.9

The reason for administration not being citizen- centric can be attributed to the attitude and work of some government servants, the deficiencies in existing institutional structures and also to the lack of awareness about rights and duties on the part of the citizens.

## **Pre- conditions for citizen- centric administration**

The poor image of government in the minds of large sections points towards inefficient and ineffective administration. This highlights the need for substantially reforming our governance systems. The former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in his civil services day speech (2007) observed:

It is in this context that 'reform of government' becomes relevant. 'Administrative Reforms' is a phrase that has been used widely to mean many things. It is used by some to mean change of any kind to deal with government problems of any description. Some regard 'administrative reform' merely as a means of 'making the government work' better. Others in fact see 'reform' as 'less government'. I view the reform of government as a means of making citizens central to all government activities and concerns and reorganizing government to effectively address the concerns of the common people.10

An analysis of the barriers to citizen- centric administration reveals that there are several pre- conditions that must be fulfilled in order to make administration citizen- centric. Some of the preconditions are discussed below.

## **Accountability**

Accountability is defined as the state of being accountable, liable or answerable. To be accountable means to be obliged to report, explain or justify something. It ensures that something is carried out as expected. Accountability is a key requirement of good administration. It means public servants must be accountable to the public. They are not only accountable to the questions asked by the people but also they have to respond to demands and provide services to the people.

#### **Accessibility**

A good administration has to be accessible to the people. If people have any problem, administrative officials should be ready to listen to them and accordingly respond to their problems. There has to be no fear in the mind of the people regarding the status and rigidity of the bureaucracy. It also requires that there should be no discrimination and the poor have easy access to the administration.

## **Transparency**

Transparency is an essential pre- condition for good administration. It is the antonym of secrecy, which is the traditional hallmark of public administration. It implies that the governmental policies and functioning are known to the larger society. Transparency means that information is freely available to and directly accessible by those who will be affected by such decisions and their enforcement. It also means that enough information is in easily understandable forms. Transparency enables citizens to keep themselves informed about the policies of the government, the rights that they have and what they should expect as service from the government. Right to information and citizens' charters are means of ensuring transparency in administration.

# **Participatory**

Promoting citizen- centric administration also implies giving a voice to citizens in the governance process. It means involvement of people in administrative activities, particularly the participation of the beneficiaries of the developmental activities, both at the formulation and implementation stages, for the success of programmes. People's participation is also an important safeguard against the abuse of administrative authority. It is a method of tapping human and material resources for development. Meaningful participation by citizens in governance can be promoted through *Panchayati Raj* institutions, *Bhagidari* programmes and involving citizen groups in certain aspects of governance.

# **Responsiveness**

Responsive administration is an apparently moral concept in public administration in as much as it calls for the accountability of public functionaries directly to the people. It is a micro- level concept, deriving its credibility and validity from the delivery system of a country's public administration. By being responsive, governmental institutions gain 'legitimacy' in the public realm, which will automatically ensure their wider acceptance and, thus, effectiveness in governance. Responsive administration also entails a mechanism for redress of grievances.

## **Effectiveness and efficiency**

Success of an administrative system also depends on the effective and efficient delivery of services to the people. Effectiveness is the extent to which an objective or goal is achieved. If an organization has successfully achieved its objectives, it is considered effective. Effectiveness is thus a matter of comparing results with intentions. Efficiency on the other hand refers to the process by which the organization maximizes its objectives with the minimum use of resources.

 In addition to the above- mentioned necessary pre- conditions of citizen- centric administration, decentralization and delegation of policies, adoption of modern technology, process simplification and integrity of the civil service are other features and norms of successful administration. In this connection, the words of Dr S Radhakrishnan, the then Vice- President of India, are worth noting, on the occasion of the First Annual Day of the Indian Institute of Public Administration

on 20 November 1959. He wanted administration to be fair to all manners of people and that the administrators must feel that they were not there merely to lord it over the people but 'they are essentially servants of the people'. He also stated that 'administrators are not to regard themselves as a privileged class. They are not to grow into a bureaucracy'. The higher civil servants, Dr Radhakrishnan said, 'must understand the needs and aspirations of the common man and woman and try to protect them from the petty officials who are inclined to harass them and show their authority'. Above all he said, 'it is my great anxiety that in this country we "should have administrative integrity first, efficiency next, economy third" – with these conditions we will be able to build a happier Indian Society'. He thus placed integrity in administration above all other requirements for better governance.11

## **People's participation in administration**

People's participation in the administrative process is very basic to its success. It means the direct involvement of citizens in the process of administrative decision making, policy formulation and implementation. People's participation also means collective and continuous efforts by the people themselves in setting goals, pooling resources and taking action that aims at improving their living conditions. To William Morrow, the term 'citizen participation' means the direct participation of ordinary men and women, in contrast to public and private elites, in policy making. Furthermore, it is employed to focus on the direct participation of the underprivileged and unfranchised in decisions that affect their lives.12

Citizens' participation in governance embodies a shift in the development paradigm from citizens as the recipients of development to one that views them as active participants in the development process. Equally, it involves a shift from a 'top- down' to a 'bottom- up' approach to development, involving increasing decentralization of power away from the Union Government and closer to grassroots levels. The concept of citizens' participation in governance is essentially based on the premise that citizens have a legitimate role in influencing decision- making processes that affect their lives, their businesses and their communities. In other words, citizens' participation refers to the mechanism and modalities by which citizens can influence and take control over resources and decision making that directly impacts their lives. At the ideological level, direct citizens' participation in governance is seen as contributing to a healthy democracy, because it enhances and improves upon the traditional form of representative democracy to transform it into a more responsive and thus a more participative grassroots democracy. It is now widely accepted that active citizens' participation can contribute to good governance in the following ways:

- It enables citizens to make government accountable, more responsive, efficient and effective.
- It helps to make government programmes and services more effective and sustainable.

- It enables the poor and marginalized to influence public policy and service delivery to improve their lives.
- It helps the individual develop a sense of civic maturity; they become more educated, tolerant and compassionate, which finally helps in improving the quality of policy.
- It helps in recognizing that citizens have vital contributors to make to the betterment of public policy.
- It helps to promote healthy grassroots democracy.
- It promotes better understanding between government and the people.
- It keeps the governance transparent and thus deepens its propensity towards obedience.

 Peoples' participation in administration is not free from barriers, one of them being the existence of widespread inertia in the larger society resulting in apathy and passivity. In addition, under the name of people's participation, what may happen is a situation which William Morrow calls 'abdication', 'pacification', 'co- operation' and 'client- building'. Citizens' participation does not necessarily lead to the leaders representing their constituencies. Rather, they strike a tie- up with the local bureaucracy, which may silence them. The representatives, when interfacing with the bureaucrats represent their individual interest, not their constituencies' cause. It has also been observed that citizens' participation, when not prudently directed, may add to unnecessary delay in decision making and implementation, and finally increase red tape.13

 The fact that participatory efforts are occasionally perverted does not mean that the perversions make the participatory movement meaningless to its original purposes. Citizens' participation demands certain preconditions, which have been laid with a view to making citizens' participation more effective. These are: enlightened political leader; citizens should be knowledgeable and competent; conscientious civil servants; informed and co- operative general public; information required for taking decisions should be clear and precise; well- organized communication network; both authority and citizens must demonstrate willingness to take responsibility; a practical survey of the environment should be made; and participation at all levels – both rural and urban – is necessary for public participation.14

## **Bhagidari and Panchayati Raj as instruments for ethics in governance**

Participatory governance is a guarantee of less corruption in public administration; it creates conditions for the administration to become transparent in its true sense. As is shown in history, community- based governance is perhaps one of the best mechanisms to ensure ethics in public administration. In India, efforts have constantly been made to appreciate community involvement in decision making. Of all the nationalist activists who fought for participatory governance, Gandhi was the most prominent; his ideas and arguments were constitutionally

endorsed with the acceptance of the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth Amendment Acts in 1992. What is fundamental in these Acts is the insistence on localizing governance with the involvement of the communities. Instead of appreciating governance by a panoptical bureaucracy, the idea of localizing governance underlines the endeavour towards involving the stakeholders in deciding what is most appropriate for their quality survival in the area to which they belong.

*Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* governance are illustrative of the shift of the locus of governance to the community that generally remains 'peripheral' in the traditional Weberian conceptualization of hierarchical public administration. One can thus safely argue that participatory governance is the outcome of the deepening of democracy in India that is being articulated by peoples' participation not only in the decision- making process, but also in building a meaningful channel of communication between the government and governed. The process may not be very smooth because it is not easy for traditional governmental authorities to willingly abdicate power. One of the factors that brought about a change in 'the rather status quoist mindset' is perhaps the growing strength of 'the community' in the context of movements for democratization all over the world – a trend that is visible in *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* governance in India. These two forms of local governance are thus powerful ideas of not only rewriting the history of governance, but also of reinventing the theoretical tools by meaningfully articulating the role of the community in public governance, overcoming all conceivable barriers.

 In that sense, despite being localized, these instances have global repercussions in two significant ways: first, these examples are articulations of local experiences in which community and communicative dialogues become effective instruments of noticeable changes at the grassroots. Given the serious conceptual implications of such organically evolved forms of governance, it can be argued that community- driven governance is a powerful alternative, especially when the top- down model of public administration no longer remains as viable as it was in 'the age of hierarchy, when only those at the top of the pyramid had enough information to make informed decision'.15 Second, this comparative study also confirms that the Gandhian notion of self- governing village republics is not at all utopian, but a practical design for participatory governance. Being self- reliant and capable of managing their own affairs, the village republics remain, as Gandhi endorsed, the nurseries of civic virtues and are important institutional resources for their continuity.

 Conceptually, the idea of the village republic as a clear break with conventional hierarchical governance also has its resonance in the writings of classical liberals such as Rousseau, J S Mill and Henry Maine, among others. All of them converged on the point that the participatory governance that the village republic sought to execute was a powerful deterrent against authoritarianism. Along with obvious theoretical inputs which will help us understand comparable instances of organically linked forms of local governance, this comparative study provides an evidence- backed instance showing how organic participation creates an

enabling environment within which social entrepreneurs can spark participatory innovations, the most effective of which can have important lessons for scaled up interventions. Seeking to understand the critical interconnection between policies and institutions, this extensive comparative study provides meaningful cues to understand the processes of responsive governance as powerful incentives for collective involvement in activities for communal well- being. In other words, although the Indian example is distinctly textured, it has clear transcendental implications simply because it is rooted in a specific socio- economic and political context, the parallel of which is available elsewhere in the globe. In this sense, it is spatial but global in its theoretical implications.

# **Administrative accountability**

Accountability is an essential feature of all forms of democratic governments. The concept of accountability refers to the liability of government servants to give a satisfactory account of the use of official power or discretionary authority to the people. This is considered as an effective safeguard against the misuse of power and abuse of public authority. The notion of accountability carries two basic connotations: answerability, which stands for the obligation of public officials to inform about and explain what they are doing, and enforcement, i.e., the capacity of accounting agencies to impose sanctions on power holders who have violated their public duties. The substance of accountability according to Mohit Bhattacharya places at least four requirements on public administrators.16

- make laws work as intended with a minimum of waste and delay
- exercise lawful and sensible administrative discretion
- recommend new policies and propose changes in existing policies and programs as needed, and
- enhance citizen confidence in the administrative institutions.

# **Administrative accountability in India**

Administrative accountability in India is enforced by means of various controls. The purpose of control is to ensure that the public servants exercise their powers and discretion in accordance with laws and regulations. Broadly speaking, there are two types of administrative control; namely, internal and external control. The internal control operates from within the administrative machinery. The techniques of internal control are: budgetary system, hierarchical order, enquiries and investigations, pressure groups, press, and annual confidential reports. The external accountability over administration in India is maintained through legislative, executive and judicial control.

 The administration is made responsible to elected representatives because in a democracy the people are supreme. Thus the legislature has been given certain powers through the constitution and through conventions so that it is able to keep an effective check upon malpractice and abuse of authority by the

administration. The legislature applies a number of methods for controlling the administration, namely, asking questions during question hour, parliamentary discussions, parliamentary audit, no- confidence motions and complaints to the ombudsman. Executive control over the administration is another potent instrument in responsible government. The executive exercises control over the administration through a number of means and techniques, such as the power of appointment and removal, a rule making power, ordinances etc., civil service code, delegated legislation, budgetary system and making appeals to public opinion. Another important instrument through which administrative accountability is ensured is judicial control, which may take the shape of judicial review, statutory appeal to the courts and writs against the government. The primary objective of judicial control over the administration is the protection of the rights and liberties of citizens by ensuring the legality of administrative acts.17

# **Governance and the changing notion of accountability**

The accountability question needs to be seen against the background of the paradigm shift that has taken place in public administration. In the practical world of public administration today, two closely competing but contemporary paradigms seem to hold sway: one is 'new public management' and the other is known as 'good governance'. Historically, as we have already discussed, the liberal democratic set- up evolved basic mechanisms of accountability such as ministerial control, parliamentary debate, legislative committees, and the ombudsman system. In recent times there have been some major changes – a sort of paradigmatic shift – in the mode of public governance under the rubric of 'new public management', and good governance.

 In contemporary public administration, what is being advocated is a marketcentred, neo- liberal approach to governance under which its objectives are shifted to economic growth and productivity and its normative standards are redirected toward efficiency, competition, profit and value for money. This is a radical departure from the traditional norms and objectives of governance enhancing human progress, removing poverty and unemployment, safeguarding citizens' rights and guaranteeing justice and fairness. There has thus emerged a unique set of challenges to the realization of accountability in the current phase of public administrative changes everywhere. According to Haque, the contemporary changes in governance – towards efficiency, outcome, competition, value for money, and customer orientation – pose formidable political, managerial and methodological challenges to accountability in terms of three specific dimensions:

- the standards of accountability (accountability for what)
- the agents of accountability (accountability to whom)
- the means of accountability (how is accountability ensured).18

 So far as standards of accountability are concerned, these have, under the current mode of governance, become instrumental in nature, placing emphasis

more on procedural and economic criteria such as efficiency and productivity than on substantive concerns like equality and representation. In other words, the accountability of public governance for market- based economic performance does not connote its accountability for welfare and justice. Second, under the new dispensation, public governance is accountable for the effective delivery of its services to customers who can pay, while it may remain indifferent towards low- income or poor citizens who are not in a position to use such services due to their financial incapacity. Accountability under this consumerist mode of governance is to the private affluent customer rather than to the collective public, and, as a consequence, the economically underprivileged citizens, who often depend on the state for basic services, do not qualify as customers since they are not able to afford user charges. So, the customer- view tends to diminish citizens' rights vis- à-vis the state and excludes common citizens from the equation of public accountability. The third dimension – the means of accountability – has been under challenge in the context of neo- liberal mode of governance. Recent policy to do away with the permanent tenure of civil servants and introduce contract- based appointments makes public servants more vulnerable to political executives exercising control over job contracts and careers; ministerial control as a means of accountability makes public servants extremely loyal to ministers, ignoring their accountability to the common people.

 Thus, the issue of accountability in the context of the World Bank strategy of governance reveals the extent to which this idea is linked with the developed world. The primary concern here is to do away with 'dysfunctional and ineffective public institutions – broadly defined to include all institutions that shape the way public functions are carried out – (that) are seen to be at the heart of the economic developmental challenge'.19 In a nutshell, accountability of administration has shifted from the common people to the customers who can afford user charges.

## **Machinery for redress of public grievances**

According to the Chambers Dictionary, grievance means 'a ground of complaint, a condition felt to be oppressive or wrongful'. A grievance may arise out of nonfulfilment of certain demands and expectations. Demands may be related to policies of the government or to the performance of the administration in the implementation of policies framed by the government. A grievance is thus any sort of dissatisfaction that needs to be redressed. Some of the common grievances against the administration may be delineated in the following groups:

- corruption: demand and acceptance of bribery for doing or not doing things
- favouritism: doing or not doing things for obliging people in power or people who matter
- nepotism: helping the people of one's own kith or kin
- discourtesy: use of abusive language or other types of misbehaviour
- neglect of duty: not doing things that the law requires

- discrimination: ignoring poor and uninfluential citizens' genuine complaints
- delay: not doing things at the appropriate time
- maladministration: inefficiency in achieving the targets
- inadequate redress machinery: failure to attend to public complaints against administration.20

The basic principle of a grievance redress system is that, if the promised level of service delivery is not achieved, the citizen should have the right to recourse to a mechanism for redress. This mechanism should be well publicized, easy to use, and prompt and, above all, citizens must have faith that they will get justice from it.

# **Grievance redress mechanism in India**

The Government of India, State governments as well as various organizations under them have set up grievance redress mechanisms to look into the complaints of citizens. At the national level, there are primarily two designated nodal agencies in the Union Government handling these grievances:

- Department of Administrative reforms and Public Grievances, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
- Directorate of Public Grievances, Cabinet Secretariat.

Besides these nodal agencies, there are other institutional mechanisms, such as the central vigilance commission and the Lokayuktas, that have the mandate to look into complaints of corruption and abuse of office by public servants. Many organizations, for example, the Reserve Bank of India, have set up ombudsmen to look into grievances. Institutions such as the National and State Human Rights Commissions, National and State Women's Commission, the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and the National Commission for Scheduled Tribes also look into the complaints from the public in their prescribed areas. Today, with the increased awareness levels, the aspirations of citizen have gone up as have also the demand for prompt and effective resolution of their grievances. The role of some of the important institutions and other initiatives for redress of public grievance in India are discussed below.

# **The Central Vigilance Commission**

On the basis of recommendations made by the Committee on Prevention of Corruption, popularly known as the Santhanam Committee, the Central Vigilance Commission was set up by the Government of India in 1964. The Commission advises the Union Government on all matters pertaining to the maintenance of integrity in administration. It exercises superintendence over the working of the Central Bureau of Investigation – the principal investigating agency of the Union Government in anti- corruption matters – and also over the vigilance administration of various ministries and other organizations of the Union Government.

## **Lokpal and Lokayukta**

The first Administrative Reforms Commission had recommended the setting up of the *Lokpal*. The *Lokpal* Bill has been introduced several times in Parliament, but due to various reasons it has not been enacted into law. The *Lokpal* is supposed to be a watchdog over the integrity of ministers and members of parliament. The *Lokpal* Bill provides for the constitution of the *Lokpal* as an independent body to enquire into cases of corruption against public functionaries, with a mechanism for filing complaints and conducting enquiries, etc.

 After the recommendations of the first Administrative Reforms Commission, many States have constituted '*Lokayuktas*' to investigate allegations or grievances arising out of the conduct of public servants, including political executives, legislators, officers of the State government, local bodies, public enterprises and other instruments of government. A member of the public can file specific allegations with the *Lokayukta* against any public servant for enquiry. The *Lokayukta* can also initiate *suo- moto* enquiry into the conduct of public servants.

## **E- governance**

In the context of globalization, the recent conceptualization of E- governance or digital governance is of significance in public administration. Drawing on the latest information and communication technology (ICT), the aim of e- governance is to open up government processes and enable greater public access to information. Both digital and e- governance are of recent origin and there is not yet a universally acceptable definition. Digital/e- governance refers to the use of emerging ICT, such as the internet, web pages and mobile phones, to deliver information and services to citizens. It can include publication of information about government services on websites and citizens downloading application forms for these services. It can also deliver services digitally, such as the filling out of a tax form, renewal of licenses and processing of on- line payments. The purpose of digital government is to create 'super counters in [the government departments] and eliminate the endless maze citizens have to negotiate in going from door to door, floor to floor to obtain services'.21 Appropriate use of various means of ICT will usher in a new era in public administration by seeking to make governmental functioning more transparent and accessible. Thus, e- governance through a technological innovation has 'changed the basic character of governance – its operational methodology, functional style, ideological orientation, even the spirit, heart and soul'.22

 E- revolution in ICT has the potential to elevate the governance process to new levels. ICT facilitates efficient storing and retrieval of data, instantaneous transmission of information, processing information and data faster than the earlier manual systems, speeding up governmental processes, taking decisions expeditiously and judiciously, increasing transparency and enforcing accountability. It also helps in increasing the reach of government – both

geographically and demographically. Recognizing the increasing importance of electronics, the Government of India established the Department of Electronics in 1970. In India, digital governance was legalized by the *Information Technology Act* of 2000. The Act provides legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as 'electronic commerce which involves use of alternatives to paper- based methods of communication and storage of information to facilitate electronic filing of documents with the government agencies'.23 Defining electronic form as 'any information generated, sent, received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, microfilm, computer- generated micro- fiche or similar device', the Act accords legal sanction to devices which involve:

(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office, authority, body or agency, owned or controlled by appropriate government in a particular manner; (b) the issue or grant of any license, permit, sanction or approval by whatever name called in a particular manner, and (c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner.24

Legally endorsed, this Act is a powerful aid to ascertain ethics in governance because e- governance is certainly an attack on bureaucratic red tape- ism that causes unnecessary delay and corruption. It is a tool for achieving transparent governance that will also be user- friendly. The ultimate goal is to bring about better governance, termed as simple, moral, accountable, responsive and transparent (SMART),25 and to create space for the regular involvement of citizens who, as customers of public services, have no direct access to governmental activities through ICT. With this aid, the citizens can not only view on- line governmental acts, they can also provide significant inputs through emails and other electronic devices. Technology is, thus, an important tool for integrating citizens' inputs and transparency into one model. The ICT- based e- governance has ushered in a new era in government innovations with capacities to (a) reduce the cost of government, (b) increase citizens' input into government, (c) improve public decision making by receiving inputs from the wider sections of the population, and (d) increase the transparency of government transactions. The object of e- governance is 'to arm the citizens to act as watchdogs of the government'.26 In view of these useful (and also well- defined) functional characteristics, e- governance is also a very meaningful step towards combating corruption. By reducing discretionary powers, it curbs opportunities for arbitrary action. E- governance also empowers citizens by making their intervention in the transactions of government business regular through ICT.27 The project – e- Sewa – that began in West Godavari district in former Andhra Pradesh, India, is illustrative here. The project is a tool to 'bridge the digital divide in the rural areas', through extensive use of information technology 'for providing access to various citizen to citizen (C2C) and citizen to government (C2G) services to people in rural areas'. Managed by women's self- help groups, the project is a class by itself as it enables 'the local women- participants' to emerge as 'information leaders' who remain critical in realizing the goal of e- Sewa.28

# **Computerized grievance redress mechanisms**

A computerized public grievances redress and monitoring system developed by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances in collaboration with the National Informatics Centre was installed in the Department on 5 September 2001. All the grievances received are entered in this system and processed. The internet version of this software was launched on 31 May 2002. It allows the citizen to lodge and monitor the progress of his/her grievance on the internet. A comprehensive website of citizens' charters in the Government of India was also launched on the same day.

# **Citizens' charters**

The citizens' charter is an instrument that seeks to make an organization transparent, accountable and citizen friendly. The citizens' charter scheme in its present form was first launched in 1991 in the UK. The aim was to ensure that public servants were made responsive to the citizens they serve. A citizens' charter is basically a set of commitments made by an organization regarding the standards of service that it delivers. A citizens' charter is a public statement that defines the entitlements of citizens to a specific service, the standards of the service, the conditions to be met by users, and the remedies available to the latter in case of non- compliance with the standards. The charter empowers the citizens to demand the standards of service that were committed to. Thus, the basic thrust of citizens' charters is to make public services citizen- centric by ensuring that these services are demand driven rather than supply driven. In this context, the six principles of the citizens' charter movement as originally framed were:

- quality improving the quality of services
- choice for the users wherever possible
- standards specifying what to expect within a time frame
- value for the taxpayers' money
- accountability of the service provider (individual as well as Organization)
- transparency in rules, procedures, schemes and grievance redress.29

The citizens' charter, when introduced in the early 1990s, represented a landmark shift in the delivery of public services. The emphasis of the citizens' charter is on citizens as customers of public services. So far 111 central ministries/departments/organizations have formulated charters in India.

#### **Right to information**

Right to Information means the freedom of people to have access to government information. It implies that the citizens should have free access to all files and documents pertaining to the government's working process. Right to information has been seen as the key to strengthening participatory democracy and ushering in people- centred governance, as access to information can empower the citizens to demand and get information about public policies and actions, thereby leading to their welfare. Transparency in government organizations makes them function more objectively, predictably and also enables citizens to participate in the governance process effectively. In a fundamental sense, right to information is a basic aid to ascertain ethics in governance.

 The story of the campaign for transparency in governance cannot begin without the role that the Rajasthan- based Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS) played in its fruition. They, with their relentless drive for the cause, 'raised the [demand for right to information] in such a compelling manner that it changed the course on what had been seen for many years largely as an academic issue'.30 What had begun in Rajasthan soon developed into a national movement for transparency with the formation of the National Campaign for People's Right to Information in 1996, which was instrumental in spreading the campaign throughout the country. The result was the adoption of the *Right to Information Act* (RTI) in 2005 which, as its preamble suggests, provides for 'setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority'.31 It is also believed that the Right to Information is complementary to democracy that 'requires an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the governed'.32 This was reiterated by the Prime Minister of India who, while piloting the bill, forcefully argued that:

the Bill will see the dawn of a new era in our processes of governance, an era of performance and efficiency, an era which will ensure that benefits of growth flow to all sections of our people, an era which will eliminate the scourge of corruption, an era which will bring the common man's concern to the heart of all processes of governance, an era which will truly fulfill the hopes of the founding fathers of our Republic.33

As articulated in the Act, the main objectives are: (a) greater transparency in functioning of public authorities, (b) improvement in accountability and performance of the government, (c) promotion of partnership between citizens and government in decision- making processes, and (d) reduction of corruption in government departments. In an environment of declining ethics in public life, the aim and mission of the RTI Act remain most revolutionary.

 The Act provides for the proactive disclosure of information, the establishment of the Information Commission, the appointment of public information officers, procedures for getting information, etc. It is groundbreaking legislation empowering people and promoting transparency.

 Replacing the 1923 *Official Secrets Act*, the RTI Act is also an enabling provision for citizens to challenge the culture of secrecy in public administration. As an expert laments,

the culture of secrecy beginning from the colonial rule till the first six decades of independence fueled rampant corruption, in which large amount of public money was diverted from development projects and welfare schemes to private use through misuse of power by authorities. Lack of openness in the functioning of the government, provided a fertile ground for breeding inefficiency and lack of accountability in the working of the public authorities.34

In the light of the secrecy that had shrouded public governance in the past, the RTI Act is not only a refreshing mechanism, but also 'a potent weapon to fight against corruption, arbitrariness and misuse of power'.35 What is basic to the Act is the institutional guarantee of openness in the functioning of the government. As proactive citizens, people can now maintain a constant vigil over what is being undertaken as public governance; by being participants in governance, they also perform their role in such a way as to make democracy not merely a structure of governance but integrally connected with their being. So, the RTI Act sets in motion processes whereby the core values of democracy are also realized. In that respect, the scope of this groundbreaking legislation is much wider, compared with other laws which are meant to articulate government functioning in accordance with specific ideological inclinations, since it also contributes to the creation of an environment in which citizens remain active partners in shaping governance, following what they consider appropriate for their wellbeing. Hence the RTI Act was hailed as perhaps one of the most revolutionary pieces of legislation in independent India. It was reiterated by the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, which, while underlining the seminal contribution of the RTI Act in strengthening the ethical roots of governance in India, emphatically declared that:

the Right to Information law of 2005 signals a radical shift in our governance culture and permanently impacts all agencies of state. The effective implementation of this law depends on three fundamental shifts: from the prevailing culture of secrecy to a new culture of openness; from personalized despotism to authority coupled with accountability; and from unilateral decision making to participative governance.36

In two interrelated ways, the RTI Act seems to have unleashed significant processes curbing tendencies towards demeaning the institutional sanctity of governance. It has, on the one hand, reinforced the importance of the institutions holding public authority, which appeared to have been appropriated and

unchallenged in the past by strong and well- entrenched vested interests. This has become possible, on the other hand, because of the consolidation of a proactive citizenry that holds their democratic rights not for mere seasonal exercises in elections, but as instruments for improvement in their daily struggle for existence. The scene has undoubtedly undergone a sea change: ethics in governance is no longer a mere descriptive category, but one that is inspirational and rejuvenating for those seeking to reinvent governance as an empowering design regardless of one's social and economic location and political views and predilections. Change is visible and governance seems to have become a level playing field, unlike in the past when it was appropriated for personal gain. The task is far from complete, as the Second Administrative Reforms Commission warns, despite the fact that this law

provides us [with] a priceless opportunity to redesign the processes of governance, particularly at the grassroots level where the citizens' interface is maximum, . . . a lot more needs to be done to usher in accountability in governance, including protection of whistle blowers, decentralization of power and fusion of authority at all levels.37

It is common knowledge that there is hardly a magic wand to make an administration ethical by eradicating corruption overnight. And thus, a mere institutional guarantee can never be adequate to instil ethics in governance, which is the outcome of long- drawn-out processes. Nonetheless, the 2005 RTI Act is both a powerful legislative design and an effective legal means to support citizens' efforts towards seeking to build a system of governance that is averse to being used for private gains.

# **Role of voluntary agencies**

Voluntary agencies are critical in India's development, primarily since their role rests in translating citizens' initiatives into achievable goals. By forcing the state to be sensitive to its obligations to the community, they also become an important instrument for ethics in governance. In brief, voluntary agencies have the twin goals of laying out and also fulfilling community- specific developmental plans and programmes, and, in so doing, they also contribute to the creation of an environment in which the state cannot but be attentive to what citizens demand for their well- being. In India, they became integral to the planning processes from the adoption of the First Five Year Plan in 1951, although their role was formally recognized only in the Third Five Year Plan (1961–6). This categorically stated that voluntary agencies are immensely important since

properly organized voluntary efforts may go a long way towards augmenting the facilities available to the community or helping the weakest and the most needy to a somewhat better life. The wherewithal for this has to come from the time, energy and other sources of millions of people for whom voluntary organizations can find constructive channels suited through varying conditions in the country.38

What was unique in the above assumption was the shift in the policy direction. Not only is the importance of voluntary organizations highlighted but that they are crucial in helping those at the periphery has also been underlined. This was further reiterated by the 1966 Rural–Urban Relationship Committee that laid emphasis on the role of voluntary agencies in mobilizing community support for local developmental activities. As its report unequivocally suggests,

local voluntary organizations can be very helpful in mobilizing popular support and assistance of the people in the activities of local body. It is possible to maintain constant and close contact with the people through these organizations. The formation of a network of local organizations, like neighbourhood and *Mohalla* (localities) committees and citizens' forums, would be useful in mobilizing public participation.39

As the above report reiterates, their contribution was recognized in attaining the developmental goals of the Indian state, especially in rural areas where it had clearly failed to emerge as an agency for inclusive development. What was just an idea was amply illustrated in the Seventh Plan (1985–90) by stating that voluntary associations constituted an important source for development planning in India. The Seventh Plan took a major initiative in articulating an idea that was mooted in the Third Plan. Hence it has been argued that it took three decades 'to legitimize this role of voluntary agencies . . . [in] making people aware of the alternatives means – other than the monopolistic delivery system of the government – of fulfilling their aspiration- driven goals and missions'.40

 By formally recognizing the role of voluntary agencies in the development process, the Seventh Plan upheld the view that there were alternative ways of development, hitherto untapped, in which people's participation was crucial. Conceptually, this was a radical change: the state was just an actor in the gigantic processes of development and its success was contingent on the cooperation rendered by other actors involved in fulfilling the developmental aims of the state. What was most refreshing in this endeavour was to tap the indigenous initiatives and to translate them into concrete plans and programmes that were tuned to the villagers' needs.

 A brief scan of the role of voluntary agencies reveals that their contribution is significant in identifying the limitations of the state- centric development that tends to ignore India's diversity as a socio- economic unit. Not only do they assist the state in realizing its developmental goals, they also contribute to their planning and implementation by devising ways and means that are appropriate for those at the receiving end. Their role is increasingly being recognized, because voluntary agencies have the special advantage of knowing the local conditions, which will help them, plan better. Their contribution in making people aware of what the state has devised for them has also been appreciated.41 This is

a clear shift in policy perspective. That both the state and voluntary agencies draw on each other strikes a new balance in contemporary development strategies. The past patron–client network seems to have been replaced by a new design of development in which the role of proactive citizens has become far more critical than the government bureaucracy in framing and also executing developmental schemes.

 By being proactive partners in the processes of development, voluntary agencies are also important agents of ethics in governance in three interrelated ways: first, given the failure of the panoptical state to capture public interest at the grassroots, especially in a diverse socio- economic context, voluntary agencies provide powerful inputs while framing situation- specific and needs- based policy options. With their growing involvement in grassroots socio- political activities, they truly represent public interests, which would have been less significant to those making decisions had their input been absent. Second, the role of voluntary agencies remains critical in forcing the Indian state to fulfil its constitutional obligations to the citizen. That the state cannot be discriminatory would have remained an elusive constitutional principles if the voluntary agencies had not played their role effectively to highlight the cardinal principle of equality, regardless of one's socio- economic location and ideological predilections; they further provide a voice to those at the periphery of the processes of development if their constitutional rights are infringed. By making the hapless majority especially in rural India aware of their constitutional entitlements as citizens of the country, they helped translate the intent of the founding fathers into concrete designs fulfilling their aspirations. Third, despite being integrally connected with governance, voluntary agencies unleash processes whereby people get connected with endeavours seeking to realize their aspired goal; they, in other words, act as a bridge between citizens and public administration while discharging their role as a conscience keeper. This is a critical role, especially in the context of the emergence of the devastating democratic deficit all over the globe. It is alarming that, in many democratic systems, the form seems to have prevailed over the substance of democracy and the meaningful interface between citizens and the elected representatives holding political authority is minimal between elections. The very presence of voluntary agencies in governance, more particularly in rural areas, has made a critical difference: democracy is thus now translated not merely as an occasional participation in the electoral processes, but as a tool of empowerment and an avenue of translating one's heart- felt desires into reality. By directing popular zeal for participatory governance, voluntary agencies thus not only reinvent public administration by making citizens its core, but also reestablish the importance of ethical values in public life by challenging the tendencies responsible for creating democratic deficits.

#### **Concluding observations**

It may be concluded that the position of the citizens, from being mere recipients of administrative help and services, has now shifted to their being the prime movers in the affairs of governance; there has taken place a change from local beneficiary status to active 'participant status'. This is most critical in governance in a democracy. The aim is to create an accountable, accessible, transparent, participative and responsive administration for citizens' well- being. By being sensitive to what the citizens demand for the fulfilment of their democratic rights, contemporary governance seems to have reinvented its core principles which no longer remained glued exclusively to the Weberian notion of hierarchical administration leaving, at least conceptually, no space for external accountability. Governance is thus not merely instrumental, but has evolved as an effective mechanism to create an environment in which citizens are not merely recipients, but instigators of change. Instead of being reactive, public administration has become proactive, with citizens remaining perhaps the most important component. In two fundamental ways, such a conceptualization of governance is innovative: on the one hand, governance does not merely mean execution of policy decisions, which was the case in the past; it also refers, on the other hand, to processes whereby citizens' responses are translated into policy decisions. What is fundamental here is the idea of the citizen being preeminent in public administration.

 In a similar vein, the idea of ethics in governance is re- conceptualized differently. In the past conceptualization of public governance, ethics in governance is usually articulated as being grounded within the conceptual boundaries of public administration and the institutions were considered to be most critical. What was unethical was always couched in institutional terms, which were always respected and zealously nurtured as sacrosanct. The primacy of institutional control was never questioned. Drawing on the Weberian notion of internal accountability, that remained most critical in so far as India's administration was concerned. It was a perfect mechanism, since Indian administration had hardly changed, at least in the structural–functional sense, from its colonial counterpart, except perhaps the fact that, instead of serving the colonial masters, it became an instrument for serving the Indian. Nonetheless, when it concerned ethics in governance, it remained committed to the Weberian conceptualization of internal accountability that was so assiduously upheld by the erstwhile colonial rulers.

 In contrast with the past, there have been changes in the conceptualization of ethics in public administration. Administrative accountability is being reinvented in the light of the changing texture of governance, in which the role of citizens is as significant as those running the machine in accordance with well- defined rules and regulations governing its functioning. Citizens no longer remain mere recipients; they become active partners in framing policies for their well- being. For them, participatory democracy is not a mere descriptive category, but an empowering idea of connecting them with the actual articulation of public administration. Ethics has gained a wider connotation: an administrative action shall cease to be ethical if it violates citizens' constitutionally guaranteed rights. What is ethical is now determined by criteria that may not have been devised internally, but by those who are affected by specific administrative act.

 Public administration is now a changed entity. In order to ascertain ethics in governance, the pyramidal structure of administration that is clearly top- down in character has undergone a sea change, because citizens have become active partners; it has become citizen- centric. There are two specific ways, as shown above, in which public administration is now less Weberian. On the one hand, changes in governance are attributed to civil society activism, which is essentially an outside influence. This has not been new, since politico- ideological movements were always an important source of change in Indian administration. As is evident, the British administration was forced to change some of its draconian laws, which were definitely unethical, in response to the campaign that the nationalists had launched. The trend continued in independent India. One of the important interventions happens to be the adoption of the RTI Act in 2005 following the decades- long ideological campaign for transparency in administration. The change is also visible within the administration. For instance, citizens' charters identifying the administrative obligations to the citizens are a powerful internal mechanism to translate ethics in governance into an achievable goal. Likewise, e- governance is another powerful aid to complement the endeavour towards making public governance transparent, ethical and really public in substance and spirit.

 Citizens' involvement in governance is a powerful aid for administrative transparency. This is being encouraged both globally and nationally. With the consolidation of a proactive citizenry in India reflecting perhaps concern for transparency in administration, the Weberian rigid and hierarchical conceptualization of bureaucracy does not seem to be a useful analytical tool to comprehend the changed texture of public authority, especially in democratic systems. The impact is too commanding to be ignored so easily. Change is visible, and Weberian rigidity does not seem to be useful. It is, in fact, being described as an impediment to making public administration a citizen- centric endeavour. In that respect, the idea that citizens are immensely significant in conceptualizing public administration remains most critical in reformulating the fundamental theoretical premises in the discipline. So, this chapter, by highlighting the importance of citizens in governance, is thus illustrative of the changes in the texture of administration that needs to be understood against a different theoretical backdrop in which citizens remain the core of public administration. What is significant here, in other words, is the assumption that, by being proactive, citizens have become integral to the decision- making processes that now cannot be hijacked so easily since a transparent and ethically tuned administration makes public administration truly public in the true sense of the term.

#### **Notes**

- 1 Luc Rouban (ed.), *Citizens and The New Governance*, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 1999.
- 2 A V Dicey, *Lectures on Relation between Law and Public Opinion in England during the Nineteenth Century*, London, Macmillan, 1948 (2nd edition).
- 3 U C Agarwal (ed.), *Public Administration: visions and reality*, Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi, 2004, p. 270.