# 9 In search of integration and identity Indian Muslims since independence<sup>1</sup>

Mushirul Hasan

In the long and impressive history of India's nationalist movement there was a deep ideological schism between ardent communalists and committed champions of a secular and composite Indian state. But the mainstream of Indian nationalism had a decidedly secular orientation. That is why, when the newly created state of Pakistan was fostering its Islamic image in 1947–48, India was engaged in reconstructing a democratic and secular polity amidst the brutal and bloody violence which accompanied independence and partition. Jawaharlal Nehru, the main architect of India's secular state, emphatically declared: 'The Government of a country like India … can never function satisfactorily in the modern age except on a secular basis'. This was an article of faith with many of his comrades in the Congress and in other political formations.

After 60 years of independence India's secular experiment needs to be reviewed in its implications both for other plural societies endeavouring to tackle their ethnic, regional and religious problems in Asia and Africa, and for the Indian Muslims who form the largest minority segment in the country. We do so without losing sight of the obvious facts that the Indian Muslims do not constitute a single, homogeneous and monolithic entity and that the differentiating features that characterize Indian society as a whole are also to be found within the Muslim community (Khan 1978). At the same time, our concern is to uncover certain broad trends amongst Muslims which would exclude regional, local and class nuances from our analysis.

In the 1940s Mohammad Ali Jinnah led a powerful movement which was meant to advance the interests of his co-religionists after the British withdrawal from the Indian subcontinent. But the final outcome of his campaign proved catastrophic to over 35 million Muslims who chose to remain in post-partition India. Leading industrial families, trading groups and professional men hurried to Pakistan to improve their fortunes, leaving behind a socially fragmented and economically depressed Muslim community. With the introduction of the universal franchise and joint electorates, the Muslims of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar lost their position as a privileged minority – a position they had enjoyed under the British since 1909. There was also a diminution of their influence in government service, for the bulk of the professional groups in these states had migrated to Pakistan. The abolition of the zamindari system reduced the rural influence of the former Muslim landlords, even more than that of their Hindu counterparts, because of the smaller number of Muslim peasants in the north and the greater number of urban rentiers among the Muslim landlords (Brass 1974: 235). The dissolution of princely states impoverished a large percentage, if not the majority, of the upper and middle classes.

With the Muslim League dissolved in the north and its leadership drained off to Pakistan, the political trajectory of the Muslim community was defined within the democratic and secular framework; its future lay in coming to terms with the broad contours of Indian secularism, rallying round political parties with avowed secular goals. 'There is absolutely no alternative to secularism, unless communal suicide be considered to be one', wrote an influential Muslim commentator (Ayyub 1965: 15).

But a community nurtured in the tradition of political separatism and religious fundamentalism, exemplified by the Jamaat-i Islami and Muslim League movements, was rather slow in accommodating to the secular Indian framework. One of India's leading lawyer-politicians noted in 1962 that his brethren had 'not yet fully adjusted themselves emotionally to a secular state'.<sup>2</sup> This view was supported by two leading scholars educated in the famous religious seminaries – the Dar al-Ulum at Deoband and the Nadwat al-Ulama in Lucknow (Haq 1972: 11–12; Faruqi 1966: 140). The concept of a secular state was contrary to the fundamentals of Islam, and to be secular was nothing short of being *ghair mazhabi* or *la dini* (irreligious). The modern secular state, stated an official publication of the Jamaat-I Islami, 'rests on the denial of God ... on the denial of the sovereignty of His exclusive title to the obedience of His creatures, ... To owe allegiance to God is to refuse allegiance to every other authority unless the latter acts as His servant and upholds the authority of His law' (Siddiqi 1952: 4–5).

While the rumblings over the acceptance of the secular concept have not quite ceased, relatively few Muslims cling to the idea of an Islamic state. Some hard-headed *ulema* may still cherish the hope of a *dar al-Islam*, but most Muslims have come to regard secularism as a boon on which their welfare depends. The Jamiyat al-ulema propounded the theory of a social contract between Hindus and Muslims to establish a secular state, while the Jamaat-i Islami, after years of diffidence, declared in 1970 that: 'In the present circumstances, the Jamaat-i Islami Hind wants that in contrast to other totalitarian and fascist modes of government, the ... secular democratic mode of government in India should endure' (quoted in Wright 1979: 86).

A keen and sympathetic observer of Indian politics remarked in the mid-1960s that 'informed Muslim opinion is clear that it wants nothing better than the liberty to work out its own destiny within the Indian secular society' (Spear 1967: 47; also see Mir Mushtag Ahmad, 'Role of Indian Muslims'; Hag 1972: 11–13, 17).

## I

In order to assess the Muslims' response to the secular processes, we must turn to an examination of their political preferences as exercised through the general elections.

In the first three general elections, Muslims tied their fortunes to the Congress bandwagon, which had the image of a secular party, and they lent their full support to Jawaharlal Nehru whose secular credentials were never in doubt.<sup>3</sup> In Uttar Pradesh, India's most populous state, Muslim candidates contesting elections on Congress Party tickets constituted the largest proportion among the Muslim political activists, and succeeded in getting elected in larger proportions than the candidates put up by other political parties (Ahmad 1974).

The earlier notion of communal consciousness as a strong element in Muslim voting behaviour (Gupta 1962; 380) stands refuted by recent studies which have shown that Muslims do not operate as a monolithic entity in politics; competitive electoral processes have, moreover, helped to break down their communal solidarity. 'The increasing

tendency of Muslim candidates to assume national party identifications shows that the integrative process is at work' (Krishna 1967: 187). Muslim candidates contesting elections on the tickets of the national parties improved their share of the total votes polled by Muslim candidates (ibid.; cf. Ahmad 1967: 523). Equally important was the conscious decision to reject overtly communal organizations and an unmistakable preference for secular parties (Krishna 1986: 187–88, 1972).

The Muslim League disappeared from north India in 1947, and attempts to revive it during 1959 proved futile. Bodies like the Jamiyat al-ulema pursued their traditional nationalist policies and acted in unison with the Congress. Many of its leaders, such as Maulana Hifzur Rahman, were returned to the Lok Sabha as Congress candidates.

In the mid-1960s, however, various Muslim groups in different parts of the country began to question the wisdom of continuing their alliance with and dependence on the Congress. They did so because the Congress had ceased to be a vehicle for their aspirations, and had shown insensitivity towards their specific complaints regarding unequal educational opportunities, discrimination in government employment, and poor representation in central and state governments, in the Indian Administrative Service, the police and the army.<sup>4</sup> Muslims were also victims of organized communal violence, as in Jamshedpur and Rourkela districts (1964), and were aggrieved at the Congress government's failure to curb such persistent assaults. Under the stress of insecurity created by riots there was a growing perception of the community's dwindling fortunes under Congress rule. Summing up Muslim feelings, a leading political scientist noted: 'The Muslims in India are in a quandary. They appear lost and out-ofgrips with the evolving reality of contemporary Indian life' (Khan 1968: 25; also see Tyabji 1971: 201, 203).

This disenchantment found expression in the 1967 elections when most Muslims deserted the Congress, especially in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Bengal, and vigorously pressed the need for a separate and exclusive platform so that they would send to the legislatures their 'own' representatives who would not be at the mercy of 'non-Muslim parties'. The Muslim Majlis-i Mushawarat, established in August 1964, was meant to articulate Muslim grievances and seek ways of alleviating them through the processes of party and electoral politics.

The Majlis was a loose confederation of diverse political interest groups, including former leaders of the Muslim League, the Jamaat-i Islami, and some Muslim Congressmen backed by the Jamiyat al-ulema. Its demands were embodied in the 1967 People's Manifesto, which effectively summarized the main grievances and demands of Muslims, including the revision of textbooks with a Hindu bias, the introduction of proportional representation in elections, protection of the Muslim Personal Law, recognition of Urdu as a second official language in the north Indian states, and preservation of the 'minority character' of the Aligarh Muslim University. It urged Muslim voters to support independent candidates from different parties, 'primarily according to the candidates' attitudes towards the Muslim community'. It stood in favour of those who were free of caste and communal prejudices, subscribed to democratic and secular principles, and were broadly in agreement with the People's Manifesto issued by the Majlis.

The Majlis succeeded in stirring up 'political and social consciousness' amongst Muslims (Tyabji 1971: 128), and in 'detouring' them 'from their usual solid support for the Congress' (Quraishi 1968: 981–82). But it was only marginally successful in influencing the outcome of the 1967 elections. The adventurism of the Majlis failed on account of the absence of a unified leadership, the fragmentary nature of the Muslim community with its regional and local specificity, and the small and scattered Muslim votes in most electoral constituencies. Besides, the path of 'contest mobility' (Schermerhorn 1978: 176) was clearly strewn with difficulties because democratic political institutions do not always lend themselves to being used by minority groups in defence of their interests. The Majlis learnt this lesson the hard way when it was stigmatized as a sinister, incipient revival of the old Muslim League, and its demands pushed more votes towards candidates whose appeal was to Hindi and Hindu revivalism. Muslims, it seemed, could not hope to take the political process into their own hands as they thought they could; they had to be content with organizing themselves as pressure groups exerting their influence through other political forces.

At the same time, it was inexpedient to allow Muslim anxieties to grow, for at stake was national unity, the secular image of the Congress, and the country's prestige in other parts of the world, especially in West Asia. Already, the danger signs were too obvious to go unnoticed. The alienation of the minorities and the consequent weakening of the secular elements amongst them, the newly acquired militancy of parochial and sectarian tendencies, the growing intrusion of religion into politics, and the widening gulf that separated Hindus and Muslims lent credence to the view that 'the secularism of India is an aspiration, not yet a reality' (Smith 1965: 10).<sup>5</sup>

#### II

Just a decade-and-a-half after independence the communal forces, long kept under check by Nehru's leadership, surged forward, causing serious stress to India's secular fabric. Amongst Muslims, the Jamaat-i Islami and the Itehadul Muslimeen derived strength and sustenance from the wave of communal violence which swept through much of north India, leading a perceptive Muslim observer to conclude that 'Muslim communalism … is now coming to surface again. Its fundamental idea … is that true Muslim society can exist only in a country where the government is in the hands of Muslims and is carried on according to Islamic law'.

Spearheaded by the cadre-based Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh (RSS) and its political wing, the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, Hindu communalism found a substantial ally in the resurgence of nationalist feelings after the Indo-China war of 1962; the alliance was strengthened by the war with Pakistan three years later. Committed to the cause of building a resurgent Hindu nation and a revived Hindi-Hindu culture, the ideology of the RSS and the Jana Sangh was fuelled by the stereotype of an aggressive Islam on the rampage. They repudiated secularism, denounced the Congress for its policy of appeasement under the 'camouflage of secularism', <sup>6</sup> and proposed the 'Indianization' of Muslims to purge them of disloyal tendencies. 'Indianization of the Muslim outlook is the only solution of the socio-religious as well as the political aspect of the communal problem', declared a foremost RSS and Jana Sangh activist (Madhok 1946: 101; 1970: 82).

The communal upsurge in the 1960s was part of the sharpening of existing caste, class and community cleavages, and reflected the limitations of the secularization process which had been boldly initiated through democratic processes, progressive social legislation, rapid industrialization and a massive adult literacy campaign. These cleavages were kept under control during the anti-colonial struggle, with unity and consensus among its central concerns. But not so after independence. The Congress was no longer at the head of a movement: it was overnight turned into a political party whose main aim was to exercise control and dominance over the levers of power and authority. Devising electoral strategies became its prime concern, while populist slogans, radical rhetoric and diffused socio-economic policies were its answers to growing caste/ class tensions and increased communal animosities. 'The image of Indian unity', warned the Economic and Political Weekly, 'cannot be built merely of eye-catching laces and frills: it must also have the supporting "stays" of harder material'. 7

The Congress was singularly lacking in ideological coherence, as was signified by the presence of communal and revivalist elements entrenched in the states and districts, and their uneasy relationship with Nehru who was committed to the destruction of communalism and the establishment of a secular state and society. It surged ahead without isolating such elements,<sup>8</sup> without developing any formal or informal structures to effect social transformation, and without evolving instruments to widen the social basis of secularism and thus assuage the fears of the minorities while satisfying the rising aspirations of various social groups. Nehru was no doubt aware of these limitations, but he also dithered on vital issues. He took certain steps or failed to take others which did not fit squarely with his promotion of secularism (Gopal, 'Nehru and secularism': 23). A few years after Nehru's death, the Economic and Political Weekly observed:

The rudest shock comes from the manner in which the Government and the country are allowing themselves to be pushed off the edge of secularism into the abyss of communal reaction, falling back to the frightening atavism of stagnant, dark and medieval ethos of the Hindi-speaking areas.<sup>9</sup>

An easy way out of the communal impasse was to woo sectional and parochial interests and to make occasional friendly gestures towards the minorities, even if it meant heightening their community consciousness. In his keenness to win Muslim confidence, Nehru allowed Muslims a voice in whether or not to provide equality before the law to all Indian women or to promulgate a common civil code, thus precluding either (Gopal, 'Nehru and secularism': 23). He stated in 1954 that he thought a unified civil code was inevitable, but that the time was not ripe to push it through in India! Again, he failed to press his own initiative for the banning of communal parties (Smith 1963: 473–74). The banning of cow-slaughter was also a matter in which Nehru failed to act according to his convictions (Gopal, 'Nehru and secularism': 25). Legislation imposing a total ban on cow slaughter was enacted in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. All of these governments were controlled by the Congress party.

Given the established tradition of using religion as a lever to influence the course of politics, it was not unusual for political parties to collaborate with communal organizations for short-term electoral gains. Opposition parties, too, were often compelled in the sheer interests of survival to fall back on expediency and forge unprincipled alliances. Nehru was sickened and expressed his anguish in no uncertain terms.

## III

Over the years we have been moving towards a society which will soon be ruled by communal bigots.

Udayan Sharma, in Sunday, 22–28 June 1986

A wounded India with festering communal sores is limping towards the twenty-first century ... India, today, certainly cannot boast of a heritage and a past which has succeeded in checking the growth of communalism.

Seema Mustafa, in *Sunday*, 28 December 1986–3 January 1987

An all-devouring communal fire is raging across the country, threatening the very existence of a multi-religious, multi-cultural and multi-lingual society.

Kuldeep Kumar, in Sunday, 21-27 June 1987

These are not sensational newspaper headlines but serious reflections on India's secular experiment over the last four decades. They portray a picture of Indian society which is both realistic and alarming. Their assessment deserves consideration. There can be no doubt that the last phase of the government of Indira Gandhi witnessed an unprecedented intensification of religious fervor and religiosity, an exacerbation of sectarian feuds, and an increased polarization of Indian society not along class lines, as Nehru had envisaged, but on purely communal grounds.

Equally significant was the rapid growth of Hindu communal organizations with militant overtones. The Vishwa Hindu Parishad and the Virat Hindu Sammelan, were the apex of several right-wing organizations. They vied with each other to emerge as the greatest champion of Hindu communal causes and led aggressive campaigns. These developments suggest that the secular consensus, an imprimatur of the Nehru era, was all but set aside by the new dominant Congress leadership, eager to accommodate Hindu revivalist and obscurantist tendencies in order to isolate and deflect the emergence of alternative political forces surfacing in different parts of the country.

The widely shared Muslim perception has been of a virtual breakdown of the secular consensus embodied in the model of integration worked out by Nehru. Cracks began to appear soon after India's victory over Pakistan in the Bangladesh war, where Indira Gandhi was convinced that she would have to cultivate a Hindu image to strike deep roots in the Indian polity. She went on conspicuous visits to various temples, swiftly banned the use of beef tallow as soon as a ghee-adulteration scandal broke out, adopted Hindu rituals and symbols in state affairs, was lenient towards Hindu revivalism which expressed itself most spectacularly in cross-country marches to 'Save Hinduism', and almost uncharacteristically asserted the 'rights of the majority'. All this was a reversal of the secular traditions that Nehru had tried to establish. 'Far from challenging such revivalism', wrote one of her admirers, Indira Gandhi 'decided to ride it as far as it would take her. And so, there was not even the minor consolation of words of sympathy from Indira Gandhi after Moradabad saw in 1981 one of the worst instances of violence against Muslims in independent India'.<sup>10</sup>

What most angered Muslims is not so much the fact that state patronage of religious fervour had encouraged the fringe of Hindu extremism, but that a long, systematic neglect of their interests had contributed to their economic decline (Faridi 1965). The view that the economic weakness of the Muslims must be seen in the context of the society as a whole, where development is slow, wages are low and unemployment is on the rise, carries no conviction with most Muslim activist groups who argue that opportunities for economic advancement are specifically blocked for their community which has borne the consequences of official neglect and discrimination. In the case of scheduled castes and tribes there are compensatory programmes; there are none for

the Muslims. Yet, other categories in north India, such as the Kurmis, Yadavs and Gujars, have been economically weak and have not had access to compensatory programmes. They have, however, in some measure sought to neutralize their weakness through mobilization in the political domain, using their numbers and voting strength to secure attention. To be sure, such mobilization, when it seeks politically allocated resources by way of job quotas and so on, has generated violent controversy in Bihar and elsewhere; but the magnitude of this controversy is small compared to the consequences that await Muslims when they seek to assert themselves, politically or otherwise.

It is possible to debate the causes of the economic decline of the Muslims, but there is no denying that they have been on the lowest rung of the ladder in terms of the basic categories of socio-economic indicators of development (Khan 1978: 1514–15). In modern industry and trade, except for isolated instances, they have not owned largescale industry or business. As late as the 1980s, there was not a single Muslim house among the fifty industrial groups, while at the lower end of the scale most Muslims are poor and backward (Sanghvi 1984: 28).<sup>11</sup>

When it comes to employment, Muslims present a grim picture of their underrepresentation, and complain that they have been reduced to being 'the hewers of wood and the drawers of water' (Ansar Harvani quoted in Ahmad n.d.: 25), but the causes of their under-recruitment are still a subject of much dispute. Muslims settle for discrimination as a convenient explanation, though much of the problem in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar is the consequence of the depletion of the Muslim middle classes in the aftermath of partition and the abolition of Urdu as a language of administration and education, which affected the very section of the middle classes that sought employment at the clerical level, in lower government service or in educational institutions. Widespread abandonment of Urdu has also made it difficult for a great many Muslim candidates who have Urdu as their mother tongue to take competitive examinations for government posts. This accounts for the fact that very few Muslims take the examinations at all; another reason, of course, is a constant fear of discrimination if they do take them. The promotion of Urdu, which has been a victim of communal bigotry and linguistic jealousy, is thus not only central to the cultural identity of the Urdu-speaking Muslims but is equally crucial for their material advancement.

The plight of the Muslims is compounded by the fact that nearly all the major communal riots during the last few decades have occurred in towns where they have attained a measure of economic success through their traditional artisanal and entrepreneurial skills: Aligarh, Moradabad, Bhiwandi, Meerut, and of course, Ahmedabad. 'Hindus tend to raise their eyebrows at the assertion of an equal status by a community which they have been used to look down upon as their inferiors in the post-independence era', concludes a report on the Delhi riots of May 1987.<sup>12</sup> 'Economic resurgence' is often ascribed to Islamic fundamentalism and to a new sense of confidence among Muslims, now that their co-religionists in the Gulf have acquired wealth and considerable global influence. The connection is at best tenuous, though the Hindu petty bourgeoisie has not hesitated to use this argument in order to whip up communal sentiments against the Muslims. The motive is to displace the emerging Muslim entrepreneurial class in certain crucial areas of trade and business and to reduce the possibility of keen competition.

Communal riots were not uncommon during the Nehru era, but they were sporadic, localized and easily controllable. This has not been the case in last few decades. The apathy, negligence and complicity of local officials has also grown over the years; wherever public authority is compliant to anti-Muslim forces, the administration has offered weak or inadequate protection to the Muslims.

### IV

The articulation of minority interests is often constrained, even in a democracy, as is illustrated by the case of India's Muslims whose identification with the Muslim League movement in the pre-independence period has inhibited them from voicing their grievances in a sustained and organized manner. The formation of the All India Muslim Convention and the Majli-i Mushawarat were bold initiatives, but the strategy of working through the electoral process backfired. The bitter controversy over Urdu, faced by the non-Congress governmental coalitions in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar after 1967, reinforced the proposition that parties identified with minority causes risked alienating many of their constituents. Indira Gandhi was quick to learn this lesson when she talked of a 'Hindu backlash' against any further 'pampering' of the minorities.

Though Parliament and the state legislatures have remained important forums, the part played by Muslim legislators has not been seen in a favourable light by most Muslims. Muslim legislators, though often elected from Muslim-populated constituencies and sponsored as minority representatives, have eschewed the more public forms of protest and rebuffed petitions for help on minority causes. This is because the electoral processes sometimes work in favour of Muslims who are inclined to be docile and reluctant to raise embarrassing issues lest they are denied nomination at the next election (Wright 1966: Chapter 5). The result is that sponsored mobility has improved the political fortunes of a few chosen legislators without advancing the interests of their constituents. 'Hence, when scholars or publicists prepare impressive lists of the Muslim candidates elected over a number of years, they may contribute to group pride, but they signify no more than a Pyrrhic victory' (Schermerhorn 1978: 177–78).

Some formal and informal channels of articulation existed during the first two decades after independence because of Nehru's close links with certain sections of the Muslim leadership and his personal commitment to providing equal opportunities to the minorities and ending discrimination against them. 'All of us', he wrote sadly, 'seem to be getting infested with the refugee mentality or, worse still, the RSS mentality. That is a curious finale to our careers'. <sup>13</sup> Though Nehru's exhortations went unheeded and the grievances of the minorities remained unredressed, Muslims continued to repose their confidence in his leadership and recognized the Congress as the main vehicle of their aspirations.

After Nehru, Congress-Muslim relations were greatly strained, and the links that India's first Prime Minister had established with the minorities were either weakened or altogether severed. Having supported Indira Gandhi in her early years of political dominance, Muslims slowly but steadily drifted away from her. Emergency and the accompanying excesses proved the last straw. Theodore Wright has argued that the 'incongruous coalition of traditionalists, secularists and repentant former Muslim League modernists' who had supported Congress in previous elections was broken up by four features of the emergency: forced sterilization, slum removal, police firing on Muslims, and the suspension of civil liberties, which included the banning of Muslim organizations such as the Jamaat-i Islami (Wright 1977: 1207–20).

The gradual weakening of the Congress base amongst Muslims made it possible for the communally-oriented Muslim groups to occupy the political vacuum, while frequent riots and unending discriminatory practices against Muslims lent legitimacy to their activities. This is a familiar pattern. In the 1940s the phenomenal success of the Muslim League and its allies was, in some measure, linked to the fact of Muslim alienation from the Congress after the 1942 Quit India movement. Capitalizing on the 'wrongs' done by the Congress Ministries of 1937–39, the League propaganda machine was able to persuade splinter Muslim groups to join its bandwagon. Nearly three decades later, Muslim organizations of different shades of opinion were able to broaden their base of support by dwelling on the Congress failure to stem the communal tide and its inability to assuage the fears of the minorities.

It is hard to delineate the main contours of Muslim conservatism, though its basic aim has remained unchanged since the advent of British rule in India: the preservation of cultural and religious identity within the defined Islamic framework. Its more tangible manifestation has been in its resistance to modern education, its opposition to the composite and syncretic trends in Indian Islam, and its tendency to thwart reformist initiatives. Muslim organizations and institutions conducted successful mobilization campaigns around these issues and were thus able to insulate the community from the process of social change and modernization, and to resist the secularizing tendencies generated during and after colonial rule. This was a phenomenon unique to Indian Islam, for reformist ideas and movements were not inconsequential in Muslim countries such as Egypt, Turkey and Iran.

Conservative reaction after independence had been most pronounced in opposing the demand for a uniform civil code – an issue which united the three principal organizations in India which were otherwise opposed to each other on fundamental doctrinal matters: the Tablighi Jamaat, the Jamaat-i Islami, and the Jamiyat al-ulema. The Jamaat-i Islami, which takes the most militant position on the issue of change in the Personal Law, argues that even a ban on polygamy cannot be accepted, because Muslims are sure it will be only 'the first step in the direction of erasing every symbol of a separate Muslim culture in India' (quoted in Brass 1974: 220). The Jamiyat alulema agrees, though its criticism is reinforced by the argument that any attempt to alter the Personal Law would be an infringement of the 'covenant' of composite nationalism which binds Muslims to India and its Hindu countrymen (Qasmi n.d.). This was echoed at a convention organized in December 1974, and is repeated at every annual session of the Jamiyat.<sup>14</sup> Ziya-ul-Hasan states the position of the Jamiyat by arguing that the demand for a uniform civil code is tantamount to a fundamental departure from the position that in the present day Indian situation where the Muslim community is deeply entangled in a struggle for the search and safeguard of its self-identity, it is only the Personal Law that can be a permanent guarantee for its preservation (Faruqi 1983: 23).

Following the December 1974 Convention, an All India Muslim Personal Law Board was set up as a watchdog body to monitor and actively resist any changes that might be brought about in the Sharia. Just over a decade later the same Board spearheaded a campaign which signified a massive fundamentalist upsurge, unprecedented in post-Independence India. The immediate provocation was provided by a Supreme Court judgment on 23 April 1985 which seemed to criticize Islamic law and Koranic

V

concepts, in granting maintenance rights to a seventy-three-year old Muslim woman, Shah Bano, who was divorced by her husband after forty-three years of marriage. Muslims everywhere considered this judgment as an assault on the *Sharia* which, in their opinion, makes no such provision in the event of a divorce, and as 'the thin end of the wedge for securing the extinction of the Muslim personal law and its substitution by a common civil code'. $^{15}$ 

The Rajiv Gandhi government capitulated to the strident clamourings of some Muslims by introducing the retrograde Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Bill in May 1986.<sup>16</sup> It was done in order to stem the rising tide of anger over the Shah Bano verdict which was losing the party its Muslim votes. The electoral defeats of the Congress after the momentous Supreme Court judgment were sharp reminders of this. 'All one can say at present', declared an angry Danial Latifi, a Supreme Court lawyer and an activist in the Committee for the Protection of Muslim Women.

is that some Machiavelli seems to have masterminded this entire operation. That master-mind is not a friend of Islam, of the Muslims or of the Muslim women. Still less is he a friend of the Republic of India. The act that preceded the Bill, of recognition of the so-called Muslim Personal Law Board as a college of cardinals for the Indian Muslims, is not only against Islam but is also the most flagrant exercise of power-drunk autocracy since Caligula installed "Incitatus", his favourite horse, as Governor of Rome. The Muslim intelligentsia who have opposed this act will continue their struggle against this illegitimate papacy.<sup>17</sup>

It is noteworthy that the 'victory' tasted over the Shah Bano issue encouraged Muslim reaction in several different ways. In early January 1987, the volatile Syed Shahabuddin, editor of *Muslim India* and a member of parliament, gave a call to the Muslims to stay away from the Republic Day celebrations on 26 January. 'Come what may', he announced, 'we shall stick to our resolve to stay away from official celebrations of the Republic Day because it is a legal, ethical means to express our agony over the conversion of a historical monument'.<sup>18</sup> This was followed by a call for an all-India strike *(bandh)* on 1 February 1987, the first anniversary of the day when, by an order of the district magistrate, the gates of the Baburi mosque or the Ram Janam Bhoomi in Ayodhya were thrown open for Hindus to offer worship in the mosque's inner sanctum. The same forces which had exerted pressure on Rajiv Gandhi to undo the 'wrong' done by the Supreme Court judgment were in the forefront of attempts to incite communal frenzy amongst Muslims. This was not all. Violence over the Baburi mosque episode, somewhat reminiscent of the 1913 Kanpur mosque agitation, spread to several towns of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, culminating in a massive congregation of over 300,000 Muslims in Delhi demanding justice and an end to discrimination against their community.

Such stirrings in the Muslim community, perhaps related to fundamentalist movements in the Islamic world and encouraged through an ideological indoctrination (Agwani 1986), symbolize its alienation from the wider democratic and secular processes in the country. The Indian people must wake up to the danger of allowing this alienation to grow. It may be that Jawaharlal Nehru's secular model and the strategy of multi-national integration may still be the answer to India's present communal impasse.