# **MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS**

### K VIVEK REDDY

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

WHEN the Indian Constitution was drafted, there was near consensus on providing for a set of rights specifically protecting minorities, in addition to the fundamental rights available to all citizens. One such right was the right of religious and linguistic minorities to 'establish and administer educational institutions of their choice'. Despite this historical consensus, the right of minorities to administer and establish educational institutions under Article 30(1) has become one of the most contested rights under the Constitution. Despite several constitutional bench decisions of the Supreme Court and two constitutional amendments, the scope of the right remains uncertain. This chapter focuses on India's constitutional experience with minority educational institutions, and in particular, the three reasons why the right under Article 30(1) is a matter of such intense contestation.

The first is the Supreme Court's error in conceptualising the rights of minority educational institutions under Article 30(1) as an exclusive right, not available to other groups. The framers of the Constitution conferred this right on minorities as a shield against any discriminatory laws passed by the majority. Instead, the Court, by a series of rulings, treated it as a sword in the hands of minority educational institutions, resulting in a special right for such institutions and not for other educational institutions. When State regulations intrusive of educational autonomy were challenged, the Court examined these laws only from the perspective of minority educational institutions, instead of examining them from the standpoint of academic freedom. This led to invasive State regulations being struck down only qua minority educational institutions and not others, creating an oasis of educational autonomy for minority educational institutions while non-minority educational institutions were deprived of this right and subjected to extensive State regulation. When the Supreme Court finally rectified this constitutional anomaly in 2001 in *TMA Pai Foundation v Union of India*, 1 it was such a big shift that the subsequent rulings were unable to internalise it; the Court's view has oscillated and the legal position remains uncertain.

The second error was the failure of the Court to provide an appropriate constitutional framework for the protection of the right of educational institutions. For over five decades, the Supreme Court refused to recognise that educational institutions had any constitutional right to administer an educational institution. When it finally recognised such a right in 2001 in *TMA Pai*, it traced it to the right to carry on trade or business or occupation under Article 19(1)(g). This constitutional entrenchment was intended to reduce the State regulatory power and enhance autonomy in administering educational institutions. Paradoxically, *TMA Pai* enabled the State to increase its regulatory power over educational institutions because it enabled the State to impose reasonable restrictions in 'public interest'. This impacted both non-minority educational institutions and minority educational institutions, for both these institutions were placed on the same pedestal. Once the Court placed both majority and minority institutions on the same pedestal, it should have extended the protection available to minority institutions to non-minority institutions as well. Instead, it extended the restrictive regulatory framework of non-minority educational institutions to minority educational institutions. Consequently, the State acquired the power to control the admission process, the mode of entry of students, the fee structure, the teaching process, and the medium of instruction and curriculum. The extent of regulation was even more acute for aided minority educational institutions. As a result, the constitutional protection afforded to minority educational institutions has become a teasing illusion.

Finally, this chapter examines a major puzzle regarding aided minority educational institutions, namely whether such institutions have the freedom to not admit non-minority students. The Court's views on this question have oscillated between two extremes, each of which undermines either Article 29(2) or Article 30(1).

Before proceeding further, the structure and text of Article 30 requires careful examination. Article 30(1) confers a positive right on religious or linguistic minorities to 'establish and administer educational institutions of their choice', whereas Article 30(2) injuncts the State from discriminating against any of the educational institutions, while granting aid on the ground that it is under the management of a minority. Article 30(1A) introduced by the Forty-fourth Amendment requires the State to ensure the amount paid for compulsory acquisition does not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under Article  $30(1)$ .<sup>2</sup>

Article 30 is one of the few exceptions to the Indian Constitution's focus on individual rights.<sup>3</sup> Article 30 is not the only right in the Constitution that deals with the rights of educational institutions. Article 26(a) recognises the right of every religious denomination to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes. Article 29 also recognises the right of any section of citizens to conserve their distinct language, script, or culture, and the mechanism to achieve this objective is by establishing an educational institution to conserve the same.

#### **II. AN ANTI-DISCRIMINATION PRINCIPLE OR A SPECIAL RIGHT?**

The central question with regard to Article 30 is whether the right to establish and administer educational institutions is confined only to religious and linguistic minorities or also to other communities. This question has become particularly important because the right under Article 30(1) to establish and administer educational institutions extends even to secular education and not just religious education.

Since the earliest cases on this issue, the Supreme Court categorically rejected the assertion that protection under Article 30(1) is only confined to religious education. The Court held that such a view will deprive the students of minority educational institutions from receiving adequate general grounding in all fields, which would enable them to earn their living and also expose them to various thought processes. The Court gave a textual justification by asserting that unlike Articles 26 or 29(1), which also confer the right to establish an educational institution, Article 30 does not define the purpose for which educational institutions should be established. The use of the phrase 'of their choice' in Article 30(1), also demonstrates that a minority educational institution has the right to impart even secular education.<sup>4</sup>

Once secular education came within the ambit of Article 30(1), other non-minority educational institutions providing similar education have also claimed equal constitutional protection as minority educational institutions. While minority institutions claimed that it was a special right for minorities alone, non-minority educational institutions claimed that Article 30 was only an equality right placing minority institutions on par with other non-minority institutions.

# **1. Judicial Vacillation**

This tension between the equal rights view and the special rights view has consistently troubled the Supreme Court, with the Court vacillating between both positions. The Court began by taking the special rights view in 1958 in *Kerala Education Bill*, partially reaffirmed in *St Xavier's*, then made a complete switch in *TMA Pai* in 2001, which was in turn re-affirmed in *PA Inamdar*. <sup>5</sup> When Parliament intervened and amended the Constitution to reaffirm the exclusive right status, the Court in 2014 in *Pramati* returned to its original position without any principled justification. 6

The contest over the exclusive right for minority educational institutions began from the very first case concerning Article 30(1). In *Re The Kerala Education Bill 1957*, the President of India sought the opinion of the Court on the constitutional validity of various provisions of a bill passed by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Kerala regulating the organisation of primary schools established by minority and non-minority groups. The Bill mandated that neither a government school nor private schools could charge tuition fee from students in primary classes. The State justified the said provision by relying on the then Article 45 of the Directive Principles, which mandated the State to provide free and compulsory education for all children until the age of 14 years.

SR Das J, speaking for the majority, declared the provision as violative of Article 30(1) as it was impossible for a minority educational institution to run without collecting any fee and in the absence of any measure by the State to make up for the loss of such income.<sup>7</sup> In his dissenting opinion, Venkatrama Aiyar J adopted a reverse discrimination approach by upholding the said provision by holding that 'there is no justification for putting on Article 30(1) a construction which would put the minorities in a more favoured position than the majority communities'.<sup>8</sup> He suggested that Article 30(1) aimed to prevent the State and the majority from discriminating against minorities, rather than to give minority educational institutions special concessions. He opined that the disability in the form of loss of income by minority educational institutions was equally applicable to institutions run by the majority community.<sup>9</sup>

The view taken by both majority and minority appears erroneous. The provision mandating that a private entity, whereby it be a majority or minority institution, is to provide free education was violative not of the right of the minorities, but violative of Article 19(1)(g), which is available to all citizens. The Constitution does not confer power on the State to interfere with the autonomy of educational institutions and mandate how they should administer the colleges, irrespective of whether the said educational institutions are administered by minority or non-minority groups. The claim for special protection would not have arisen if the Court struck down the provision by relying on Article 19(1)(g). Again in 1971, Hidayatullah CJ, speaking for a unanimous five-judge bench, held that the special right to minority communities cannot be negated by applying the equality clause as 'the Constitution itself classifies the minority communities into a separate entity for special protection which is denied to the majority community'. $\frac{10}{10}$ 

A nine-judge bench of the Supreme Court had to confront this issue again in *Ahmedabad St Xavier's College Society v State of Gujarat*, <sup>11</sup> wherein minority educational institutions challenged a

State legislation enabling the University to impose conditions on colleges, including minority colleges seeking affiliation. Ray CJ categorically held that rights conferred under Article 30(1) are only confined to linguistic and religious minorities and 'no other sections of citizens of India has such a right'.<sup>12</sup> The exclusive nature of these rights was justified on the ground that 'the majority who can always have their rights by having proper legislation do not pass a legislation prohibiting the minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice',  $\frac{13}{12}$  and if minorities do not have such special protection they would be denied equality.<sup>14</sup> Khanna J differed slightly. In a significant opinion, which would be relied on heavily in subsequent cases, he acknowledged that Article 30(1) was a 'special [right] to the minorities'.<sup>15</sup> He hedged it, however, by stating that the idea of a special right was 'not to have a kind of a privileged or pampered section of the population but to give minorities a sense of security and a feeling of confidence'. <sup>16</sup> Article 30(1) was a means to bring about equality by ensuring the preservation of minority institutions and 'bring about an equilibrium'.<sup>17</sup> He reiterated that the protection is confined only to minorities because the majority can protect its interest by the democratic process.<sup>18</sup>

The contest over the exclusive nature of the right under Article 30(1) resurfaced before a bench of eleven judges in *TMA Pai Foundation v State of Karnataka*. <sup>19</sup> *TMA Pai* was a momentous decision, completely changing the legal landscape for educational institutions. For the first time, the Supreme Court gave a constitutional basis for a person to run an educational institution. Prior to this ruling, the Court had held that non-minorities did not have a right to establish and administer an educational institution. <sup>20</sup> However, *TMA Pai* held that even non-minorities have the right to establish and administer educational institutions. The Court traced this right to the freedom to carry on an occupation of one's choice under Article  $19(1)(g)$  and the right of a religious denomination to maintain an institution for charitable purposes under Article 26, by asserting that education was a charitable activity.

Once the Court provided a constitutional basis for every citizen to establish and administer an educational institution, it proceeded to deal with the rights of non-minority educational institutions *vis-à-vis* the rights of minority educational institutions. Without expressly overruling prior rulings, it placed minority and non-minority educational institutions on the same pedestal. BN Kirpal CJ, speaking for the majority, held that 'principles of equality must necessarily apply to the enjoyment of ... rights [under Article 30(1)]'.<sup>21</sup> He observed that while no law can discriminate against the minority, '[A]t the same time, there also cannot be any reverse discrimination.<sup>22</sup> This was the first time the Court introduced the concept of reverse discrimination while discussing the rights of minority educational institutions. Relying on Khanna J's opinion in the *St Xavier's* case, Kirpal CJ declared that:

[T]he essence of Article 30(1) is to ensure equal treatment between the majority and the minority institutions. No one type of category of institution should be disfavoured or, for that matter, receive more favourable treatment than another. Laws of the land, including rules and regulations, must apply equally to the majority institutions as well as to the minority institutions. $2^{\frac{23}{2}}$ 

The concurring opinions of Variava and Bhan JJ rejected the exclusive right theory. They held that Article 30 'was not framed to create a special or privileged class of citizens' and it was 'framed only for the purpose of ensuring that the politically powerful majority did not prevent the minority from having their educational institutions'. <sup>24</sup> No interpretation of Article 30 should create 'further divide between citizen and citizen'.<sup>25</sup> But the Court's complete revision of the constitutional landscape

expectedly led to a spate of dissenting opinions. Quadri J observed that the right under Article 30(1) was an 'additional right' to establish and administer educational institutions and that the extent of rights of non-minority educational institutions under Articles 19(1)(g) and 26 was different from the right of minority educational institutions under Article  $30(1)$ .  $\frac{26}{10}$  Ruma Pal J, in her dissenting judgment, also noted that Article 30(1) creates 'special class in the field of educational institutions' and a class that is entitled to special protection in the matters of setting up educational institutions of their choice.<sup>27</sup> She asserted that the favoured treatment to minority educational institutions did not violate the equality clause as the Constitution permits special provisions for various groups.  $\frac{28}{2}$ 

Once *TMA Pai* recognised the constitutional right of non-minority educational institutions and placed them on the same pedestal as minority institutions, it became a potent weapon against the expansive regulatory power of the State. The ruling enabled the educational institutions of both majority and non-minority groups to challenge various State enactments intrusive of educational autonomy.

Despite the majority ruling in *TMA Pai*, the special claim of minority educational institutions was again questioned by a bench of five judges in *Islamic Academy of Education v State of Karnataka. 29* Khare CJ, speaking for the majority, held that the majority ruling in *TMA Pai* only meant that the law cannot favour majority institutions over minority institutions. <sup>30</sup> He asserted that *TMA Pai* did not mean 'that non-minority educational institutions would have the same rights as those conferred on minority educational institutions by Article  $30 \dots$ ,  $\frac{31}{1}$  and added that the special right under Article 30 does give minority educational institutions 'certain advantages' and, as an illustration, said that while the government may nationalise non-minority educational institutions, it cannot do so for minority educational institutions. He added that minority educational institutions have preferential rights to admit students of their own community, which is not available to a non-minority educational institution.<sup>32</sup> Sinha J strongly dissented from this view, holding that it would be 'constitutionally immoral' to perpetuate inequality among the majority of people of the country in the guise of protecting the constitutional rights of minorities.<sup>33</sup> Article 30 was only an additional protection, he argued, to bring the minorities onto the same platform as that of non-minorities for establishing and administering educational institutions.<sup>34</sup>

The issue did not die with *Islamic Academy* and came up again when *Islamic Academy* was referred to a larger bench of seven judges in *PA Inamdar v State of Maharashtra*. 35 In a unanimous ruling, Lahoti CJ again reasserted the equal rights view by stating that Article 30(1) was only 'intended to instill confidence in minorities against any executive or legislative encroachment on their right to establish and administer educational [institutions] of their choice'.<sup>36</sup> He stated that 'Article 30(1) though styled as a right, is more in the nature of protection for minorities.<sup>37</sup> Despite this, he noted that there could be some regulatory measures that may be permissible *vis-à-vis* non-minority educational institutions but impermissible for minority educational institutions, and in his view this was the additional protection which minority educational institutions enjoyed under Article  $30(1)$ .  $\frac{38}{10}$ He did not, however, elaborate upon what these additional protections were.

The Supreme Court in *PA Inamdar* also held that State-mandated quotas cannot be imposed in unaided educational institutions, whether minority or non-minority, and that admissions had to be made on merit.<sup>39</sup> To undo the effect of this ruling, Parliament enacted the Constitution (Ninety-third) Amendment Act 2005. This introduced Article 15(5), enabling the State to make provision for reservation for Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes in government, as well as private unaided educational institutions. However, an exemption was carved out for minority educational institutions. This clearly supported the special nature of minority educational institutions, even though it was confined to reservation in admissions.

The constitutional validity of the exclusion of minority educational institution from the ambit of the regulatory power of State-prescribed quotas was considered in *Ashoka Kumar Thakur v Union of India*.<sup>40</sup> The response of the Supreme Court was unsatisfactory and left much to be desired. A bench comprising five judges produced four opinions, of which three judges were silent on the constitutional validity of the exclusion of minority educational institutions from Article 15(5). Without considering the majority opinion in *TMA Pai* or *Inamdar,* Balakrishnan CJ upheld the exclusion of minority educational institutions from Article 15(5) by asserting that 'minority institutions have been given a separate treatment in view of Article 30 of the Constitution'.<sup>41</sup>

The dissenting opinion of Bhandari J was even more puzzling. He upheld the exemption for minority-aided institutions from the obligation to admit socially and educationally backward classes, but held that, since the Constitution aimed at a casteless society, the exemption for minority educational institutions furthered this objective and therefore, 'there is no need to go out on a limb and rewrite them into the amendment'. $\frac{42}{5}$ 

Article 15(5) came up for consideration yet again when the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 was challenged. The Act mandated that all unaided schools, including unaided minority schools, reserve 25 per cent of the strength of the primary school to children belonging to disadvantaged groups for free and compulsory elementary education. The validity of the provision came up for consideration before a three-judge bench of the Court in *Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v Union of India*. <sup>43</sup> Kapadia CJ, in his majority opinion, upheld the quota for non-minority schools, but held the provision to be unconstitutional *vis-à-vis* unaided minority schools because of Article 30(1) and asserted that the quota would 'result in changing the character of the schools if [the] right to establish and administer such schools flows from the right to conserve the language, script or culture, which right is conferred on such unaided minority schools'.<sup>44</sup> In a strong dissent, Radhakrishnan J held that a compulsory mandate requiring even private schools to reserve a quota for weaker sections is a serious encroachment of the rights of all educational institutions and not just minority educational institutions.  $45$  He reasoned that 'no... difference can be drawn between unaided minority schools and unaided non-minority schools …' with regard to the reservation policy of the State in view of the ruling in *TMA Pai* and *Inamdar*. 46 With respect to unaided non-minority schools, the Court held that the reservation of 25 per cent is a reasonable restriction under Article  $19(1)(g)$ . <sup>47</sup> The majority judgment is puzzling because the right to conserve the language, script, or culture has been recognised under Article 29(1), which applies to all groups, including minority and non-minority groups.

The exemption for minority educational institutions came up again before five judges in *Pramati Educational and Cultural Trust v Union of India*. <sup>48</sup> Here, the Court for the first time specifically dealt with the constitutional validity of Article 15(5), which granted exemption to minority institutions from quotas prescribed by the State. Patnaik J, speaking for the Court, upheld the constitutional amendment by holding that minority educational institutions are a 'separate class and their rights are protected under Article 30  $\ldots$ <sup>49</sup> The Court held that the minority character of an educational institution may be affected by admission of socially and educationally backward class citizens.

The *Pramati* ruling is erroneous for two reasons. First, the Court ignored the evolution of law on

the exclusive rights of minority educational institutions. In justifying the special treatment for minority institutions, the Court ironically relied on *TMA Pai* and ignored the central dicta of the said ruling that the principles of equality must necessarily apply for the enjoyment of rights under Article 30(1), and that there cannot be any reverse discrimination between minority and non-minority educational institutions. <sup>50</sup> This conflict between *Inamdar* and *Pramati* has been noticed in a recent ruling and the matter has been referred to the Chief Justice.<sup>51</sup> Secondly, even if minority educational institutions could be exempted, there was no reason for exempting minority educational institutions from the social justice obligation of admitting students from weaker and disadvantaged sections of the minority community itself.

We thus see that the constitutional position on minority educational institutions is far from clear. Should we follow the rulings of the larger bench of the Supreme Court in *TMA Pai* and *Inamdar*, applying the equal rights view, or follow the rulings of the subsequent smaller benches holding the right of minority educational institutions as a 'special right'? After *TMA Pai*, the Court held that the Article 30(1) right cannot put minority educational institutions in a more advantageous position than non-minority educational institutions, leading to 'reverse discrimination'.<sup>52</sup> Can the principle of reverse discrimination propounded by *TMA Pai* even apply to minority educational institutions? The only matter on which a clear position exists is that minority educational institutions are not bound to implement quotas carved out by the State in the course of the admission process.

# **2. Four Justifications**

Four justifications have been advanced to assert that the right of minority educational institutions is a right exclusive to religious and linguistic minorities and not available to other communities.

### a. *The Historical Justification*

The historical argument is that in lieu of the minorities giving up their claim for separate electorates and reservations of seats in the legislature, the right under Article 30(1) was exclusively conferred on minority educational institutions.<sup>53</sup> Emphasis is placed on Articles 330 to 337, providing for quotas for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and the Anglo-Indian community in Parliament and the State legislatures and contemplates their claims to be considered in State employment. There is a conspicuous exclusion of minorities from these provisions, in contrast with their recognition under British rule, as minorities were conferred with an absolute right to establish and administer educational institutions.

The difficulty with this justification is twofold. First, the historical evidence suggesting a trade-off between separate electorates and an unqualified right to establish and administer minority educational institutions is very thin. The Constituent Assembly debates certainly demonstrate an intense opposition to separate electorate for minorities, as well as consensus on the need to protect minorities.<sup>54</sup> The Objective's Resolution moved by Nehru stated that 'adequate safeguards shall be provided for minorities'.<sup>55</sup> But there is little evidence to show that minority rights were used as a bargaining chip for giving up the claim for separate electorates. Secondly, there is nothing to show

that the founders intended to confer this right *exclusively* on minorities. On the contrary, they conceived of these rights as being available to everyone. The Sapru Committee Report, which formed the basis for the fundamental rights chapter, extensively examined the rights of minorities and held that:

[T]he fundamental rights of the new Constitution will be a standard warning to all that what the Constitution demands and expects is perfect equality among all sections in the enjoyment of civic and political rights and all applications of life.  $\frac{56}{3}$ 

The initial proposal of minority rights outlined by the Sapru Committee Report spoke of rights of 'all inhabitants' to establish and administer educational institutions.  $57$  And the only special right which minorities claimed was the obligation of the State to provide education to the children of minority communities in their mother tongue.<sup>58</sup> The Constitution makers conceived of Article  $30(1)$  more as a non-discrimination clause than as an exclusive liberty for religious and linguistic minority educational institutions.

### b. *The Textual Justification*

Article 30(1) is categorical—'all minorities whether based on religion or language shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice'. The Constitution clearly defines the category of people for whom the right has been conferred. The use of the phrase 'all minorities' has to be contrasted with other rights conferred on all citizens or persons, as in Articles 14 or 19. Yet, there are three reasons why a bare textual reading is unpersuasive in this context.

First, this reading ignores the majestic command of the equality clause in the Constitution—'the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws'. Secondly, such a reading leads to some bizarre consequences. For instance, the non-religious and non-linguistic minorities would then only have a right to establish an educational institution for religious education, under Article 26 and Article 29, but would be deprived of establishing an educational institution for secular education. Surely, the Constitution cannot intend that a person has a constitutional right to religious education but not for secular education. Such a course of action would violate the free speech clause and the equality clause. Thirdly, the anti-discrimination character of the right is evident from the text of Article 30 itself. In Article 30(2), the founders rejected the primary claim of minority institutions during the framing of the Constitution—minority educational institutions should be entitled to State aid as they would not be able to survive and protect their culture in the absence of State assistance. Although this entitlement claim was rejected, it was mandated that the State should not discriminate against minority educational institutions while granting aid. This shows that the right was conceived as an anti-discrimination right rather than as a special liberty.

#### c. *The Anti-Majoritarian Justification*

In *St Xavier's*, Ray CJ reasoned that:

The right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice has been conferred on religious and linguistic minorities so that the majority who can always have their rights by having proper legislation do not pass a legislation prohibiting minorities to

There are two difficulties with this reasoning. First, this assertion assumes that it is possible to draw a clear distinction between the majority and minority. However, in a plural society like India comprising multiple communities and groups, it would be difficult for one community to lobby with the legislature for the protection of their interests. Consequently, religious and linguistic communities which receive constitutional protection have an edge over other communities who may be numerically smaller, but do not receive the same constitutional protection. For instance, if Scheduled Tribes in a particular State want to establish an educational institution for their children, there is no reason why they should be denied the same constitutional protection as is available to religious and linguistic minority communities. And nowhere is this more evident in Article 30(1) itself—the protection under Article 30(1) does not extend to all minorities, but is only confined to religious and linguistic minorities. Denying these groups constitutional protection would undermine the very rationale of Article 30(1)—that is, preventing the discrimination of minorities. Secondly, Ray CJ assumes that fundamental rights only operate in the context of majority against minority. But fundamental rights are also intended to protect the individual from the collective power of the State. If Ray CJ's premise is accepted, the Constitution should have only conferred fundamental rights on the minority on the assumption that the majority could have secured their liberties and freedom through the legislative process.

### d. *The Equality Justification*

The fourth justification for the exclusive nature of the right conferred under Article 30 was asserted by Mathew J in *St Xavier's*, who invoked the equality clause to justify the special protection for minority educational institutions. He asserted that the equality clause requires differential treatment for minorities,  $\frac{60}{2}$  and that 'juridical equality postulates that the religious minority should have a guaranteed right to establish and administer its own educational institutions where it can impart secular education in a religious atmosphere'.<sup>61</sup> Mathew J's assertion recognised the established principle of the equality jurisprudence that unequal persons cannot be treated equally. When it comes to religious education, or protection of any aspect or dimension which is unique to the minorities, the requirement of treating minorities differently from non-minority educational institutions may be justified, and the protection of Article 30(1) is to apply with full force and effect. However, the difficulty arises with respect to secular education. If Article 30(1) was to be treated as an exclusive right, a non-minority institution offering secular education could be denied constitutional protection purely because of its religious and linguistic identity, which creates a perverse constitutional incentive to acquire a minority identity. Any interpretation that prizes the acquisition of identity motivated by conferment of legal privileges is incompatible with the equality clause and the claims of a pluralistic society.

Interpreting Article 30(1) as a special right for minorities had deeper repercussions and entangled the judiciary in needless controversies. Since the Court held that Article 30(1) was a special right available only to minorities, different groups claimed minority status. This created two sets of issues, which was entirely avoidable. First, who is a minority? Secondly, should the determination of minority status be made at a national level or at the State level?
On the first issue, several groups that had their roots in Hinduism claimed they were a minority, in order to enjoy the right to establish and administer an educational institution. The classic example is the Ramakrishna Mission claiming that it was a minority for the purpose of Article 30(1) as it was preaching 'Ramakrishna religion' and not the Hindu religion, which was accepted by the Calcutta High Court and subsequently reversed by the Supreme Court.<sup>62</sup> This was not a solitary instance and the Court on several occasions had to engage in the task of examining religious beliefs and customs to ascertain whether a particular group was a minority. $\frac{63}{2}$  Such a situation may not have arisen if the right to establish and administer an educational institution was available to all groups and not just to minorities. On the second issue, the Court consistently held from *Kerala Educational Bill* to *TMA Pai* that the determination of who constitutes a minority has to be done at the State level and not at the national level. <sup>64</sup> Ruma Pal J in a strong dissent in *TMA Pai* held that minorities could either be national minorities or State minorities and any determination of minority must be done 'in relation to the source and territorial application of the particular legislation against which protection is claimed'.<sup>65</sup> Both issues arise as a sole consequence of treating Article 30(1) as a special right.

### **III. THE RIGHTS OF MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS—THE UNDOING OF** *TMA PAI*

Any analysis of Article 30(1) has to begin with an answer to the larger question—where in the Constitution do we locate the rights of educational institutions? Prior to 2001, the Supreme Court in *Unni Krishnan v State of Andhra Pradesh* held that education was fundamentally a 'charitable activity', that the Constitution did not recognise any right to run an educational institution, and that the role of private educational institutions was only to supplement the efforts of the State in providing education to the people.<sup>66</sup> This position was at odds with various provisions of the Constitution. Article 26 recognised the right of every religious denomination to 'establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes'. An educational institution would have come within the ambit of this clause since the Court itself recognised that education was a charitable activity. Similarly, Article 29(1) conferred a right on any section of citizens having a distinct language, script, and culture to conserve the same and establishing an educational institution is a recognised mechanism for conserving a language, script, and culture.

The constitutional position was rectified in 2001, when *TMA Pai* held that the right to establish and administer an educational institution was traced to the right of citizens to carry on an occupation, trade, or business under Article 19(1)(g) and the right of religious denominations to establish charitable institutions under Article  $26(a)$ .<sup>67</sup> For minority institutions, the right was always available under Article 30(1). The Supreme Court made this shift on the premise that 'governmental domination of the educational process must be resisted'.<sup>68</sup> And for the first time, the Supreme Court recognised that the right to establish and administer an educational institution comprises the rights '(a) to admit students; (b) to set up a reasonable fee structure; (c) to constitute a governing body; (d) to appoint staff (teaching and non-teaching); and (e) to take action if there is dereliction of duty on the part of any employees'.<sup>69</sup>

Although the Supreme Court's decision, granting a constitutional foundation for the rights of an educational institution, was a move in the right direction, the Court erred by locating the right within Article 19(1)(g). First, Article 19(1)(g) can be subjected to reasonable restrictions imposed by the State in the interests of the general public. An educational institution is not just a trade or an occupation. It is a place where ideas are conceived and developed by debate and discussion, and academic freedom requires particular autonomy. By tracing the right to administer educational institution under Article  $19(1)(g)$ , the Supreme Court placed a shopping establishment and educational institution on the same pedestal. Secondly, by placing the right of educational institutions within Article 19(1)(g), the Supreme Court exposed the said right to possible extinction. The First Amendment to the Constitution in 1951 carved out a nationalisation exception to the right to carry on a trade, business, or occupation under Article 19(1)(g). Thus, an educational institution could, like any other industry, be nationalised by the State. This defeated the very rationale of conferring constitutional protection for education institutions in *TMA Pai*.

Prior to the *TMA Pai* ruling, the Supreme Court asserted that the minority educational institutions have an absolute right to administer educational institutions in light of Article 30(1). This claim was used by minority institutions to attack various State regulations pertaining to education. The State responded to these two claims by asserting that the Article 30(1) right was not absolute and did not deprive the State of its legitimate regulatory power. To resolve these competing claims, the Supreme Court crafted a standard to reconcile Article 30(1) with State regulatory power over the educational institutions. A dual test was conceived, whereby it held that every State regulation must be reasonable and must be conducive in making the institution an effective vehicle of education. The Court held that the constitutional right to administer given to minority educational institutions did not include the right to 'mal-administer'.<sup>70</sup> The Supreme Court consciously avoided the test of public interest as it would enlarge the power of the State, and observed that Article 30(1), unlike Article 19(1)(g), does not enable reasonable restrictions in public interest.

Applying this standard, the Court held that while the State can impose standards, it cannot take steps to implement the standards or oversee the operations of minority institutions. The application of this standard becomes difficult when minority educational institutions seek merely affiliation, and not aid, from the University. What conditions can legitimately be imposed by the State? In *St Xavier's*, the Supreme Court held that any affiliation should be in terms of the affiliation imposed by the State and should not be in abridgement or derogation of the rights of minorities under Article 30(1). Mathew J, relying on the doctrine of unconstitutional conditions familiar in American public law, held that the condition of affiliation imposed by the University may be invalidated on the ground that denying the benefit because of the exercise of a right in effect penalises its exercise.<sup>71</sup>

The constitutional landscape changed after *TMA Pai.* Even though *TMA Pai* sought to reduce the governmental role in the educational process, it actually ended up increasing it and in the process diminishing the freedom of minority educational institutions. This is because once the Court located the rights of non-minority educational institutions in the right to carry on trade or occupation under Article 19(1)(g), it had an adverse impact even on the rights of minority educational institutions. The Court held that restrictions applicable to non-minority institutions were equally applicable to minority institutions. As demonstrated below, instead of curtailing State regulatory power, as *TMA Pai* intended, State regulatory power over the educational process has only increased, leading to abridgement of the rights of minority educational institutions.

#### **1. Medium of Instruction**

The right of minority educational institutions to choose the medium of instruction has been consistently recognised as part of the right to administer. This issue came up immediately after the commencement of the Constitution, when various State Governments took actions to promote the local culture and language, and insisted that education must be in the local vernacular language or mother tongue. The State Governments were encroaching upon the right of minorities to administer their own educational institutions. In almost every case the actions of the State Government were struck down not just for the minorities, but also for the entire population by relying on the minorities' right under Article 30(1).

In 1953, the State of Bombay issued a circular mandating that admission to English- medium schools should be confined to children belonging to the Anglo-Indian community. The State argued that education should be in the mother tongue. A five-judge bench of the Supreme Court in *State of Bombay v Bombay Education Society <sup>72</sup>* held that it was 'implicit' under Article 30(1) 'to impart instruction in their own institutions to the children of their own community in their own language'.<sup>73</sup> This ruling was reaffirmed in numerous cases to strike down regulations restricting the medium of instruction.<sup>74</sup>

After *TMA Pai*, this position should only have been strengthened as the mode of teaching had been left to the institution. However, this position was weakened when the Court in *Usha Mehta v State of Maharashtra<sup>25</sup>* held that the right of minority institutions under Article 30 cannot be read to include a 'negative right to exclude the learning of regional language'.<sup>76</sup> The Court justified this complete reversal by holding that Article 30(1) is subject to the same reasonable restrictions as are applicable to non-minority colleges.<sup> $77$ </sup> The Court held that the decision of the government was 'conducive to the needs and larger interest of the State'. <sup>78</sup> This was a clear departure from the pre-*TMA Pai* constitutional framework, which mandated that any regulations affecting minority institutions must be in the interest of the institution and State interest cannot be used as a yardstick. The situation was redeemed in the recent constitutional bench ruling in *State of Karnataka v Associated Management of English Medium Primary & Secondary Schools*, which held that even if teaching in a mother tongue is helpful to children, the State cannot impose that decision upon minority schools and private unaided schools, as that would be violative of Articles 30(1) and 19(1)(g).<sup>79</sup>

#### **2. Minority Educational Institutions that Seek Neither Aid nor Recognition**

Consistently since 1958, the Supreme Court held that minority educational institutions could be classified into three categories—'(1) those which do not seek either aid or recognition from the State, (2) those which want aid, and (3) those which want only recognition, but not aid'.<sup>80</sup> The applicability of State regulatory power can only arise for institutions that seek either aid or State recognition. But with respect to the first category, the Court has always taken the view that they are outside State regulatory power and can exercise their rights to their 'heart's content', since they are seeking neither aid nor recognition. <sup>81</sup> These are institutions where knowledge is being disseminated for the sake of knowledge and not for any State certification. These institutions could range from evening music courses to skill development classes or pure religious institutions conducted entirely outside the purview of the State. The only restrictions these institutions were subject to were the normal 'laws of the land', which are applicable to any other establishment. $\frac{82}{3}$ 

Although *Inamdar* acknowledged that these institutions can exercise their rights according to their 'heart's content unhampered by any restrictions', it expanded the scope of regulatory power by holding that the State can regulate such institutions on grounds of 'national interest based on considerations such as public safety, national security and national integrity or are aimed at preventing exploitation of students or the teaching community'.<sup>83</sup> While sounding innocuous, this imprecise phrase facilitated the expansion of State regulatory power.

#### **3. The Admission Process**

*TMA Pai* recognised that every educational institution has the right to admit students of its choice. Based on this principle, the Court held that admissions to unaided minority educational institutions like schools and undergraduate colleges cannot be regulated by the State as the scope of merit-based selection is practically nil.<sup>84</sup> The role of the State was confined to prescribing qualifications and minimum eligibility conditions in the interest of academic standards.<sup>85</sup> However, for professional colleges, it was emphasised that admission should be based only on merit.

Once the Court recognised merit as a norm, it held that there cannot be any State involvement in the said process. Consequently, *TMA Pai* and subsequently *Inamdar* held that the State cannot impose quotas in unaided educational institutions (whether majority or minority) to implement the State's policy of reservation. The Court held that such an imposition amounts to a 'serious encroachment on the right and autonomy of private professional educational institutions' and '[cannot] be held to be a regulatory measure in the interest of the minority within the meaning of Article 30(1) or a reasonable restriction within the meaning of Article 19(6) of the Constitution'.<sup>86</sup> However, both rulings insisted that the admission process should be 'fair, transparent, non-exploitative and based on merit'.<sup>87</sup> This was a radical departure and is consistent with the Court's overall approach that educational institutions that do not receive any aid from the State cannot be subject to the State's regulatory power in the admission process. However, the prescription of merit as a norm by the Court raises a few concerns.

First, the Court has substituted the norms of the State (quota for reserved category students) with its own norm—that is, admission on merit. The Court did not justify the basis on which this norm was imposed on unaided educational institutions. It may have been permissible if this norm was imposed on public institutions that are funded by the State on the plausible reasoning that the requirement of admission on merit flows from the mandate of the equality clause. This issue particularly acquires significance in the context of private unaided minority professional colleges. One of the anomalies of the *TMA Pai* ruling was that unaided minority professional colleges ended up in a worse position than aided minority professional colleges. While aided minority professional colleges were entitled to admit students from its own community to the extent prescribed by the State, unaided professional educational colleges had to admit students only on the basis of merit. This was clarified in *Islamic Academy*, wherein the majority held that the State can fix the limit for admission of minority community students from that State. However, in *Inamdar*, the Court emphasised that admissions in unaided professional educational institutions (whether minority or non-minority) can be done only on the basis of merit. Consequently, the legal position on whether unaided professional minority colleges can admit students of their own community is unclear. There is no reason why an unaided professional educational institution cannot take students exclusively from its own community, since it is not

receiving any aid from the State. At best, the State can regulate the minimum eligibility standards that every student must satisfy to be qualified to avail of professional education.

Secondly, the Court in *TMA Pai* and *Inamdar* did not give sufficient clarity as to how it was defining merit. Is the requirement of merit satisfied when a person has satisfied the minimum standards or did merit have to be decided in a competitive manner? In *Inamdar*, after emphasising on numerous occasions that merit must form the basis for professional education, the Court held that every institution can provide a quota up to 15 per cent for non-resident Indians (NRI) students.<sup>88</sup> Although the Court attempted to justify the same by saying that the fees collected from such students can be used to cross-subsidise economically weaker sections, the creation of such a separate category is a departure from the norm of merit prescribed by it.

Thirdly, even assuming that merit can be prescribed as a norm for admission into professional colleges, how does the Court acquire the power to prescribe such norms? Once the Court has located the right of educational institutions under Articles 19(1)(g) and 30(1), any restriction on the right of admission needs legislative authorisation. At best, *TMA Pai* and *Inamdar* could have held that the State by way of law can fix merit as a criterion for admission by passing a law. Instead, the Court took on the legislative role by prescribing norms by which the unaided professional colleges should conduct their admission process. This is prima facie violative of Article 19  $(1)(g)$  and the principle of separation of powers.

There is a second way in which the freedom relating to admissions has been curtailed. As mentioned, prior to *TMA Pai*, a minority educational institution had the freedom to determine how it would admit students. While *TMA Pai* extended this autonomy over the admission process to both minority and non-minority educational institutions, *Islamic Academy* and *Inamdar* held that the mode of admission by educational institutions will be supervised by State committees. Minority institutions that used to administer their own entrance examinations had to now seek permission of a State committee and if the committee refused approval, they had no option but to adopt the admission mechanism prescribed by the State. Consequently, minority and non-minority institutions have had to virtually give up their right to devise their own admission mechanism. When the Union government prescribed the common admission test for admission to professional colleges, the Supreme Court held in *Christian Medical College, Vellore v Union of India 89* that the freedom to run private educational institutions includes the right to conduct examinations for admitting students. The Court held that depriving minority educational institutions of their right to conduct their own entrance examinations is violative of Article 30. But the majority opinion was silent as to how the said right can be reconciled with the committees mandated in *Islamic Academy* and *Inamdar. 90*

### **4. The Admission of Non-minority Students**

*Kerala Education Bill* held that a minority educational institution can admit students who do not belong to the same community. This was justified textually as Article 30(1) does not state that the right should be exercised only for the purpose of the said minority community. <sup>91</sup> However, after *TMA Pai,* the Court in *Inamdar* held that unaided minority educational institutions cannot admit students of non-minority communities or students of minority communities from other States beyond a prescribed limit and if they fail to do so, they would lose their status as a minority educational institution and the protection of Article 30(1).  $\frac{92}{2}$  Such a restriction may be justified for aided institutions as was done by

*TMA Pai* for aided linguistic minority educational institutions, <sup>93</sup> but there is no constitutional rationale for placing limits on the admission process of unaided minority educational institutions. This was incompatible with the premise of *TMA Pai* of resisting governmental domination over the educational process.

# **5. Fee and Profit**

Prior to *TMA Pai,* the Supreme Court had prescribed an elaborate scheme stipulating the fee that may be charged by a professional educational institution. <sup>94</sup> However, *TMA Pai* reversed this position by recognising that every educational institution has the right to set up a reasonable fee structure. The Court held that an educational institution cannot charge a capitation fee, but it can generate a 'reasonable revenue surplus' for the purpose of development for education and expansion of the institution.  $\frac{95}{2}$  This was a right that was applicable to both minority and non-minority educational institutions. This was a major and welcome departure with respect to the rights of educational institutions.

However, this change was immediately scuttled by *Islamic Academy*, which stipulated the establishment of committees to supervise the fee structure of an educational institution. Every institution, including minority educational institutions, had to place its proposed fee structure along with relevant books of accounts before committees constituted by the State for approval. This completely reversed the freedom of an educational institution to determine its fee structure. It enabled the State to intervene on fee structure even before any finding that the fee charged by the institution was in the nature of profiteering or capitation fee. It also established homogeneity in fee structures as the committees were applying the same yardstick for evaluating costs that go into the running of an educational institution. This was a partial nationalisation of the educational process. Even with respect to pricing of essential goods, there is no stipulation that the price had to receive prior approval of the State.

The freedom recognised in *TMA Pai* to determine a fee structure was further diluted in *Modern School v Union of India*, <sup>96</sup> where the Court held that the fee structure also has to satisfy the requirement of transparency and accountability in addition to being reasonable. The Court asserted that the autonomy of an educational institution cannot lead to 'commercialisation of education'.<sup>97</sup> Relying on the said principle, the Court upheld a Delhi statute, which mandated unaided schools to maintain accounts and use their money for a specific purpose. The Court also upheld the regulation that prohibited the management from diverting the fees to establish a new school. The Supreme Court did not stop there, but went further and directed the form in which accounts had to be maintained by schools, including minority schools. It also held that management of unaided schools can 'charge [a] development fee not exceeding 15% of the total annual total tuition fee'.<sup>98</sup> The Court did not make any distinction between minority and non-minority schools by relying on the *TMA Pai* logic that the right under Article 30(1) is subject to reasonable regulations which can be framed having regard to 'public interest and national interest'.<sup>99</sup>

## **IV. STATE REGULATION OF AIDED MINORITY EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS**

Are minority educational institutions that receive aid from the State bound to admit non-minority students? This issue arises in view of the apparent conflict between Articles 29(2) and 30(1). Article 29(2) mandates that citizens shall not be denied admission into any educational institutions receiving aid out of State funds on the grounds of religion, race, caste, language, or any of these. Article 29(2) represents the cardinal tenets of secularism—State funds cannot be applied which differentiate on the basis of religion. The question that arises is whether minority educational institutions receiving State aid are bound by Article 29(2), and consequently are precluded from the power to admit only students belonging to the minority community.

Aided minority educational institutions have asserted that the constitutional injunction under Article 29(2) cannot deprive them of the special right conferred upon them under Article 30(1) to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. On the other hand, it is argued that the Constitution did not carve out an exception for aided minority institutions under Article 29(2). A specific reference has been made to Article 337, which entitles the Anglo-Indian community to aid from the State in respect of education and further stipulates that no educational institution shall be entitled to receive aid unless 40 per cent of the admissions are made available to persons other than the Anglo-Indian community. Article 28(1) of the Constitution prohibits educational institutions that are wholly maintained out of State funds from providing religious instruction. Similarly, Article 28(3) also prevents an educational institution recognised or receiving aid from the State from requiring a person to take part in religious instruction or attending any religious worship without his consent. Similarly, the right under Article 30(1) is not completely immune from State regulatory power. In the absence of a similar provision under Article 29(2), aided minority educational institutions cannot be differentiated on the basis of religion in the course of the admission process.

The question of whether Article 29(2) is subject to Article 30(1) or *vice versa* has troubled and continues to trouble the Supreme Court since its inception. The question arose for the first time in 1950, when a number of Christian minority educational institutions received State aid. SR Das CJ, speaking for the majority in *Kerala Education Bill*, resolved this issue in favour of minority educational institutions by asserting that depriving minority institutions of their right to admit students after receiving State aid would mean 'minority institutions will not, as minority institutions, be entitled to any aid'. $\frac{100}{100}$  He said that the purpose of Article 29(2) could not have been to 'deprive minority educational institutions of the aid they receive from the State'. <sup>101</sup> However, he reconciled the conflict between Articles 29(2) and 30(1) by holding that the minority institution has to admit a 'sprinkling of outsiders' into the institution.<sup>102</sup> He asserted that a minority institution admitting nonminority students 'does not shed its character and cease to be a minority institution'. On the contrary, 'the object of conservation of the distinct language, script and culture of a minority may be better served by propagating the same amongst non-members of the particular minority community'.  $\frac{103}{103}$ 

This question resurfaced in 1991 when the admission programmes of St Stephen's College and Allahabad Agricultural University were challenged for giving preference to Christians and churchsponsored students despite receiving aid from the State. An issue which was disposed of as a 'minor point' in 1958 became a central one and the Court was deeply conflicted. Jagannatha Shetty J, speaking for the majority, held that a group right under Article 30(1) conferred on minority educational institutions has to be made functional and at the same time the individual right not to discriminate under Article 29(2) has to be affirmed. $\frac{104}{10}$  Shetty held that identical treatment for minorities and non-minorities would violate the equality clause and sought to resolve the conflict by holding that aided minority educational institutions are entitled to prefer students from their

community subject to a ceiling of 50 per cent and the remaining shall be made from other communities on the basis of merit.<sup>105</sup> The issue of 'sprinkling of outsiders' in the 1958 ruling had now evolved into a 50 per cent quota for non-minority communities, though there appears no constitutional basis for this.

The ruling in *St Stephen's* was attacked by several minority educational institutions and came up for reconsideration before an eleven-judge bench in *TMA Pai*. Kirpal CJ again acknowledged the conflict between Articles 29(2) and 30(1). He chose to reaffirm the balance struck in *St Stephen's* between the right of citizens not to be deprived in aided institutions under Article 29(2) and the right of minority educational institutions in Article 30(1), but disagreed with the 50 per cent formula. Instead, he mandated that the State should prescribe the ceiling on the quota for other community members having regard to the nature of education, population, and the educational needs of the area in which the institution is located.<sup>106</sup>

Quadri J, in a strong dissent, held that the right of minority institutions to admit individuals of minority communities is not in any way affected by the receipt of State aid. He reasoned that unlike other fundamental rights such as Articles 19, 25, or 26, no such limitations have been incorporated in Article 30(1). Consequently, the injunction in Article 29(2) cannot be made applicable to minority educational institutions under Article  $30(1)$ .  $\frac{107}{10}$  Placing emphasis on the use of the word 'only' in Article 29(2), Quadri J asserted that if the denial of admission to non-minority members is based on protecting the rights of the minority institutions, it would not be in violation of Article 29(2), since it is based on the need to protect rights of minorities under Article  $30(1)$ . <sup>108</sup> The constitutional requirements of equality and secularism recognise the rights of minority institutions to admit students of their choice, as well as the right of minority community students to seek admission in such institutions over others.<sup>109</sup>He also emphasised that unlike Article 337 there is no intention in Article 30 to suggest that the receipt of grant-in-aid would result in making available the percentage of seats in the minority institutions to non-minority students. $\frac{110}{10}$  Any other view would convert the right in Article 30(1) into a 'promise of unreality'. $\frac{111}{11}$  Ruma Pal J also delivered an important dissenting judgment, holding that a minority institution does not waive its right by seeking aid, and the absence of any restriction in Article 30 demonstrates the same. If Article 29 applied to minority institutions under Article 30(1), it would largely 'wipe out' the right and there would be no difference between minority educational institutions and other educational institutions.<sup>112</sup> She, however, carved out an exception that Article 29 would apply if a minority institution is admitting students of other communities, and in such a scenario it will have to admit students without discrimination.<sup>113</sup>

The regulation of aided institutions again arose when the validity of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009, which mandates aided institutions to reserve 25 per cent of the seats to children belonging to weaker sections of disadvantaged groups, came up for consideration. In *Society for Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan v Union of India*, <sup>114</sup> while the majority and the minority differed with respect to constitutional validity *vis-à-vis* unaided minority schools, they concurred that the provision is valid for aided minority schools.<sup>115</sup> While the majority and the minority relied on Article 29(2) and *TMA Pai,* the minority opinion held that the State is entitled to put fetters on the freedom of administration once the school receives aid from the government or any state agency. <sup>116</sup> Similarly, on appointing faculty, the Supreme Court in *Sindhi Educational Society v Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi*<sup> $117$ </sup> held that the aided minority educational institution should not be compelled to appoint teachers from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.<sup>118</sup> The

Court held that a minority educational institution, by taking aid, does not give up its 'inbuilt right to appoint persons, which in its opinion are better culturally and linguistically compatible to the institution'. <sup>119</sup> The Court reiterated that the power to grant should not be used to 'destroy, impair or even dilute the very character of ... linguistic minority institutions'.<sup>120</sup>

The Supreme Court's views have oscillated between two extremes. On the one hand is the current position of law, as articulated by Kirpal J. If a minority educational institution receives aid, the State will determine the quota for other community members. This position does not allow the institution to privilege its own minority, thereby upholding the secular principle that a State-aided institution be indifferent to religion, but seems at odds with the whole point of a minority educational institution that is, liberation from State regulation. On the other hand is the alternative position, which views aided and non-aided minority educational institutions identically. While the former view undervalues Article 30(1), the latter renders Article 29(2) meaningless. Both extremes seem unpersuasive, and perhaps a more promising path might lie through some compromise, where in the case of aided minority educational institutions there is some degree of State regulation up to a threshold. The key question, of course, will be the extent of this threshold and the factors on which it should be determined. Interestingly enough, the one issue that has never been tested in any of the Supreme Court rulings on aided minority institutions is the relationship between State aid and the extent of control exercised by the State.

#### **V. CONCLUSION**

Few areas have been the subject of more vexed constitutional litigation in India than the rights of minority educational institutions. This chapter has tried to show the extent of confusion, even chaos, which defines this area, and the varied ways in which the constitutional promise of Article 30(1) is yet to be fully understood and fulfilled.

2 In *Society of St Joseph's College v Union of India* (2002) 1 SCC 273 [278], the Supreme Court held that this provision requires:

a specific provision in the law to provide for the compulsory acquisition of the property of minority educational institutions, the provisions of which law should ensure that the amount payable to the educational institution for the acquisition of its property will not be such as will in any manner impair the functioning of the educational institution.

<span id="page-17-0"></span> $3$  The other constitutional provisions that recognise group rights in the Constitution are Articles 17, 23, 26, and 29.

<sup>4</sup> See *Ahmedabad St Xavier's College Society v State of Gujarat* (1974) 1 SCC 717 [12] (hereinafter *St Xavier's*); *Re The Kerala Education Bill 1957* AIR 1958 SC 956 (hereinafter *Kerala Education Bill*); *Rev Father W Proost v State of Bihar* AIR 1969 SC 465. Despite the expansive interpretation of art 30(1), it does leave open the question as to whether the minority education institution can set up a police academy or a military school.

<sup>5</sup> *PA Inamdar v State of Maharashtra* (2005) 6 SCC 537.

<sup>6</sup> *Pramati Educational and Cultural Trust v Union of India* (2014) 8 SCC 1.

<sup>7</sup> *Kerala Education Bill* ([n](#page-17-0) 4) [33]–[34].

<sup>8</sup> *Kerala Education Bill* ([n](#page-17-0) 4) [36].

<sup>9</sup> *Kerala Education Bill* ([n](#page-17-0) 4) [36].

<sup>10</sup> *State of Kerala v Very Rev Mother Provincial* (1970) 2 SCC 417 [7]. The Court did not go into the issue, since the State asserted that it would not enforce the law if it was struck down *vis-à-vis* minority institutions.

 $\frac{1}{2}$  (2002) 8 SCC 481.