# Unit 9 Women and Society

| Women and Society | 23 |  |
|-------------------|----|--|
|                   |    |  |

Women represent almost half of the total population of our country, and their participation in the developmental programmes is considered imperative. No schemes whether in the fi eld of economic development or social development can be successful unless women play their constructive role in such programmes. In spite of the social imbalances existing in the society, there has been considerable improvement in their social status; today women occupy many high positions and their instinctive zest for life and cheerful disposition illumine many homes. Women's role in directing and shaping the density of the society is crucial.

# **STATUS OF WOMEN IN INDIA: AN OVERVIEW**

Th e status of women in India has been a chequered one, as it has seen many ups and downs. In the Vedic age, they were worshipped as goddesses. In the Muslim age, their status suff ered a sharp decline, and in the British regime they were looked down upon as 'slaves of slaves'. Since independence, the tide seems to have gone in their favour. Th ere is no denying the fact that women in India have made some progress, maybe, because of the social legislation, the progress made in the fi elds of education, health, or economics or as a result of technological developments, or because of a process of evolution. Although in very small numbers, today we have women in almost all spheres of life. Th ey are doctors, engineers, pilots, journalists, teachers, administrators, judges, the State legislators, State governors, ambassadors, members of Parliament, and ministers. We have had a woman prime minister, Mrs Indira Gandhi and a president of the UN Assembly, Mrs Vijay Laxmi Pandit. Ms Sheila Dixit, Ms Vasundhara Raje, Ms Uma Bharti, and Ms Rabri Devi have taken over as chief ministers of Delhi, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Bihar, respectively. Ms Jayalalitha is the chief minister of Tamil Nadu. Ms Mayawati has been the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh thrice. Ms Rajinder Kaur Bhattal has been the chief minister of Punjab.

Th e constitution (73rd and 74th) Amendment Act, 1992, provides 33 per cent reservation for women in Panchayati Raj institutions and local bodies, enabling women to take the positions of sarpanch, mayors, counsellors, etc. of their respective bodies. Ms Kiran Bedi has become legendary as a model IPS (Indian Police Service) woman offi cer. Ms Kalpana Chawla is an illustrious example as a woman astronaut.

Th e situation on the economic front is not better. Th e women's work in the house that includes collection of fi rewood, bringing of water from long distances, and helping in the family business or in the fi elds is not recognized because they are not paid for it. Th e census report does not take note of it. It is estimated that the average hours of unpaid work done by women outside their home ranges from 6.1 to 7.5 per day with some women working for 10 hours and more. Moreover, 89.5 per cent of the women workers are engaged in the unorganized sector. Of these, 82 per cent are in agriculture and allied occupations. In the organized sector, women form 13.3 per cent of the total number of employees. In the public sector, they account for 11 per cent of the employment force, and in the private sector the percentage is 17.8.

So far as senior management jobs are concerned, women hold 5.8 per cent posts as against men in similar positions in the all India services. Th ere are only 9 per cent women offi cers in the Indian Police Service. In the Indian Administrative Service, there are 7.5 per cent women. Although concern is being expressed for their emancipation in every fi eld, economic independence is of paramount importance. Eff orts are on to ensure that woman is economically not dependent on anyone. But these eff orts have hardly been of any help. Th e woman is now burdened with two kinds of jobs—her work within the house and the job outside. She does not fi nd any free· time to enjoy the fruits of her economic independence. In many cases she is the custodian of her salary till she arrives home. Her salary later becomes a part of the total income of her family. Th e economic independence is not the fi nal solution. An equal emphasis has to be laid on the total development of the woman, the awareness about her rights and responsibilities, the recognition of her role, and the work that she does at home. If necessary, the social system must change so that the woman does not have to ask for concessions.

Th e condition in the political arena is no better either. Each political party stands for women's participation in political activities in a big way. But do we see the refl ection of their wishes in the Parliament? Th e percentage of women members of Parliament has been on the decrease. Twentythree women were elected to the Lok Sabha in the fi rst general election, whereas 19 were elected or nominated to the Rajya Sabha. Today, after 56 years of independence, there are only 24 women members of the Lok Sabha and 24 of the Rajya Sabha.

A dismal picture of the status of women as attempted above is further refl ected in their position in the society. As stated earlier, the sex ratio in India is 927 girls per 1000 boys. In some states, it is most alarming. As reported in the census 2001 it is 793 in Punjab, 820 in Haryana, and 897 in Himachal Pradesh. Infant mortality rate is higher for girls with a ratio of 7.8 per cent for girls to that of 6.7 per cent for boys. In 1999, 40 per cent of the women were assaulted by their partners (UNIFEM Biennial Report) and 65.3 per cent women reported of some kind of abuse (UNDP Report). In 2001, the estimated adult literacy was 31.3 per cent for men and 54.6 per cent for women (UN Social Indicators). According to the National Family Health Survey 1998–1999, only 52 per cent of women are consulted for decisions concerning their own health. Th e percentage of deliveries attended by health professionals in 1998–1999 was 43 per cent, the lowest proportion is 22 per cent in Uttar Pradesh. Women's wage rate is on an average only 75 per cent of that of men and constitutes only one-fourth of the family income.

It is estimated that in India there are 92 million working women. Studies concluded that not only the women form the most impoverished lot but also that the women represent the fastest increasing group of impoverished. Nowhere apart from certain African countries has poverty adopted the female face in such a fantastic manner as in the subcontinent.

Poverty refl ects not only in economic terms but also translates into deprivations of several kinds. In poorer households, right from food, work, education, clothing to marriage, women receive the worst of the lot. Nutritious food is reserved for the male members. Alongside unequal food distribution comes unequal provisions for health care facilities. Studies show that females are less likely to receive medical care than males, less likely to be admitted to hospitals, and in some instances less likely to survive than boys. A poor nutritious state of females means that their illness is of longer duration.

Girls are made to leave schools at the smallest of excuses, mainly to act as household assistants or domestic servants, whereas boys are allowed to study relatively more.

For every woman who steps out of the house to work as a domestic keep or as a construction worker or as a farmer, there is her daughter who stays back home babysitting, cooking, and housekeeping. Th us, girls are generally lesser fed, lesser loved, and lesser educated, and they are married off at early age against their will. Th is leads to premature motherhood and a staggering mortality rate of 410 per 1,00,000 deliveries, giving birth on an average 3.3 times in her life. However, many a time she is not allowed the dignity of marriage, but rather used like a slave.

In most Indian households, females are denied independence in professional, educational, and other essential forms of instruction. She is groomed to subordinate herself to the collective will of the family to ensure that she makes a good life later. Later on, she is denied inheritance on equal footing. Th ere is obviously lack of decision-making power, even of the elementary type. When it comes to higher decisions such as those related to fi nance, property, and family planning, independence is almost unheard of.

Hard pressed to accommodate the role both of breadwinners and domestic caretakers, women are often forced to make compromises on professional fronts. Th ey accept jobs that pay less, off er minimum economic and social security, where labour laws are diffi cult to implement and where there are minimum chances of economic growth.

In rural areas, 87 per cent women are employed in agriculture as labourers and cultivators. In urban areas, about 8090 per cent of the women workers are employed in household industries, small trade and services, and in building and construction work. A woman still bears the cost of her traditional domestic chores while the rising cost of living has put on her additional burden of earning and contributing to the total family income.

## **PROBLEMS OF WOMEN**

As explained above, the plight of women, in general, is distressing and their condition in society is deplorable, notwithstanding the fact that there have been some improvements in the lives of a negligible section of women. Th is improvement has been because of the measures taken for the amelioration of their lot by the governments, voluntary organizations, and social groups. But there still remains a lot to be done to ensure a meaningful life for the womenfolk of our country.

An account of the status of women attempted above highlights the problems of women, which may be enumerated briefl y as follows:

**(i) Gender bias:** Women in India suff er from gender bias of extreme nature. Th ey are discriminated on the basis of their sex. Boys are preferred over girls as is evident from the female foeticide and infanticide, preference to boys in matters of food, nourishment, education, and other necessities of life.

**(ii) Absence of freedom:** Women do not enjoy as much freedom and liberty as men do. It is rightly observed that women have always to depend on their parents in their childhood and adolescence, on their husbands and parents-in-laws after marriage, and on their children in old age. Lack of freedom does not let their instructive qualities of assertion, leadership, and enterprise develop and blossom.

**(iii) Crime against women:** Women are victims of crimes of numerous types at the hands of men. Th ey are abused and exploited, physically and mentally tortured, beaten and even burnt for dowry, divorced on fl imsy grounds, and compelled to undergo all kinds of hardships of performing the dual tasks of breadwinners and carrying out domestic chores. If employed, abduction, rapes, murders, and harassment at work places has become very common.

**(iv) Poverty:** As discussed earlier, women are the most impoverished, they live in abject poverty. Th ey are often sold by parents in exchange of money, are forced to adopt prostitution, and sometimes are the object of human traffi c to be exported to foreign countries.

**(v) Denial of education:** Women are ignorant and illiterate. Girls are denied education as the parents, particularly in rural areas, believe that they are destined to household activities and are not supposed to be exposed outside the four walls of the house.

**(vi) Inadequate facilities for professional training:** Even though girls in the towns go to schools they are not provided adequate facilities and avenues for training for higher education, especially in the rural areas.

**(vii) Absence of employment opportunities:** Th ere is a dearth of jobs for even educated women. Unemployment is the most serious problem faced by our country. Educated girls get frustrated and are forced to accept jobs at lower wages and on terms and conditions of the employer. Th ey are denied economic and social security available to the regular employees in public services and organized sectors of labour.

**(viii) Social evils:** Child marriage, expensive marriages involving expenditures way beyond the capacity of some parents, large families, too many children despite the publicity for smaller families, joint family system expecting and forcing the women to be engaged in various household responsibilities, lack of leisure and recreational activities, use of drugs and alcohol among the well-to-do family women, and death of bread earners in riots and wars further augment the problems of women.

**(ix) Diseases and other health hazards:** Women, being weak for lack of proper nutrition, fall an easy prey to all kinds of diseases, epidemics, stresses and strains, and the recent onslaught of the deadly diseases like AIDS. Th ere does not exist proper facilities for their treatment. Th ere is a lack of proper infrastructure and availability of medicines and treatment in exclusively designed institutes for women patients and, for that matter, in general hospitals.

**(x) Absence of proper representation in social, economic, and political institutions:** Women are denied proper representation and empowerment in social, economic, and political institutions in the matters of decision-making and implementation of concerned policies and programmes. Although they have been given 33 per cent reservation at the grass root institutions, their struggle for getting the same at State legislatures and the Parliament has not been successful so far. Th ey have not been empowered either in Panchayati Raj or in local government institutions in some states. To solve the problem they have to continue with their struggle more vigorously.

## **THE CHANGES IN THE STATUS OF WOMEN**

Visible and desirable changes in the status of women are evident in great abundance. Gender bias is being removed through legislation and society pressures. More and more girls are going to schools. Th ey outnumber boys in colleges and universities in achieving top positions. Th ey are qualifying the common entrance tests to medical, engineering, management, IIT's, and civil services. Women like Kalpana Chawla, a space scientist and Kiran Bedi, the most celebrated IPS offi cer are a source of inspiration and models to be followed by the promising young girls. A large number of girls are proving successful as entrepreneurs and are setting up their independent businesses in various fi elds. Conscious of their political rights, they are aspiring for occupying the coveted posts of the heads of government, chief ministers, and cabinet ministers. All this points out the emergence of a bright status for women.

Th e factors contributing to the changes in status of women in recent years and the measures adopted for these changes are discussed in detail:

Th e year 1990 was observed as the year of the 'girl child'. Her well-being and her status in the family, community, and nation were the focal points of concern. Perhaps there may be an increasing awareness that the girl child is also a human being with thoughts, emotions, aspirations, will, and individuality of her own. In fact, the post-independence period, particularly in the case of women, has been a continuation of the pre-independence era of social reforms, economic upliftment, and political recognition. Th e struggle for equality, justice, and identity continues.

Th e social reforms, which began in the nineteenth century, set in motion a number of legal measures with a view to improve the conditions of women. Th e laws thus enacted, among others, related to foeticide, child marriage, widow remarriage, sati, etc. Even though this was a step forward and an enabling factor in the development of women, the law could not achieve the desired results. For in the case of social legislation it is also imperative to have a change in the outlook, in the perception of women's role and support services. All these have been very slow to come by. Consequently, even after more than a century of social reforms, the change, though discernible, is far from being indicative of parity between men and women.

Th e overview of the situation generally is distressing. Rape, dowry deaths, misuse of the tests to determine the sex of the child in the womb and termination of pregnancy in case of a female foetus give an indication of the horrible behaviour patterns. In recent years, the government has taken a number of steps to set right the wrong that is done to the girl child. We have the report of the committee on the status of women, the women's year followed by the women's decade, women's departments, national perspective plan for women, the inclusion of a separate chapter on women's development in the Seventh Plan, and now the national commission. All these measures show the concern for women.

Th e women have yet to travel a long way before they can be equated with men.

#### **Achievements of the 'Year of the Girl Child'**

Th e South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) at its convention at Islamabad in 1989 had agreed on observing 1990 as the year of the girl child. During the year, India hosted many conferences and symposia that deliberated on the· age-old trials and tribulations of the girl child. Th e year witnessed some developments in favour of girl child and others in exploitation of women.

To begin with, a great achievement of the year was in the fi eld of adoption. Statistics compiled by the Voluntary Coordinating Agency, Bombay, under the auspices of the Indian Association for Promotion of Adoption showed that more parents were taking to adoption and they prefer girls. And in the state of Maharashtra, there had been a ten-fold leap, especially in Mumbai, Pune, and Nagpur.

Child marriages and particularly marriage of girls below 18 years of age was another topic well covered by the mass media. A suitable SAARC slogan goes thus: 'Too old for toys, too young for babies'. Amniocentesis with its technique of selective abortion plunged the year into heated debates while adding to the social weaponry used against women. Along with this sex determination technique that put an end to female foetuses, came the feeling that almost everything is stacked against the female child. 'Invest Rs 500 and save Rs. 50,000 later', this is how a doctor in Amritsar advertised his sex determination clinic. Data collected from six hospitals in Mumbai revealed that out of 8000 foetuses aborted early, 7999 were female.

Widespread agitation and protests in the state succeeded in bringing about a legislation banning amniocentesis in Maharashtra. A similar campaign for a central legislation was on. Th e year also witnessed increasing incidents of violence against women. Ironically, greater awareness had led to more cases being reported, while the number of convictions had gone down. According to police fi gures, punishments are awarded only in three out of 100 cases. Th is delay is mainly due to apathy in fi ling FIRs and issuing challans.

#### **Rise in Crimes Against Women**

Th ere has been a constant rise in dowry deaths, bride burning, and other forms of torture against women in the country. Rape, assault, molestation, kidnapping, and illegal confi nement are also rampant, both in rural and urban areas. Apart from heinous crimes, there are other off ences too which are committed against women in subtler forms and on a wider scale. Th ese are, for instance, abortions on suspicion that the child to be born may be a female, and denying the daughters the same quantity and quality of food as given to the sons.

#### **Reasons for Rise in Crimes Against Women and Suggestions to Mitigate Them**

**(i)** One reason why crimes against women continue to increase is that there is hardly any deterrent and the culprits feel that they can easily get away with anything. In all the cases of dowry deaths in Delhi over the past four years, there has been only one conviction. And according to a social activist, out of the 6500 cases registered with the police on crime against women, there were only 1500 arrests, and all of them were released on bail. Moreover, statistics of the Police Research Bureau have recorded only 3 per cent convictions during the past 10 years, to say the least.

**(ii)** There have been scores of amendments and inclusion of various laws in the statute book to check this unhealthy trend. The Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, has been amended twice to make its provision more punitive. The Indian Penal Code, the Criminal Procedure Code, and the Indian Evidence Act have also been amended simultaneously to deal effectively not only with dowry death cases but also with the cases of cruelty to married women. Similarly, the rape law has also come up to be modified to remove some of its drawbacks. All these measures, however, could not check the crime from further escalating. The objectives of these laws may not be faulted, but what is of crucial importance is their enforcement. A wide gap exists between laws with high social and economic purposes and their implementation on account of police inefficiency and widespread corruption. In this climate, the cutting edge of laws, both as instruments of crime prevention and that of social change, is bound to get blunted.

**(iii)** Legal remedies alone cannot cope with a regressive socio-economic set-up in the absence of radical structural, social, and economic reforms, which can be implemented only by mass mobilization and mass participation. With the kind of bureaucracy, police, and political set-up that we have, the mere passing of laws will not deliver the goods. A struggle even for the implementation of the existing laws that can help to uphold, protect, and promote the legitimate rights and demands of the women can be of much value.

**(iv)** It is also a matter of regret that the courts have, of late, begun to treat the accused with what might be described as irresponsible leniency. For instance, the Supreme Court has halved the sentence (from 10 to 5 years) of two constables convicted of raping a woman within the four walls of police station. Th is was done on the ground that the victim was, 'of questionable character and easy virtue'. Th is is a defi nite retreat of the Supreme Court's own bold and socially conscious earlier directive, when it advised the lower judiciary not to hesitate in awarding the maximum penalty prescribed under the law in such cases. Apart from negating the serious view of custodial rape, the decision also nullifi es the guidelines issued by the Central government in late eighties to prevent police misbehaving with women.

**(v)** Long delays in law courts are also responsible for a spurt in crimes. It has been seen that it often takes years together for the cases to reach the fi nal stage of disposal. During the course of pendency, most of the witnesses are either lured/scared away or evidence relevant to the case is destroyed by the off enders. And for want of these, the cases fall fl at. To prevent such happenings, cases like dowry deaths and rapes must be summarily tried by special courts to be set up for the purpose. Th ese courts will certainly ensure speedy justice to victims not otherwise possible under the normal process of law that is not only time-consuming but also humiliating. Similarly, family courts, if set up, can also take care of many problems of married women.

**(vi)** Ironically, public response to violence against women is one of indiff erence.

In sum, there can be no two opinions about the need for stringent laws, sensitive judiciary, eff ective enforcement machinery, and vigilant women's groups to deal with such atrocious crimes against women. But what is needed more than anything else is a 'total revolution' in the thinking of society that always blames the women for the crime of which she is the victim, not the perpetrator.

# **Programme for Women Welfare at the Centre and State Levels**

Of late, women all over the world have been agitating and struggling for their rights and privileges and initiating woman liberation movements to achieve their rightful place in their respective societies. Th e United Nations had declared 1975 as International Women Year and the period 1975–1985 as the International Women Decade. March 8, is observed as Women's Day in our country every year. All these anniversaries and commemorative days are observed to focus the attention and concern of the governments and the society on the needs of women and the eff orts required to meet them—on their fundamental right to equality; the equal right to nutrition, health, education and opportunity; beginning with the right to survive. All these components are crucial for the all round development of the women and the community, she lives in. Th e Centre and State governments and Union Territories administrations launched a number of programmes for improving social and economic status of women. Th ere were intensifi ed eff orts to maintain continuity and for the progress and expansion of these programmes during the Women's Decade.

**(i)** Various state governments, recognizing the role of integrated delivery of early childhood services, took up the centrally sponsored scheme of Integrated Child Development Services for implementation in the states; the impact of the scheme was evident on the lives of children and mothers in several crucial indicators—increased immunization coverage, reduced infant morality rate and decline in birth and death rates.

**(ii)** Th e 20-Point Programme was launched, which lays special emphasis on accelerated programmes for women welfare and nutrition programmes for pregnant women and nursing mothers, especially in tribal, hilly, and backward areas.

**(iii)** Women and Children Development Corporations were set up.

**(iv)** Construction of a number of women's hostel buildings by voluntary organizations, with the aid given by the Central and State governments.

**(v)** Provision of crèches in conjunction with working women's hostels as well as in other establishments.

**(vi)** Various concessions and facilities for working women such as relaxation on age limit in entering government services, special leave benefi ts, etc.

**(vii)** Th e Central Social Welfare Board, State Social Welfare Advisory Boards, Indian Council for Women Welfare, All India Women's Conference, Bhartiya Grameen Mahila Sangh, Red Cross, Association for Social Health in India and other voluntary organizations were in existence long before the International Women's Decade, but during this decade these organizations geared up their machinery and came up with novel programmes for women's welfare. Celebration of simple marriages and even mass-marriages, settlement of family dispute arising out of demand for more dowry, and matrimonial problems have been receiving greater attention of all such voluntary welfare organizations.

**(viii)** Social maladies and social imbalances in the society call for providing greater social security to women. Women also have to suff er the backlash eff ects of growing problems of drug addiction and alcoholism. After the death of the drug-addict husband, the wife has to stand on her own and think of ways and means to steer the family through the crisis. Dowry deaths, bride burning, social improprieties, etc. have prompted these voluntary welfare organizations to work with more zeal and vigour for the eradication of such social evils and for creating social awakening, raising social values, and improving social health so that women should live in complete social harmony.

**(ix)** Th e state governments have set up protective homes for the distressed women and those who are in moral danger under the Suppression of Immoral Traffi c Act. Due to broken homes and highly individualistic society, the problems of unmarried mothers, orphans, and emotionally disturbed women are quite acute today. In this context, for organizing and strengthening social welfare services on modern lines, consistent with the curative and rehabilitative needs is all the felt. Th ese social obligations continue to receive much of the government attention and the policies and programmes are reviewed and modifi ed in the light of the new social challenges.

# **Social Legislation for Women**

With a view to improve the declining sex ratio and for containing the menace of female foeticide, the Government brought into force the Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention

of Misuse) Act, 1994, with eff ect from 1 January 1996. Th e amendments to the act made in 2002 brought the technique of pre-conception sex selection and use of ultrasound machines within the ambit of the act; made punishments prescribed under the act more stringent; and empowered the authorities for search, seizure, and sealing of the machines, equipments, and records of violators of the law. Th e Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, was passed, which provides for (a) the payment of equal remuneration to men and women workers and (b) prevention of discrimination on the ground of sex against women in the matter of employment arid for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Th e Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1955, had been amended by the Marriage Laws Amendment Act, 1976, to provide for the right of a girl to repudiate before attaining majority, her marriage as a child, whether the marriage has been consummated or not. Th e Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, was made more stringent. Th e Child Marriage Restraint Amendment Act, 1978, raises the age of the marriage for girls from 15 to 18 years and for boys from 18 to 21 years. Th e Factories (Amendment) Act, 1976, provides for establishment of a crèche where 30 women are employed as against one for every 50 hitherto. Th e Maternity Benefi ts Act, 1961, was amended in April 1976 to cover women who do not fall within the purview of the Employee's State Insurance Act, 1948. Th ese legislative measures are expected to go a long way in removing social prejudices, social **inequalities, and social stigmas against women.**

#### **The Department of Women and Child Development**

Th e Department of Women and Child Development is charged with the nodal responsibility to implement and co-ordinate programmes of women's welfare and development. It activates diff erent ministries departments both at the centre and state levels dealing with women's welfare and development programmes. It also initiates and intensifi es measures to promote voluntary eff orts in the fi eld of women's development. Th e department, besides playing a nodal role, also implements the following schemes for the welfare and development of women:

**Hostels for working women:** With the progressive change in the economic structure of the country, more and more women are moving from their homes in search of employment. One of the main diffi culties faced by them is lack of suitable accommodation in a healthy and wholesome environment. Keeping in view the diffi culties faced by such women, Central Scheme of Assistance for Construction of Hostel Buildings for Working Women was started in 1972. Th e scope of the scheme was widened in 1980 by including a provision for day-care centres for children. Financial assistance to the extent of 50 per cent of the cost of land and 75 per cent of the cost of construction of the hostels is given to voluntary organizations. Assistance on the same pattern is also provided for the purchase of building to start hostels. Besides voluntary organizations, local bodies, women's development corporations, universities and schools/colleges of social work are eligible for fi nancial assistance under this scheme.

**Employment and income-generating production programme:** Th is programme was started in 1982–1983 to train women belonging to weaker sections of society and provide them employment on sustained basis. It is implemented through public sector undertakings/corporations/autonomous bodies/voluntary organizations. Assistance for the programme comes from Norwegian Agency for International Development.

**Women's training centres/institutes for the rehabilitation of women in distress:** Adversities of life arising out of economic, social, psychological, and environmental situations aff ect women the worst. Young and old widows, unmarried mothers, and victims of kidnapping are some of the vulnerable groups aff ected. Prolonged illnesses of the bread earner or his being jailed for a crime and desertion by husbands are other reasons for destitution. With the objective of rehabilitating such women and their dependent children, a scheme was launched in 1977 to provide vocational training-cum-employment and residential area so that these women could become economically independent. Th e scheme envisages training of short duration, not exceeding a year. Th e scheme is a centrally sponsored one. Th e expenditure is shared between the Central government, State government, and the implementing organizations in the ratio of 45:45:10. In the case of Union Territories, expenditure is shared between the Central government and the implementing organization in the ratio of 90:10. Voluntary agencies registered as societies/trusts, district, rural development agencies, panchayats, and other local bodies are eligible for assistance.

**Short-stay homes for women and girls:** Th e department gives grant-in-aid to voluntary organizations to establish and run short-stay homes to protect and rehabilitate those women and girls who are facing social and moral danger because of family problems, mental strain, social ostracism, exploitation, or any other cause. Under the scheme services/facilities of medical care; psychiatric treatment; case-work services; occupational therapy; social facilities of adjustment; and education, vocational, and recreational activities are provided.

**Family life institute:** Th e Association for Social Health in India runs the Family Life Institute in Delhi. Th e major functions of this institute are counselling services and family life education for the maladjusted spouses, parents, unmarried youths, teenagers of unsettled and depressed mind, child drop-outs, etc.

**Pilot project for mobilizing public opinion against traffi cking and elevation of moral standard in general:** Under this project, fi nancial assistance is given to enable the Association for Social Health in India to .generate public opinion against traffi cking and elevation of moral standards in general.

**Education work for prevention of atrocities against women:** Assistance under this scheme is given to the organizations working with women for their social upliftment and betterment. Prevention of atrocities against women can be carried out through propaganda, publicity, and research work. Th e diff erent methods to achieve the goal are as follows:

**(i)** Production and publication of educative journals, articles, books, and other publicity materials such as pamphlets, booklets, hoardings, posters, and slogans depicting themes of violence against women

**(ii)** Carrying out surveys/studies on particular aspects of violence and atrocities against women.

**(iii)** Production of fi lms, short plays, short stories, poems, and other creative eff orts.

**(iv)** Dissemination of information in regional languages.

**(v)** Holding of seminars, conferences, meetings, exhibitions, and training camps for social and other workers including government functionaries.

**(vi)** Organization of legal literacy training camps, paralegal training, and use of folk media such as street plays, puppetry, and other traditional art forms to raise awareness related to violence against women.

**Support to training and employment programme for women (STEP):** A new omnibus scheme to render support to women's employment in various sectors such as agriculture, dairy, animal husbandry, fi sheries, khadi and village industries, handlooms, handicrafts, and sericulture, where women are preponderantly engaged in work, was formulated at the beginning of the Seventh Plan. Th e scheme focuses on the poorest, the most marginalized poor assetless women including wage

labourers, unpaid family workers, female-headed households, migrant labourers, tribals, and other dispossessed groups.

**National commission on self-employed women:** Th e national commission on self-employed women under the chairmanship of Ela R. Bhatt was set up under the Department of Women and Child Development on 5 January 1987. Its terms of references were to examine the present status of women in the self-employed sector, with special reference to employment, health, education, and social status; to assess the·impact of various labour legislations of the self-employed, specially in respect of maternity benefi ts, health insurance, etc.; to identify the constraints on increase of productivity of self-employed women and the gaps in training, credit, upgradation of skills, marketing, etc.; to survey employment patterns including production relations and assess their impact on the wages of the self-employed women; to undertake a survey of the eff ects of macroeconomic policies relating to investment, production, technology, etc. on the status of self-employed women; to consider the link between the productive and reproductive roles of the self-employed women, with special reference to their health status; and to suggest measures relating to all sectors for removing the constraints that adversely aff ect the integration of self-employed women in the national development process.

It strongly recommended that women should be given control over assets, as this would perhaps be an important intervention by the government, to make their economic ventures viable and improve their status. It has also sought reservations in jobs for women.

**National commission for women:** Many organizations for women, cutting across party lines, have been demanding the setting up of a statutory body for protecting their rights. Th e demand for a national commission for women had been made in 1976 when the fi rst comprehensive report on the status of women in India was released. Th ere was broad agreement that positive steps were required to give women their due place in the society. In the meantime, mounting instances of bride burning, dowry, practice of sati, all combined to give the matter a new urgency. National Front government introduced the National Commission on Women Bill on the last day of the budget session of Parliament in 1990. But the Bill lapsed on account of the dissolution of Lok Sabha. Th e Bill was again presented before the newly constituted Parliament and the commission was set up in 1992. Th e commission has a chairman, fi ve members, and a member secretary all nominated by the Central government. Th e main activities of the commission are review of legislation, looking into specifi c individual complaints of atrocities, and remedial action to safeguard the interests of women. In addition, several states have also established 'State Women's Commission.'

**Th e Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961:** Dowry system has always given rise to innumerable socio-economic problems of far reaching consequences and wide ranging ramifi cations. Of late, numerous incidents of bride burning, harassment, and physical torture of the young brides and various kinds of pressure tactics being adopted by the husband-in-laws pressuring for more dowry have compelled the social reformers and the intelligentsia to give serious thought to the various aspects connected with the very institution of dowry. Admittedly, legislation by itself cannot normally solve deep-rooted social problems. Nonetheless, legislation is necessary to exercise educative impact besides providing legal sanctions against this social evil of devastating consequences. It is in this context that while the Dowry Prohibition Act was enacted in 1961, the Dowry Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 1984 was passed to further plug some of the loopholes in the original Act, which came into force with eff ect from 2 October 1985. Th e act, inter alia, stipulates under the Dowry Prohibition (Maintenance of Lists of Presents to the Bride and Bridegroom) Rules, 1985, that the list of presents which are given at the time of the marriage to the bride/bridegroom shall be maintained by the bride/bridegroom in writing and shall contain a brief description of each present, its approximate value, the name of the person who has given the present, and how the person giving the present is related to the bride or bridegroom, a description of such relationship, and shall be signed by both the bride and the bridegroom.

**Women's development corporations:** A scheme to set up Women's Development Corporations in all the States and Union Territories was formulated during 1986–1987. Th e objective of the scheme was to provide better employment avenues for women so that they could become economically independent and self-reliant. Further, the scheme helps to overcome the major obstacles to women's employment sector. In fact, the Women's Corporations set up by the State governments and Union Territories are expected to work as catalytic agent to create sustained income generating activities for women. Th ese corporations promote schemes for women and women's groups belonging to weaker sections of the society with priority to single women. Th e functions of the corporation include identifi cation of potential areas of employment, assistance for project formulation, and raising required fi nances, arranging raw material for working women in multiple occupations, and providing training facilities and infrastructure for marketing the products.

#### **Conclusion**

It is obvious from the analysis of the measures taken for the development and welfare of women that, partly due to the social upsurge and change in attitudes manifesting themselves into various forms and ways, and partly due to the accompanying social, economic, and legal measures, the woman in independent India has come to acquire a better status in the society. With the march of time and progress since independence, the woman has gradually come to acquire considerable emancipation from the complexities and ills with which she had been suff ering for long. Today's woman has come to have better acceptability and respectability, better status of equality with men, better rights and privileges, better opportunities and avenues in all spheres of national life—social, economic, and political.

In the emancipation and liberation of women, in the recognition of the legitimate place in the family and the society, in the recognition and protection of her interests, rights and privileges, and in the gradual enhancement of her status, the law has played great role as an instrument of change.

Th e Constitution of India did it by declaring in its preamble its desire to have justice—social, economic and political—and to secure equality of status and opportunity. Th e Constitution did its best to ensure translation of the objective into reality by incorporating provisions, ensuring equality of status and of opportunity in the fi elds of education, public employment, and political life. Apart from ensuring 'equality before the law' and 'equal protection of laws' in the wider sense of the term, the Constitution took great pains to specifi cally prohibit the state from discriminating against women on the ground of sex in such areas as education and public employment, and to direct the state to take special care to promote women's welfare, particularly the protection of their health as mothers and their dignity as individuals.

Th e legislatures in India have also been alive to the ideal set by the Constitution and have not lagged behind in devising legal ways and means to protect the interests and rights of women and to confer upon them special benefi ts so as to place them as far as possible, at par with men. Th e legislatures, have, after 1950, enacted a large number of new laws and have modifi ed such laws as were in existence at the time of the commencement of the Constitution to make them suit the new changing demands. Th e laws passed after 1950 bear testimony to the concern our legislatures have shown towards protection of women.

In addition to the legislative measures, the governments at the Centre, States, and Union Territories have also initiated numerous welfare measures for the development and welfare of women, but much more needs to be done to achieve the desired objectives. New programmes need to be introduced, the existing ones expanded, and the lacuna from which they suff er to be remedied, as per suggestions given below:

# **SUGGESTIONS FOR AMELIORATION OF WOMEN'S LOT AND IMPROVING THEIR STATUS**

**(i)** Women issues have been analysed, among others, by the two important documents of the Ministry of Human Resource Development—National Perspective Plan for Women 1988–2000 and the Report of the National Commission on self-employed women and women in the informal sector. It is unfortunate that the painstaking work done by Ela Bhatt's Committee has remained in the ministry's archives and no action has been taken on the valuable recommendations. If these recommendations are given the consideration they deserve and implemented, they can certainly contribute to the amelioration of women, especially those working in the informal sector.

**(ii)** A number of welfare programmes for women had been initiated during the last few years, but their implementation at the grassroots seems to be weak. Th e focus has, therefore, to be on the implementation and strengthening of machinery at various levels.

**(iii)** Th e State governments are slow in taking required action on the guidelines, suggestions, and proposals made by the Central government. For instance, the bill on the family courts was passed in 1984, but until now only six courts have been set up by the State governments.

**(iv)** Th e administration, whether it is an IAS offi cer or any other offi cer, deals with the issues in a routine manner. Th e sensitization of administration is, therefore, imperative to ensure speedy implementation of women programmes.

**(v)** Th ere are some specifi c priority issues where the focus is on implementation. For instance, the issue of dowry and dowry atrocities. Th e Central government would like every state to have a special cell for women where the aff ected women can go. Similarly, there should be more women in the judiciary, particularly the lower courts and also in the police stations. Th e Home Ministry has launched a campaign for recruiting more and more women, but not enough has been done. Th e conditions of women in jails are appalling. Th ere is a need to set up jails exclusively for women. Th e jails do not have adequate women staff , and the keys of women's cells are in the possession of jail superintendents. For violation of law, in most cases, women are arrested by male offi cials. Unless unavoidable, no women should be arrested between sunset and sunshine, and only female offi cials above the rank of assistant subinspector should eff ect the arrest. Once these steps are taken, the entire atmosphere and environment will change for the benefi t of women.

**(vi)** Th e voluntary agencies that take up the cause of women can do much more than they have already done. Not enough of them exist in the rural areas. Women social workers who have been doing voluntary work so far need to be paid. Th ere is a need for greater co-ordination between the voluntary agencies.

**(vii)** Th e feminist movement in India is a very positive movement and that is the reason why it has not met with the type of hostility that it has in other countries. It has been balanced enough not to create a sense of insecurity. Th ings cannot be changed overnight and one has to take the men along to achieve results.

**(viii)** Th e schemes initiated for improving the economic status of rural women seem to have fl opped. For example, under the integrated Rural Development Programme, 30 per cent of benefi ciaries were to be women-headed enterprises and the banks were supposed to fi nance them. But the banks did not fund the schemes, as they thought that women as individual borrowers are non-credit worthy and have no title to their assets, which cannot be hypothecated. Hence, the Ministry of Rural Development fl oated another scheme called Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas (DWCRA), which shifted the focus from individual loaning to group loaning based on women's groups. But according to the banks, women groups are no better than individual women; the loosely organized illiterate women are not legal entities, and loan recoveries would be diffi cult. Some banks felt that once a woman was married, she would go away and not repay the loan. Organizing women around specifi c economic activities is, thus, diffi cult. No wonder the Women's Development Finance Corporations in the states have proved infructuous. Th ey have become subsidy distribution agencies for women, and like other public sector corporations they are surviving on the consolidated fund of India, which is shrinking.

 Again there is marketing problem of women's enterprises. Despite the plethora of marketing agencies women's products still do not get the right price. Some districts have set up their own sale outlets managed by district rural development agencies. Some products are sold in local markets. Th e tendency is to set up exclusive marketing agencies for women products. Th e government can direct its departments and public sector undertakings to place orders for their requirements with women groups for their products rather than with contractors. What is needed is not much centralized set-up, but decentralized tie-ups with several existing sale and purchase bodies of the state and non-state agencies.

**(ix)** Th e whole problem aff ecting women is not the dearth of laws and regulation, but the administrative will to enforce the existing laws. Th e present factory inspectors, mostly males, are more concerned with formal compliance of factory laws such as fi re extinguishers fi xed or not fi xed (whether they work or not is immaterial), fi rst aid boxes provided or not provided, display of the names of the factory inspector and the boiler inspector, etc on the factory notice board. Th ese trivial matters get the attention of labour inspectors, but important matters such as provision of a crèche for the children of women workers, provision of proper toilets and drinking water facilities, proper maintenance of muster rolls, and payment of wages on time are neglected.

 Even in co-operative cotton ginning, spinning, and pressing factories where women labourers are in a majority, no crèche facilities exist. To ensure better conditions for working women, we do not need separate labour commissioners. Stringent enforcement of existing laws would help women in formal sectors. We have yet to see women factory inspectors. Th e implementation of the Factories Act, 1948, Mines Act, 1952, and Plantation Labour Act, 1951 would help women a great deal.

**(x)** Exploitation of women and child labour takes place both in formal and informal sectors, more so in the latter. Even the formal sector employers behave like the employers of the informal sector when it comes to the provision of medical aid and welfare services. Presently, employees state insurance (ESI) hospitals and dispensaries do not cover women in informal sectors. By providing them identity cards they could be brought under the health cover of ESI dispensaries. Many informal sector workers would prefer to pay nominal health insurance fee and get a health check-up rather than be fl eeced by private practising doctors.

**(xi)** Women's development and welfare form a component of the departments of social welfare in the states. Th ey should have separate directorates of women/children, which should be

 managed and controlled by women authorities, as they know the problems of women intimately and can motivate and activate them in solving them through the implementation of programmes oriented to their development and welfare.

**(xii)** Women are ignorant about provisions of law, protecting them against atrocities relating to divorce, bride burning, legal separation, guardianship, early marriage, pension for widows, etc. Some non-government organizations (NGOs) and activist groups functioning in diff erent towns and villages have done exemplary work in organizing legal literacy camps and fi ghting the cases of socially marginalized women. For example, SUTRA in Himachal Pradesh has succeeded in getting a number of women their old age pension and closing liquor vends in villages. Such institutes of the government and non-government sectors need to be identifi ed, promoted, and developed.

**(xiii)** Lastly, the ministry and the department of women and child development are the nodal agencies for the development and welfare of women and children, but to pass the buck to them is not fair. It is to be realized that the regulative and promotive measures have to be initiated by several ministries and agencies for the development and welfare of women and every one of them should play its role in the best possible manner.

 In the ultimate analysis, it is to be understood that more than pious wishes, legal amendments, and lofty pronouncements, it requires will and dogged perseverance on the part of both government and women to ensure for the latter a place of pride and respectability in the society. With all the concern that is refl ected in the policy of the Government and the massive programmes undertaken by it for the development and welfare of women, the future scenario for women is indeed bright.

# **QUESTIONS**

- 1. What is the status of women in the Indian society? Do you think their status has improved now?
- 2. Describe the various legislative measures enacted by the Government to protect and promote the welfare of women in India.
- 3. What are the problems of Indian women? Describe the measures taken for their welfare.
- 4. What are your suggestions for improving the status of women in India?