#### **184 Post-Colonial Development and Health**

- Jerome, N. W., Kandel, R. F., & Pelto, G. H. (Eds.). (1980). *Nutritional anthropology: Biocultural perspectives on food and nutrition*. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Kiple, K. F. (2000). The question of Paleolithic nutrition and modern health: From the end to the beginning. In K. F. Kiple & K. C. Ornelas (Eds.), *The Cambridge world history of food* (pp. 1704–1709). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Martorell, R. (1998). Body size, adaptation and function. In P. J. Brown (Ed.), *Understanding and applying medical anthropology* (pp. 39–45). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Messer, E. (1997). Intra-household allocation of food and health care: Current findings and understandings—introduction. *Social Science & Medicine, 44*, 1675–1684.
- Murcott, A. (1988). Sociological and social anthropological approaches to food and eating. *World Review of Nutrition and Dietetics, 55*, 1–40.
- Pelto, G. H. (1986). Current research directions in nutritional anthropology. *Sosiaalilääketieteellinen Aikakauslehti* (*Journal of Social Medicine*), *23*, 93–103.
- Pelto, G. H. (1996). Nutritional anthropology. In D. Levinson & M. Ember (Eds.), *Encyclopedia of cultural anthropology* (pp. 881–884). New York: Henry Hott.

- Pelto, G. H. (2000). Continuities and new challenges in applied nutritional anthropology. *Nutritional Anthropology, 23*, 16–22.
- Pelto, G. H., Pelto, P. J., & Messer, E. (Eds.). (1989). *Research methods in nutritional anthropology*. Tokyo: The United Nations University.
- Popkin, B. M. (2002). An overview on the nutrition transition and its health implications: The Bellagio meeting. *Public Health Nutrition, 5*, 93–103.
- Quandt, S. A., & Ritenbaugh, C. (Eds.). (1986). *Training manual in nutritional anthropology*. American Anthropological Association.
- Richards, A. F. (1939). *Land, labour and diet in Northern Rhodesia: An economic study of the Bemba tribe*. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
- Ritenbaugh, C., & Goodby, C.-S. (1998). Beyond the thrifty gene: Metabolic implications of prehistoric migration into the New World. In P. J. Brown (Ed.), *Understanding and applying medical anthropology* (pp. 46–51). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Sharman, A., Theophano, J., Curtis K., & Messer, E. (Eds.). (1991). *Diet and domestic life in society*. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
- Wilson, C. S. (2002). Reasons for eating: Personal experiences in nutrition and anthropology. *Appetite, 38*, 63–67.

# **Post-Colonial Development and Health**

#### **Steve Ferzacca**

*Decolonization is always a violent phenomenon.* Frantz Fanon, *The Wretched of the Earth,* 1963

## **INTRODUCTION**

The post-World War II era marked the rise of new nationstates. Released from the shackles of European colonialism, the former colonies as newly emerging nations began to chart their own courses toward becoming modern global partners with and for their former colonizers. Manifestos of various political persuasions and economic strategies became blueprints for transforming colonialist architectures of rule into nationalist administrations. One important manifesto that spoke a common language across the globe was development ideology. For newly emerging nation-states in search of an international language to legitimate their status as democratic nations among democracies, development ideology, based on the authoritative ground of "scientific" theory and technique, provided immediate entry into an international network of power, knowledge, and finance. The health of the population and the state of its health care provisions were, after forming a government, a top priority for these youthful nation-states. South and Southeast Asian countries, various African states, governments in the Middle East and the Americas, in the spirit of self-determination, guided by the ideology of developmentalism, prepared for take-off into the atmosphere of the modern world by turning their attentions to improving health. In many cases, after centuries of colonial rule, standards of health and health care remained dismal, especially for those segments of the population already marginalized by colonial practices.

Medical anthropology found itself as a sub-field of anthropology at this historical moment of post-coloniality. The research concerns and methodological approaches of medical anthropology emerged within a post-colonial

#### **Colonialism, Early Post-Colonialism, and Health 185**

context for which "development" and the urge to develop were integral features of political and social life. Medical anthropology as applied to theory and practice shaped and was shaped by the "essential binaries" that are central organizing principles for colonial theories of human diversity formulated to justify inequality and relations of domination and control. Such binaries include distinctions made between primitive and modern, simple and complex, small scale and large scale, undeveloped (or developing) and developed, Third World and First World. However, medical anthropology as a problem-oriented research activity also reflected the real actualities of colonial history manifest in conditions of health and health care. Medical anthropology continues to reflect and contribute to the unfolding history of post-coloniality and the post-colonial condition.

## **COLONIALISM, EARLY POST-COLONIALISM, AND HEALTH**

The health consequences of colonialism immediately faced by post-colonial regimes cannot be characterized by any one set of health problems, health practices, and perceptions. Rather, differences in health and health care reflect regional, class, ethnic, gender, age, rural and/or urban circumstances, posing a myriad of challenges for post-colonial development efforts. The withdrawal of colonial powers left behind a mixed legacy of health conditions and health care provisions. Where one lived in terms of geography, and where one stood in terms of colonial social structure were significant determinants of health for emerging post-colonial societies. Janzen (1978) in his groundbreaking ethnography on medical pluralism among the BaKongo in Lower Zaire (today's Democratic Republic of the Congo), describes the social and geographic distributions of various health problems faced by available medicine at the time of his study (1969). The Belgian colonial government played a central role in the increasing prevalence of post-colonial "endemic killers" among populations in the Lower Zaire river region. Colonial expansion into the region disrupted an ecological balance among settlement patterns, subsistence strategies, and economic arrangements. Colonial infrastructure projects, for example the building of the railroad, required a local labor force. Colonial recruitment activities resulted in the displacement of people and settlements. Before the intrusion of colonial expansion, villages had been built on top of hills and mountains which provided some immunity to the insect vectors that carried malaria, sleeping sickness, and dysentery. As peoples of the Lower Zaire moved to the valleys and sheltered forests, either as colonial laborers or in an attempt to escape labor recruitment, whole villages were exposed to endemic killers such as malaria, gastrointestinal parasites, and sleeping sickness.

At the time of his study Janzen noted that while "endemic killers" had been "brought under control" the persistence of these health problems continued after the arrival of "modern" colonial medicine. He outlined a post-colonial social geography of disease and illness that followed social divisions established by poverty, access to adequate food supplies, "inadequate knowledge" of health care and disease prevention, and in the case of children, stage of human development. For BaKongo children their conditions of life in Lower Zaire remained plagued by respiratory infections, chronic diarrhea, polio, measles, and sickle-cell anemia. For the poor and ill-educated, life was one of chronic malnutrition and diseases related to vitamin deficiencies, as well as outbreaks of smallpox, and yellow fever.

In Southeast Asia, Indonesia provides a similar set of circumstances and health conditions after Independence from Dutch colonial rule. Gardiner and Oey (1987) document a disease profile for Java before independence dominated by infectious and communicable diseases, notably cholera, smallpox, malaria, typhoid, dysentery, and tuberculosis. The *Handbook of the Netherlands East-Indies, 1924* warns Dutch colonialists of the persistence of "the contagious abdominal troubles … enteric fever, amebic and bacillary dysentery, cholera, malaria" as well as hookworm disease, yaws, beri-beri, leprosy, plague, and smallpox that affect health in the Dutch colonies. In 1966, nearly two decades after Indonesian Independence, President Suharto gave birth to the Seven Health Efforts program instituted in order to cope with the "return of epidemics," especially malaria and the poxes. Indonesian post-colonial development projects meant to eradicate epidemic infectious diseases targeted the improvement of conditions surrounding food, clothing, housing, preventive medicine, curative medicine, pharmaceuticals, and education (Ferzacca, 1996). In 1967, with help from the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF, the first national Master Plan for the development of national health care services in Indonesia was born with these issues in mind and at hand.

In addition to the presence of the "traditional hazards associated with lack of development" (WHO, 1997) post-colonial development efforts had to face and were stalled by millions of deaths and other health problems in the newly emerging nations related to violence, wars, and military coups. At the dawn of post-coloniality guns and other weaponry were often the most abundant forms of technology used in nation-building and becoming a developed country. The costs due to these violent national awakenings were felt in terms of health. Nigeria, a British colony until 1963, as a newly emerging Republic was wracked by ethnic conflict and warfare that in 1967 led to the Biafran War. By 1970 it was estimated that the number of dead from violence, disease, and starvation was between 1 and 3 million. Moreover, the infrastructure of health care was destroyed in the region of Biafra. The hostilities and destruction of the Biafran War resulted in severe shortages of food, medicine, clothing, and housing. One of the military tactics of the Nigerian government against the successionist Republic of Biafra was to impose blockages that were effective in cutting off food supplies. Famine was widespread in the region. The images of Biafran children sick with *kwashiorkor*, an extreme form of protein-energy malnutrition, appeared worldwide. Before the fighting ended about 1 million children had died of starvation.

In the former colonies post-colonial health care provisions were pieced together from remnants of colonial era medicine. European colonial experiences in and perceptions of the disease environments of the colonies along with experiences with and perceptions of colonial populations shaped post-colonial strategies toward health care. For European colonizers medicine as a "tool of empire" was employed to civilize the natives as well as environments hostile to the health of both colonizers and colonized (Arnold, 1988). The "local health care system" of colonial medicine generally included an array of clinics, hospitals, and rural dispensaries as well as medical care provided by missionaries, local individuals who received some training in this import of medical technique and knowledge, and indigenous healers and medicines.

In the Congo the advent of colonial medicine is directly related to the sleeping sickness epidemic (Lyons, 1988). In the first part of the 20th century the population struck by endemic sleeping sickness dropped to half the level of the 15th century. Belgian colonial medical services dispatched to confront sleeping sickness evolved into the system of hospitals, rural clinics, missions, patterns of research activity, and bureaucratic health administration that some claimed by the 1950s "was without a doubt the best in the whole tropical world" (Grinker, 1994, p. 50). In June 1960 independence was achieved and the First Republic of the Congo inherited a medical pluralism that included the colonial medical services along with "indigenous therapy" and medical perception (Janzen, 1978).

The appearance of colonial medicine in Indonesia began late in the Dutch colonial enterprise. Boomgaard (1993) notes that the "popularity of shots" in Java began with the anti-yaws campaigns after 1900, and left a "lasting impression" of the efficacy of scientific medicine on local medical perception and practices in colonial Indonesia. These public health campaigns in conjunction with the "Javanization of medical personnel," particularly in the *Dokter Djawa* schools that provided medical training for the natives, and increasing urbanization, was the context from which the Dutch Colonial Public Health Service in 1925 was launched (Boomgaard, 1993). Many scholars agree that early in the 20th century scientific models of health and disease, especially as these models pertain to hygiene and germ theory, made their way into the consciousness of certain segments of the Indonesian population, most likely through public health campaigns aimed at eradicating malaria, cholera, typhoid fever, smallpox, and the plague (Gardiner & Oey, 1987). An equally important urgent health condition in the natural history of scientific medicine in Indonesia was the influenza pandemic of 1918 (Brown, 1987). The availability of post-colonial medical services based on biomedical practices and perceptions of illness and disease increased after Independence, and especially after the mid-1960s with the emergence of President Suharto's New Order government. The Indonesian National Health Care System was organized from a pre-existing Dutch colonial network of hospitals, public health centers, rural health centers, and mobile units.

The medical architectures that grew out of these strategies for which European medicine was dominant provided the foundation, often times a skeletal one at that, for post-colonial health care. The technologies and architecture of health care, found to be in varying states of order and decay, along with the cultural logic that in the colonial context had informed their use, were adopted by newly emerging nations in the desire to remedy the ill-health of their national populations and to begin the

#### **Colonialism, Early Post-Colonialism, and Health 187**

path toward development. The cultural logic of European colonial medicine not only reflected an emerging science of medicine. In addition, the cultural logic of colonial medicine reflected the views of European colonizers of the environments and populations under their control. Medicine and medical technique were arranged and employed within hierarchically arranged categories and sets of "essential binaries" that represented the colonial world view in general ways beyond the realm of medicine (Bhabha, 1994). The "humane imperialism" (Comaroff & Comaroff, 1992) of colonial era medicine produced and reproduced conceptual frameworks of the natives and their environments in terms of body, hygiene, person, society, medical perception, and technique. Native bodies were closer to nature than the cultured ones of Europeans, and their wild, filthy, animal-like, traditional, magical bodies, hygiene, persons, societies, materia medica, respectively stood in contrast to civilized, clean, human, modern, scientific European ones.

As post-colonial national developments begin, these common binaries incorporated into development ideology, are appropriated by governments as they apply this ideology for purposes of nation-building and statemaking. Ironically, the very categories of rule imposed by colonial regimes became measures of progress and development for post-colonial states, albeit within a language of development that was little more than a revision of the scientific racism of colonialism. Gone were the references to evolutionary models of human difference to be replaced with a language of economic change in which binary oppositions between First World and Third World, traditional and modern societies, developed and developing, represented the before and after results of development efforts, strategies, and programs.

For example, in 1949 as the New Republic of Indonesia wrestled its independence from a returning and obsessed Netherlands East Indies colonial regime there was already a vibrant discussion among various Indonesian nationalist leaders and future social engineers concerned with the appropriate directions for this new nation toward becoming modern while maintaining the authentic traditions unique to the peoples of this archipelago. Ethnic groups, their practices and beliefs, including their medicines and medical knowledge, were organized by their proximity in both time and space to modernity using the contrasting category of tradition. Typically, Indonesian ethnic groups who foraged in the forests or lived rural agricultural lives were characterized as peoples ruled by customs and traditions with levels of technology, medical or otherwise, that were equally traditional compared with Indonesians living in cities who had adopted city ways, medical or otherwise, that were modern. Likewise, the health problems that plagued peoples categorized along these lines were also described as either traditional or modern. Since the majority of the Indonesia population lived as agricultural peasants the nation-state itself, determined by international standards that were also adopted by the Indonesian government, was in need of development in order to progress from a post-coloniality stuck in tradition toward modern ways of life.

These "essential binaries" of development ideology that offer contrasting portraits of "modern" in terms of the "traditional," "Western" in terms of "non-Western," "urban" in terms of "rural," provided the necessary parameters for post-colonial development projects targeting health. In the Indonesian case local knowledge incorporated in the health plans for a nation formed around the essential binaries of development ideology identified *tradisi*, or the traditional, *adat*, or custom, *desa*, or the village, and *daerah*, or a place outside urban landscapes as potential sites for development. *Tradisi, adat, the desa, and daerah* had been important categories since Dutch colonial efforts to account for and standardize ethnic diversity in the colony. These categories for the postcolonial regime became important markers of the potential presence of under-development and traditional patterns of illness and disease.

In the newly emerging nation-states poised between remedying the health hazards of colonialism and traditional lifeways, most Westerners began practicing what was to become medical anthropology (Janzen, 2001). Medical anthropology of the time did little to reflect critically on these ethnocentric categories of distinction. Medical anthropologists often operated as cultural brokers, bridging gaps of translation thought to plague interactions and development efforts taking place between the modernity of aid and assistance and the traditions of the needy. Moreover, as advocates, medical anthropologists often reified these distinctive features of contact and change when calling attention in relativist terms to the logic of native medical perceptions and practices. In what follows, post-colonial developments are explored in terms of continuing health conditions, emerging health issues related to development, and the conceptual schema of development that continued to locate that "external discourse" (Gupta, 1998) of modernity based in "western experience" (Escobar, 1994) within images, activities, and associations related to health and health care.

## **POST-COLONIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND HEALTH**

Post-colonial development met and continues to meet the challenges of high fertility and mortality rates, health environmental issues, poverty and its impact on segments of post-colonial populations, acute respiratory infections, diarrheal diseases, vaccine-preventable infectious diseases, malaria, and other tropical vector-borne diseases. In fact, the persistence of these health issues is considered the bio-historical facts of under-development that are also the targets of development. Any positive changes in these and other health measures of progress brought about by development signal successful movement toward takeoff. Post-colonial governments, along with a wide variety of other governments, international aid agencies, and non-governmental organizations have targeted the health and demographic measures of progress for which Europe and the United States provide the gold standards in terms of achieving their pinnacle stage of development.

The health profiles of developing countries bore out in demographic profiles are based on national census data collected by post-colonial state bureaucracies. This important activity of the state provided the targets toward which development projects could be applied. The demographic profiles of non-Western industrialized countries were and continue to be the comparative measures used to track a developing country's movement toward becoming a developed country. Returning to the Congo, relying on statistics collected in 1959, Janzen reveals a demographic profile for the Lower Zaire in which life expectancy at birth only reached 37.64 years for males and 40 years for females. The infant mortality rate stood at 180 deaths per 1,000, half of what it had been 20 years earlier, but nevertheless still a high rate of death. He noted constant but high fertility rates, and a declining mortality rate overall. Similarly, Indonesia just after Independence (1950) experienced life expectancy rates at birth of 35–40 years. Infant mortality rates at this time stood at 200 deaths per 1,000 (Ananta & Arifin, 1990). As in the case of central Africa, Indonesia also continued to exhibit high fertility rates as well as high rates of maternal mortality.

Demographic measures and profiles are significant in that they become the measures of development, or lack thereof, for post-colonial regimes on the pathway toward becoming developed nations. The Indonesian government's National Census Bureau (*Biro Pusat Statistik*) figures document various demographic changes that indicate the changing shape of Indonesian society—a development the New Order regime in Indonesia was proud to take credit for. Demographic profiles appear to be at the point of "transition." Life expectancy at birth has increased from a 1950 expected age of death between 35 and 40 years to a 1990–95 rate of 61–64 years (Ananta & Arifin, 1990). Infant mortality rates have fallen from a 1950 rate of 200 deaths per 1,000 to a 1993 rate of 65 deaths per 1,000, with projected rates continuing to decrease (Ananta & Arifin, 1990). Fertility rates have declined as health care measures and family planning campaigns take effect. The distribution of population in Indonesia by age is changing rapidly, becoming older overall, and beginning to mirror the population distributions of developed countries.

This demographic transition, often referred to as the epidemiological transition, the health transition, or in some cases the risk transition, is the result of postcolonial development efforts brought about through family planning programs, public health and sanitation programs, wider access to health as well as shifts in economic conditions and improvements in nutrition for national populations overall. The health costs of development are the "Western diseases" of affluence and "civilization" that include the chronic degenerative diseases associated with over-nutrition, increasing age, and other behaviors, for example smoking and alcohol consumption.

Of course, not all segments of post-colonial society experience the health benefits and costs of development. In the "least developed countries" 20% of children still die before age 5 compared with 1% in "developed countries" (WHO, 1997). Women in developing countries face high risks for iron deficiency anemia, protein-energy malnutrition, death from pregnancy-related complications, and health conditions related to increasing poverty especially among rural communities (WHO, 2000). In spite of trends toward risk transition from "traditional hazards associated with lack of development" to "modern hazards" related to development, vital statistics indicate that public health efforts should be maintained toward reducing poverty, improving the provision of sanitary

#### **Post-Colonial Medicine 189**

services, improving water supplies, providing adequate housing, insuring safety in the workplace, and decreasing exposure to pathogens and toxins from foods and in soils. Medical anthropology continues to play an applied role in addressing and documenting the persistence of these "traditional" health hazards.

Development organizations, and especially the WHO, have identified three diseases that now dominate the "global burden of disease" causing more than 5 million deaths every year. These include HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria which, as a group, represent a disease profile of newly emerging infectious diseases. For postcolonial societies these diseases represent a mix of the old and the new as the HIV/AIDS pandemic has taken hold in developing countries with tragic and devastating consequences. In Africa and Asia, HIV/AIDS has become a major health problem that has motivated the marshaling of health care provisions in the same way that colonial medicine was provided to treat epidemics such as sleeping sickness in the Congo.

## **POST-COLONIAL MEDICINE**

Post-colonial health provisions are an admixture of medical practices and perceptions that reflect the colonial experience. These local health care systems continue to include a combination of hospitals, clinics, health posts, pharmacies, nurse paramedical practitioners, and health cadres as well as a multitude of government-sponsored health programs, for example family planning programs, family nutrition improvement programs, village community health development programs, advanced age programs, and programs that train local level health promoters, to name just a few. Mention should also be made of the increasing number of magazines on health, or articles and newspaper columns, television and radio programs, and advertisements that all promote health from the perspective of scientific medicine.

In addition, indigenous medicine, often referred to as traditional medicine, is vibrantly apparent as well. Anthropologist Charles Leslie (1974), in his work on Asian medical systems, noted that in the context of modernization medical revivalisms of traditional medicine constituted a "looking forward–looking backward" for many nations in their quest to become modern developed countries. Particularly in China and India, medical revivalism was a significant "aspect of cultural nationalism in these societies" (Leslie, 1976, p. 319). Indonesia provides an illustration of post-colonial medicine which reproduces colonial categories while at the same time producing something different.

The popularity of *pengobatan tradisional*, or traditional medicine, in Indonesia indexes a concern with tradition at a time when Indonesian nationalist rhetoric portrayed the nation on the brink of becoming modern. This modernist revival marked a heightened attention toward traditional medicine within a vibrant and powerful national discourse on contemporary life and citizenship in Indonesia. The Indonesian government considers *pengobatan tradisional* an essential resource in the cause of development (*pembangunan*) (Ferzacca, 2002). As a consequence, traditional medicine becomes a progressive tradition. The logistical issues inherent in the Indonesian engineering of an Indonesian-flavored modernization have set limits on the ability of the government to provide "modern" scientific medicine to a diverse and dispersed national citizenship. For a developing country such as Indonesia, modernist technologies of health embodied by scientific medicine cannot always be made available to the Indonesian population overall. Nor, given the diversity of ethnic groups and their nearness to or distance from the centers of modernity, is scientific medicine always an appropriate technologic intervention.

Therefore, safe and rationalized forms of traditional medicine and practice are promoted until the time when progress toward an advanced social–cultural–economic stage is reached. For Indonesian governance, standard Western modernization theory that advocates breaking down tradition as an obstacle to development is replaced with one that produces, reproduces, and so re-distributes tradition. Tradition and its authenticity, then, are not just artifacts, images, and activities, but a mark of social relations and identities.

From the perspective of Indonesians traditional medicine includes a wide variety of shaman who practice as curers, sorcerers, and ceremonial specialists. In addition to this varied group of shaman are the roving sellers of health elixirs, entrepreneurs who make and sell elixirs and other medicines out of their homes and in the markets. Practitioners of traditional medicine also include: masseuse; Chinese herbalists and acupuncturists; healers who practice South Asian Ayurvedic and Arab Unani medicine; particularly potent teachers of Islam who have the ability to heal; persons who exhibit a particular talent for healing and other shamanistic practices such as divination; spirit mediums; medical doctors who include traditional medicine in their practices; a wide variety of dentists, optometrists, and surgeons who use traditional medical techniques and medicines; and entrepreneurs who sell manufactured and prepared traditional medicines. Practitioners of traditional medicine are often referred to simply as *dukun*, even though with more frequency there are those who prefer other terms such as the currently popular *paranormal*.

While the availability of traditional medicine in Indonesia represents the contingencies of health care provision in a developing country, medicine is also anchored in historically contingent social forms and practices as well as environmental circumstances. Health and medicine also provide "idioms" and forms of agency for which Indonesians can come to say something of the conditions of their lives and the state of things as they see it. The use of traditional medicine engages communities of sense and sentiment that are experienced as re-enactments of an authentic culture situated within the emergent communities of Indonesian modernity. The continued post-colonial use of colonial categories and essential binaries embedded in development ideology and practice reproduces "partial presence" of these practices and structures of thought (Bhabha, 1994, p. 86). Medical pluralism in post-colonial societies such as Indonesia offers a "complex border zone of hybridity and impurity" (Gupta, 1998, p. 6) within which post-colonial identities are produced through the use of medicine.

Post-colonial development promises many benefits for societies embarking on the road toward prosperity and an improved quality of life. Under the gaze of development ideology and technique the health status of a society serves as one indicator of where it stands in the process of developing. The demographic, health, and nutritional profiles measured by the instrumentalities of government bureaucracies and evaluated from enumerated collections by statistical examination are considered the objective realities of individual and social conditions at a particular historical moment for a segment of society or for an entire nation-state. Under the ideological gaze of development these objective measures become moral barometers that mark both the degree and kind of conditions underway in the process of development. Medical anthropology concerned with post-colonial development has operated within the context of development ideology to apply anthropological approaches and knowledge toward problem-solving—problems that appear in development encounters. At the same time medical anthropology of post-colonial development has also been concerned with the structural aspects and cultural politics of development. In this way medical anthropologies of post-colonial development are also subject to and so reflect the complex border zone of hybridity and impurity that is post-coloniality.

## **REFERENCES**

- Ananta, A., & Arifin, E. N. (1990, November). *Demographic transition in Indonesia: A projection into the year 2020* (Population Projection Series No. 1). Jakarta Indonesia: Demographic Institute.
- Arnold, D. (Ed.). (1988). *Imperial medicine and indigenous societies*. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Bhabha, H. K. (1994). *The location of culture*. London and New York: Routledge.
- Boomgaard, P. (1993). The development of colonial health care in Java: An exploratory introduction. *Bijdragen Tot De Taal-, Land- En Volkenkunde, 149*, 77–93.
- Brown, C. (1987). The influenza pandemic of 1918 in Indonesia. In N. G. Owen (Ed.), *Death and disease in Southeast Asia: Explorations in social, medical, and demographic history* (pp. 235–256). Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
- Comaroff, J., & Comaroff, J. (1992). *Ethnography and the historical imagination*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Escobar, A. (1994). *Encountering development: The making and unmaking of the Third World*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Ferzacca, S. (1996). *In this pocket of the Universe: Healing the modern in a central Javanese city*. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Anthropology.
- Ferzacca, S. (2001). *Healing the modern in a central Javanese city* Carolina Academic Press.
- Ferzacca, S. (2002). Governing bodies in New Order Indonesia. In M. Lock & M. Nichter (Eds.), New Horizons in Medical Anthropology, *Essays in honor of Charles Leslie* (pp. 35–57). London and New York: Routledge.
- Gardiner, P., & Oey, M. (1987). Morbidity and mortality in Java 1880–1940: The evidence of colonial reports. In N. G. Owen (Ed.), *Death and disease in Southeast Asia: Explorations in social, medical, and demographic history* (pp. 70–90). Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
- Grinker, R. R. (1994). *Houses in the rainforest: Ethnicity and inequality among farmers and foragers in central Africa*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Gupta, A. (1998). *Post-colonial developments: Agriculture in the making of modern India*. Durham and London: Duke University Press.
- Janzen, J. M. (1978). *The quest for therapy: Medical pluralism in Lower Zaire*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Janzen, J. M. (2001). *The Social fabric of health: An introduction to medical anthropology*. New York: McGraw-Hill.