# **2 Democratic decentralization and ethics in governance**

As early as 1887, Lord Acton had warned that 'power tends to corrupt and absolute power corrupts absolutely'. This is a historically tested hypothesis and is usually referred to while explaining the rise and consolidation of undemocratic and authoritarian politico- ideological authorities. What is unique about the assumption is that it has also led to alternative conceptualizations of power and authority by drawing on powerful endeavours challenging concentration of power and centralization of authority. The idea is couched in a popular theoretical model of democratic decentralization that also encourages participatory governance involving the stakeholders. Implicit in this theoretical assumption is the idea that democracy, being complementary to decentralization, is a powerful instrument for effective governance since it allows the stakeholders to guide governance in accordance with their ideological priorities, with the panoptical state hardly having a role to play. Conceptually speaking, this speaks of a design of governance in which stakeholders remain integral to the entire administrative process. The outcome is two- fold: on the one hand, it creates an environment in which governance never becomes a distant object, but is part and parcel of the being of stakeholders. Given their involvement in administrative decision making, it also sets in motion, on the other hand, processes of accountability which cannot be ascertained so easily in the Weberian hierarchical form of bureaucracy, because of its lack of appreciation for external accountability.

 As the following discussion will show, democratic decentralization is definitely a powerful device to ensure ethics in governance; not only is this an arrangement to challenge the bureaucratic grip over governance, it is also an effective and easily conceivable ideological design that draws on popular aspirations for governance as per their socio- ideological and economic priorities. Based on global experiences, it is also believed that democratic decentralization is not merely a refreshing conceptual category, but a doable mechanism to address the issues of lack of ethics in governance particularly in most of the developing countries. What is most striking is the fact that, despite being theoretically well structured and conceptually rich, democratic decentralization did not seem to have received adequate academic attention, perhaps for historical reasons. Persuaded by the effective role of panoptical bureaucracy, most of the leaders of the decolonized world did not seem to bother to explore whether it

was adequately equipped to address their context- specific problems. Soon it was evident to the policy makers that typical bureaucratic governance was not at all appropriate for what had been conceptualized as their ideological mission. Countries that had won independence after prolonged colonial rule were almost crippled due to the lack of ethics in governance and consequently the rising importance of corruption in public life. So efforts were made to explore alternatives to arrest the rapid deterioration of ethics, morality and fair play in the public arena: one of the endeavours was to institute and also to strengthen local government because it was believed that 'only in an effective and empowered local government can the positive power to promote public good be reinforced and the negative impulse to abuse authority curbed'.1 Besides the obvious institutional advantages of such an arrangement, an empowered local government was likely to create circumstances in which 'ordinary citizens can hold public servants accountable in the face of asymmetry of power exercised by the bureaucracy, [and] citizens who are directly affected by their action are empowered to exercise oversight functions'.2 An alert local government is necessary to create an engaged citizenry that, by being involved in both policy making and its implementation, is a shield for protecting the moral fabric of governance. The outcome may not be visible instantaneously; what it will lead to is the unleashing of processes whereby citizens become integrally connected with the drive towards creating a system of governance that is ethics- driven and morally sensitive.

 In view of the growing acceptability of democratic decentralization as a design for governance in India since she became politically free in 1947, this chapter seeks first to identify the theoretical sources of this conceptualization and later to show how it was sought to be applied as an effective means to address governmental deficits arising from the growing incidence of corruption and other malpractices in governance. It is true that the issue of lack of ethics in public life cannot solely be addressed by administrative means, although it will be a meaningful step towards creating an environment in which debasing tendencies in public administration are severely challenged to build ethically tuned and morally defensible systems of public governance. This is easier said than done, although the idea of democratic decentralization is a powerful theoretical formulation with adequate empirical depth to unsettle the well- established arguments that support bureaucratic hegemony in administration. Besides providing the fundamental theoretical ideas of democratic decentralization, which are universal in character, the aim of the chapter is also to show the historical trajectory of the idea in different phases of India's recent political history. Concerted efforts were made in the past through the two 1992 amendments to the constitution of India – the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth – which seem to have radically changed the texture of the arrangement that came into being in the wake of the common urge for democratic decentralization in governance.

 It is difficult to survey the experiences of each and every province in democratic India. Hence the chapter has selectively delved into two case studies of *Bhagidari* in Delhi and *Panchayati Raj* in West Bengal since they represent unique instances of the successful application of democratic decentralization in governance in both urban and rural settings respectively. On the basis of a detailed discussion of these two experiments, the chapter substantiates the argument that, in so far as means for ensuring ethics in governance are concerned, democratic decentralization is too persuasive to be ignored so easily. With the growing consolidation of the urge for ethics in public life which is held as a major reason for social, economic and political decadence, the drive for involving the stakeholders in public governance is a politically rewarding and ideologically fulfilling endeavour towards meaningfully addressing the sources of distortion and demeaning influences in governance.

# **Conceptual endorsement**

Localizing development through participation is a powerful socio- political design in the discourses for empowerment. Thinkers in different phases of human history contributed to the participatory discourses, which were relative to the prevalent socio- economic and political circumstances. For Rousseau and the English Pluralists, the idea of civic engagement was to be instilled to avoid further social decay. This is an idea which also reverberated in the writings of the Federalists and Tocqueville: while the Federalists valued dialogue as perhaps the most effective means for the coming together of people with diverse social roots towards a common goal, Tocqueville attributed civic engagement in its applied sense to the success of democracy in America. By accepting participation as a vehicle for localizing development, as promoted by the activist–theoreticians, Gandhi had always strongly argued for dispersal of authority; de- concentration of authority is, in other words, a conceptually persuasive and empirically sound means of governance, especially in a democratic set- up where an alert citizenry always keeps the pubic authority on its toes. There are two important features of this thinking that immediately attract attention: first, participation involves self- initiated action, reflecting a specific voice and choice that results in an empowerment of the hitherto peripheral stakeholders at the grassroots; second, by decentralizing authority and creating space for the involvement of communities, this genre provides for a new and also contrasting mode of thinking in conceptualizing governance.

 As is argued, key to success in governance is participation by the citizenry, which remains the core of democracy. Politically viable and ideologically meaningful, participatory governance is always referred to as an effective instrument for ensuring ethics in public life: the idea is that the greater the participation, the less the chances for corruption in governance. Perhaps the best exposition of this perspective happens to be one that Alexis de Tocqueville articulated in his *Democracy in America* by saying that:

the nation participates in the making of its laws by the choice of its legislators, and in the execution of them by the choice of the agents of the executive government; it may almost be said to govern itself, so feeble and so restricted is the share left to the administration, so little do the authorities

forget their popular origin and the power from which they emanate. *The people reign in the American political world as the Deity lives in the universe. They are the cause and the aim of all change; everything comes from them and everything is absorbed in them* (emphasis added).3

Thus democracy was, to this French aristocrat, not merely a political form of governance, but also a site in which participation in the political processes was articulated and executed. The aim is to create a system of governance that, being sensitive to the needs of the citizens, never allows appropriation by vested interests for partisan gain. This is most fundamental to democratic governance, which, besides seeking to install a unique politico- ideological structure of authority on the basis of collective bonhomie, also creates a spirit to evolve a system of governance which is free from distortions and tuned to the universally accepted constitutional principles protective of human life, regardless of one's socio- economic location and ideological predispositions.

 This was reiterated by Gandhi who, while justifying participatory governance as a key to the success of democracy in its truest spirit, expressed his ideas largely in typical Tocquevillian language. According to him, 'true democracy cannot be worked by twenty men sitting at the centre; it has to be worked from below, by the people of every village'.4 What was unique in Gandhi's conceptualization of civic engagement in public affairs was his notion of the 'oceanic circle' that he developed while defending village *swaraj* by saying that

Life will not be a pyramid with the apex sustained by the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre will be the individuals always ready for the village, the latter ready to perish for the circle of villages, till at last the whole becomes one life composed of individuals, never aggressive in their arrogance but even humble, sharing the majesty of the oceanic circle of which they are integral units.5

Two ideas are pre- eminent here: first, for him, a circle of interdependent villages remained perhaps the most viable unit for sustained and equitable economic growth for any society; second, and perhaps more importantly, systematic economic well- being would certainly make the individuals within the circle selfreliant and thus confident. Hence he was very critical of the doctrine of 'the greatest good of the greatest number, [which] is a heartless doctrine and has done harm to humanity. [The only] real and dignified human doctrine is', according to Gandhi, 'the greatest good of all, and this can only be achieved by utmost self- sacrifice'.6

 It is evident that Gandhi was deeply uneasy with the modern state. For him, a society based on *swaraj* – 'true democracy' or non- violence – was the only morally acceptable alternative to the modern state. According to him, the *swaraj*based polity would be composed of small, cultured, well organized, thoroughly regenerated and self- governing village communities; elected by these communities, a small body of people would administer justice, maintain order, and

take important economic decisions through interactive dialogues with the community as a whole. These units would thus not be merely administrative but also powerful economically and politically, fulfilling their role by seeking to articulate *swaraj* in its true form. As such, they would thus have a strong sense of solidarity, provide a genuine sense of community and act as nurseries of civic virtues. In conceptualizing the village *swaraj* that would finally lead to *Sarvadaya* (welfare for all), Gandhi was drawn to *dharma*, which, in his view, consisted of sensitivity and responsiveness. After having theoretically justified *swaraj* as an efficient form of civic engagement that emphasized the importance of both individuals and communities, the Mahatma evolved his model by identifying twelve basic principles for what he conceptualized as an authentic form of participatory democracy. These principles were:

(1) involving men in productive employment, (2) a man who does not do bodily labour does not have the right to eat, (3) equitable distribution of resources, (4) trusteeship by the wealthy of the superfluous wealth possessed by them, (5) decentralization of power and authorities, (6) inculcating the *swadeshi* (self- reliance) spirit in the community, (7) making the villages independent and interdependent in terms of need in the circle of villages, (8) cooperation provides fundamental resources for healthy communal existence, (9) *satyagraha* (non- violent means of protest) is an obvious choice in cases in which village authorities deviate from the common good, (10) secularism (equal respect to all religions) is critical to cement a stable bond among the members of the community, (11) regular annual elections to constitute *Panchayati Raj* (rural government) and (12) *Nai Talim* (new education), insisting on vocational training in handicrafts, is a sure step towards making individuals self- reliant and also appreciative of the dignity of labor.7

 What was fundamental in Gandhi's conceptualization of village *swaraj* was the idea of self- reliance through a meaningful articulation of the decentralization of power and authority. He always used a moral argument to persuasively pursue his point of view. Hence he always felt that, without devotion to the cause, nothing substantial could be achieved. In his words,

devotion means faith – faith in God and in one's self [which] will lead one to make all sacrifices . . . and if sacrifice is made in the service of others, it is easy . . . [because] no mother would want to sleep in the wet for her own sake, but she would gladly do so if she can thereby find for her child a dry place to sleep.8

 On another occasion, he defended care for others in distress as unavoidable in a human being. 'One ceases to be a human being', argued Gandhi, 'unless one makes the distress of others as his (*sic*) own and tries to relieve it'.9 On the basis of the above brief exposition of Gandhi's model of participatory rural governance, it can fairly be said that his approach to civic engagement was based on

high moral values, which may not have always been realistic in the prevalent world of capitalistic expansion through cut- throat competition, although its conceptual validity is beyond question. What is distinctive about Gandhi's argument for civic engagement in public affairs was his unalloyed faith in the indigenous traditions that seemed to have been submerged in the avalanche of industrial civilization of the Western variety that came to India, piggybacking on colonialism. Gandhi's idea of village *swaraj* is a unique conceptualization because, besides drawing upon India's indigenous tradition of governance, he also based it on what he learned from Western sources while crafting a context- sensitive model of civic involvement in public affairs.

 As is evident, according to the classical thinkers, the key to the success of democracy in its actual spirit is a participatory governance that ensures meaningful civic engagement. This, they strongly felt, would act as a deterrent against attempts at appropriating institutions of authority for private gain. Their primary concern was to found a system of governance that was neither discriminatory nor prejudiced, but fair and well equipped to translate into reality the true spirit of democracy. For them, since governance was contingent on the prevalent socio- economic and ideological milieu, it would be wrong to comment on its nature without reference to the contextual constraints. Mere tweaking of the structure was not going to work; what was thus necessary was to create an environment in which the basic values of ethical governance were uncritically appreciated. This was a systemic solution which needed to be supplemented by the strengthening of society's moral fabric; it was a solution which called for reinventing one's self in accordance with the desire to work for the collective well- being because, with a contended collectivity, a society was bound to be free from prejudices that appreciate sectional partisan goals at the cost of the multitude.

 What is unique here is the fact that, despite being rooted in diverse socioeconomic and political circumstances, not only were these ideas reflective of a common concern, but they also conveyed an identical message to rescue governance from the quagmire of corruption and demeaning influences. To them, governance needed to be conceptualized at two interrelated levels. At one level, it was characterized clearly in an instrumental sense as a goal- driven exercise. At another, by arguing that the nature of governance was context dependent, the classical thinkers seem to have highlighted its wider connotations, which remained elusively independent of the existent socio- economic and ideological milieu.

 The efforts are being continued. What the classical thinkers so strongly felt seems to have found an echo in the endeavours that the World Bank has recently undertaken to defend democratic decentralization as a key to common wellbeing. While arguing for the dispersal of public authority and the expansion of its base by involving stakeholders, the World Bank identifies four major structural concerns – transparency, openness, accountability and probity – which are critical in articulating governance in its unalloyed sense. First, transparency is the hallmark of democratic decentralization which 'can make government processes more visible and intelligible to ordinary people [because] . . . when decisions are made at or near the local level, . . . it is far easier for ordinary citizens to find out about them'.10 Second, one of the primary factors for the growing acceptance of democratic decentralization is the fact that it creates systems that are 'more transparent and easier for individuals and groups at local and supralocal levels to access and influence'.11 This openness is a major characteristic of local governance which not only encourages participation, but also creates an environment in which government is no longer something captured by the elites. Third, democratic decentralization stands out as an arrangement because it 'tends strongly to foster more accountable government'12 by making those in decision making accountable not only to the stakeholders, but also to the fundamental constitutional values and ideological concerns of the polity in question. Accountability cannot be ascertained merely by administrative feats, but by an engaged citizenry that, by being vigilant, keeps a check on distortion in governance. Finally, despite the fact that democratic decentralization fails to completely rule out corruption in public life, it has, nonetheless, set in motion processes whereby the values of probity, integrity and honesty are being taken seriously by the decision makers and the governed alike. These are societal values which will have a better chance of survival and appreciation provided the society in question is favourably disposed towards this; otherwise, as a top- down dressing, probity cannot succeed as a determinant of a prejudice- free administration.13

 The above discussion highlighting the conceptual underpinning of the arguments reveals two basic points which are relevant to comprehend ethics in governance: first, democratic decentralization contributes to an arrangement of governance in which the idea of ethics seems to have been naturally ingrained. An administrative feat cannot be adequate to address this concern; it requires a concerted effort by the citizens who always remain core to governance. Nonetheless, as a principle upholding a specific design for exercising public authority, the devolution of power, is a powerful alternative seeking to articulate public voice in governance. Second, the importance of democratic decentralization is being increasingly felt, because of the equally powerful drive towards 'state capture' for self- gratification. In view of the fact that moral values in public life are declining at an alarming rate, the global concern does not seem to be overstretched, but real. As shown above, the World Bank has its own solution, which may not have universal applicability despite being conceptually viable. What is thus critical is the fact that moral decadence is not peculiar to specific countries, but has affected nations across the globe. This means that it has societal roots that need to be probed far more seriously than is being attempted now. Nonetheless, specific administrative feats that have already been undertaken by political leaderships across nations remain significant ideological steps to at least initiate a debate on what is deemed to be most appropriate to rejuvenate governance, keeping in mind the centricity of the citizen.

# **The Indian case study**

The enactment of the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth constitutional amendments in December, 1992 was a legislative feat that formalized democratic decentralization as a form of governance. This is a unique piece of legislation, because it concerned democracy and representation, unlike the previous endeavours in which attempts at democratic decentralization had been initiated to fulfil developmental and administrative goals. Besides giving the stakeholders a voice in the decision making, these enactments were also reflective of a genuine concern from the political leadership, who seemed to have become mute observers of India's rapid moral decline, given the consolidation of tendencies for appropriating public authority for personal benefit. Corruption was not an anathema, but had become integral to public governance. The concern for ethics in governance figured prominently in public speeches delivered by those in power, but never seemed to become critical when it mattered. Arguing that the constitutional guarantee of democratic decentralization was necessary to re- build popular faith in governance, India's erstwhile Prime Minister exhorted that

a wide chasm separates the largest body of the electorate from a small number of its elected representatives. This gap has been occupied by the power brokers, the middlemen and vested interests. . . . With the passage [of the bill which finally became the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth Amendment Acts], the *panchayat*s would emerge as a firm building block of administration and development . . . as an instrument in the consolidation of democracy at the grassroots.14

 Despite the fact that it was a masterstroke on the part of the ruling Congress to take steam out of the opposition, the above statement is a testimony to the decadence that considerably plagued public authority in India. There was a trust deficit, and government failed to generate public confidence because of the alleged involvement of those in power in deeds that were clearly contrary to all established ethical norms. Nonetheless, in such gloomy circumstances, serious attempts were made to address the concern for rebuilding public trust, and the result was the enactment of those groundbreaking pieces of legislation which accorded a constitutional guarantee to local governance that, by virtue of being located in Part IV (Directive Principles of State Policy) of the Constitution of India, was never justiciable. A remarkable constitutional design, these amendment acts have both revolutionized our approach to local governance and also sought to evolve alternative methods of power sharing, which are ethically appropriate and also morally justified in the context of an apparent mass disillusionment with those in positions of governance. Besides being nurseries of civic virtues, these institutions of local governance help articulate a powerful public voice in development and overall administration that so far remains an exclusive bureaucratic domain. In order for democratic governance to flourish in its true spirit in India, these amendment acts seem to have become the most prominent legislative provisions in radically altering the texture of power. Elected representatives, rather than being solely the agents of power, have become a conduit for the aspirations of the people electing them to govern. Politically empowering, these pieces of legislation have again catapulted the stakeholders onto the centre stage of politics at the grassroots in rural India by further reinforcing the importance of ethics in governance, something which seems to have taken a backseat in India's recent past.

## **Two specific instances: Bhagidari and Panchayati Raj**

*Bhagidari* in Delhi and *Panchayati Raj* in West Bengal are two successful examples of participatory governance in India. Seeking to translate into reality the idea of democratic decentralization of power, the former is an experiment in citizen– government partnership in a typical urban setting while the latter is about people's involvement in governance in an Indian province that was uninterruptedly ruled by a coalition of political parties of the left for more than three decades. Besides involving the stakeholders in the decision making, both of these forms seem to have followed a well entrenched tradition of decentralization of power in India. Conceptually, *Panchayati Raj* governance and *Bhagidari* represent efforts at community development through the decentralization of power: the former is a mechanism to bring villages, urban neighbourhoods or other household groupings into the process of managing development resources without being dependent on the institutionalized forms of government authority; decentralization fosters involvement of the stakeholders in the decision- making process, which is contrary to the Weberian top- down model of governance. Different from 'deconcentration' of power, which is clearly Weberian, decentralization opens up the foundation of administration with the institutional recognition of those who remain integrally linked with governance at the grassroots. This is always advantageous, since local participants enrich decisions by incorporating local knowledge and preferences in the institutionalized processes of decision making. So decentralization and community involvement seem to have translated 'participatory governance' into a distinct reality, which enhances 'pro- social thinking, strengthens citizenship, and enables more inclusive civic engagement [by making] the community decision making integral for building capacity for self- reliance and collective action'15 or, social capital, as it is usually defined in contemporary social science literature. Contemporary public administration is not only about efficiency; it also upholds democratic participation, accountability and empowerment. There is thus a constant tension between (a) how to make the government efficient and (b) how to keep it accountable. This is a challenge that government confronts, especially when the conceptions of people are 'as consumers in the market- driven neo- liberal political set- up' and of people are 'as citizens in democratic governance'.16 This reveals the increasing importance of participation in public affairs. The aim is 'to strengthen [the people's] voice in general – and the voice of the poor, in particular'. The strategy is 'to revamp the rules of the game that shape the incentives and actions of public actors – including the voice mechanism that promotes the rule of law and accountability of government to its citizens'.17

 One cannot avoid looking at Gandhi's conceptual framework while assessing participatory decision making as a phenomenon, since it is intellectually rooted in such a conceptualization. One of the important sources which acted critically in articulating participatory governance in India happens to be Gandhi's notion of village *swaraj*, which he developed in a series of letters that he exchanged with his colleagues during India's nationalist movement and public speeches that he made to fulfil his political mission of India's independence. For Gandhi, Henry Maine seemed to have provided a very critical intellectual impetus in his conceptualization of participatory governance. It is thus not strange to find a clear imprint of Maine's description of autonomously governed and self- reliant Indian village communities, which he developed in his *Village Communities in the East and* West,18 in Gandhi's argument of strongly defending the community's involvement in local administration. In Gandhi's well thought out views, participation in community life and self- accountability while discharging that role remain two important and also non- negotiable conceptual pillars of public governance. Drawn on his perception supporting participatory governance, he thus elaborated his argument by saying that:

every village has to be self- reliant and capable of managing its affairs even to the extent of defending itself against the whole world. It will be trained and prepared to perish in the attempt to defend itself against any onslaught from without. . . . Such a society is necessarily highly cultured, in which every man and woman knows what he or she wants and, what is more, knows that no one should want anything that others cannot have with equal labour.19

Gandhi's main concern was to make villages self dependent not only in terms of resources, but also in terms of running the administration. By making discussion an integral part of local administration, he also created a distinct space for induced participation, through methods that are inculcated over a period of time. This usually works miracle, especially in a context in which civic engagement is organic to the human psyche. This is what explains the success of self- sustaining local governance in India. The growing involvement of the people in the *Panchayati Raj* institutions has made the concept of 'peoples' audit' meaningful. That serves as a powerful check on the aberrations in bureaucratic functioning in the development sphere, be they the misappropriation of funds, false reporting or wrongful identification of beneficiaries.

 The systems of the *Panchayati Raj* and *Bhagidari* forms of governance are rooted in Gandhi's conceptualization of *swaraj*, which is a powerful theoretical construct of participatory governance at the grassroots. A mechanism of social inclusion, *swaraj* also creates an environment for inclusive governance whereby people regardless of caste, class and clan participate in the decision- making processes. As he argued,

Swaraj is . . . complete freedom . . . because it is as much for the prince, as for the peasant, as much for the rich landowner as for the landless tiller of the soil, as much for the Hindus as for the [Muslims], as much for the Parsis as for the Jains, Jews and Sikhs irrespective of any distinction of caste or creed or status in life.20

Apart from delineating the exact nature of *swaraj*, he also, in a Lockean way, allowed the governed to remain the actual custodians of administration by giving them the authority to dismiss the truant government at any time. Hence he was insistent that 'real Swaraj will come not by the acquisition of authority by a few but the acquisition of the capacity by all to resist authority when it is abused', and selfgovernment in its true sense 'depends', he further argued, 'entirely upon our internal strength, upon our ability to fight against the heaviest odds'.21 There are two important conceptual points which need to be highlighted, given their applicability to the Indian case. First, unlike the post- Gandhian theoretical discourse on local governance, the Gandhian formulation is most enlightening given its organic roots in Indian thinking. The idea of *Panchayati Raj* and *Bhagidari* seem to have been grounded in Indian psyche and Gandhi's articulation translates them into practice. This is where Gandhian conceptualization is far more effective in comprehending the reality than any other derivative theoretical parameter. Second, Gandhi's formulation is useful not only to understand the nature of local governance, but also to conceptualize how it is constituted, especially in a diverse society such as India, which represents a multiplicity of identities. In this sense, he has drawn our attention to that system of governance that derives its sustenance not from the institutions on which it is based, but from those who constitute it. What thus gains ground is the idea that the governed remain the most significant ingredient in governance.

 Gandhi's conceptualization provides creative inputs in deciphering the distinct nature of participatory governance. What is fundamental in such a conceptualization is the idea of collaborative endeavour in addressing visible deficits in governance. In contemporary academic intervention, this is being dealt with at greater depth, given the rising complexities in public administration. Patsy Healey found planning as instrumental to organize disparate societies. By focusing on 'fragmented societies', Healey evolves what she calls a 'communicative approach to the design of governance systems and practices . . . fostering collaborative [and] consensus- building practices'.22 There is a clear Gandhian tone not only in Healey's formulation of a communicative approach, but also in its functional manifestations which is evident when she says that

the communicative approach both offers a way forward in the design of governance processes for a shared power world and takes as a normative position an ethical commitment to enabling all stakeholders to have a voice. It also offers a format for change through collective efforts by transforming ways of thinking [which remain at the heart] of participatory democracy in pluralist societies.

 This is reinforced by Judith E Innes and David E Booher while conceptualizing collaborative planning in the context of a water crisis in the Sacramento

region of California. Different from the traditional linear method relying primarily on formal expertise, they insist on 'collaborative dialogue' which draws on 'nonlinear socially constructed processes engaging both experts and stakeholders'.23 Implicit in this formulation is the assumption that collaboration aims at creating 'a shared or collaborative rationality' which acts decisively in shaping a meaningful policy towards addressing problems of serious magnitudes. Clearly Gandhian in spirit, the idea of collaborative rationality draws fundamentally on the collective self that emerges out of intensive cooperation, which may be both instantaneous and institutionalized. In other words, by emphasizing the importance of the collective self in governance, these authors take into account the importance of deliberations involving multiple stakeholders in constructing 'a social response' contributing to what it is sought to be achieved for the common benefit. In conceptual terms, collaborative rationality leads to 'communicative planning', based on another powerful idea of 'dialogical incrementalism which draws its sustenance from dialogical communication involving stakeholders'.24 There is a flip side as well, because communicative planning does not always reflect the true nature of deliberations due to 'the class bias' and 'unequal power relations' in the society in question. Here, planning acts as a control mechanism, whereby the will of the hegemonic class prevails over the rest, as Yiftachel persuasively argues while providing a Foucauldian perspective to the planning processes. As shown by the author in the context of Israel, planning is a class device, meant for protecting the prevalent class balances in such a way as not to disturb the vested interests.25 So planning, despite its deliberative roots, continues to remain power- driven and its nature is thus pre- determined even before it is conceptualized in black and white.26

 There are thus two complementary perspectives in conceptualizing localparticipatory governance. First, community remains most significant in articulating needs, mobilizing resources and managing local affairs. Development is to proceed from the bottom up with the local unit normally taken as the basic unit of planning at the grassroots. Second, implicit in this assumption is the idea of social ownership, which implies that the productive resources in a community are communally owned and managed. The resources generated are meant to provide civic amenities to the community. In this most critical sense, local governance that is also participatory is a clear alternative to the hierarchical Weberian bureaucratic form of organization.

 Within this broad theoretical format, as explained above, this chapter seeks to test whether the participatory mode of governance is an appropriate conceptual tool to understand *Bhagidari* in Delhi and *Panchayati Raj* in West Bengal as examples of participation- driven local self- government. The other important area of concern is to show how sustained civic engagement in local governance brings about a dramatic metamorphosis in local administration, which is not remote controlled, as in the Weberian theoretical mould, but partakes in issue solving on the basis of the stakeholders' inputs, drawing on what they feel appropriate for their localities.

## **Bhagidari in Delhi**

*Bhagidari* is a citizen- dependent format of local self- government, based on 'citizens' partnership in governance'. In order to make administration responsive and participative, it seeks (a) to utilize the processes and principles of multistakeholder involvement by institutionalizing the role of citizen groups, nongovernmental organizations and government in governance; (b) to develop 'joint- ownership by the citizens and government of the processes of change', and (c) to facilitate people's participation in governance.27 Although *Bhagidari* is still in its formative stage, it has radically altered Delhi's public governance by charting out meaningful roles for the stakeholders. There is no doubt that the initiative came from the party in power, which gradually lost its grip over the programme due largely to the spontaneous involvement of the citizens in activities contributing to their well- being especially in areas of 'operation and management of civic services, capital investment in infrastructural projects, planning and participatory budgeting and maintenance of neighbourhood security'.28 By creating partnership between government and citizens, organized through residents' welfare associations, market trader associations, industrial associations, village groups and non- governmental organizations, *Bhagidari* is an attempt 'to address the deadlock in governance by involving different stakeholders as partners'.29 These new 'collective actors' take part in those programmes that may appear peripheral to the government. In this sense, they are also meaningful partners in public administration, which cannot remain indifferent to those issues which they raise, due to the obvious political consequences. *Bhagidari* has thus translated a true partnership between citizens and government into a reality in urban governance in Delhi.

 A citizen- friendly format of governance, *Bhagidari*, which means participation, is also an attempt to translate some of the neo- liberal assumptions on administrative reform into reality. For instance, by formally recognizing the role of citizens in local governance, the participatory design of *Bhagidari* is clearly a break with the past when the government remained the only agency in public administration. In this respect, *Bhagidari*, despite initial hiccups, seems to have provided a clear solution to the administrative inadequacies of over- burdened government. With the articulation of *Bhagidari*, public administration is now pluralized, in the sense that the roles of other agencies are considered complementary in governance. By recognizing the importance of multiple agencies in societal problem- solving, this indigenous form of urban governance, which came into existence in 2000 in Delhi, also redefines the role of citizens in public governance. Instead of being passive, citizens are now drawn into the administrative process, which had so far remained the exclusive domain of the seasoned bureaucrats. *Bhagidari* is therefore a unique experiment in public governance that has simultaneously shrunk the government and expanded its reach: while *Bhagidari* has taken away some of the critical responsibilities from the government, it has, at the same time, stretched its domain by involving the stakeholders who so far remained peripheral in governance. By 'de- centring' administration,

*Bhagidari* is a powerful theoretical intervention in re- conceptualizing some of the major hypotheses of decentralized public administration. Not only is *Bhagidari* a persuasive critique of the Weberian hierarchical form of government, it also seeks to provide an alternative conceptualization of public administration by demarcating the role of non- governmental actors in governance. *Bhagidari* seems to have 'realigned the channels by which citizens can access the state as partners. [It has thus effectively] gentrified the channels of political participation, respatializing the state by binding the unpropertied poor to the local state'.30 What is striking about *Bhagidari* is its role in re- invigorating the urban administration in India's capital city of Delhi, where government is supposedly overactive for obvious reasons. Can one attribute the growing importance of *Bhagidari* to the cosmopolitan character of Delhi that, besides being the capital city, can also be described metaphorically as 'a salad bowl', given its multicultural character? *Bhagidari* is thus a well articulated and context- sensitive response, seeking to redefine urban governance by charting out meaningful roles for the stakeholders.

## **Panchayati Raj in West Bengal**

Much of the economic change in rural West Bengal since 1977 is made possible because of a significant political process, initiated and carried forward by the Left Front government. The devolution of power– including considerable financial powers – to the elected rural political authority, known as *Panchayats*, has been important here. This step, together with a strong political commitment to implementing land reforms, has ensured a process of genuine democratic participation by the rural poor in the remaking of their lives and their socio- economic environment. Although the enactment of the *Seventy- Third Amendment Act* in 1992 was a significant step towards revamping the *panchayati* institutions in the country, the Left Front initiated the process as early as 1977–80 by giving *Panchayats* substantial power for local development.

 Contrasted with *Bhagidari*, the *Panchayat* system in West Bengal has a long history of three decades.31 There is however one similarity: like *Bhagidari*, the West Bengal experiment of local governance was initiated by the Left Front government as soon as it came to power, for the first time, in 1977. But that is all. The programme that kicked off with government patronage is being nurtured by the constituents of the ruling Left Front. Undoubtedly, the *Panchayat* system of governance in West Bengal led to the involvement of the people at the grassroots in which the role of the party was most critical. Unlike *Bhagidari*, in which the stakeholders gradually became formidable, the *Panchayati* system of governance largely remained a stooge to the party in power.32 As a result, besides the loyalists, the rest of the stakeholders were pushed to the periphery to avoid opposition. So the story of the Left Front's ascendancy can also be told in a different way. The *Panchayat* system has served the political purposes of the Left Front reasonably well. It has formed the basis of the political support of the party. Yet, the party does not allow the *Panchayats* to be independent of its control simply

because it has a tradition of strong centralized party discipline. Accordingly, there is a tendency to use local *Panchayats* by the central committee at the state level as an instrument of political mobilization and cultivation of political clientelism. The fact that the ruling party candidates win unopposed in a large number of *Panchayat* constituencies is indicative of a dangerous political trend that hardly allows opposition to crystallize simply because they would not dare to provoke a situation in which they would face the combined wrath of the party cadres and police. The implications are disastrous, as a survey confirms by highlighting that

the high- handed and violent ways of meeting any resistance on ground . . . galvanized the opposition in the . . . State, in addition to causing disunity within the ruling coalition and eroding its general credibility as a defender of the interests of vulnerable rural population.33

 Furthermore, contrary to the Left Front's claim, the downward devolution of power has given way to the rising middle sections of rural society who now control the *Panchayats*. 34 The local *Panchayats* have thus been appropriated to pursue partisan goals by those who reigned supreme by holding institutional responsibilities within the party. It is, therefore, not surprising that the *Panchayati Raj* institutions that had brought hope to the people at the grassroots eventually faced sharp criticism from those who had previously viewed the *Panchayati Raj* as the most effective form of rural governance and development. As a result, these bodies have become 'synonymous with the elected popular bureaucracy'. Governed by what is known as a 'political–organizational perspective', the leading partners of the government, the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (hereafter CPI (M)), for instance, justified the hegemonic control of the party in terms of the ideological goal of 'democratic centralism'. The party cannot simply be bypassed. In order to translate the party's perspective, the CPI (M) State Committee constituted at the level of the *Panchayats* a guiding cell (*Parichalan committee*) that was entrusted with the task of steering the *Panchayats* in accordance with the directives of the party high command.35 The growing hegemony of the party provided, on the one hand, organizational strength to the *Panchayats*; it also, on the other hand, strengthened the party functionaries who, despite being 'outsiders', continued to remain significant in the *Panchayat* bodies simply because of their assigned role in the party directives. So, centralization of power actually struck at the very root of devolution of power. Yet, the Left Front had been continuously winning elections for more than three decades, which was attributed to its success in integrating the governmental pro- people policies with the strategies of political mobilization. By contextualizing Marxist ideology, the CPI (M)-led coalition shifted its social base from being a party of the industrial proletariat to one of marginal farmers, sharecroppers and the landless poor. This social base was consolidated further by uniting the socially marginalized groups, including *Dalits*, Tribals and Muslims, around the party's social- democratic ideology. The sustained viability of the Left Front for more than three decades

can be attributed to 'this unique class–community coalition' that made the Left Front invincible in rural Bengal.

# **Changing nature of local governance**

This comparative study of two different types of participatory governance in India has underlined two important features of public administration that are critical in conceptualizing its nature in the context of the rising importance of 'the global village'. First, by involving citizens in public governance, *Bhagidari*, which came into existence in 2000 in Delhi, is undoubtedly an innovative design seeking to articulate an alternative form of governance. An institutionalized mechanism of cooperation between civil society organizations and government, this is also a scheme in which stakeholders are expected to play a critical role in 'reinventing government' in India, where the government is over- burdened with responsibilities for historical reasons. A citizen- friendly form of governance, *Bhagidari* is also an attempt to translate some of the neo- liberal assumptions on administrative reforms into reality. For instance, by recognizing the role of civil society organizations in public administration, *Bhagidari* seems to have translated public–private partnership into a concrete and meaningful programme of action. Conceptually, public–private partnerships refer to contractual partnerships between public and private sector agencies, specifically targeted towards financing, designing, implementing and operating infrastructure facilities and services that were traditionally provided by the public sector. Such collaborative ventures are built around the expertise and capacity of the project partners and are based on a contractual agreement that ensures appropriate and mutually agreed allocation of resources, risks and returns. Furthermore, by upholding the role of citizens in local governance, *Bhagidari* provides a participatory design of governance that is clearly divorced from the Weberian notion of 'closeted' governance. In this respect, *Bhagidari*, despite initial hiccups, seems to have addressed meaningfully the administrative inadequacies resulting from overburdened government.

 Second, while *Bhagidari* is an extra- constitutional mechanism of governance, *Panchayati* Raj is a scheme that derives its sustenance from the Constitution of India. Reaffirming the constitutional commitment, the *Seventy- Third Amendment Act* further strengthens this form of rural governance that has evolved organically with the consolidation of India as the world's largest democracy. Dissatisfied with the functioning of municipalities in Delhi, citizens appear to have zealously supported the *Bhagidari* campaign, which also gained a fresh lease of life with the return to power of the Indian National Congress in 2008.36

 The *Panchayati raj* system has a comparative advantage because of the constitutional sanction which *Bhagidari* lacks. The government in rural India has become truly people- centric in the sense that the local inhabitants remain integrally involved in the processes of governance through democratic means of deliberations and negotiations. The West Bengal example is illustrative here. As a system of governance, *Panchayats* have radically altered the structure of power in rural West Bengal where 70 per cent of the state's population lives. With the presence of Left Front activists in every key institution at the grassroots – ranging from the governing bodies of credit societies to the primary schools – the government has been able to build and sustain a well entrenched network among the rural population. This has led to the consolidation of what is identified as 'governmental locality', which signifies the presence of government in a locality as an institution and also the locality's presence in government as a process. Such governmetalization of rural localities has generated a new and innovative correspondence within and between village representative bodies and tied them to the state power. In such a symbiotic network between the villagers and the Front activists lies the explanation as to why the Left Front retains its grip in rural West Bengal without any substantial setbacks. Nonetheless, the hegemonic presence of the ruling parties has also gagged the voice opposing the government, which is contrary to the very spirit of participatory governance and the inculcation of democratic processes. It is true that, with the formation of *Panchayats* in villages as the centre of governance, villagers were drawn to rural governance. In course of time, however, the party activists seem to have appropriated roles that were meant for the people regardless of party affiliations. This is undoubtedly a serious distortion of the foundational values of participatory democracy that did not go unchallenged, as the outcome of the 2011 assembly election suggests. The ruling coalition, which played a critical role in empowering people by making them integral to governance through the institution of *Panchayats,* became a clear victim of what its constituents did to reverse the process. With its ignominious defeat in the 2011 assembly poll, the ruling coalition paid the price for their open complicity with anti- democratic forces challenging the people's voice of resentment, anger and disenchantment with the Left Front government.

 The West Bengal situation is also illustrative of a historical paradox of a global nature that manifested first with the disintegration of the former Soviet Union and also the dramatic ideological shift in China. These examples are sharp comments, perhaps more on the application of a libertarian ideology, known as Marxism, and less on the nature of the ideology itself. Taken together, these examples also direct our attention to the critical role of 'the people', irrespective of ideological divide, in redrawing the contours of governance in various sociopolitical and economic contexts. There is no specific formula, though one can safely argue that the core values of participatory governance – diligence, cooperation and self- help – seem to have catapulted citizens onto the centrestage of public governance and thus have provided a sure guarantee for peoplecentric democratic politics.

 The story will, however, remain incomplete unless we address 'the problem areas' in otherwise successful efforts at involving the community in governance. *Bhagidari*, a very recent addition to the lexicon of public administration, may have translated into reality community participation in governance but it does not seem to have inspired the Delhi inhabitants to the extent it was expected to at the beginning. Presumably because of the complex socio- economic and political

setting of Delhi, *Bhagidari*, a product of an executive intervention, has so far failed to evolve as a politico- administrative design in the city.37 In this sense, it is unlike the *Panchayati Raj* governance in West Bengal that, because of its organic roots in villages, evolved at the outset in parallel to the processes of democratization at the grassroots. For the villagers, the *Panchayati Raj* is nothing but an extension of the larger family spreading across the villages, seeking to take care of their socio- economic and political needs. Nonetheless, it has faced rough weather, primarily because of the distortion that has crept into the system due to its growing politicization in recent years. The obvious outcome is the declining importance of 'the community' and 'the hegemonic grip' of the political bosses of the ruling coalition over the rural institutions of governance, ignoring the stakeholders to the extent of diluting the very spirit of participatory democracy for partisan gains.

 The sustained popularity of the left in West Bengal is attributed to a well entrenched party machinery that manages 'conflict and also co- opts the aggrieved through its patronage network'.38 This also suggests how populist policies of doling out patronages at the grassroots consolidated 'a clientelistic relationship' between the party and the electorate. The unusual political stability in rural West Bengal seems to be associated positively and significantly with the receipt of recurring benefits. Those drawing benefits tend to vote for the left because of the mutual benefit accrued. 'It is [therefore] not surprising', argued experts, 'that the land- less and socially and educationally backward sections' constitute a strong base for the Left.39 The clientelistic relationship has its flip side as well. Because the winner has direct control over the substance of the village- level plan and the selection of the beneficiaries, the *Panchayat* system invariably indulges in politicization of the planning process and the implementation of the public projects. *Panchayats* failed, on occasion, and the party functionaries appropriated these grassroots institutions to fulfil their selfish goal, as the available literature confirms. People are disillusioned because the local *Panchayat* leaders squandered the government funds for development to buy liquor and build club houses for their own benefit.

 It is not therefore odd to find that the *Panchayati Raj* institutions that brought hope to the people at the grassroots are now subject to trenchant criticism by those who found them a most effective form of rural governance when they were introduced in West Bengal. The reasons are not difficult to seek. A large sample survey carried out in 2006 confirms that the credibility of those at the helm has been waning. That most *Panchayat* members were corrupt was endorsed by the survey, which further indicates a pervasive distrust of the moral authority of those who claim to mediate, on political grounds, the contending claims of livelihood, fairness and dignity. It is this 'popular distrust' that accounts for the gradual decline of the left forces in rural West Bengal. While this distrust causes a clear dent in the left's support base, it has also alienated the poor, especially the *Dalit* and the tribal population, from the institutions of *Panchayat* governance. If these institutions cannot find innovative ways to accommodate the poor, the atrophy, as the survey suggests, may create space for various violent extremist movements that have little regard for the existing democratic norms. The growing consolidation of 'ultra- radical extremist forces' in various districts in West Bengal is illustrative of the growing disenchantment with the incumbent government, which appears to have been alienated, to a significant extent, from the people by being insensitive to, if not completely ignorant of, their demands and requirements. A piquant situation has emerged with the transformation of the *Panchayats* into 'mere tools' to realize partisan aims at the cost of the foundational principles of participatory governance. It is therefore no surprise that the ultra- radical extremist political outfits seem to have gained enormously in recent years by championing what the ruling left parties promised for the hitherto marginalized sections of the society at the beginning of the long reign of people- centric governance in 1977.

 Similarly, *Bhagidari* is seriously handicapped, primarily because of Delhi's complex administrative structure in which it is located. Delhi is a state, but of a different kind due to the fact that it is also the capital of the Union of India. Accordingly, critical aspects of Delhi's government are in the hands of the Union Government of India. For instance, the Delhi Police, Delhi Development Authority, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, and New Delhi Municipal Corporation are accountable to the Union Government. Furthermore, unlike any other constituent state in India, the elected government of Delhi is not constitutionally authorized to legislate on all subjects in the State List in the seventh schedule of the Constitution of India. The state government is, for instance, debarred from legislating on important subjects relating to land, police and law and order, because these are areas of concern for the Union Government of India as well. This is a serious structural constraint that invariably impinges on the functioning of *Bhagidari*. 40 Due to overlapping jurisdictions and lack of adequate financial support, the government of Delhi has failed to execute a large number of developmental projects that have emerged from Large Group Interactive Sessions. For instance, matters falling within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Corporation and Delhi Development Authority may be shelved unless they are approved by the relevant departments within the Union Government of India. This is likely to cause tension between the two governments. The fact that the Congress Party, which held power in Delhi, was also a dominant partner in the ruling coalition at the national level allowed differences of opinion between the two levels of government to be resolved through political dialogue among Congress Party members. The situation would have been different if the party in power in Delhi had not been the one that wielded power at the Union level. The basic weakness of *Bhagidari* stems from the fact that the programme continues to remain an administrative mechanism without constitutional recognition. With the formation of the *Bhagidari* cell directly under the supervision of the chief minister, the government may have provided an administrative sanction that remains meaningful only so long as the government in power endorses it; there is, thus, an uncertainty that cannot be ruled out. Nonetheless, *Bhagidari* is one of the few successful government- sponsored schemes that have created an ambience in which citizens seem to have realized their potential as agents of change.

## **Concluding observations**

In view of the clear evidence, it is now believed that institutions are not adequate shields to arrest the rapid deterioration of moral values in society, because it is rooted in the wider socio- economic and political circumstances, which appear to have created an atmosphere of helplessness and disillusionment. India has recently been rocked by the revelations of scam after scam in which ministers and top bureaucrats were reportedly involved, who besides being supportive, were also charged for having masterminded these nefarious acts. This is not new, because there are instances even in the past when governance was not absolutely free from degenerative practices; what is alarming is the increasing number of cases that have brought to public notice in recent years. It is true that there cannot be an explanation that is universally valid, given the specific nature of each of the scams that seems to have considerably dented administrative efficiency. Nonetheless, these instances are a testimony to the decline of ethics in public life, which is linked to the overall moral decadence confronting Indian society. Although society is to be blamed, because of its failure to strengthen its moral fabric, institutional responses should not be belittled since they also aim at reforming the structure of governance by introducing several schemes and designs which are potentially strong enough to radically alter the texture of its functioning. As shown in this chapter, some of the institutional steps, including the constitutional guarantee to democratic decentralization as a form of local governance that the Indian state has recently adopted, seem to have acted decisively in curbing malpractices in governance. Given its well entrenched roots in society, corruption cannot be removed so easily, although the importance of participatory governance such as *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* in arresting the decline of ethics in public authority cannot be easily undermined.

 Participatory governance drawing on the spirit of democratic decentralization is an antidote to centralization in administration which, as per the Second Administrative Reforms Commission, 'delegitimizes democracy, alienates the citizen, perpetuates hierarchies, and often breeds corruption and inefficiency'.41 Being aware that the 'propensity to abuse authority is intrinsic to all authorities', the Commission thus recommended certain specific mechanisms to measure citizens' satisfaction as the consumer of public services, which entail 'report cards, citizens' feedback at delivery and service counters, call centres and such for the citizens' voice to be heard and feedback to be counted . . . and social audit through credible community based organizations'.42 The aim is to ascertain citizen- centricity in administration which will, the Commission believed, contribute to the sustenance and consolidation of ethics in governance through an effective empowerment of stakeholders, accompanied by putting the appropriate institutional mechanisms in place. The Seventy Third and Seventy Fourth amendment acts seem to have initiated powerful processes towards fulfilling the constitutional aim of truly democratizing our administration in which ethics as much the concomitant institutional values remain the critical governing ethos.

the fact that the spirit in which these amendment acts were promulgated remains a distant one, there is no doubt that they are among the few pieces of legislation that, along with reinventing the nature of public authority in India, have also reinforced the centricity of the citizen in governance as perhaps one of the most effective means to contain tendencies towards crippling ethics in public life. They may not be adequate, in other words, to contain corruption completely, but the institutional changes that they have brought about in governance at the grassroots seem to have dramatically transformed the texture of local administration. They have done so by involving the stakeholders who, so far, remain peripheral in the top- down bureaucratic structure in post- independence India. What is fundamental here is the fact that *Bhagidari* and *Panchayat Raj*, despite not being full- proof mechanisms to combat corruption and ensure ethics in governance, are powerful alternative statements on how to make public authorities accountable and sensitive to the citizens' requirements of realizing democracy both in spirit and in substance.

 What sustains the momentum for ethics in governance is the drive towards the opening up of political authority, which until now remained the captive of the dominant elites of the past. The enactment of the Seventy- Third and Seventy- Fourth amendment acts, however, radically altered the texture of local governance 'by bringing the locus of decision making closer to citizens, which increases the benefits of participation while reducing its costs'.43 The more the citizens participate in governance as part of their being in a locality, the more democratic it will become and the less will be the tendencies towards appropriating public authorities for partisan gains, because the citizens will be vigilant in relation to governmental policy designs and acts. Participation has, as history shows, a snowball effect because 'when enough people are convinced of the value of participation [and] they sense a fundamental change in the nature of politics and power',44 governance will become an empowering instrument to execute what is deemed to be useful for the people at large. With their involvement in governance, the engaged citizenry will not only become 'potent political forces, [they can also] move the actions of the local governments towards [their] interests by adding their voice to the mix of necessary accommodations'.45 What is fundamental here is the fact that participatory governance is a powerful means to articulate democratic decentralization in its true form. By reaffirming the critical role of citizens in governance, India's empowered local government seems to have set in motion processes whereby governance has been reinvented in the light of the growing democratization that has already gripped India to a significant extent. This confirms the contention that institutional changes cannot completely arrest the moral decadence or large- scale decline of ethics in society, although they are strong enough to oppose those seeking to destroy the publicness of public authorities. Here perhaps lies the reason as to why changes in local governance were heartily welcomed, since they were powerful legislative steps to make local authorities completely citizen- centric and also conscious of those ethical codes of conduct that are most pertinent in fulfilling the fundamental ethos of democratic decentralization.

 The narrative would not, however, be complete without commenting on the gradual deterioration of both *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* in recent years. *Bhagidari* seemed to be dead following the ignominious defeat of the Congress Party in 2015, though it has reappeared in the form of *Mohalla Sabhas* which the Aam Admi Party- led government meaningfully utilized during the election campaign and its aftermath to garner support in its favour. Instead of being genuinely representative of segments of society, these *Mohalla Sabhas* have become a constant source of distrust among those who had been integral to *Bhagidari* in the recent past. Notwithstanding their capability of bringing people together, these new institutions of local authorities do not seem to have realized their full potential so far, perhaps because of their failure to emerge as acceptable political platforms for the people regardless of ideological predilections. Nonetheless, given their strategic location in Delhi's governance, they can be optimistically expected, argues an analyst, 'to act as a torque through which both the state and citizenry bargain their respective axial positions'.46 Similarly, *Panchayati Raj* institutions were also not free from criticism, given the degeneration that affected their functioning over the years. Like *Bhagidari*, they also became instruments for self- gratification, undermining significantly the values and principles that informed their formation and gradual consolidation in West Bengal. They were powerful tools for citizens' involvement in governance but gradually lost their relevance as the party- pampered elites captured the government machineries in the localities. So, the clamour for ethics in governance, which also entails respect for local voices when taking decisions meaningful to the stakeholders, no longer remained as pertinent in governance as before.47 In course of time, the devolution of power in West Bengal through *Panchayati Raj* transformed 'the form of rent- seeking from outright theft and graft to other, more pernicious and ostensibly legal avenues of resource capture'48 undermining considerably the ideological aim of ensuring equity and instilling efficiency in governance. Despite the criticisms, which are genuine, there is no doubt that *Panchayati Raj* has contributed to the creation of an alert citizenry that, by always being vigilant, never allows the government to remain indifferent to their demands and the issues that they raise for their well- being.

 The stories of *Bhagidari* in Delhi and *Panchayati Raj* in West Bengal are thus not merely indicative of significant institutional changes, but also a testimony to the changing socio- economic and political fabric supportive of meaningful engagement of citizens in governance. By being proactive, citizens have also become instigators of change, and governance is a practical arena in which decisions arrive out of multiple processes of deliberations, challenges and negotiations and in which the citizen will always remain critical. In other words, contrary to the Weberian top- down administration, governance, which is moulded in the spirit of democratic decentralization, is a differently textured design of citizens' involvement in the decision- making processes. The key to the success of governance, especially in a nation as complex and diverse as India – spanning the seventeenth century to the twenty- first – is contingent on how efficiently these conflicting aims are reconciled. Democratic decentralization is perhaps that effective ideological arrangement which is both accommodative and also forward looking. Various instances of misuse of authority notwithstanding, *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* are undoubtedly effective designs of policy making, through which attempts were made to make governance sensitive to the basic ethical ethos of administration, which is both ideological in nature and politically construed. In three distinct ways, they can be said to have initiated processes for ensuring ethics in governance that cannot be easily belittled. First, they are primarily, at least in theory, designs for engaging citizens in governance; critical of bureaucratic hegemony, *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* are conceptually different forms of governance at the grassroots in which citizens remain the focal point. Second, governance is not only about institutions, but also about appropriate policy decisions seeking to contribute to the well- being of the stakeholders. For those holding authority, being ethically tuned entails being attentive to what satisfies the citizens most, for which they need to be both accessible and interactive; otherwise, the idea of meaningful civic engagement for effective governance will always remain elusive. Third, being offshoots of intensive democratic churning at the grassroots, both *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* represent popular urges for democratizing administration which, by ensuring the determining role of citizens, represent a powerful effort towards articulating one of the fundamental principles of the Constitution of India. Being ethical means being tuned to these principles, which also include powerful checks against the capturing of resources for partisan gain. What *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj* have shown is how effective meaningful institutional changes can be for restoring ethics in governance, even in the midst of overall moral decadence, by catapulting the citizens onto the centre stage of politics. This constitutes a new parameter of politics, which gained an easy acceptance once *Bhagidari* and *Panchayati Raj*, as has been shown in this chapter, were conceptualized as alternative forms of governance through which issues of ethics, values and principles could become far more significant than before.

## **Notes**

- 1 *Local Governance: an inspiring journey into the future*, Sixth Report, Second Administrative Reforms Commission, Government of India, New Delhi, October 2007, p. 16.
- 2 Ibid.
- 3 Alexis de Tocqueville, *Democracy in America*, Vol. 1, Vintage Classics, New York, 1990, pp. 57–8.
- 4 M K Gandhi, *The Village Swaraj*, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1962, p. 41.
- 5 M K Gandhi's press interview, 28 July 1946, *Hindustan Times*, Delhi, 30 July 1946.
- 6 *The Diary of Mahadev Desai*, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1953, p. 149.
- 7 M K Gandhi, *The Village Swaraj*, pp. 30–43.
- 8 Ibid., p. 477.
- 9 M K Gandhi's letter to the *Ashram* sisters, 7 January 1927, *The Selected Letters, 1921–1927*, Vol. 1, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1953, p. 138.