#### **Overview of the Culture 923**

- Faiman-Silva, S. (1997). Choctaws at the crossroads. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- Galloway, P. (1995). Choctaw genesis. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- Henderson, J. N. (1994). The epidemiology of American Indian gerontology. Paper presented at the annual American Public Health Association meeting. Washington, DC.
- Henderson, L. C. (2002). The cultural construction of diabetes mellitus among Oklahoma Choctaw elders and health care providers: Discordance between models. *Association for Anthropology and Gerontology, 23*, 4–6.
- Henderson, J. N., & Henderson, L. C. (2002). Cultural construction of disease: A "supernormal" construct of dementia in an American Indian tribe. *Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology, 17*, 197–212.

- Henderson, J. N., Crook, R., Crook, J., Hardy, J., Onstead, L., Carson-Henderson, L. et al. (2002). Apolipoprotein E4 and tau allele frequencies among Choctaw Indians. *Neuroscience Letters, 324,* 77–79.
- Indian Health Service. (2000). Trends in Indian health: 1998–1999. Rockville: Indian Health Service.
- McKee, J. O. (1989). The Choctaw. New York: Chelsea.
- Swanton, J. (1946). The Indians of the Southeastern United States. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 137. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

# **Roma of the United States and Europe**

#### **Anne Hartley Sutherland**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

The Roma name is one that has become common currency today, replacing the designation Gypsy which has negative connotations. Since many Roma use the term Gypsy with outsiders, and there are contexts in which Gypsy is the broader term, its use is still applicable in certain contexts and certainly appears in the literature as well as Internet search engines. In Europe and the British Isles, terms such as Romanies, Travelers or Tinkers are also used. Many different groups form the Roma population based on a common sense of belonging although they may have very different characteristics and use different names.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Roma can be found in significant numbers in the United States, Europe, Russia, Middle East, North Africa, India, Pakistan, and Central Asia. Some have migrated to Australia, Hawaii, and Alaska, but as far as we know they have not reached Japan, China, or Southeast Asia. The Roma are generally believed to have originated in Northern India, but they dispersed about 1,000 years ago and have lived in other places since. Today they are located in cities and towns.

The Roma speak Romanes which is a Sanskrit based language, that belongs to the Indo-Aryan branch of Indo-European languages. Because the Roma have lived in so many places over a long period of time, Romanes contains approximately 60% loan words. The closest language to Romanes is Hindustani. All Roma speak a second or third language from the country in which they live or have traveled.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

There is no census data on the Roma in the United States, but estimates of the Roma population range between 100,000 and 300,000 members of various diverse groups (Vlach Roma, Boyash, Irish Travelers, Hungarian Roma, etc.) living in all parts of the United States. The population of Roma in Europe is estimated between 4 and 10 million, with the largest numbers concentrated in Central European and Balkan countries (as much as 5% of the population). Not all Roma are Vlach-speaking Roma, but the designation of Roma has been given a more general meaning by intellectuals among the Roma to apply to all groups who self-identify as Gypsy. There are a number of diverse Roma groups. Not all of them speak the same dialect or language or have the same cultural practices. Different groups have taken up different occupations, including music, metal work, buying and selling horses or cars, fortune-telling (primarily women), and selling craft items. Middle-class Roma have entered the professions, but this is still a small group. Most Roma work for themselves or are occupied in menial jobs.

The Roma migrated into Eastern and Western Europe through Persia en route from India over a period of approximately 1,000 years. Theories about the origins of the Roma in India have been based on linguistic and cultural information, but recent studies in genetics indicate that the Roma indeed originated with a small group of founders splitting from a single ethnic population in the Indian subcontinent (Gresham et al., 2001). Since leaving India, Roma have always lived within another culture or country as a minority and pariah group. They have been the subjects of extreme discrimination and persecution throughout history, especially in Western and Central Europe where they were enslaved in the Middle Ages. Between 500,000 and 600,000 European Roma perished under the Nazis in World War II. In the 19th century they migrated to North and South America where they continue to be a nomadic or semi-nomadic group. In the United States where discrimination is less severe than in Central Europe and the Balkans, they still suffer negative stereotypes. Police, for example, typically view the Roma as a criminal class rather than a culture.

Roma trace descent through both parents but take on patrilineal names and have a patrilocal marriage preference. They live in a large, close, patrilocal descent group called a *vitsa*. Authority in the *vitsa* is based on age with both older women and men having the highest status. Men are powerfully situated in the system of juridical authority, and women in the complex system of religious, spiritual, and medical authority. The lowest status kinship category is the daughter-in-law or *bori*. She is expected to serve her in-laws, take on a primary role as provider and wage earner for the extended family, as well as provide children for the grandparents. Roma have no religious specialists other than older women, but they use religious specialists from local churches to conduct baptisms. In the United States their own religion is punctuated by certain rituals including the baptism of a 6-weekold child, marriage, the *pomana* (death ritual), *slava* (saint's day feast) and some American holidays such as Easter and Thanksgiving (Sutherland,1986).

Roma in the United States generally live in urban areas, usually on main streets and in the poorer parts of towns. They are not as easily recognizable to the American population as they are in Europe where they stand out more. In America they often prefer to represent themselves as a member of another ethnic group than Roma since it abates the stereotyping and discrimination against them. However, the women often wear long colorful skirts and low cut sleeveless blouses with a scarf on their head if they are married. One of their survival mechanisms is to keep to themselves and avoid contact with non-Roma except in work related circumstances.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

The Roma are not a healthy population. Life expectancy is up to 10 years less than in the non-Roma population, and infant mortality is up to four times higher (Braham, 1993). High levels of poverty, overcrowding and unemployment, and low levels of education are contributing factors. Their medical condition is in fact quite serious. In one study of 58 Roma in the Boston area, Thomas (1985) found that 73% exhibited hypertension, 46% diabetes, 80% hypertriglyceridemia, 67% hypercholesterolemia, 39% occlusive vascular disease, and 20% chronic renal insufficiency. Their diet is extremely high in animal fat, and their lives are very sedentary. Thomas also found that 84% were obese and 86% smoked cigarettes. All of these factors combined with high cholesterol levels, hypertension, and perhaps a genetic predisposition, result in the life expectancy of a Roma in the United States to be between 48 and 55 years (Thomas, 1987). Since births are often not registered and age at death is difficult to determine, life expectancy statistics are not exact in accuracy. However, during my fieldwork, of the eight deaths that took place, the oldest was 50 and the average age was 40 (Sutherland, 1992b). A study in Sweden noted a higher incidence of asthma and chronic bronchitis among Roma than the control group. A U.K. study also documented high incidences of obesity, heart disease, and diabetes (Lehti & Mattson, 2001). Globally their nutrition and access to clean water is poor as is their access to adequate income, housing, and education. In Russia and Central Europe, as well as in the Balkans, their health condition is seriously deteriorating.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

The Roma in the United States seek medical help both from American doctors and their own *drabnari*, literally meaning older women who have knowledge of medicines. They are very assertive in seeking medical care from the medical system. Many are on welfare and have medicaid cards and therefore have access to good medical care. They have an unusual ability, given that most are illiterate, to understand our complex medical system and to get attention from medical personnel (Sutherland, 1992a). On the other hand, their insufficient knowledge of biology and medicine as well as their rudimentary vocabulary in English puts them at risk. They often do not practice preventative medicine or understand the full implications of doctors' instructions. While they may demand specific famous doctors or treatment they have heard about, they ignore preventative and long-term treatment. They have been known to share pills with each other, request specific colored pills and prefer older, physically bigger doctors over younger, thinner ones (Sutherland, 1992a,b). When a family member is sick, large numbers of relatives congregate at the hospital, sometimes camp on hospital grounds, and create confusion among medical personnel. However, they respect authority and are eager to learn about the best treatments and are supported by a huge network of relatives. One study in the United States concluded that Roma receive better medical care than other urban minorities because they are so effective at utilizing medical services (Salloway, 1973). These generalizations are not applicable to Balkan and Eastern European Roma where the discrimination is so much more severe, and where many Roma are denied access to medical care.

Some older women are medical practitioners for diseases they consider under the purview of their own group. These women may supervise treatments for the patient in addition to those ordered by the doctor. Their treatments deal with diseases they classify as "Gypsy diseases" which include convulsions based on possession by the Devil (the cure is the Devil's own dung or *Asafetida*); infection by a spirit called *Mamioro* which means "little grandmother" (the cure is her vomit prepared into tablets). Older women acting as midwives also attend childbirth to help the mother have an easier birth (a *Selaginella* plant, called St. Mary's Hand, is placed in water to open the womb—also at the deathbed to make sure the spirit leaves the room) (Sutherland, 1992a).

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

The Roma view health and illness in the larger context of social order. Good health and good fortune (many children, money) are consequences of individual diligence in following purity rules. Conversely illness, bad luck, and impurity are also closely associated with being ritually unclean (*marime*). To be ritually clean, the Roma must follow a large number of rules about washing, eating, separation of parts of the body, separation of male and female, and separation from the polluting influences of non-Roma who do not follow these rules (Sutherland, 1986). They make a distinction between illnesses caused by contact with non-Roma and their own "Gypsy illnesses." For the former they go to the American medical system, and for the later they consult their own *drabarni*. Gypsy illnesses include those caused by *Mamioro*, a spirit who visits places that are unclean and brings illness, *tosca*, a disease they translate as "nerves" is caused by the devil, as are convulsions which are a sign that the devil has entered the body of the individual. Other illnesses and bad luck are caused by *mule*, the ghosts or spirits of dead relatives. *Mule* are not necessarily harmful, but relatives of the dead who do not properly observe *pomani* (death rituals) could be made ill by them. Mental illness is rare, although virtually every Roma person I knew who was tested by a psychiatrist was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder, that is, in relation to the American view of a healthy personality (Sutherland, 1986). The cure for mental illness is for a person to follow the purity rules and other social customs such as getting married. All *drabarni* carry a bag of medicines that may include Asafetida, *johai* (literally meaning, ghost) which are baked pieces of the vomit of *Mamioro* (most likely is a slime mold called *Fuligo septica*) and other herbal medicines such as a fungus called "the spoon," a special herb called *drarnego*, garlic, black pepper, gold coins, and pieces of the aprons of ancestors who were *drabnari*. Johai is the most valuable medicine a *drabnari* carries in her medicine bag. It cures fear of ghosts, hemorrhages, influenza, pneumonia, cholera, and epileptic convulsions and is administered in addition to medicines prescribed by a doctor (Sutherland, 1992a).

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Roma attitudes toward sex and sexuality include separation of the sexes before marriage (even close relatives), and rules about sex and sexuality based on notions of purity. Bodily substances emanating from the lower body are polluting, including sexual fluids, menstrual blood, blood from childbirth, urine, and fecal matter. These substances must be separated in touching and washing from the upper body and particularly the head which must be kept pure. Thus sex can make a person impure and liable to illness if practiced wrongly. People who engage in sexual intercourse may also abstain from all animal products on Fridays as a cleansing act. Impurity may also adversely affect fecundity which is generally welcome, children being highly valued. Roma may practice contraception or have their tubes tied when they reach the limit of family size they desire. Fecundity increases a woman's status; infertility lowers it. Oral sex is considered the most polluting act one could perform, but its prohibition also has the effect of making it the most titillating.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Most Roma go to the hospital to give birth but neglect the important period of pre-natal care because they do not want to undergo an internal examination by an obstetrician. If a *romni* midwife delivers the baby she cleans the umbilical cord with ashes, and an amulet prepared by the *drabarni* is sewn into the baby's clothes for protection. A hospital birth will usually include a mother or older woman as an assistant rather than the father who stays outside the birth room for cleanliness reasons. An important reason that women have chosen hospital births over a *romni* midwife is to leave all polluting substances from the birth in the hospital and lessen the period of separation and isolation after birth. This period is now about 9 days instead of the traditional 6 weeks. The incidence of miscarriages and infant mortality is high. In a 1967 sample of 400 American Roma, infant mortality was 25% of all reported past pregnancies and births. Since hospital births have risen since then, infant mortality is presumed to be lower now (Sutherland, 1992b) although still higher than the control population.

#### **926 Roma of the United States and Europe**

A recent study (Nemenyi, 1999) of 80 Hungarian Roma women has shown that different Roma groups have different attitudes toward family planning. The Vlach (Roma) group, the most "traditional" in customs have large numbers of children by choice and practice family planning (both contraception and abortion). The Boyash practice no family planning, but the Romungro (musicians) and urban Budapest "Gypsies" have smaller families by choice with the highest level of consciousness of family planning of any Roma group. However, the Romungro and urban Roma start giving birth at a very young age. One of the most interesting conclusions of this study is that the Hungarian health care workers seemed to view all Roma women as "wild," assuming that their higher fertility was due to lack of family planning. Nemenyi also noted that the poor health conditions of the mothers and their shorter life expectancy in relation to the Hungarian population, contributed to a higher incidence of premature births in connection with early, frequent, and late deliveries and a higher amount of dystrophy, mental and physical disabilities.

### **Infancy**

In the first 6 weeks, an infant is viewed as highly vulnerable. At birth the baby is tightly swaddled and handled only by the mother. If the mother nurses, she is told to avoid certain foods considered to produce colic (green vegetables and tomatoes). Many women choose to bottlefeed. In the first weeks of life the mother and baby are isolated from all other family members, and the windows and door to her room are kept shut to keep out a spirit of death that may come to harm the baby. Another danger to the baby is the evil eye which causes the baby to fuss and become ill. The giver of the evil eye is then asked to make a cross with spittle on the forehead of the baby to counter it. The dangers of infancy are ameliorated when the baby is baptized at about 6 weeks of age. If a baby dies, it is considered *prikaza* (a polluting misfortune) for the parents who must avoid the body of the baby (Sutherland, 1992a, 1996).

### **Childhood**

A child is protected from illness when he or she is baptized and considered free of pollution from birth substances. Children are much loved and enjoy freedom from the restricting rules of cleanliness. They are not

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 927**

susceptible to becoming defiled and are not expected to understand feelings of shame. Children, for example, may eat food prepared by non-Roma, food that adolescents must reject lest they become defiled by it. The entire extended family cares for children. They are not left alone and are included in adult social activities. They are allowed to eat sugar and fat and may develop tooth decay early. Children are indulged and allowed to run free with their cousins and only told to stop being noisy and boisterous if they bother the adults (Sutherland, 1992a, 1996).

### **Adolescence**

A major change occurs at adolescence for both boys and girls. Adolescents are introduced to the notion of personal shame. Their bodies and their behavior are suddenly judged in terms of their control of polluting substances (menstrual blood, semen) and shameful actions (sexual contact). Girls in particular have to keep clean and observe the washing, dressing, cooking, and eating codes of women. Women's clothes are washed separately from those of men and children, and they cannot cook food for others during menstruation unless they avoid touching menstrual blood. Some girls fast during menstruation (Sutherland, 1986). Adolescents are expected to behave much like adults and to marry as early as possible. Those who experiment with drugs or sex are considered to have a social or mental problem for which marriage is a cure. Alcohol and smoking are not discouraged.

### **Adulthood**

Married women are expected to support their husband's family and their own children. Men's income can be spent on themselves or their children. Women must serve food to their in-laws and show respect to men by not passing in front of them (unless they have a baby in their arms) or allowing their skirts to touch men. They must show modesty by wearing more traditional Roma clothes, and, if married, a head scarf (diklo). Adult women and men soon develop health problems such as obesity, diabetes, high cholesterol, and hypertension leading to an untimely death in many cases. At menopause or when they cease sexual relations, men and women become pure again and the cleanliness rules are eased. To encourage good health, they eat pepper, salt, vinegar, garlic, and onions (Sutherland, 1992a).

### **The Aged**

Old people are highly regarded for their knowledge and special status as pure because menstruation and sexual relations are assumed to have ceased. The aged are politically powerful and exert a great deal of influence over the younger members of the extended family group. They are consulted on everything including arranging the marriages of their offspring and all political decisions by the group. Usually a younger person will not agree to medical procedures without the approval of their oldest relatives who often arrange the medical treatment and act as a mediator with the doctors. In the hospital an older authority figure must be involved in all decisions, and the older women may also treat the patient. The aged are surrounded by their family and cared for at home until death. They may not travel much because of illnesses, but they are at the center of all social and political life. Showing proper respect for the old is the best way of ensuring that their spirit will not carry a grudge to the grave and plague the relatives left behind. Even before a person dies their good deeds begin to take on a mythological stance, and the bad deeds are never mentioned (Sutherland, 1986).

### **Dying and Death**

The period of dying and death constitute a personal crisis as well as a social crisis. When Roma become seriously ill, the entire community is galvanized, and doctors, hospital staff, reporters, social workers, and the police are made aware of a great happening. The Roma flock into town, camp on hospital grounds, and gather in large numbers. Dying in old age when one has prepared for death is a crisis for the *vitsa*, but it is accepted as natural. The ideal death is a "great death" for which one has prepared and that can be shared with large numbers of relatives and friends. The death of a young person, on the other hand, is an enormous tragedy and is thought to have happened because of some moral uncleanness. The relatives are so grief-stricken and fearful, they may become wild and threatening, especially to doctors. Relatives scratch their faces until they draw blood, beat themselves on the chest and head, and wail or shout plaintively to the deceased.

A person who is dying is never left alone. Relatives keep a constant vigil with the dying person to make sure they do not die with a grudge or curse on their lips, to assure that the spirit is released out an open window at the moment of death so it can roam free and leave the relatives left behind, or to frighten death away if they see him approaching the room. The last words of the dying are very important. When the person dies, embalming is considered good to remove the blood from the body. Relatives sit with the body day and night usually in the funeral parlor.

Relatives who are in mourning abstain from washing, shaving, combing hair, or changing clothes for 3 days, at the end of which they can wash and the body is buried. A *pomana* (death feast) is held 9 days, 6 weeks, 6 months and a year after death. The *pomana* may be held in a hall or at the end of the year at the gravesite. The spirit of the dead person (*mulo*) is present at each *pomana* and is set a place to eat and drink. Relatives generally try to avoid the spirit except at the *pomana* when it is important to show the deceased that they are receiving the proper respect.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

Published literature on the health of the Roma is sparse, and there is a need for more study of their health needs and conditions (Hajioff & McKee, 2000). Recent genetic medical research has identified nine Mendelian disorders in Roma populations caused by mutations including muscular dystrophy, galactokinase deficiency, primarily congenital glaucoma, congenital myasthenia, congenital cataracts, facial dysmorphism neuropathy syndrome, and hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies (Kalaydjieva et al., 2001).

Today the Roma in Europe and the United States are increasingly transnational. In the last 25 years in Europe, and since the fall of communism, Roma have either joined the middle class or become increasingly marginalized at the bottom of the social scale where their health conditions have seriously deteriorated. This altering of the traditional social structures in a demographically young population, in addition to the loss of traditional jobs (scrap dealing and traveling sales) combined with the obstruction they meet in trying to find new ways of making a living, mean that all too often the sale of drugs or prostitution is a primary source of income. Until recently drug use by Roma had been unknown. The rise in drug use has been accompanied by the appearance of HIV infection (Sastipen Network).

Poor health, overcrowded living conditions, lack of employment, and little access to health care have created serious health problems. A number of alarming trends in health have been noted in the European Roma community. One study in Spain reported a nine times greater prevalence of antibodies to hepatitis A in Roma children than in the non-Roma population (Cilla, Perez-Trallero, Marimon, Erdozain, & Gutierrez, 1995). Another Spanish study showed that Roma children are at particularly high risk for lead poisoning (Redondo, 1995). In Romania the Roma have one of the highest fertility rates in the region, but infant mortality is also higher than in the population at large. Life expectancy is significantly lower as well. Romani children have a higher rate of vitamin deficiency, malnutrition, anemia, dystrophy, and rickets than the non-Romani in Romania. Romania has the most AIDSinfected children in Europe due to the use of unsterilized needles, and the Romani community has also been dramatically affected. The number of cases of TB and AIDS has been growing at an alarming rate. Over half of the children in one Romani neighborhood were HIV positive according to interviews with one group of doctors (Zoon, 2001, pp. 79–80). In Bulgaria, doctors working in Romani neighborhoods identified widespread cardiovascular conditions, and kidney, liver, gastric and intestinal diseases. In one neighborhood 40 of 70 children tested positive for TB. The last reported cases of polio in Bulgaria were among Romani children (90 cases) and half were disabled by the disease. Romani children seem to have significantly low immunization coverage (Zoon, 2001, p. 90). In Macedonia the Roma infant mortality rate is twice the national average, and infants have extremely high incidences of diarrhea (52% of the women answered "yes" when asked if their infants had diarrhea in the last month) and respiratory diseases (Zoon, 2001, p. 102).

## **REFERENCES**

- Braham, M. (1993). *The untouchables: A survey of the Roma People of central and eastern Europe*. Geneva: UNHCR.
- Cilla, G., Perez-Trallero, E., Marimon, J. M., Erdozain, S., & Gutierrez, C. (1995). Prevalence of hepatitis A antibody among disadvantaged gypsy people in northern Spain. *Epidemiology and Infection,* 115, 157–161.
- Gresham, D. et al. (2001). Origins and divergence of the Roma (Gypsies). *American Journal of Human Genetics, 69*, 1314–1331.
- Hajioff, S., & McKee, M. (2000). The health of the Roma people: A review of the published literature. *Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health*, Nov *54*(11), 864–869.
- Lehti, A., & Mattson, B. (2001). Attitude to care and pattern of attendance among gypsy women—a general practice perspective. *Family Practice, 18*, 445–448.
- Nemenyi, M. (1999). Gypsy mothers and the Hungarian health care system. *Patrin Web Journal*, Jan 6.

#### **Overview of the Culture 929**

- Redondo, M. J., Guisasola, F. J. (1995). An unknown risk group of lead poisoning: The gypsy children. *European Journal of Pediatrics, 154*, 197–200.
- Salloway, J. (1973). Medical care utilization among urban Gypsies. *Urban Anthropology, 2*(1), 113–126.
- Sastipen Network. The European Roma community facing drugs and HIV/AIDS phenomena. Available online at, http://www.asgg.org. sastipen/doc2.htm
- Sutherland, A. (1986). *Gypsies, the hidden Americans*. Chicago: Waveland Press.
- Sutherland, A. (1992a). Health and illness among the Rom of California. *Journal of the Gypsy Lore Society*, *5*, *2*(1), 19–59.

- Sutherland, A. (1992b, September). Gypsies and health care. Cross-cultural medicine (Special Issue). *Western Journal of Medicine, 157*, 276–280.
- Thomas, J. (1985). Gypsies and American medical care. *Annals of Internal Medicine, 102*, 842–845.
- Thomas, J. (1987 August, 15). Disease, lifestyle and consanguinity in 58 American Gypsies. *Lancet*, 377–379.
- Zoon, I. (2001). *On the margins, Roma public services in Romania, Bulgaria and Macedonia*. New York: Open Society Institute.

# **Samoa**

#### **James R. Bindon**

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Samoan Archipelago comprises nine volcanic islands from 13 to 15 south and 168 to 173 west. Since 1900, the islands have been divided into eastern and western moieties. The five islands in the east; Ta'u, Ofu, Olosega (the Manu'a Islands), Tutuila, and Aunu'u form the Territory of American Samoa, while the four islands to the west; Upolu, Savai'i, Manono, and Apolima make up the Independent State of Samoa (ISS). The largest population concentrations are in the Pago Pago Bay Area on Tutuila in American Samoa, and Apia on Upolu in ISS. Prior to colonial influence, there were two polities in the archipelago, separating the Manu'a Islands from the six islands to the west. All of the Samoan Islands are high volcanic islands with peaks up to 6,000 ft on Savai'i and partially encircling reef structures with nearshore lagoons.

The Samoan language falls within the Polynesian Group of the Austronesian language family. There are no significant dialect variations of Samoan, but there are important distinctions in the phonology from region to region within the islands. Samoan has a relatively elaborate lexical division between common words used for everyday conversation (Shore, 1982) and respect or chiefly vocabulary used both for speaking to chiefs (*matai*) and between non-chiefly individuals to denote formality and politeness. Within the chiefly vocabulary, there are also alternate words used for and by chiefs (*ali'i*) and talking chiefs (*tulafale*). English is the most common second language and Samoans in American Samoa are highly bilingual in English.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

### **Population**

Demographers agree that there were no reliable estimates of population in the Samoan Islands until the 1920s. Reports of missionaries and administrators during the 19th century vary widely in quality, and supply widely varying population counts. Commodore Wilkes based his 1839 estimate of the population on reports from local missionaries to come up with a total of about 57,000. This early figure is viewed as the least reliable of the 19th century. The first reasonably reliable census yielded a total of about 34,000 in 1853. The discrepancy between these two censuses led to speculation about severe depopulation after European contact. However, most demographers