# **Modern Portfolio Theory**

Modern portfolio theory (MPT) is generally defined as the body of financial economics beginning with Markowitz' famous 1952 paper, "Portfolio Selection", and extending through the next several decades of research into what has variously been called *Financial Decision Making under Uncertainty, The Theory of Investments, The Theory of Financial Economics, Theory of Asset Selection and Capital–Market Equilibrium*, and *The Revolutionary Idea of Finance* [45, 53, 58, 82, 88, 98]. Usually this definition includes the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and its various extensions. Markowitz once remarked to Marschak that the first "CAPM" should be attributed to Marschak because of his pioneering work in the field [56]; Marschak politely declined the honor.

The original CAPM, as we understand it today, was first developed by Treynor [91, 92], and subsequently independently derived in the works of Sharpe [84], Lintner [47], and Mossin [65]. With the exception of some commercially successful multifactor models that implement the approaches pioneered in [71, 72, 74, 75], most practitioners have little use for market models other than the CAPM, although (or, perhaps rather, *because of* the simplicity it derives from the fact that) its conclusions are based on extremely restrictive and unrealistic assumptions. Academics have spent much time and effort attempting to substantiate or refute the validity of the CAPM as a positive economic model. The best examples of such attempts are [13, 28]. Roll [70] effectively ended this debate, however, by demonstrating that, since the "market portfolio" is not measurable, the CAPM can never be empirically proven or disproven.

## **History of Modern Portfolio Theory**

The history of MPT extends back farther than the history of CAPM, to Tobin [90], Markowitz [53], and Roy [78], all of whom consider the "price of risk". For more detailed treatments of MPT and pre-MPT financial economic thought, refer to [22, 69, 82]. The prehistory of MPT can be traced further yet, to Hicks [34] who includes the "price of risk" in his discussion of commodity futures and to Williams [95] who considers stock prices to be determined by the present value of discounted future dividends. MPT prehistory can be traced even beyond to Bachelier [3], who was the first to describe arithmetic Brownian motion with the objective of determining the value of financial derivatives, all the way to Bernoulli [7], who originated the concept of risk aversion while working to solve the St. Petersburg Paradox. Bernoulli, in his derivation of logarithmic utility, suggested that people maximize "moral expectation"—what we call today *expected utility*; further, Bernoulli, like Markowitz [53] and Roy [78], advised risk-averse investors to diversify: "*...* it is advisable to divide goods which are exposed to some small danger into several portions rather than to risk them all together."

Notwithstanding this ancient history, MPT is inextricably connected to CAPM, which for the first time placed the investor's problem in the context of an economic equilibrium. This modern approach finds its origin in the work of Mossin [65], Lintner [47, 48], and Sharpe [84], and even earlier in Treynor [91, 92]. Accounts of these origins can be found in [8, 29, 85]. Treynor [92] built on the single-period discretetime foundation of Markowitz [53, 54] and Tobin [90]. Similar CAPM models of this type were later published in [47, 48, 84]. Mossin [65] clarified Sharpe [84] by providing a more precise specification of the equilibrium conditions. Fama [26] reconciled the Sharpe and Lintner models; Lintner [49] incorporated heterogeneous beliefs; and Mayers [57] allowed for concentrated portfolios through trading restrictions on risky assets, transactions costs, and information asymmetries. Black [10] utilized the two-fund separation theorem to construct the zero-beta CAPM, by using a portfolio that is orthogonal to the market portfolio in place of a risk-free asset. Rubinstein [79] extended the model to higher moments and also (independently of Black) derived the CAPM without a riskless asset.

Discrete-time multiperiod models were the next step; these models generally extend the discrete-time single-period model into an intertemporal setting in which investors maximize the expected utility of lifetime consumption and bequests. Building upon the multiperiod lifetime consumption literature of Phelps [68], Mirrlees [63], Yaari [97], Levhari and Srinivasan [44], and Hahn [30], models of this type include those of Merton [59, 60], Samuelson [83], Hakansson [31, 32], Fama [27], Beja [4], Rubinstein [80, 81], Long [50, 51], Kraus and Litzenberger [41], and culminate in the consumption CAPMs (CCAPMs) of Lucas [52] and Breeden [15].

The multiperiod approach was taken to its continuous-time limit in the intertemporal CAPM ("ICAPM") of Merton [61]. In addition to the standard assumptions—limited liability of assets, no market frictions, individual trading does not affect prices, the market is in equilibrium, a perfect borrowing and lending market exists, and no nonnegativity constraints (relaxing the no short-sale rule employed by Tobin and Sharpe but not by Treynor and Lintner)—this model assumes that trading takes place continually through time, as opposed to at discrete points in time. Rather than assuming normally distributed security returns, the ICAPM assumes a lognormal distribution of prices and a geometric Brownian motion of security returns. Also, the constant rate of interest provided by the risk-free asset in the CAPM is replaced by a dynamically changing rate, which is certain in the next instant but uncertain in the future. Williams [96] extended this model by relaxing the homogeneous expectations assumption, and Duffie and Huang [23] confirmed that such a relaxation is consistent with the ICAPM. The continuous-time model was shown to be consistent with a single-beta CCAPM by Breeden [15]. Hellwig [33] and Duffie and Huang [24] construct continuous-time models that allow for informational asymmetries. The continuous-time model was further extended to include macroeconomic factors in [20]. Kyle [42] constructs an ICAPM to model insider trading.

These, and other CAPMs, including the international models of Black [12], Solnik [86], and Stulz [89], as well as the CAPMs of Ross [73, 76] and Stapleton and Subrahmanyam [87], are reviewed in [16, 17, 19, 62, 77]. Bergstrom [5] provides a survey of continuous-time models.

Extensions of the CAPM have also been developed for use, in particular, in industrial applications; for example, Cummins [21] reviews the models of Cooper [18], Biger and Kahane [9], Fairley [25], Kahane [39], Hill [35], Ang and Lai [2], and Turner [94], which are specific to the insurance industry. More recent work continues to extend the theory. Nielsen [66, 67], Allingham [1], and Berk [6] examine conditions for equilibrium in the CAPM. Current research, such as the collateral adjusted CCAPM of

Hindy and Huang [36] and the parsimonious conditional discrete-time CAPM and simplified infinitedate model of LeRoy [43], continues to build upon the model originated in [91]. Each is perhaps more realistic, if less elegant, than the original. And yet it is the single period, discrete-time CAPM that has become popular and endured, as all great models do, precisely *because* it is simple and unrealistic. It is realistic enough, apparently, to be coincident with the utility functions of great many agents.

### **A Perspective on CAPM**

One of the puzzles that confronts the historian of CAPM is the changing attitude over time and across different scholarly communities toward the seminal work of Treynor [91, 92]. Contemporaries consistently cited the latter paper [11, 13, 37, 38], including also [84, 85]. However, in other papers, such as [16, 45, 55], these citations were not made. Histories and bibliographies continue to take note of Treynor's contribution [8, 14, 58, 82], but not textbooks or the scholarly literature that builds on CAPM. Why not?

One reason is certainly that Treynor's manuscript [92] was not actually published in a book until much later [40], although the paper did circulate widely in mimeograph form. Another is that Treynor never held a permanent academic post, and so did not have a community of students and academic colleagues to draw attention to his work. A third is that, although Treynor continued to write on financial topics, writings collected in [93], these writings were consistently addressed to practitioners, not to an academic audience.

Even more than these, perhaps the most important reason (paradoxically) is the enormous attention that was paid in subsequent years to refinement of MPT. Unlike Markowitz and Sharpe, Treynor came to CAPM from a concern about the firm's capital budgeting problem, not the investor's portfolio allocation problem. (This concern is clear in the 1961 draft, which builds explicitly on [64].) This was the same concern, of course, that motivated Lintner, and it is significant therefore that the CAPMs of Lintner and Sharpe were originally seen as different theories, rather than different formulations of the same theory.

Because the portfolio choice problem became such a dominant strand of academic research, it was perhaps inevitable that retrospective accounts of CAPM would emphasize the line of development that passes from the individual investor's problem to the general equilibrium problem, which is to say the line that passes through Tobin and Markowitz to Sharpe. Lintner and Mossin come in for some attention, as academics who contributed not only their own version of CAPM but also produced a series of additional contributions to the academic literature. However, Treynor was not only interested in a different problem but also was, and remained, a practitioner.

### **Conclusion**

In 1990, the world beyond financial economists was made aware of the importance of MPT, when Markowitz and Sharpe, along with Miller, were awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics for their roles in the development of MPT. In the presentation speech, Assar Lindbeck of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences said "Before the 1950s, there was hardly any theory whatsoever of financial markets. A first pioneering contribution in the field was made by Harry Markowitz, who developed a theory *...* [which] shows how the multidimensional problem of investing under conditions of uncertainty in a large number of assets *...* may be reduced to the issue of a trade-off between only two dimensions, namely the expected return and the variance of the return of the portfolio *...* . The next step in the analysis is to explain how these asset prices are determined. This was achieved by development of the so-called Capital Asset Pricing Model, or CAPM. It is for this contribution that William Sharpe has been awarded. The CAPM shows that the optimum risk portfolio of a financial investor depends only on the portfolio manager's prediction about the prospects of different assets, not on his own risk preferences *...* . The Capital Asset Pricing Model has become the backbone of modern price theory of financial markets" [46].

### **References**

- [1] Allingham, M. (1991). Existence theorems in the capital asset pricing model, *Econometrica* **59**(4), 1169–1174.
- [2] Ang, J.S. & Lai, T.-Y. (1987). Insurance premium pricing and ratemaking in competitive insurance and capital asset markets, *The Journal of Risk and Insurance* **54**, 767–779.

- [3] Bachelier, L. (1900). Theorie de la sp ´ eculation, ´ *Annales Scientifique de l'Ecole Normale Superieure ´* **17**, 3e serie, 21–86; Translated by Boness, A.J. and reprinted in Cootner, P.H. (ed.) (1964). *The Random Character of Stock Market Prices*, MIT Press, Cambridge. (Revised edition, first MIT Press Paperback Edition, July 1967). pp. 17–78; Also reprinted as Bachelier, L. (1995). *Th´eorie de la Sp´eculation & Th´eorie Math´ematique du jeu*, (2 titres en 1 vol.) *Les Grands Classiques Gauthier-Villars*, Editions Jacques Gabay, Paris, Part 1, ´ pp. 21–86.
- [4] Beja, A. (1971). The structure of the cost of capital under uncertainty, *The Review of Economic Studies* **38**, 359–369.
- [5] Bergstrom, A.R. (1988). The history of continuoustime econometric models, *Econometric Theory* **4**(3), 365–383.
- [6] Berk, J.B. (1992). *The Necessary and Sufficient Conditions that Imply the CAPM* , working paper, Faculty of Commerce, University of British Columbia, Canada; Subsequently published as (1997). Necessary conditions for the CAPM, *Journal of Economic Theory* **73**, 245–257.
- [7] Bernoulli, D. (1738). *Exposition of a new theory on the measurement of risk*, *Papers of the Imperial Academy of Science*, Petersburg, Vol. II, pp. 175–192;Translated and reprinted in Sommer, L. (1954). *Econometrica* **22**(1), 23–36.
- [8] Bernstein, P.L. (1992). *Capital Ideas: The Improbable Origins of Modern Wall Street*, The Free Press, New York.
- [9] Biger, N. & Kahane, Y. (1978). Risk considerations in insurance ratemaking, *The Journal of Risk and Insurance* **45**, 121–132.
- [10] Black, F. (1972). Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing, *Journal of Business* **45**(3), 444–455.
- [11] Black, F. (1972). Equilibrium in the creation of investment goods under uncertainty, in *Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets*, M.C. Jensen, ed., Praeger, New York, pp. 249–265.
- [12] Black, F. (1974). International capital market equilibrium with investment barriers, *Journal of Financial Economics* **1**(4), 337–352.
- [13] Black, F., Jensen, M.C. & Scholes, M. (1972). The capital asset pricing model: some empirical tests, in *Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets*, M.C. Jensen, ed., Praeger, New York, pp. 79–121.
- [14] Brealey, R.A. & Edwards, H. (1991). *A Bibliography of Finance*, MIT Press, Cambridge.
- [15] Breeden, D.T. (1979). An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and investment opportunities, *Journal of Financial Economics* **7**(3), 265–296.
- [16] Breeden, D.T. (1987). Intertemporal portfolio theory and asset pricing, in *The New Palgrave Finance*, J. Eatwell, M. Milgate & P. Newman, eds, W.W. Norton, New York, pp. 180–193.