# **Culture, Stress, and Cardiovascular Disease**

**William W. Dressler**

### **INTRODUCTION**

For the past half-century medical anthropology has been guided by various theoretical orientations. These include (but are not exhausted by) interpretive orientations, political–economic orientations, and biocultural orientations. The latter approach to research, which is allied with ecological and adaptation perspectives, has been productive for the field through the explicit effort to link the biological and the cultural. Research in some areas of medical anthropology can proceed with scant reference to human biology (e.g., interactions of patients and healers). There are, however, some questions of cultural significance that require taking account of biological variation within and between populations. A biocultural orientation provides theory and method for approaching these problems and for unpacking the complex interactions of culture and biology.

Cardiovascular disease, as a general term, refers to any pathology of the cardiovascular system, which would include diseases of the heart as well as vascular disease affecting other parts of the body (such as stroke). Medical anthropologists have studied this broad category of diseases in a variety of ways, but this entry will focus primarily on a condition that is less disease per se but rather a kind of barometer of the system as a whole: blood pressure. A regular cycle of pressure in the cardiovascular system is necessary for basic tissue nutrition. Oxygen and nutrients must be transported across cell membranes. A relatively low level of blood pressure is required for this tissue perfusion; yet, it is not unusual for a person's blood pressure to be considerably higher than that required for system maintenance. At even modest levels of blood pressure (e.g., those considered "normal" in biomedicine, such as 130/80 mmHg, or millimeters of mercury) the risk of serious cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction (or heart attack) increases significantly.

Cross-cultural research on blood pressure has been carried out for over 30 years, sometimes by medical anthropologists, sometimes by epidemiologists and other researchers. One reason that much research on blood pressure has been conducted is because of the relative ease of measuring it. No more elaborate equipment is required than a sphygmomanometer and a stethoscope. It is true, however, that blood pressure can be measured with deceptive ease; a number of conditions of its measurement must be standardized, and the observer must be experienced and aware of the common mistakes in its measurement. Nevertheless, given the ease of measurement of blood pressure, and its strong relationship to other disease outcomes, cross-cultural studies on the distribution of blood pressure provide a rich source of data for understanding biocultural processes.

## **BLOOD PRESSURE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SOCIETIES**

Henry and Cassel (1969) noted that the observation that there are mean blood pressure differences between societies goes back at least to the 1930s. There are a number of papers appearing in the medical literature in the 1950s and 1960s that provide descriptive data on mean blood pressures and the distribution of blood pressure by age and sex in societies dramatically different from the industrial societies that were home to the researchers. Implicitly, and even sometimes explicitly, comparisons were uncritically made between, for example, foragers such as the Hadza of Africa and data from the United States and Europe. Typically, researchers were surprised by two results. First, mean blood pressures were usually found to be much lower in the "traditional" society than in a "modern" society like the United States. Second, rarely were blood pressures observed to increase with age or to differ between genders in the traditional societies, while in modern societies increasing blood pressure with age and differences between men and women (that change with age) were the norm.

With accumulating studies of this kind, in the late 1970s Ingrid Waldron and her associates (Waldron et al., 1982) were able to collate over 80 different studies of

#### **Blood Pressure Differences within Societies 329**

blood pressure, and to link characteristics of the communities studied with data from the Human Relations Area Files. A number of interesting results emerged from this exercise. First, community mean blood pressures increase along a continuum of sociocultural complexity, with societies arrayed according to the familiar sequence of foraging, pastoral, horticultural, agricultural, and industrial modes of adaptation. Second, the increase of community mean blood pressures is not smooth and linear along this continuum; rather, there is a sharp increase in mean blood pressure between horticultural and agricultural societies, which then stays high in industrial societies. And third, controlling for community average levels of obesity does not alter the pattern, which is consistent by age and sex as well. It is unlikely that these patterns are artifacts of differences between observers in the measurement of blood pressure, since such differences would be more likely to obscure patterns rather than produce them. Furthermore, these differences are not an artifact of treated cases, since measurements were carried out on (at least roughly) representative samples of the communities.

The work of Waldron and associates probably represents the most convincing evidence for societal differences in disease risk.

## **BLOOD PRESSURE DIFFERENCES WITHIN SOCIETIES**

As noted above, in the data collated by Waldron and her associates, there was a sharp increase in community average blood pressures between societies practicing foraging and pastoral/horticultural modes of adaptation, and those societies based on systems of extensive agriculture and industrial economies. There is a sudden change in health status at one point along the continuum, suggesting that something associated with the increasing sociocultural complexity of these societies is associated with changing human biology. The term "the epidemiologic transition" has been used to describe this pattern. The epidemiologic transition refers to the shift in patterns of morbidity and mortality within a population from one dominated by infectious and parasitic diseases (compounded by nutritional deficiencies) to one dominated by chronic diseases (compounded by nutritional imbalances and excessive caloric intake).

Evidence consistent with this observation comes from studies of differences in blood pressure within societies. Many of these studies were guided by the "modernization" hypothesis. In this research, communities are ordered along a continuum from "traditional" to "modern." Traditional communities are those in which the local economy is still based on production for local consumption; there is little formal education; national languages are not frequently used; social structure emphasizes extended family relationships; and, there is little penetration by global supernatural belief systems. Modern communities are those in which wage-labor has replaced local production; formal education is present; national language supplants local dialects; the nuclear family becomes a more important unit of social structure; and, individuals adopt one of the global supernatural belief systems. There is a gradient of increasing risk of chronic disease, as indicated by increasing blood pressure (as well as increasing serum glucose, serum cholesterol, obesity, and symptoms of psychiatric disorder) that is associated with a gradient of increasing modernization (Dressler, 1999).

The modernization hypothesis has been investigated in two ways. First, aggregate data (e.g., proportion of persons employed in subsistence agriculture; proportion of nuclear family households) have been used to assign whole communities to a point along the continuum. Then, mean differences in blood pressure have been calculated for each community and variation within and between the communities has been examined. Second, modernization has been measured at the individual level, in terms of a person's occupation or living arrangements. Then, the correlation between these modern characteristics and blood pressure has been calculated. There are reliable and consistent blood pressure differences between communities arrayed along a continuum of modernization. The associations of blood pressure and individual-level variables are much less consistent.

Changing diets have been investigated as a major contributor to this pattern. These hypotheses take two forms. First, increasing caloric intake and decreasing physical activity associated with modernization can lead to higher levels of obesity and risk of high blood pressure. This explanation is fairly easily dealt with by adjusting for measures of body composition such as the body mass index. This is routinely done in this kind of research, and the effects of modernization on blood pressure are independent of body mass. Second, changing patterns of dietary intake have been found to be associated with modernization, consisting of increasing intake of sodium

#### **330 Culture, Stress, and Cardiovascular Disease**

and saturated fats, both of which are thought to be associated with increasing blood pressure. But again, when investigated closely, changing patterns of dietary intake do not account entirely for increasing blood pressure levels.

Attention therefore turned to social, psychological, and cultural factors that might account for these differences. In the late 1950s and early 1960s there was a remarkable burst of activity in thinking about this issue, culminating in an article by Cassel, Patrick, and Jenkins (1960). These investigators were particularly interested in what happened to migrants from rural areas to urban areas, although the same reasoning can be applied to culture change occurring within any community. They offered the following hypothesis: the migrant to a novel setting carries with her a particular understanding of how the world works, in every sense (i.e., what it means to work, how marriages are constituted, how families treat themselves and their neighbors, how to worship—everything). She is confronted, however, with a system for which her understanding may not work. The novel and dominant culture of the new setting must be learned for everyone else's behavior to be understood, and indeed for her to behave in ways that are understandable to others. She must, in other words, culturally adapt to the new setting. Even if she is successful, such adaptation can be costly. Indeed, this is precisely what Hans Selye meant by the General Adaptation Syndrome when he gave the concept of stress its first scientific respectability in the 1930s. Adaptation is costly, and the cost of adaptation is written on the body in terms of what we call health. So, Cassel et al. argued that the less successfully the migrant culturally adapts to the new setting, the higher her stress levels and the higher her blood pressure.

This introduced the concept of stress, and the idea of the stress of culture change, to the literature on modernization and disease. There were, however, certain theoretical and methodological difficulties that limited this as an area of inquiry. First, there was increasing disenchantment within anthropology, especially cultural anthropology, with the whole idea of modernization. The theoretical orientation guiding this work came out of the linear models of economic development that guided post-World War II thinking. All societies were seen as moving along a trajectory of development that would culminate in an industrial mode of production, accompanied by a predictable set of social and cultural changes. This has turned out to be dramatically wrong; instead, a world

systems theory posits a continuing state of underdevelopment within some societies, as these occupy positions on the periphery of that world system. Regardless of which specific variant of this theory is used, some kind of world systems view appears to describe more accurately what is going on with respect to economic development (or continuing under-development) than does a modernization perspective. Therefore, some other way of thinking about the epidemiologic transition is needed.

Second, while Cassel et al. developed a very useful theory of the health effects of culture change, it proved to be very difficult to actually test. This research group was extremely productive, but the logic of the tests of these ideas remained an epidemiologic logic. In epidemiology, the logic of making inferences about the operation of disease processes generally involves the comparison of population groups, one of which is thought to have been exposed to a particular set of risk factors, while the other has not. In the work of Cassel et al. this logic involved comparing groups thought to have been exposed to a set of sociocultural stressors (e.g., migrants to a novel cultural setting) versus those who have not been exposed to this set of stressors (e.g., sedentes), with differences interpreted in terms of the contradictions of cultural systems described by the theory. There never was, however, any direct evidence that these cultural contradictions actually occurred. In other words, methodological developments for assessing in a precise and rigorous way the differences in shared culture between groups, and how these differences may enter into individual behaviors, which in turn are associated with higher blood pressure, were not forthcoming. Therefore the theory remained essentially untested.

Third, anthropologists increasingly turned their attentions to advances occurring in cognate fields (psychology, sociology, and epidemiology, principally) with respect to the stress model. The period of the 1960s and 1970s was an extremely fertile one in terms both of theory and method in the evolution of the stress model. Ethnographers drew on these developments and integrated these concepts and methods with anthropological concerns to derive models of stress relevant in the context of developing societies. This enabled these researchers to avoid the pitfalls of the concept of modernization, while at the same time employing measures that could be directly linked to individual behaviors and health outcomes. This served as a major direction in research throughout this period.

### **MODELS OF STRESS**

Research on stress and disease in sociology, psychology, and epidemiology paralleled work on modernization and disease in anthropology. By the late 1970s, a rough synthesis had emerged that could be used in the development of research models that would be useful cross-culturally. The term "stress" can be used to as a shorthand description for a general area of inquiry. Stress research or the stress model takes as subject-matter the direct link of thought, emotion, and behavior to physiologic changes and hence to disease. In early usage, the term referred to a specific physiologic pathway, although contemporary physiologic research recognizes that there are multiple pathways hormonally mediated by the hypothalamo– pituitary–adrenal axis, the hypothalamo–pituitary–gonadal axis, and the hypothalamo–pituitary–thyroid axis (as well as others; Worthman, 1999).

From the standpoint of social and culture theory, the aim was to identify factors that could be anticipated to be reliably associated with the activation of efforts at adaptation on the part of individuals, that would in turn be associated with a particular pattern of physiologic responses, that in turn could lead to sustained disease. Until recently, the major empirical link made was from social–environmental factors to disease, with the intervening links of physiology posited by analogy with laboratory experiments. More recently, some techniques have been developed that make it possible to measure hormonal mediators in the field and link them to disease outcomes (Panter-Brick & Worthman, 1999). The opportunity to study the physiologic mediators of the stress process is an important addition to the research in this area. At the same time, a principal aim of research continues to be the identification and measurement of factors in the social environment that tax individual adaptive capabilities.

There are two broad classes of social factors thought to influence risk of disease. Stressors are those factors that are (or are understood to be) problematic for individuals. These are events or circumstances that must be dealt with at some level for life to proceed smoothly. Stressors can be further divided into two categories. Acute stressors are typically events that occur suddenly with little warning, or if they are anticipated, their occurrence is limited in time. Chronic stressors are problematic circumstances that persist through time. Both chronic and acute stressors are associated with an increased risk of disease.

A second broad category of social factors can be referred to as resistance resources. Resistance resources are factors that enable the individual to avoid, withstand, or alter the stressful events and circumstances to which she is exposed. These again can be divided into two categories. Social support refers to the help or assistance that an individual can anticipate or receive by virtue of her membership in a network of social relationships. Coping styles refer to relatively stable individual dispositions to approach stressful circumstances in particular ways. On the one hand, individuals may actively seek out ways of coping with the occurrence of a stressor; on the other hand, individuals may more passively withdraw from a stressful circumstance and attempt to emotionally alter the meaning of the stressor.

One of the more influential models of the way in which these factors influence disease risk is the stress buffering model. It is argued that stresses in life are a more-or-less ubiquitous part of human existence, yet not everyone succumbs to the effects of stressors. Rather, individuals, even though they may be exposed to stressors, may not suffer the effects of those stressors because of their available social or psychological resources. Stressors will then have two different patterns of associations with disease risk. On the one hand, where resources are low, stressors will have a substantial effect on disease risk. On the other hand, where resources are high, individuals may be insulated from the stressor effects. That is, resistance resources may buffer the effects of stressors. Actually, one of the most influential papers in this area was also authored by Cassel (1976), who turned to stress models of this kind in search of operationally more explicit ways of examining stress processes.

The question then became one of how this general model might be applied in various ethnographic settings. Scotch (1963) was one of the first anthropologists to look at blood pressure from an explicit stress model. He compared samples of Zulu in South Africa, one sample living in a traditional homeland, the other living in an urban area. He found a variety of factors to be associated differently with high blood pressure in each area. For example, women who were past childbearing age were more likely to have high blood pressure in the rural area, while they were more likely to have low blood pressure in the urban area. Similarly, individuals who were members of Christian churches were more likely to have high blood pressure in the rural area, and low blood pressure in the urban area. Scotch interpreted this pattern of associations as evidence of stress, due to the incongruity between behaviors and context. Women past childbearing age experienced a loss of valued social status in the rural area, while they were relieved of onerous economic burdens in the urban area. Similarly, members of Christian churches were viewed with a certain suspicion in the more traditional and conservative rural areas, while in the urban areas this opened up the possibility of greater social participation. While Scotch's work is still broadly interpretive (i.e., there is little operational specificity to support his arguments), his research was groundbreaking and set the stage for later studies of blood pressure.

Dressler (1982) developed a specific model of stress and culture change on the island of St. Lucia, in the eastern Caribbean, using the theoretical synthesis described above, and building on Scotch's work. By the mid-1970s, St. Lucia had experienced some 20 years of very modest, but sustained economic growth as a result of innovations in the banana industry, which in turn spurred development in other areas. An increasing exposure of people to media representations of North American and European middle-class lifestyles accompanied this growth. The accumulation of consumer goods (e.g., radios, stereos, imported furniture) was emerging as a primary definer of local social status. At the same time, the real potential for increasing incomes to sustain such lifestyle aspirations did not grow at the same rate (economic growth may trickle down, but it does so very slowly and very incompletely). This meant that for a substantial portion of the population the economic resources necessary to fuel the high status lifestyle were absent, although this hardly altered lifestyle aspirations. Drawing on theories of status inconsistency, Dressler argued that individuals who presented themselves in mundane social interaction as having attained the valued lifestyles, but who did not have the economic standing consistent with that claim, would not receive confirmation of their status claims by others. This inconsistency in social status, referred to as "lifestyle incongruity," was predicted be a chronically stressful circumstance which would be associated with higher blood pressure, and this hypothesis was confirmed (after controlling for age, sex, and the body mass index).

At the same time, the social and psychological resources that could support coping with stressful circumstances were investigated. In St. Lucia, social support took a very specific form, relative to patterns of family and household formation that have been well described for the West Indies. It is unusual for persons to marry prior to beginning a family, and frequently individuals will have children by two or more other people. This practice, along with a high solidarity among adult siblings, links individuals into large networks of households. Because individuals are expected to support their offspring, both "inside" and "outside" the household, and because of adult sibling solidarity, there are flows of material resources among households with these links. Dressler hypothesized that this comprised a social support system that would buffer the stressful effects of lifestyle incongruity, and this hypothesis was also supported.

These results were replicated in a variety of settings (Bindon, Knight, Dressler, & Crews, 1997; Dressler, 1993; McGarvey, 1999). It is worth noting, however, what varied, more and less, across cultural contexts. Generally speaking, lifestyle incongruity could be operationalized in very similar ways across different contexts, and had very similar effects. This is because the process leading to status incongruence of this sort is a function of how capitalist markets make their way into local settings. The market for mass-produced goods and services, and the social value attached to those goods and services, is global in nature, as is the generally slow growth of local economies. Therefore, this aspect of the process looks very much the same in different places. Social support systems, however, are rooted in social structure within each local setting, and are therefore much more variable. In a sense, then, the status incongruence/social support model represents an examination of how processes of globalization intersect with local social structures in terms of cardiovascular health outcomes.

There are, however, ways in which stressors can be culturally modified. A good example of this can be found in Janes's (1990) study of blood pressure among Samoan migrants to northern California. Culture change in Samoa accelerated with the advent of World War II, and initiated a process of migration from Samoa to Hawaii and the mainland United States. Like so many migrants, Samoans in the United States were able, in part, to re-create village life in the context of urban centers such as San Francisco. This re-creation could, however, lead to difficulties. On the one hand, there were Samoans who continued their aspirations for status along traditional dimensions, especially seeking chiefly statuses (*matai*) and a leadership role in the extended family. On the other hand, there were Samoans who sought status along more traditional American middle-class dimensions, especially in terms

#### **Cultural Consonance, Stress, and Blood Pressure 333**

of achieving white-collar occupational status. In the former case there is a relatively heavy financial investment to achieve status. In the latter case the investment is more in the form of increased educational qualifications. Janes created two measures of status incongruence, one "internally" oriented toward the Samoan community, and the other "externally" oriented toward the American community. Each of these was associated with an increased risk of high blood pressure.

With respect to social supports, in Samoa the extended family would be the appropriate unit for examining social support. But migration to the United States makes the extended family unit a source of difficulty as well, especially because of the economic demands that lead people to focus more on the nuclear family as the relevant social unit in American urban centers. Therefore, Janes argued that it is only a subset of extended family relationships (again, in this case adult siblings) that can truly be considered a source of support in times of felt need. Consistent with these ethnographic observations, higher support from siblings buffered the effects of stressors on blood pressure.

These studies, incorporating insights from the stress model, proved to be very effective in moving medical anthropologists beyond the modernization paradigm in studying the risk of cardiovascular disease. It is important to emphasize that all these studies were embedded within ethnographic research on these communities. Without careful attention to local meaning and local understanding, it would have been impossible to identify relevant variables in each setting and to develop culturally appropriate measures of those variables for inclusion in multivariate models. Ethnography provides the context for the research.

At the same time, this research is somewhat limited in its investigation of cultural influences in these processes. Like so much anthropological research, the concept of culture provides a general interpretive context for the research, leading investigators to identify certain kinds of social and behavioral factors as important because of the meaning attached to those factors in those specific settings. But what about more direct effects of culture? This is what Cassel and his collaborators were arguing for in their earlier papers, but the methodological and conceptual tools were not available for making those ideas operational. In more recent work, using innovations in culture theory and method, researchers have returned to these questions.

## **CULTURAL CONSONANCE, STRESS, AND BLOOD PRESSURE**

One of the challenges in trying to examine more direct (as opposed to contextual) effects of culture on disease risk is finding a definition of culture that is both theoretically satisfying and yet can be used to understand how individuals come to be at risk. The problem of linking culture to the individual is one that has been prominent throughout the history of anthropological theory; however, employing a cognitive definition of culture suggests a resolution (Dressler & Bindon, 2000). Cognitive approaches define culture as the knowledge one must possess to function as a member of society. Culture is composed of sets of schematic, representational models of cultural domains that individuals learn. These models consist of the elements within domains and the relationships among those elements. From mundane social interactions to the most symbol-laden rituals, we as individuals and groups learn and share cultural models of how any given social context is constituted, the meaning of events and circumstances, and hence the ability to interpret others' behaviors as well as direct our own. Furthermore, culture cannot be reduced to what individuals know, but rather should be understood as the aggregate of knowledge that is distributed across individual minds.

Generally speaking, anthropologists have dispensed with the problem of relating that cultural knowledge to individual behavior, instead assuming that there is a close correspondence between the two. At the same time, the ethnographic literature is replete with examples of how people claim one set of principles as their culture, and proceed to behave in different ways. The relationship between culture and behavior is, in other words, problematic. And, there may be a variety of reasons why individuals do not or, perhaps more importantly, cannot behave in a way strictly congruent with community cultural models.

Dressler and associates (Dressler & Bindon, 2000; Dressler & Santos, 2000) used these ideas in research on blood pressure in Brazil and in the African American community in the southern United States. They suggested that the degree to which individuals are able to approximate in their own behaviors the cultural model of a particular domain, which they referred to as "cultural consonance," would be related to blood pressure. Operationalizing cultural consonance in a precise way was made possible by using the cultural consensus model, developed by Romney, Weller, and Batchelder (1986). The cultural consensus model uses the responses from a set of key informants to a standardized set of questions about some cultural domain to test for the degree of sharing among the informants, under the assumption that knowledge must be shared to be considered to be cultural. If there is sufficient sharing, then it can be inferred that all the informants are drawing on a single cultural model in responding to the questions (intracultural diversity in responses can also be detected using the technique). Then, giving higher weight to informants who are more central in the space of cultural meaning, the culturally best set of responses to the questions can be estimated.

Dressler and associates applied this model to the cultural domains of lifestyles and social supports. Informants were asked to rate a set of lifestyle items and behaviors in terms of their importance in defining a good life. They were also asked to rate a number of potential social supports as likely alternatives in response to crisis situations. These data were then analyzed using cultural consensus analysis, and, in each society, significant consensus was found, indicating widely shared models of lifestyle and social support (which of course differed between societies). It is important to note that informants rated events and circumstance in terms of their cultural, not individual, salience.

Then, extensive epidemiologic survey research was carried out in which respondents were asked about their own individual behaviors in the domains of lifestyle and social support, and in which data on blood pressure, diet, physical activity, and other factors were obtained. Cultural consonance was calculated as the degree to which individuals in their responses matched the culturally prototypical responses as derived from consensus analysis. In both Brazil and the southern United States it was found that the higher the degree of cultural consensus in both domains, the lower the blood pressure (controlling for usual covariates, diet, and a variety of psychological variables). The investigators argue that low cultural consonance is a chronically and profoundly stressful experience. Individuals who, at some level, know and understand the widely shared cultural models for behavior in some domain find themselves lacking in their own behaviors. Most likely, this sense of being outside of accepted conventions is reinforced as well in

mundane social interactions. The end result is enhanced risk of cardiovascular disease.

Why are individuals low in cultural consonance? Evidence points to economic factors as the primary (although not the only) limiting factor. In advanced capitalist society, without sufficient economic resources, generally accepted conventions for how life is to be lived are virtually impossible to attain and to maintain. But, these results clearly indicate that the health effects of a particular structural position in society are mediated by cultural processes.

### **SUMMARY**

The cross-cultural study of cardiovascular disease risk has been remarkably productive for building theory within medical anthropology and in anthropology writ large. As Caudill (1958) pointed out many years ago, disease can be used to trace the fault lines within sociocultural systems. As such, the study of blood pressure cross-culturally has provided insight into how culture and social structure come together to generate obstacles and barriers, and to create supports and resources, for persons in their everyday lives. Furthermore, medical anthropologists studying cardiovascular disease have been sensitive to world systems and how macro-level change can have measurable consequences at the level of the individual and her health status.

In one sense, research in this area has come full circle. Early researchers such as Scotch and Cassel interpreted their results in terms of a culture theory emphasizing shared meaning, and how inconsistencies or incongruities in meaning could lead to stress and disease. Later researchers, applying the stress model, were able to identify factors at the individual level and to more directly test the importance of those factors. The importance of culture in the process was not lost, but continued a role as defining context and an interpretive framework for more specific findings.

More recent work, taking advantage of innovations in culture theory and research methods, has been able to empirically demonstrate how the cultural is linked to the individual, which in turn is linked to the biological. This direction in research is likely to be productive in terms both of building culture theory, and in terms of uncovering new dimensions of human health.