# **FISCAL FEDERALISM**

## NIRVIKAR SINGH\*

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

INDIA is an obviously large and heterogeneous nation, with its unity partially determined by geography, history, and culture, but also shaped and preserved in recent decades by the framework of its Constitution. The constitutional structure, by recognising the need for multilevel governance in a country so large and heterogeneous, has arguably been critical in the nation's evolution since Independence. The very fact of enshrining multiple levels of government in the Constitution, with loci of independent authority, has made India a federal nation, though the process of nation building was not one of explicit federation of independent units.<sup>1</sup> India's main sub-national units are its States, which are large, more homogeneous in many respects than the nation as a whole, and have independently elected governments.

The political federalism initially embedded in the Constitution through the design of State-level Governments was subsequently enhanced by the creation of a layer of elected local governments. At the same time, the political structures have been complemented by fiscal federal structures, also included in the Constitution, that provide the lifeblood of political federalism. The fiscal aspects of federalism are the subject of this chapter. Fiscal federalism covers matters of expenditure and revenue at different levels of government, as well as the fiscal links between levels of government. These links can be direct, in the case of intergovernmental transfers, or indirect, as when different levels of government raise revenue from the same or overlapping tax bases. The expenditure authority assigned to sub-national governments is an obvious corollary of political federalism, since the power to elect a government is meaningless if that government has no control over spending. Less obviously, the power to tax at the sub-national level is also crucial, and intergovernmental transfers may be an inadequate substitute for this sub-national power. Issues of what constitutes true revenue authority in the Indian case are complex, and arguably at the heart of challenges that the nation's fiscal federal system must tackle.

The remainder of this chapter is organised as follows. Section II summarises and analyses the basic original structures of fiscal federalism in India, including assignments of spending and revenue, and mechanisms and institutions for making transfers across levels of government. These institutions include the Finance Commission, Planning Commission, and various central ministries. Section III traces the various constitutional amendments that have taken place in the sixty-plus years since the adoption of the Constitution, including changes in expenditure and revenue authorities, changes in transfer mechanisms, and most significantly, the creation of a tier of local governments. This section includes a discussion of the process of amending the Constitution, trying to understand the intellectual and political drivers of change in this regard. Section IV discusses the working of the institutions of fiscal federalism over the decades, in the context of the various constitutional provisions and amendments, paying particular attention to how these provisions and modifications have been implemented in practice. Section V assesses debates and legal cases pertaining to the constitutionality

of the practice of fiscal federalism in India at various times, and to what extent these cases together provide a coherent and comprehensive legal view of Indian fiscal federalism. Topics of relevance in legal cases include institutions governing intergovernmental transfers, the distinction between taxes and fees, and the scope of authority of different levels of government. Section VI provides a summary conclusion.

### **II. THE INITIAL FRAMEWORK**

India became an independent democratic nation in August 1947 and a constitutional republic in January 1950. The Constitution explicitly incorporated a federal structure, with States as sub-national entities that were assigned specified political and fiscal authorities. States' boundaries were not inviolate, but have been repeatedly redrawn by unilateral central action, as allowed by the Constitution. India now comprises twenty-nine States, six 'Union Territories' (UTs), and a National Capital Territory (NCT), Delhi. In general, the Constitution was structured to give the Union government residual authority and considerable sovereign discretion over the States, creating a relatively centralised federation.

The primary expression of statutory constitutional authority in India comes through directly elected parliamentary-style governments at the national and State levels, as well as nascent directly elected government bodies at various local levels. The national parliament has two chambers, the Lok Sabha (House of the People), directly elected in single-member, first-past-the-post constituencies, and the Rajya Sabha (Council of States), indirectly elected by State legislators. The Prime Minister and council of ministers serve as the executive branch, rather than the largely ceremonial President. The States mostly have single-chamber legislatures, with Chief Ministers in the executive role. Most UTs are governed directly by appointees of the Union government. Each State also has a Governor, appointed by the President, but effectively an agent of the Prime Minister. Overlapping political authorities at the Central and State levels have been dealt with through intra-party bargaining, and, more recently, through explicit bargaining and discussion. An Inter-State Council (ISC) was provided for in Article 263 of the Constitution, and created in 1990, and it has become a forum where some political and economic issues of joint concern are collectively discussed and possibly resolved.<sup>2</sup>

At inception, the Indian Constitution clearly laid out the areas of responsibility of the Central and State Governments, with respect to expenditure authority, revenue raising instruments, and the legislation needed to implement either. Expenditure responsibilities were specified in separate Union and State Lists, with a Concurrent List covering areas of joint authority. $3$  Tax powers of these two levels of government were specified in various individual articles. <sup>4</sup> Legislative procedures for each level, particularly with respect to budgets and appropriations, were spelled out in detail in the Constitution, and are similar to parliamentary democracies elsewhere, having followed the British model.

Powers of legislation for the Centre and States follow the responsibilities assigned in the three constitutional Lists, but there are several relatively broad 'escape clauses', which give the national Parliament the ability to override the States' authority in special circumstances. Furthermore, the assignment of legislative powers ignores potential conflicts, such as when international treaties, the signing of which is a central power, affect State subjects, but this is perhaps unavoidable in a summary constitutional assignment.<sup>5</sup> When conflicts over legislation arise between the Centre and the

States, the Supreme Court is the arbiter. The framework of the Constitution tends to favour central authority in such cases. The power to amend the Constitution also resides with the national Parliament, with a weak requirement that half or more of the States ratify the amendment for it to take effect.

The functions of the Union government are those required to maintain macroeconomic stability,  $6$ international trade and relations, and those having implications for more than one State, for reasons of economies of scale and cost-efficient provision of public services.<sup>7</sup> The major subjects assigned to the States comprise public order, public health, agriculture, irrigation, land rights, fisheries and industries, and minor minerals. The States also assume a significant role for subjects in the Concurrent List, such as education and transportation, social security, and social insurance.

The initial constitutional assignment of tax powers in India was based on a principle of separation, with tax categories being exclusively assigned either to the Centre or to the States, through the Union and State Lists, with further guidelines spelled out in Articles 268 to 274 and Articles 276 to 279. Most broad-based taxes were assigned to the Centre, including taxes on income and wealth from nonagricultural sources, corporation tax, taxes on production (excluding those on alcoholic liquors), and customs duty. These were often taxes where the tax revenue potential was greater, as a result of relatively lower collection costs, and higher elasticities with respect to growth. The Centre was also assigned all residual tax powers. At the sub-national level, a long list of taxes was constitutionally assigned to the States, but only the tax on the sale of goods has turned out to be significant for State revenues. This narrow effective tax base was largely a result of political economy factors (eg, rural landed interests were initially quite powerful in government at the State level) that have eroded or precluded the use of taxes on agricultural land or incomes (and also of user charges for public irrigation and even electricity) by State Governments. $8$ 

The realised outcome of the Indian assignments of tax and expenditure authority, their manner of implementation, and the response of different levels of government and taxpayers to the assignment and implementation was a substantial vertical fiscal imbalance, in the sense of States' own revenue raising being inadequate to meet their assigned expenditure responsibilities. The large vertical fiscal imbalances between levels of government were not unanticipated, and provisions were included in the original Constitution to cover Centre–State transfers through the creation and operation of a Finance Commission  $(FC)$ . There is a theoretical case for this kind of arrangement, based on the greater economic efficiency of national tax collection combined with sub-national spending for many kinds of public goods and services.

The Constitution provided for the sharing of the proceeds of certain centrally levied taxes (eg, noncorporate income tax<sup>10</sup> and Union excise duty<sup>11</sup>) with the States, as well as grants to the States from the Consolidated Fund of India. $\frac{12}{12}$  The FC, which is appointed by the President of India every five years (or earlier if needed), makes recommendations on these transfers, which have been mostly, but not always, unconditional.

While the FC decides on tax shares and makes grants, a completely separate body, the Planning Commission (PC), established by a resolution of the central cabinet in March 1950, has made grants and loans (in the ratio 30:70 for the major States) $\frac{13}{12}$  for implementing development plans, which were introduced at this time. As planning gained emphasis, extending to each State as well, the PC became a major dispenser of such funds to the States, also coordinating central ministry transfers: one-third or more of total Centre–State transfers are made through these channels. As there was no specific provision in the Constitution for these plan transfers, the Union government channelled them under the

miscellaneous (and ostensibly limited) provisions of Article 282. In August 2014, the Prime Minister announced that the PC would be wound up and replaced with a new organisation. This new organisation was announced in January 2015, and named the NITI Aayog, with a new leadership and a new organisational structure.<sup>14</sup>

Various central ministries give grants to their counterparts in the States for specified projects, either wholly funded by the Centre (central sector projects) or requiring the States to share the cost (centrally sponsored schemes). The ostensible conceptual rationale for these programmes is to finance activities with a high degree of inter-State spillovers, or which are merit goods (eg, poverty alleviation and family planning), but they may often be driven by pork-barrel objectives. These projects are supposed to be monitored by the PC, and coordinated with the overall State plans. Categorical transfers by central ministries have increased in the past decade, reflecting political drivers as well as the inability in a federal system to have a constitutional check on the Centre's power to make such grants.

A final area that impinges on federal finance is that of government borrowing. Article 292 of the Constitution gives the Centre the power to borrow, subject to the security of the Consolidated Fund of India, and to any limits that might be placed on it by Parliament. Similarly, Article 293(1) has provisions for borrowing by State Governments, though they may not borrow abroad. Article 293(2) allows the Centre to make loans to the States, or provide guarantees to loans taken by them, subject to possible conditions laid down by Parliament. Significantly, according to Article 293(3), States cannot borrow without the consent of the Centre if they are already indebted to the Centre, or it is a guarantor for existing loans. In fact, that condition has prevailed almost always, since the Union government was, until fairly recently, the States' main source of lending, and every State was indebted to the Centre.<sup>15</sup>

#### **III. AMENDMENTS**

India's fiscal federal arrangements have been subject to a variety of modifications through constitutional amendments. On the expenditure side, education was on the State List until 1977, when it was moved to the Concurrent List as part of the Forty-second Amendment. This amendment, passed during the Emergency period, also made other changes to the Seventh Schedule assignments of responsibility between the Centre and States, <sup>16</sup> as well as various other significant changes to the Constitution (some of which were later reversed). $\frac{17}{12}$ 

The first time the constitutional assignment of taxes was amended was in 1956, when the language governing inter-State sales taxes was sharpened and clarified. Articles 269, 286, and the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution were all modified in this Sixth Amendment. Inter-State sales taxes were to be levied and collected in accordance with an Act of Parliament,  $\frac{18}{18}$  but with the proceeds accruing to the States and not going into the Consolidated Fund of India. The original provisions of the Constitution led to some ambiguities in States' jurisdictions over taxes, even though inter-State taxes were always intended to be outside the purview of the States. $\frac{19}{19}$ 

In 1983, another change pertaining to inter-State sales taxes was made, this time to deal with ambiguities in the language of the original provisions that allowed for avoidance or diminution of sales taxes in certain situations. The Forty-sixth Amendment modified Schedule 7 (adding a category

to the Union List pertaining to inter-State consignments of goods) and Articles 269, 286, and  $366.\overline{20}$ 

The third time that a constitutional amendment dealt with taxes, in the Sixtieth Amendment of 1988, the change made was straightforward, simply raising the ceiling on possible State or local taxes on professions from Rs 250 to Rs 2,500. The figure had been specified in the original Constitution, and had been made unrealistic by decades of inflation and real growth. Of course, this problem will recur periodically.

The most recent modification of tax assignments came in 2004, and was more major. The Eightyeighth Amendment introduced taxes on services as an explicit entry in the Union List in Schedule VII, modified Article 270, and inserted a new Article 268A. Given the Centre's residuary powers of taxation, taxes on services had implicitly been within the authority of the Centre. The language of the amendment included imprecise language indicating that a services tax would be shared with the States, and the government's statement of objects and reasons discussed the amendment in the context of the introduction of a Value Added Tax (VAT), but this entire area of sales taxation is still in a state of evolution, as will be discussed in subsequent sections.

There has been only one constitutional change in the mechanism of Centre–State transfers, although institutional practices have varied and evolved over time. In the initial constitutional design of the tax-sharing arrangement between the Centre and the States, only the revenues from certain central taxes, such as income tax, were shareable with the States. A large proportion of such taxes went to the States, distorting Union government incentives for collecting them. In 1994, the Tenth Finance Commission proposed that the entire Consolidated Fund of India be the pool that would be shared, removing distortions of incentives across different categories of central tax revenue. This recommendation led to the Eightieth Amendment in 2000, which essentially implemented the proposed new sharing mechanism.

The most sweeping constitutional change in India's fiscal federal arrangements came with the Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth Amendments, which created, respectively, stronger rural and urban local governments than had hitherto been possible. Local government was initially, and remains, under the control of the States, being in the State List of the Seventh Schedule. However, the amendments added the Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules to the Constitution, detailing rural and urban local government expenditure responsibilities. Many of these remained concurrent with the States, which also retained control over local finances, in that local tax authority remained circumscribed, with transfers from State funds through new State Finance Commissions providing funds for the new expenditure responsibilities.

State Governments have varied in the level and quality of implementation of new local expenditure authorities and revenues to support them. The structure of the Constitution made this inevitable, to some extent, but the amendments could, perhaps, have offered a firmer approach to devolving revenue authority to local governments, since it provided much greater political decentralisation than had existed in the past. The mismatch between revenue and expenditure authority for local governments is much greater than for State Governments, and both levels of mismatch may require constitutional change rather than just improvements in existing institutional frameworks: this is discussed in subsequent sections. $\frac{21}{2}$ 

The processes leading to amendments in the Constitution pertaining to taxes, expenditures, and intergovernmental transfers illustrate one aspect of the working of fiscal federalism in India. In the case of the Sixth Amendment, dealing with inter-State sales taxes, the initial impetus came from legal cases involving State Governments and private corporations, adjudicated by the Supreme Court. The Court's decisions and interpretations brought out the ambiguities in the existing constitutional language. The Union government then appointed a Taxation lnquiry Commission in 1953–54, leading to a report with recommendations in 1955, which in turn formed the basis of the parliamentary bill and the amendment the following year.

In the case of the issues leading to the Forty-sixth Amendment, the driver was once again legal cases that went up to the Supreme Court, and the rulings of the Court created a clear need for a stronger and clearer articulation of the tax status of certain transactions. In this case, the matter was referred to the Law Commission of India, which is appointed periodically by the executive branch to examine a variety of legal issues. The report was prepared by the Sixth Law Commission in 1974, but took some years to be translated into constitutional change legislation, during which time further legal cases arose.

The Sixtieth Amendment, in 1988, was relatively straightforward, and was enacted simply in response to representations from several State Governments. The Eightieth Amendment, dealing with intergovernmental tax sharing, was also not driven by legal disputes, but was instead shaped by conceptual arguments in favour of greater economic efficiency, developed by the Tenth Finance Commission. The Eighty-eighth Amendment arose as part of a much broader process of reform of sales taxes in India. The initial assignments of authority to tax goods and services, as well as how they were subsequently implemented, created problems of overlapping of tax bases, and cascading of taxes (in which values that are taxed include taxes paid elsewhere), both of which reduce the efficiency of the indirect taxes. A version of VAT, which avoids or reduces the problems, was introduced at the central level as early as 1986, but a more comprehensive VAT covering the States did not come into force until 2003–05. It was in this last period, therefore, that the Eighty-eighth Amendment, clarifying the Centre's power to tax services, was introduced and adopted. The ongoing attempt to devise and implement a comprehensive Goods and Services Tax (GST) to supersede the existing VAT represents, in some ways, a culmination of over two decades of reform of the indirect tax system.<sup>22</sup>

The Forty-second and the Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth Amendments were quite different in character and process from all these other constitutional changes in fiscal federal structures. Rather than technical issues pertaining to the power to tax, or the basis for tax sharing, the drivers were complex political forces. The Forty-second Amendment was remarkably broad, and passed hurriedly in an abnormal political situation. The reassignment of education from the State List to the Concurrent List was a relatively small part of the sweeping scope of the amendment, and, while problematic in some respects, has not been reversed, and has, to some extent, ratified a pre-existing reality. The two 1993 amendments giving more explicit constitutional status and powers to local governments, on the other hand, took decades to come to fruition, and can even be thought of as a continuation of fundamental debates on the nature of Indian federalism that go back to India's initial Constituent Assembly and its constitution-making exercise. Ultimately, the difficult process of political bargaining between the Centre and the States led to a compromise that still arguably lacks some essential features in the sphere of fiscal federal arrangements, that is, the weakness of local governments in the sphere of independently raising their own revenues.

The evolution of Indian fiscal federalism has not just been shaped by constitutional changes. The

PC's role in influencing various Centre–State transfers has been driven by changing political equations, sometimes leading centralising impulses, at other times responding to the impacts of political decentralisation. The National Development Council (NDC) was set up soon after the PC. It is chaired by the Prime Minister, and its members include selected central cabinet ministers, Chief Ministers of the States, and members of the PC. It plays an important role in plan formulation, serving as a forum for political bargaining (as did the PC itself, though less explicitly).

The PC itself saw its role vary over time. For example, until 1969, Plan transfers were project based. At that time, the NDC switched to a formulaic approach, but discretion and political bargaining have continued to play a role. In the 2000s, for example, central ministry transfers for national missions in health and education and a national rural employment scheme greatly increased the relative importance of discretionary Centre–State transfers. The Plan transfer formula has also been the subject of political bargaining: in 2013, the Union government commissioned a report that seemed to undermine or question the practice and methodology of classifying certain States as 'Special Category', qualifying them for a more favourable transfer formula. The ISC has also become a forum (broader than the NDC) where political and economic issues of joint concern can be collectively discussed and possibly resolved. For example, the Tenth Finance Commission's recommendation on changing the Centre–State tax-sharing arrangement was discussed and refined in the ISC before becoming a legislative proposal and then a constitutional amendment.

The existence of Plan and central ministry transfers has clearly impinged on the ability of the FC to take a comprehensive approach to the horizontal division of the States'share of the combined Centre– State tax pool. Periodically, though, the FC has challenged the rationality of the approach to Plan transfers in particular, since the distinctions between developmental and non-developmental expenditures have lacked a clear economic rationale. On the other hand, the FC, while it has provided a relatively stable formula for its horizontal division among the States—primarily meant to increase and equalise their fiscal capacity—has struggled with its own objectives. In addition to formulaic transfers, it has made various grants with negative incentive effects, and, in recent years, has sought to make transfers conditional on the fiscal performance of the States. This last effort was spurred by Central instructions to the FC to help control State fiscal deficits. In sum, the FC has also responded to changing national fiscal conditions and macroeconomic goals, in ways that have involved conflicting approaches to different components of Centre–State transfers. $\frac{23}{10}$  The constitutional language pertaining to the FC has permitted this breadth and variation in its working.

Turning to the practice of sub-national borrowing, as noted earlier, some central loans are made under the supervision of the PC, and have been tied to PC grants in a fixed proportion. Central loans have also included funds from multilateral agencies or other external sources, which are earmarked for specific programmes and projects in particular States. After the reforms of the 1990s, States have more freedom to negotiate directly with multilaterals, and the Centre plays combined roles of approver, guarantor, and intermediary. Finally, there can be ad hoc central loans based on special circumstances or exigencies in individual States, and short-term ways and means advances to provide revenue smoothing. One of the FC's major concerns in recent periods has been to increase the fiscal discipline in sub-national borrowing arrangements, through aggregate borrowing caps, and a shift from discretionary lending or on-lending by the Centre to more market-mediated borrowing by the States. Various (non-transparent) borrowing mechanisms also exist for local-level governments, and these will increase in importance as urbanisation requires greater infrastructure spending. So far, none of the changes in sub-national borrowing practices has required a constitutional change.
### **V. LEGAL CASES AND LESSONS**

There are several ways of categorising the range of legal cases pertaining to India's constitutional arrangements for federal finances. The first is by topic, which includes taxes, expenditure authorities, intergovernmental transfer mechanisms, and sub-national government borrowing mechanisms: this will be the primary organising principle used here. Secondly, legal cases differ according to the set of governments involved, for example, whether they deal with one level of government (Centre, State, or local), or with intergovernmental relations. Thirdly, private sector parties may or may not have been involved in a particular case. Fourthly, some cases have led to constitutional amendments, but in general, legal cases are resolved by specific judicial interpretations of constitutional language. As described earlier, the Sixth and Forty-sixth Amendments were both responses to judicial interpretations of existing constitutional language that was not satisfactory to the legislative and executive branches of government.

## **1. Taxes**

Legal cases involving taxes have, unsurprisingly, been very common, especially when there is a direct opposition of interests between private sector entities that wish to reduce their tax burdens, and governments that want to maintain or increase revenue. Given the large number of cases, the discussion here will be selective. Many cases that are not considered in detail in this chapter deal with technical issues of what qualifies as income, what constitutes a good, $\frac{24}{3}$  what constitutes consumption or use, and so on.

Many cases have involved the scope and application of a particular tax, and appeals to the Supreme Court have hinged on the interpretation of constitutional language. In 1954, the Court made a significant observation in *Navinchandra Mafatlal v The Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City*.<sup>25</sup> The case had originally been brought in 1950, and involved a question of whether 'income' included 'capital gains'. Citing a string of cases going back before Independence, the Court noted that 'in construing words in a constitutional enactment conferring legislative power the most liberal construction should be put upon the words so that the same may have effect in their widest amplitude'. <sup>26</sup> The Court echoed this view in *The Western India Theatres Ltd v The Cantonment Board Poona Cantonment*, in 1959. 27

In a 1969 case, *M/S Jain Bros v The Union of India*, the Supreme Court made a specific Statement on double taxation in the context of an income tax case: 'The Constitution does not contain any prohibition against double taxation even if it be assumed that such a taxation is involved in the case of a firm and its partners after the amendment of s. 23(5) by the Act of 1956; nor is there any other enactment which interdicts such taxation.<sup>228</sup>

In 1978, in *Avinder Singh v State of Punjab*, the Court made a broader explicit observation on the constitutional validity of double taxation, concluding, 'There is nothing in Art. 265 of the Constitution prohibiting double taxation.' <sup>29</sup> This statement made explicit a position implicitly taken in the *Western India Theatres* case. In *Avinder Singh*, the Court went on to observe, rather sweepingly, that 'Bad economics may be good law and vice versa.<sup>30</sup> As an aside, this kind of judicial thinking raises serious concerns about the approach to law-making on matters that affect economic activity of all

kinds, not just federal finance issues.

The *Avinder Singh* case has been cited in many other subsequent court judgments, and its pronouncement on double taxation was quoted at length in *Municipal Council Kota v The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd* in 2001, in a case involving levy of an octroi-like tax. <sup>31</sup> Broadly, these kinds of cases have affirmed that the discretion of the Central and State Governments to impose taxes is quite broad under the Constitution of India. Arguably, this puts the onus on politicians to reform tax laws, and the Constitution where necessary, to limit double taxation where it is most likely to cause economic harm. The recent introduction of VAT, and plans for a GST, together represent an ongoing effort to rectify problems in existing laws and constitutional guidelines on tax authority.<sup>32</sup>

Another example of the Supreme Court's providing a broad interpretation of the power to tax, this time for the Union government, concerned a case involving the import of country liquor into the Union Territory of Delhi: *Satpal & Co v Lt Governor of Delhi*. <sup>33</sup> The Court's ruling provided a clear statement of residuary powers of the Centre:

[E]xcept the matters specifically enumerated in List II (State List) in the Seventh Schedule, Parliament's plenary power to legislate extends to all conceivable matters which can be topic of legislation, and even this limitation on its power vanishes when Parliament legislates for part of the territory of India not included in a State. The three dimensional picture becomes complete, viz. (i) to select topic for legislation (ii) enactment of legislation on the topic and (iii) to impose tax in respect of such subject matter of legislation by reference to Art. 248 which confers power to make any law with respect to any matter not enumerated in Lists II and III including the power to impose tax not mentioned in either of those lists. $34$ 

Other rulings of the Supreme Court have upheld powers of retrospective taxation (eg, *The Tata Iron* & Steel Co Ltd v The State of Bihar;<sup>35</sup> Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel and Co v Union of India<sup>36</sup>) and broad discretion as to how a tax is levied (eg, *Jullundur Rubber Goods Manufacturers Association v Union of India*, <sup>37</sup> *Goodricke Group Ltd v State of West Bengal 38* ). These rulings have come in various cases, some involving the Centre and others individual States.

Issues of fiscal federalism arise more squarely in cases of overlapping or concurrent authority. While the Centre's power to tax is only buttressed by its residuary powers under the Constitution, the States' powers are circumscribed, even in the case of the State List in the Seventh Schedule.<sup>39</sup> For example, Entry 50 in the State List is 'Taxes on mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating to mineral development'. The State of Orissa (now Odisha) levied a tax on mineral or coal bearing lands. In *State of Orissa v Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd*, the Supreme Court ruled that this tax was in substance a tax on minerals and mineral rights, and was therefore preempted by a previous Act of Parliament—the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act of 1957.<sup>40</sup>

Less than a decade later, however, the Supreme Court reversed itself on this subject, in *State of West Bengal v Kesoram Industries Ltd*. <sup>41</sup> The judgment in this case is lengthy and offers detailed perspectives on the relative powers of the Centre and the States. After a review of numerous other precedents and related cases, the ruling stated, 'Entries 52, 53 and 54 in List I are not heads of taxation. They are general entries. Fields of taxation covered by Entries 49 and 50 in List II continue to remain with State Legislatures in spite of Union having enacted laws by reference to Entries 52, 53, 54 in List I.<sup> $\frac{42}{1}$ </sup> Furthermore, 'So long as a tax or fee on mineral rights remains in pith and substance a tax for augmenting the revenue resources of the State or a fee for rendering services by the State and it does not impinge upon regulation of mines and mineral development or upon control of industry by the Union government, it is not unconstitutional.<sup>'43</sup>

Aside from its core argument, the Supreme Court's ruling in *Kesoram* also contained some broad statements about Indian federalism:

[T]he interpretation of the flexible provisions of the Constitution can be accompanied by dynamism and lean, in case of conflict, in favour of the weaker or the one who is more needy. Several taxes are collected by the Centre and allocation of revenue is made to States from time to time. The Centre consuming the lion's share of revenue has attracted good amount of criticism at the hands of the States and financial experts. The interpretation of Entries can afford to strike a balance, or at least try to remove imbalance, so far as it can. Any conscious whittling down of the powers of the State can be guarded against by the courts.<sup>44</sup>

It is arguable whether these statements represented an appropriate exercise of the Supreme Court's powers, but that is a broader issue with regard to the working of the Court over many decades, and beyond the scope of this chapter.

States' powers to impose sales taxes are limited by restrictions on inter-State sales taxes. As noted in Section 3, the Sixth Amendment was a major step in clarifying the nature of these restrictions, as well as defining the Centre's authority in such cases. Prior to the amendment, the Supreme Court had had some difficulty with the provisions of Article 286, in *State of Bombay v The United Motors (India) Ltd*. 45 In essence, the Court did not believe that Article 286 completely disallowed States from taxing inter-State sales. This decision was substantially reversed the following year, in the ruling on *The Bengal Immunity Company Limited v State of Bihar*, <sup>46</sup> but the ambiguities reflected in these cases and judgments led to the Sixth Amendment. In the case of the Forty-sixth Amendment, the original case was *The State of Madras v Gannon Dunkerley & Co (Madras)*, <sup>47</sup> which defined sales of goods in such a manner that a series of subsequent Court decisions held a range of transactions not to be liable for sales tax. This effective loophole was finally closed in 1982, through the constitutional amendment. 48

Another issue that has been the subject of legal attention has been that of taxes versus fees. Taxes and fees are distinguished in the Constitution, and the Supreme Court made an early ruling on the nature of this distinction, emphasising that fees must be for specific services, and that the fee revenue and cost of provision must also have some relationship: *The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments v Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt*. 49 In this ruling, the levy under dispute was held to be a tax and not a fee, and was disallowed. However, in several subsequent decisions (eg, *Sreenivasa General Traders v State of Andhra Pradesh 50* ) the Court has substantially broadened the concept of a fee, blurring the boundary between fees and taxes. Some of this change in interpretation was driven by the recognition that fees for regulatory services are more difficult to connect to the benefits of individual fee payers. On the other hand, even for regulatory fees, the possibility that they are partially used for general revenue raising remains.<sup>51</sup> Interestingly, the legal discussions on taxes versus fees do not get at the heart of one of the more pervasive problems in Indian governance, which is the failure to charge for private goods or services that are publicly provided, such as electricity or irrigation water for farmers.<sup>52</sup>

A final issue in the area of tax authority, directly related to federal issues, is that of intergovernmental tax immunities. Article 285 of the Constitution explicitly prohibits States from taxing property of the Union government. The definition of 'property' in this context is quite broad, and not restricted by the purposes to which it is put. However, there are some caveats in practice. The Railways are still liable to pay fees to local authorities for local services, as in *Union of India Owner of The Eastern Railway v The Commissioner of Sahibganj Municipality*. <sup>53</sup> Furthermore, various kinds of government corporations are not exempt from State taxation, as in *Western*

*Coalfields Ltd v Special Area Development Authority, Korba*. <sup>54</sup> On the other hand, no property owned by the Union government can be taxed by a local authority, even if it is being leased out and used for commercial or residential purposes.

In the case of Central taxation of State Government properties, Article 289 of the Constitution protects State Government property from such taxation. However, Parliament may pass laws allowing the Centre to tax the business operations of a State, including property used for such operations, or income thereby generated. The Supreme Court has stated that imports and exports by a State Government can be subject to customs duties, and that State Government production and manufacture can be subject to Union excise duties: this was done in an advisory opinion (with a 5:4 split) of the Court on the matter being referenced to it by the President of India.<sup>55</sup>

# **2. Expenditures**

Constitutional cases pertaining to expenditures have not had the same character as those for tax authorities. Public interest legislation has often played a role in cases involving the lack of efficacy of government spending (eg, cleaning up the River Yamuna), or the appropriateness of spending (eg, a subsidy for Haj pilgrims). The drivers of the Forty-second, Seventy-third, and Seventy-fourth Amendments, which made significant changes in expenditure assignments across levels of government, were political compulsions, and while other aspects of these amendments may have come under judicial scrutiny for constitutional validity, the modifications to expenditure assignments have been considered to be relatively innocuous.<sup>56</sup>

The case of water management, however, provides an important example of federal issues on the side of expenditure powers. Inter-State river waters involve joint Central and State responsibilities, while most other water issues are, according to constitutional assignments, State responsibilities.<sup>57</sup> Parliament has not taken a lead in creating institutions to manage inter-State rivers, beyond passing an act to deal with disputes, the Inter-State River Water Disputes (ISRWD) Act of 1956. This legislation included provisions for the establishment of tribunals to adjudicate where direct negotiations had failed.<sup>58</sup>

More generally, issues of environmental protection, including air and water pollution and preservation of natural resources such as forests, have invited considerable judicial activism, as in the intervention of the Supreme Court requiring that polluting taxi-rickshaws in the NCT of Delhi be converted to run on compressed natural gas. Mandal and Rao provide a comprehensive analysis of environmental issues in a federal context, including the Supreme Court's judicial activism, in the case of forest preservation, air pollution, and water management.<sup>59</sup> The Energy Resources Institute examines the impact of Supreme Court rulings on forests and mineral rights, arguing that the Court has greatly increased centralisation in the former case, but has decentralised in the latter, through its decisions in recent decades.<sup>60</sup>

### **3. Transfers**

Until the Eightieth Amendment, the constitutionally prescribed mechanism for sharing taxes between

the Centre and States was restricted to a limited number of taxes. Furthermore, the Centre was able to further restrict the scope of sharing—it could and did impose an income tax surcharge that was nonshareable, even when income tax revenue itself was part of the shareable pool (and allocated chiefly to the States at the time). The amendment changed the sharing pool to be the entire Consolidated Fund of India, with some relatively small exceptions, thus simplifying the mechanism of vertical sharing (though not of horizontal division among the States) and improving and rationalising incentives for tax policy and collection.

Based on the specification of its constitutional role, the FC has made recommendations for vertical and horizontal tax sharing, and combined these with recommendations for various grants. The basic recommendations of the FC have tended to be accepted and implemented by the Centre, so there have not really been any constitutional issues that have arisen. The formulation and adoption of the Eightieth Amendment was also relatively smooth. Of course political bargaining does occur, and may influence FC-determined transfers at various levels: the composition of the FC, the special grants it makes, and perhaps even discussions over the horizontal tax-sharing formula. Politics also presumably shaped the Eighty-eighth Amendment, which kept service tax revenue under a new Article 268A outside the purview of the FC, giving the Centre scope for discretion as to how it chooses to share that revenue. Overall, issues with FC transfers have been in the realm of economic efficiency and horizontal equity, rather than any pertaining to constitutional law.

The constitutional issue has been somewhat livelier in the case of Central transfers made under Article 282. Unlike the relatively detailed language of Articles that govern the working of the FC, including tax sharing and grants, Article 282 is brief and non-specific: 'The Union or a State may make any grants for any public purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make laws.'<sup>61</sup> Article 282 has been used to justify Central ministry transfers, as well as PC transfers.

Court cases that have affirmed the breadth of the scope of Article 282 have not directly dealt with Central transfers, but have been High Court judgments regarding State Government grants. In 1960, in *Laxman Moreshwar Mahurkar v Balkrishna Jagannath Kinikar*, the Bombay High Court's ruling stated:

If the Government purports to spend money for a purpose which it characterises as a public purpose though in point of fact it is not a public purpose, the proper place to criticise the action of the Government would be the legislature or the Appropriation Committee. The Courts are not the forum in which the Government's action could be sought to be criticised or restrained.<sup> $2$ </sup>

The issue being dealt with in this and subsequent cases (eg, *Bira Kishore Mohanty v State of Orissa*, 63 in the Orissa High Court, and *KN Subba Reddy v State of Karnataka*, 64 in the Karnataka High Court), as is clear from the quote, was the appropriateness of State Government spending decisions, rather than the constitutionality of an institutional mechanism for intergovernmental transfers.

On the other hand, there have been ongoing constitutional arguments against the justification of PC grants through Article 282. The Congress government in Tamil Nadu, in its memorandum to the Fourth Finance Commission in 1964, noted that:

Article 282 of the Constitution . . . occurs in the section dealing with miscellaneous financial provisions and permits the center as well as the states—to give grants for any public purpose. It could never have been the intention of the framers of the constitution that this Article should be over-worked so as to become the more important instrument of financial assistance to the states and thus permit the center to assume control even over subjects which are solely within the competence of the states.<sup>65</sup>

Other institutional voices, including the Administrative Reforms Commission and the FC itself, have at various times argued for Plan transfers to be overseen by the FC, permitting a comprehensive and more neutral approach to Centre–State transfer decisions.<sup>66</sup>

The Supreme Court finally addressed the issue of Article 282 in *Bhim Singh v Union of India*. 67 This case was brought in 1999, and concerned the validity of the Member of Parliament Local Area Development (MPLAD) scheme, whereby individual MPs each received lump sum grants to be spent in their constituencies as they wished for public purposes. In the course of addressing the petition, the Court reviewed the entire gamut of mechanisms for Centre–State transfers,  $\frac{68}{68}$  and came down squarely on the side of an expansive interpretation of Article 282:

The analysis of Article 282 coupled with other provisions of the Constitution makes it clear that no restriction can be placed on the scope and width of the Article by reference to other Articles or provisions in the Constitution as the said Article is not subject to any other Article in the Constitution. Further this Article empowers Union and the States to exercise their spending power to matters not limited to the legislative powers conferred upon them and in the matter of expenditure for a public purpose subject to fulfilment of such other provisions as may be applicable to the Constitution their powers are not restricted or circumscribed.<sup>69</sup>

While the Court did not address the validity of PC transfers directly, it noted the existence of a range of Central ministry schemes that have become intertwined with the PC's own efforts, and after considering the detailed features of the MPLAD scheme, found no cause for questioning its constitutionality.<sup>70</sup>

The final conclusion of the Court remained somewhat self-contradictory, however, because it simultaneously assigned great breadth and discretion to transfers under Article 282, while still maintaining that its provisions were normally meant for special, temporary, or ad hoc schemes (Clause 3 in the following):

1. Owing to the quasi-federal nature of the Constitution and the specific wording of Article 282, both the Union and the State have the power to make grants for a purpose irrespective of whether the subject matter of the purpose falls in the Seventh Schedule provided that the purpose is 'public purpose' within the meaning of the Constitution.

2. The Scheme falls within the meaning of 'public purpose' aiming for the fulfilment of the development and welfare of the State as reflected in the Directive Principles of State Policy.

3. Both Articles 275 and 282 are sources of spending funds/monies under the Constitution. Article 282 is normally meant for special, temporary, or *ad hoc* schemes. However, the matter of expenditure for a 'public purpose', is subject to fulfilment of the constitutional requirements. The power under Article 282 to sanction grant is not restricted.<sup> $71$ </sup>

In any case, the Supreme Court's affirmation of the scope of Article 282 remains in force for supporting Union government discretion in transfers, even as the PC has been slated for extinction.

## **4. Borrowing**

Government borrowing has not been subject to constitutional or other legal cases. Plan transfers have been a major source of Central loans to the States, and State indebtedness increased dramatically in the 1990s, $\frac{72}{1}$  resulting in concerted efforts, through legislation and through incentive mechanisms

designed by the FC, to control State debt and deficits. In general, the FC and the RBI have played roles in trying to improve sub-national borrowing mechanisms and practices, while the Union government, having passed its own fiscal responsibility legislation, pressured the States to follow suit.

#### **VI. CONCLUSION**

India has an elaborate set of constitutional arrangements with respect to fiscal federalism. These explicit arrangements have been augmented by additional practices, which have found constitutional justification in rulings of the Supreme Court, as the final arbiter on matters of interpretation of the Constitution. In general, the Constitution's arrangements have been flexible enough to accommodate various reforms, or have been occasionally amended when this was necessary. The Court has tended to adopt an expansive view of powers of government action, including the power to tax, especially at the Central level. More recently, the Court has tended to take an activist position in addressing government failures in areas such as environmental protection, but this activism has had varying effects on fiscal federal relations in different domains. Ongoing (the GST) and potential future (piggybacking on taxes at different levels of government) tax reform may require further constitutional amendments, and these will in turn require bargaining between different levels of government. Overall, the Constitution of India has provided a durable and flexible, if imperfect, framework for India's fiscal federal arrangements.

\* I am grateful to the editors of the volume, Sujit Choudhury, Pratap Bhanu Mehta, and especially Madhav Khosla, for helpful suggestions. I am also grateful to the Handbook conference participants for useful comments and to Varun Srikanth for help with case references. As always, I am indebted to M Govinda Rao for teaching me so much about Indian federalism.

 $1$  The constitutional structure has been centralised enough to lead some to label India as quasi-federal. For example, the Constitution gives the Union, or Centre, the power to change State boundaries, or even extinguish States. The Supreme Court, in *Bhim Singh v Union of India* (2010) 5 SCC 538 [48], addressed the nomenclature and argued that India is 'quasi-federal'.

 $2^2$  Constitution of India 1950, art 263. The ISC includes the Prime Minister, State Chief Ministers, and several Central Cabinet ministers as members. While the ISC is advisory, it has formalised collective discussion and approval of important matters impinging on India's federal arrangements, including tax sharing and inter-State water disputes.

<sup>3</sup> Arts 245–63, in Part XI of the Constitution cover legislative (arts 245–55) and administrative (arts 256–63) relations between the Union and the States, referring as needed to the three Lists assigning responsibilities. These Lists themselves are in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. All residual areas not explicitly mentioned are under the Centre's authority, adding a significant centralising feature to the Constitution.

 $4$  Tax provisions, including tax-sharing guidelines, were contained in arts 265, 268–74, 276, and 285–89 in Part XII of the Constitution.

 $\frac{5}{2}$  Devesh Kapur and Pratap Bhanu Mehta, 'The Indian Parliament as an Institution of Accountability' (2006) Democracy, Governance and Human Rights Programme Paper Number 23, 29 [<https://casi.sas.upenn.edu/sites/casi.sas.upenn.edu/files/bio/uploads/The%20Indian%20Parliament.pdf>](https://casi.sas.upenn.edu/sites/casi.sas.upenn.edu/files/bio/uploads/The%20Indian%20Parliament.pdf), accessed November 2015. The authors give the example of international trade agreements on agriculture, which is in the State List, while international affairs are in the Union List.

<sup>6</sup> These include issuing currency and coinage, dealing in foreign exchange, foreign loans, the operation of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), international trade, banking, insurance, and operation of stock exchanges.

<sup>7</sup> These include the operation of railways, posts and telegraphs, national highways, shipping and navigation on inland waterways, air transport, atomic energy, space, regulation and development of oilfields and major minerals, interstate trade and commerce, and regulation and development of inter-State rivers.

<sup>8</sup> One problem in sub-national tax assignments lay in an inconsistency in constitutional provisions. Although art 286 does not allow restrictions on inter-State transactions, Entry 52 in the State List empowers the States to levy tax on the entry of goods into a local area