#### **Location and Linguistic Affiliation 915**

- Waldram, J. B. (1985). Hydroelectric development and dietary delocalization in northern Manitoba, Canada. *Human Organization, 44*, 41–49.
- Waldram, J. B., Herring, D. A., & Young T. K. (1995). *Aboriginal health in Canada: Historical, cultural, and epidemiological perspectives*. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
- Young, T. K. (1988). *Health care and cultural change: The Indian experience in the central Subarctic*. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
- Young, T. K. (1994). *The health of Native Americans*. New York & Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Young, T. K., Reading, J. Elias, B., & O'Neil, J. (2000). Type 2 diabetes mellitus in Canada's First Nations: Status of an epidemic in progress. *Canadian Medical Association Journal, 163*, 561–566.

# **Oklahoma Choctaw**

### **Joseph Neil Henderson and Linda Carson Henderson**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

The official name for the tribe is the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma. Other terms that are locally used include "Choctaws," and sometimes "Chocs." The linguistically correct name is "Chattah." This is occasionally used by native speakers in oral discourse and for some official occasions such as tribal ceremonies and, on occasion, at political speeches.

The two largest Federally recognized Choctaw tribes are the Oklahoma Choctaw and the Mississippi Choctaw who live on a Federal reservation north of Jackson, Mississippi. They are descendants of families that were not removed to Indian Territory. These Choctaw tribes are not politically affiliated with each other, although there are friendly relations between the two.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

At European contact time, the Choctaws were on lands mapped today as Mississippi, and had dispersion that also reached into present day northern Florida, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, and Arkansas. Today, the Oklahoma Choctaws are located in the southeastern quadrant of Oklahoma, with the administrative headquarters in Durant, Oklahoma. At Tushkahoma, Oklahoma, is the tribe's council house used into the early 1900s, but now occupying a largely symbolic tie to the past. The Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma is bounded on the west by the territory of the Chickasaw Nation, and to the north is the Creek Nation.

The current location is the product of the creation of Indian Territory in the early 19th century. The earliest mapping of Indian Territory, in preparation for "receiving" the southeastern natives, assigned the Choctaws the entire lower portion (east to west) of the land. Later, this was divided in half so that the western half of the former Choctaw land was made available for the natives from the plains. Then, later, the Choctaw land was cut in half again to assign the Chickasaws adjacent land (McKee, 1989).

Today, the former Indian Territory is the State of Oklahoma. As a result of its Indian Territory history, it has 37 Federally recognized tribes. However, the Oklahoma Choctaws, like the other Oklahoma tribes, have only tiny fractions of their former Indian Territory land space that is reservation status. The old tribal boundary lines still exist, but the State of Oklahoma is co-mapped onto them.

Linguistically, the Oklahoma Choctaws are Muskogean speakers (Swanton, 1946). There are numerous native speakers living. However, language extinction is a real risk. The tribe has language courses offered on the internet, and at one time required those working at the tribal headquarters to take Choctaw language courses during the work day, if they did not speak the language.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Before contact time, Choctaws lived in the southeastern woodlands and were intensive horticulturists. Primary food items included corn, beans, squash, pumpkins, and meat items from deer, rabbit, turtle, birds, fish, and others. Their neighbors were the Chickasaw, Creek, Cherokee, and Seminoles. The Choctaws were encountered by the DeSoto Expedition and were reported to have extensive body tattoos, forehead flattening, and short hair styles. They also used bow and arrows, blow guns, and snares for trapping land animals and for fishing. Ceramics and baskets were also commonly used for storage, cooking, and carrying. Extensive foot trails facilitated travel and communication. The society was organized as matrilineages and politically structured as a chiefdom at contact time (Galloway, 1995; McKee, 1989; Swanton, 1946).

Today, the population of the Oklahoma Choctaw living in Oklahoma is about 40,000. The total enrollment of the tribe is over 200,000. The southeastern portion of Oklahoma is woodlands with rivers and rolling hills whose elevations reach about 2,500 feet. The highest elevations are in the east, and the lower, flatter lands are in the west. It is in the higher elevations with lower population density where tribal members note that the most traditional Choctaws live. "Traditional," or colloquially, "following the old ways," is indicated by speaking the native language, living on old allotment lands, being as separate from the local white society as possible, going to an "Indian Church," eating traditional foods, and engaging in Choctaw rituals. However, two communities, considered by many to be "traditional," are located inside the former Choctaw boundaries which are now designated as Chickasaw. In spite of the category "traditional" and its unstated opposite "progressive," the best approach to understand contemporary Choctaw culture is to assume great heterogeneity in all aspects of culture.

Religion is based on exposure to Protestant missionaries from the early 18th century. While many Choctaws go to the conventional Protestant churches in the Oklahoma towns of the area, many Choctaws go to "Indian Churches." These are located remotely, may or may not have an ordained pastor, and often are conducted in Choctaw language only. The Indian Church is actually a hub of community cultural dynamics. In addition to the church building which looks like a small Christian chapel with steeple, the surrounding few acres have family "camp houses" used for weekends or longer stays. The Indian Church provides an exclusive place away from the otherwise dominant white society. It is here that cultural identification is fully reinforced, communications and alliances maintained, and children enculturated in Choctaw ways.

It should also be noted that many non-Christian beliefs are present and actively practiced. These include beliefs about cosmology, ghosts, disease-object intrusion, love medicine, use of traditional "Indian doctors" which are called "*Chattah alikchi*" (Choctaw "doctors"), belief of medicinal (i.e., supernatural) power in eagle feathers, releasing "medicine" in sage and cedar through smudging, and use of numerous herbal remedies.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Many of today's late middle aged and older aged Choctaws had been forced to go to Indian Schools operated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs or by denominational interests. In these schools, the tribal culture was devalued and punishment meted for speaking their native language. The chiefs, at the time of removal from their homelands, were rewarded for being "progressive" by the government of the United States. The Chief today is elected according to a tribal constitution modeled after the U.S. constitution (Faiman-Silva, 1997). However, there are some who still prefer to have a model of government that is based more on the pre-removal form of governance.

The Oklahoma Choctaw tribe is now also a multi-million dollar corporation. The Chief serves much like a CEO (Chief Executive Officer) with the responsibility of many diverse for-profit businesses. The tribe is proud of its economic successes and has received awards of commendation from the U.S. government for innovation in enterprises. The Chief is informed and counseled by an Assistant Chief, and a 12-member tribal council, all of whom are elected. It is fortunate that the success of the economic engine of the tribe has been, in part, applied to the health and social service provisions owned and operated by the tribe.

The economy is one based on participation in the area's commerce that includes, labor, farming, manufacturing, lumber, and other ordinary jobs. The tribe

#### **916 Oklahoma Choctaw**

#### **Medical Practitioners 917**

also engages in business development of its own. The tribe now operates several gaming facilities, several "travel plazas" which are convenience stores with fuel and gaming, "smoke shops" with discount tobacco products, and several other smaller operations including pre-fabricated housing manufacturing.

Since 1985, all Choctaw health care facilities have been managed by the tribe under the auspices of the Indian Self-Determination Act (Indian Health Service, 2000). There is a contract between the Oklahoma City Area Office of the Indian Health Service and the Health Service Authority of the Choctaw Nation. Federal funds are provided for tribal use each year and technical assistance is provided by Indian Health Service personnel. Physicians and other health care professionals may be either commissioned officers of the Public Health Service or direct employees of the Choctaw tribe. Currently, the majority of providers are direct employees of the Choctaw Nation, and many are members of the tribe.

The Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma is the first tribe in the United States to build its own hospital. The Choctaw Health Services Authority manages the hospital at Talihina, Oklahoma, and four health centers located in the towns of McAlester, Hugo, Poteau, and Broken Bow. The Broken Bow Health Center has two staff physicians to service 10,800 outpatient visits annually while support staff care for an additional 5,000. The Hugo Health Center and McAlester Health Center each have one physician and one physician's assistant. They manage 11,000 outpatient visits a year. Information about staff and outpatient visits at Poteau was not available at the time of this writing.

The hospital and the clinics annually log about 48,000 patient visits. The patient seeking services must be a member of any federally recognized tribe and, must reside in the Choctaw Nation Health Service Area. Tribal facilities cannot provide a full range of health care, and it may be required that the patient be treated elsewhere. Unfortunately, prejudice remains toward Choctaws. For some, the prospect of obtaining needed services in the White community is considered undesirable and may result in a demeaning experience. Nonetheless, non-tribal care is an extremely important element of the health care delivery system although care must be authorized through the Contract Health Service Program. Costs remaining after Medicare, Medicaid, VA, Worker's Compensation, Title XIX, and/or group health insurance is used, is paid by the tribe.

Diabetes mellitus II (adult onset) is a particular problem for most tribes, and the Oklahoma Choctaw are no exception. The American Diabetes Association states diabetics should receive their care from a physiciancoordinated team. Such teams include, but are not limited to, physicians, nurses, dieticians, and mental health professionals with expertise in diabetes (American Diabetes Association, 1998). The Diabetes Clinic at the Choctaw Nation Hospital provides high-risk diabetic patients with a comprehensive multidisciplinary program. Staff includes physicians, nurses, a podiatrist, a nutritionist, certified diabetes educators, and mental health practitioners.

The Choctaw Nation also has numerous other health and social services. These include emergency medical service, drug and alcohol testing, substance abuse recovery program, mail order pharmacy, eyeglasses, dentures, and hearing aid clinics. Also, other services include child care assistance, day care, food distribution, Head Start programs, Indian Child Welfare programs, low income home energy assistance, nutrition services for elders (55), vocational rehabilitation, and Women, Infant, and Children (WIC) programs.

Living conditions vary widely among the Choctaw, from one-bedroom homes in need of repair with a wood stove, cold water, and outhouse, to three-bedroom centrally heated homes with contemporary furnishings. Many elders reside in small "Indian homes," which have running hot and cold water and adequate plumbing. These "Indian homes" are federally subsidized housing provided under strict eligibility requirements. Living rooms sometimes doubled as sleeping quarters for extended family (Faiman-Silva, 1997). The Choctaw nation is committed, however, to providing support to elders in order to improve living conditions. Aid includes the availability of affordable rental housing, Indian Housing, the tribally funded Housing Improvement Program, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs Housing Improvement Program. Renovations may be done with tribal assistance. Heat assistance is also available.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Since about 1955 when the Indian Health Service (IHS) was established, most tribes have had allopathic physicians providing basic primary care at modest clinics and hospitals on tribal lands. In recent years, many tribes have elected to take over the cost of operating their own health care facilities independent of the Indian Health Service. Yet, the ability to do so is uneven across tribes and leaves some with excellent services and some with suboptimal care. The IHS itself estimates that it can meet only half of the needed primary care for tribes.

Other types of health care providers are numerous. These include licensed nurses, physician assistants, psychologists, social service staff, nutritionists, and podiatrists. Podiatric service is connected to the high rate of diabetes mellitus and consequent foot trauma. Nutritional counseling is also available through programs of the Women, Infant, Children early nutrition and child care program of the Federal government.

In addition to physicians and other biomedically trained staff, an important part of health provision is done by tribal Community Health Representatives (CHRs). These CHRs are paraprofessionals that are members of the tribe for whom they provide services. They receive training from an Indian Health Service program. Their functions are to conduct disease screening (e.g., hypertension, diabetes), deliver health education (e.g., diet, exercise, safety), conduct in-home visitation, broker information/ resources, and provide transportation to health care services. The number of CHRs for the Oklahoma Choctaw is about thirty and these are mainly women. Their value as part of an ongoing health promotion program for family members of all ages is extremely high.

Each CHR travels many thousands of miles per year because of the predominately rural nature of the Choctaw Nation. The Indian Health Service provides a four-door, medium sized car for each CHR. This vehicle is used to go to clients' homes, no matter how remote, and to transport clients to the tribal clinics and hospital. CHRs also have required in-service education to maintain expertise on the topics germane to their paraprofessional role. On a regular basis, the CHRs will conduct health fairs which are done in communities large and small. The purpose of CHR tribal health fairs is to bring the health education, screening, and resource information sharing to a community-level population base.

CHRs are evenly distributed geographically across the Choctaw Nation based on population. The land base comprises ten and one-half counties of the State of Oklahoma. Each of the ten counties has a tribal "Field Office" which is the place for many activities such as senior meals, speakers, and other social functions. Also, the Field Offices serve as office space for the Women, Infant, and Children programs, CHRs, and workers in other programs. The CHRs generally live in the area that they serve. In towns that are larger that most of the rural towns, there may be two CHRs working. However, most of the counties have one CHR. Their case loads range from about 30 to 60 clients per month.

The "cultural distribution" of the CHR is not absolutely fixed, but has a trend toward having a CHR who is fluent in Choctaw in the regions where more people are most comfortable speaking Choctaw. In these areas are found those with the strongest cultural identification with the old ways and some elders who are monolingual Choctaw speakers. Since CHRs are educators and recipients of information related to their clients' personal health and family related matters, having CHRs whose cultural identification and language skills are most similar to the client base is seen as helpful.

Outside the establishment provider groups is the traditional healer. This person is the "*Chattah alikchi*," or "Choctaw doctor," in today's idiom. The *alikchi* occupies the role of the spiritual healer and probably, in some instances, is close to the definition of shaman. Originally, it did not mean "doctor" in the contemporary sense that a doctor is a physician who treats biomedical disease based on allopathic theory. *Alikchi* is a morpheme that means "supernaturally connected." It was applied to a person, male or female, who had specific supernatural connections via training as a child by the "little people." These people are considered to be inhabitants of the local woods and have supernatural capabilities. Many Choctaw people believe that these entities are still present. The "little people" were said to capture a child at play, take them to their home in the woods, and train them to be *alikchi.* Their skills would be applied only as an adult.

The notion of healer is conceptualized today in three separate categories. First, is the *Chattah alikchi* who is specifically a Choctaw person with supernatural healing capacity. There are vague references indicating that *Chattah alikchi* can use their power to do harm as well as good. Second, there is the category of *alikchi* meaning a Native American person who may be Choctaw but could be a member of another neighboring tribe such as the Creek or Chickasaw. Sometimes, however, the designation of *alikchi* is applied to someone more culturally removed from Choctaws, such as a Comanche person in southwestern Oklahoma. The distinctive features for inclusion in this category are; being Native American, and having an accepted capacity to heal based on tribal ethnomedical constructs. Third, *alikchi* is used in Choctaw language discourse to refer to allopathically trained, non-Native American physicians who are encountered in the tribal health services or surrounding community. In this usage, *alikchi* is synonymous with "doctor," as used by the non-Native American population.

In contemporary Oklahoma Choctaw life, *Chattah alikchi* occupy a somewhat vague position in terms of contemporary practice. From data collected about degrees of cultural identification by one of the authors (LCH), 14 of 30 elder interviewees acknowledged the existence of *Chattah alikchi*. However, only eight discussed using *Chattah alikchi* themselves. Moreover, information of the specific whereabouts of *Chattah alikchi* was not forthcoming. In summary, the fully practicing *Chattah alikchi* may be rare in practice, but common in cultural consciousness.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

The Oklahoma Choctaw have experienced generations of contemporary American education and life experience. Most of the Choctaw population are subscribers to the biomedical model and are participants in it via the health care services provided by the Indian Health Service or the tribal health care operations staffed by conventionally trained personnel. However, medical pluralism is present as indicated by the use of culturally derived healers, as reported herein.

The contemporary Oklahoma Choctaws have a cultural history imbued with multiple explanatory models for health and disease. Although many of the "old ways" are shielded from outsiders, there are reported instances of practices derived from disease–object intrusion theory. For example, a report of shoulder pain was treated with superficial skin incisions over the site of pain, direct application of the mouth to the incisions, sucking of the incision site, and showing the disease–object (a "spider-like" mass) to the patient. Also, a type of "soul loss" is known to the tribal members, although no current reports of an instance of this have been reported. An entity known as "*impashilup*" (literally, "eater [of the] spirit") would enter the body and consume the soul. Prevention was to abstain from destructive or morose thoughts. Cure is not currently known.

Medicine bags (*baht inkwish*, literally, "bag" "medicine") made of animal skin and containing plant and mineral material considered to have "medicine" were widely used in the past, and, many Choctaw people have their own medicine bags today. They are used to ward off problems and give "medicine" (i.e., protective power) to the holder.

Although historically the use of communal sweat lodges was not found within the Oklahoma Choctaw culture (sweat lodges for one person were common), the use of communal sweat lodges has increased within the Choctaw Nation, as well as in other parts of Indian Country, in the post-World War II era. The sweat lodges have been especially useful in the treatment of drug and alcohol abuse, incorporating traditional healing with accepted counseling modalities.

Diabetes mellitus afflicts one out of every five American Indians. Yet, according to the Diabetes Quality Improvement Project, in 1996, the Indian Health Service received \$1,578 per capita to care for its population compared with \$3,920 per capita expended for the U.S. civilian population (Acton et al., 2001). Moreover, the rate and degree of severity of the disease within the American Indian population is higher than that of the rate and severity within the general U.S. population. Additionally, American Indian diabetics are four times more likely than their White counterparts to experience an amputation as a consequence of diabetes and six times more likely to experience kidney failure. In Oklahoma, where the Choctaws are one of the largest tribes of 37 federally recognized tribes, 24% of Oklahoma Indians have diabetic retinopathy (American Diabetes Association, 2002).

Improving diabetic health status among Oklahoma Choctaw could well be possible. Recent insights about the cultural dynamics of Oklahoma Choctaw diabetic health behavior constitute a crucially important component for the biocultural appreciation of the disease (Henderson, 2002). Sixty subjects (30 diabetics and 30 health care providers) were interviewed. All subjects were classified as either identifying strongly with Choctaw culture or identifying strongly with White culture. Subjects that identified strongly with the "old Choctaw ways" were *less* likely to understand the biology of the disease and to see the disease and its sequelae as an expected part of one's life. However, Choctaws subjects who had a strong cultural identification with the larger White community were more likely to know the basic biology of the disease and to comply with medical treatments and advice. Moreover, the majority of health care provider subjects that treated these patients did not consider the Choctaw patient's cultural identification position relevant to their clinical work. However, the few health care providers who are themselves Choctaw and who identified strongly with Choctaw culture recognized the relevance of cultural differences to treatment practices within the Choctaw community. The result is that while diabetes is one disease, there are at least four variant models for diabetes operating in the community.

The four models, based on this sample, first include those Choctaws that strongly identified with the "old Choctaw ways." This explanatory model normalized the symptoms of the disease, made compliance an undesirable connection to the White establishment, and rendered disease sequelae such as amputation and renal insufficiency expected life course events for "Indian" diabetics. Second, those Choctaws that strongly identified with mainstream American White society had an explanatory model of diabetes that is similar to "Whites" and were more likely to comply with interventionists' recommendations. Third, the dominant explanatory model of the providers was one which recognized that there were Choctaws that follow the "old ways" and those that do not, but believe that these two positions are not relevant to their practice, treatment, or intervention efforts. Last, those providers who were Choctaw and identified strongly with the "old Choctaw ways," considered the cultural identification position of Choctaw diabetics very significant in the development of treatment approaches for them. Accounting for these multiple models of diabetes in intervention and prevention efforts could greatly improve diabetic health status.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Partner selection mainly follows the larger American society practices. However, there is extant an admonition to preserve Choctaw ancestry as fully as possible. This promotes a pressure to court and marry only members of the tribe. Secondarily, there is acceptance of marriage with a member of another tribe. Nonetheless, it is common for Choctaws to marry members of the majority population.

Children are desired, but do not constitute a type of kinship wealth. They are generally well cared-for largely in the context of a nuclear family setting. However, there is some greater sense of corporate child care across family kindred groups than in the local White society. This is most observable when families have maintained their former allotment lands and live in clustered home sites. Such home sites typically have houses grouped together with about 20–75 yards separating them. These clustered home sites have produced good-natured jokes about those families that refer to them living on the "rez." This is considered a humorous analog to tribes that do live on Federal

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

reservation land, unlike the Oklahoma Choctaw.

The items below represent main trends in overt behavior. Cultural heterogeneity allows for many conceptual and behavioral variations that may be linked to the earlier Choctaw practices but that are privately held or selectively revealed.

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

The exposure to American educational institutions and the biomedical model via the Indian Health Service has lead to a Choctaw model of pregnancy and birth that is largely based on contemporary American patterns. Today, virtually all births occur in hospitals whether it is the tribal hospital or in a non-Indian local hospital. However, before the last decade, prenatal care was not easily available due to many barriers, such as rural distances to care, transportation limitations, financial limitations, and cultural barriers. It was also not uncommon for women in labor who could not reach the tribal hospital to go to a non-Indian hospital parking lot, stay in the car throughout labor, and when delivery was imminent, present themselves at the emergency room. In so doing, they were assured of receiving obstetrical care, albeit on an emergency basis.

Elder women today tell of labor and delivery in the early Choctaw hospital built in 1916. Women of that era did use indigenous herbal teas to ease and speed labor. These were brought by family members to the hospital, kept in a jar under the bed, and used by the patient. Also, the indigenously preferred position of delivery was probably a squatting position based on reports of women who would get in a squatting position in the hospital bed. However, these reports conclude with the expectant mother being wheeled from the ward to a delivery room where the patient was place in the supine position.

### **920 Oklahoma Choctaw**

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 921**

### **Infancy**

The exposure to American educational institutions and the biomedical model via the Indian Health Service has lead to a Choctaw model of infancy that is largely based on contemporary American patterns. However, there is sufficient concern for some mother–infant pairs regarding nutrition and parenting that a strong Women–Infant–Children program is available throughout the tribal area. Mothers will come to one of ten "Field Offices" operated by the Choctaw Nation. These Field Offices typically are brick buildings with about 1,000 square feet of space. They have a common room for meals and meetings as well as offices for project coordinators who administer nutrition projects, family resources (e.g., parenting, domestic abuse) assistance, and Community Health Representatives. The infants can be brought to these locations for basic anthropometric measurements to screen for developmental indicators. The mothers also receive health education information from the staff and by print materials. They can also obtain nutritional supplements for the infant.

### **Childhood**

All children receive education in the local public schools. There are Head Start programs that are well attended and to which tribally owned buses transport the children from remote rural locations. However, there is a problem with proper childhood nutrition that many believe results in adult onset diabetes mellitus, and an increasing concern about a rising incidence of Type II diabetes in childhood. The Choctaw Nation is currently expanding its diabetes education base to include elementary school children because primary prevention strategies are of utmost importance to diabetes control.

### **Adolescence**

Choctaw adolescents attend local public middle and high schools where they are exposed to a typical American curriculum regarding the sciences and health. There is a significant problem with smoking rates that is compounded by Oklahoma's dubious distinction as the state with the highest use of tobacco products. Moreover, there is some cultural impetus for tobacco use that relates to tobacco as a sacred substance. Many advertisements in American Indian newspapers advocate "Traditional Use, Not Abuse." However, adolescent tobacco use remains high.

There is also an increasing prevalence of obesity in this age group. Consequently, Type II diabetes is as much a health concern for adolescents as it is for adults. There are new programs for adolescents that emphasize diet and exercise. Also, cultural messages that relate to the early days of American Indian life in which there was no obesity or diabetes are becoming more common. The current epidemic of obesity and diabetes is blamed on the "white man," or "civilization."

### **Adulthood**

Nutrition, exercise, and substance abuse are the main health issues of adulthood. The health care program of the tribe has aggressively responded to these in the last several years. As with other non-Indian programs responding to these matters, it has proven difficult to have a total success with these health problems.

Substance abuse is a problem of sufficient magnitude that special programs have been developed. A special inpatient facility has been operated by the tribe for years and serves members of all tribes. This includes alcohol abuse as well as other substances. One component of the substance abuse program integrates the use of sweat lodges with the more conventional treatment protocols. It is considered to offer spiritual, mental, and physical purification.

The Choctaw Nation hospital has made strides to respond to adult onset diabetes (Type II) by operating a Diabetes Wellness Center. This center is staffed by endocrinologists, diabetes educators, specially trained nurses, and podiatrists. The center takes a family model approach to intervention and conducts family education for the prevention and treatment of diabetes.

### **Aged**

Elderhood has many facets to it. First, "elder" may be a social status conferred to adults considered helpful, socially powerful, and having qualities of leadership regardless of age. Second, "elder" may also be used to indicate a person who is old regardless of social status. Last, "elderlies" is sometimes used to refer to all the old people in a tribe. In general, anyone who is considered old is accorded respect. Those who are both "old" and "elders" (i.e., the social status) receive even more respect.

Like many elders, Choctaw elders experience multiple jeopardy. They are members of a minority group (by government definition), many are poverty-stricken, and are in poor health compared to their general population counterparts. The Indian Health Service designates those persons age 55 and older as elders. American Indian elders are living longer, due to improved public health, but they are "sicker longer" with chronic disease when compared to the general population. Indian Health Service data indicate that elders are more disabled and experience health declines at an earlier age than their White counterparts.

Assistance for Choctaws elders is also available by the provision of hearing aids, eyeglasses, dentures, canes, wheelchairs, and other disability-related equipment to those who cannot afford to purchase them. Through the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Choctaw Nation has a food distribution program which serves over 5,000 people per month throughout the 10 counties. In addition to this program, the Nutrition and Supportive Services Programs provide meals, information and referral, transportation, and arts and crafts to Indian Senior Citizens 55 years of age or older. The program provides one meal a week at the local community centers.

### **Dying and Death**

The influence of general American society has lead to a contemporary view of dying and death that is very similar to those of the Christian church. However, there are some Choctaw people whose multi-culturalism is seen relative to death and spiritual matters. For example, some people will not walk near the cemetery of their own "Indian Church" after the sun sets because *shilup* (i.e., ghosts) come out then. An Indian Church is a remotely located church that is partly Christian and, yet, retains some Choctaw-specific beliefs. Most Indian Churches have adjacent cemeteries. For burial, a back-hoe from the county is brought out to dig the grave. Also, in addition to Christian beliefs and rituals, some will burn white sage, tobacco, and cedar and "smudge" the body prior to closing the casket lid. Then, they will smudge themselves as a rite of purification.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

Increased longevity results in the manifestation of diseases and conditions that are age associated, and typically, are chronic, incurable, and debilitating. One of these is late life onset cognitive dysfunction due to organic brain disease (e.g., Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia). However, a recent genetic study suggests that Choctaws may be less likely to develop Alzheimer's disease than Anglo-Europeans (Henderson et al., 2002). The Apolipoprotein E4 gene is associated with developing Alzheimer's disease. From a sample of 70 people with Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood confirmation of "full blood" status, the frequency of this allele is less than 50% of White controls. However, there is speculation that vascular dementia may be more prevalent due to antecedent risk factors that are high prevalence conditions in this and other tribes (e.g., smoking, diabetes, obesity, hypertension, and alcohol abuse) (Henderson, 1994).

Linguistically, there are no Choctaw morphemes coding for the disease known in English as "Alzheimer's Disease" (Henderson & Henderson, 2002). The closest terminological connection is "*imanokfila kanea*" (intellect lost). Other candidate morphemes, such as, "*tasembo*" (crazy) fail since they can apply to nonhumans as well (e.g., dog, horse). Also, from a cultural construction of disease perspective, there are families in the Choctaw tribe in which the hallucinatory symptoms of dementia are interpreted as the person communicating with the supernatural world in preparation for death (Henderson & Henderson, 2002). As one person said of her grandmother who suffers from dementia, "She sees people we don't see." The granddaughter does *not* say that her grandmother "sees people that aren't there." The afflicted person simultaneously exhibits special capacity, reveals details about the vaguely understood "other side," and brings a bit of mystical awe to the family. This view departs greatly from the usual medical model of pathology and consequent symptomatology due to brain cell death. Additionally, this "supernormal" construct of dementia offers an expanded window into the extensive range of interpretive models applicable to perceptible states of health and disease in the context of culture.

## **REFERENCES**

- Acton, K. J., Shields, R., Rith-Najaran, S., Tolbert, B., Kelly, J., Moore, K. et al. (2001). Applying the diabetes quality improvement project indicators in the Indian Health Service primary care setting. *Diabetes Care, 24*, 22–26.
- American Diabetes Association. (2002). Diabetes among Native Americans. March 12, 2002. Available online at, http://www. diabetes.org

#### **Overview of the Culture 923**

- Faiman-Silva, S. (1997). Choctaws at the crossroads. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- Galloway, P. (1995). Choctaw genesis. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- Henderson, J. N. (1994). The epidemiology of American Indian gerontology. Paper presented at the annual American Public Health Association meeting. Washington, DC.
- Henderson, L. C. (2002). The cultural construction of diabetes mellitus among Oklahoma Choctaw elders and health care providers: Discordance between models. *Association for Anthropology and Gerontology, 23*, 4–6.
- Henderson, J. N., & Henderson, L. C. (2002). Cultural construction of disease: A "supernormal" construct of dementia in an American Indian tribe. *Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology, 17*, 197–212.

- Henderson, J. N., Crook, R., Crook, J., Hardy, J., Onstead, L., Carson-Henderson, L. et al. (2002). Apolipoprotein E4 and tau allele frequencies among Choctaw Indians. *Neuroscience Letters, 324,* 77–79.
- Indian Health Service. (2000). Trends in Indian health: 1998–1999. Rockville: Indian Health Service.
- McKee, J. O. (1989). The Choctaw. New York: Chelsea.
- Swanton, J. (1946). The Indians of the Southeastern United States. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 137. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

# **Roma of the United States and Europe**

### **Anne Hartley Sutherland**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

The Roma name is one that has become common currency today, replacing the designation Gypsy which has negative connotations. Since many Roma use the term Gypsy with outsiders, and there are contexts in which Gypsy is the broader term, its use is still applicable in certain contexts and certainly appears in the literature as well as Internet search engines. In Europe and the British Isles, terms such as Romanies, Travelers or Tinkers are also used. Many different groups form the Roma population based on a common sense of belonging although they may have very different characteristics and use different names.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Roma can be found in significant numbers in the United States, Europe, Russia, Middle East, North Africa, India, Pakistan, and Central Asia. Some have migrated to Australia, Hawaii, and Alaska, but as far as we know they have not reached Japan, China, or Southeast Asia. The Roma are generally believed to have originated in Northern India, but they dispersed about 1,000 years ago and have lived in other places since. Today they are located in cities and towns.

The Roma speak Romanes which is a Sanskrit based language, that belongs to the Indo-Aryan branch of Indo-European languages. Because the Roma have lived in so many places over a long period of time, Romanes contains approximately 60% loan words. The closest language to Romanes is Hindustani. All Roma speak a second or third language from the country in which they live or have traveled.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

There is no census data on the Roma in the United States, but estimates of the Roma population range between 100,000 and 300,000 members of various diverse groups (Vlach Roma, Boyash, Irish Travelers, Hungarian Roma, etc.) living in all parts of the United States. The population of Roma in Europe is estimated between 4 and 10 million, with the largest numbers concentrated in Central European and Balkan countries (as much as 5% of the population). Not all Roma are Vlach-speaking Roma, but the designation of Roma has been given a more general meaning by intellectuals among the Roma to apply to all groups who self-identify as Gypsy. There are a number of diverse Roma groups. Not all of them speak the same dialect or language or have the same cultural practices.