- Galloway, A. (1999). Broken bones: Anthropological analysis of blunt force trauma. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
- Haglund, W. D., & Sorg, M. H. (2002). Advances in forensic taphonomy, method, theory, and archaeological perspectives. Washington, DC: CRC Press.
- İşcan, M. Y., & Kennedy, K. A. R. (1989). Reconstruction of life from the skeleton. New York: Alan Liss.
- Krogman, W. M., & İşcan, M. Y. (1986). The human skeleton in forensic medicine. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
- Lombroso, C. (1887). L'homme criminel. Paris: Alcan.
- Manhein, M. H., Listi, G. A., Barsley, R. E., Musselman, R., Barrow, N. E., & Ubelaker, D. H. (2000). In vivo facial tissue depth measurements for children and adults. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 45(1), 48-60.
- Maples, W. R., & Browning, M. (1994). Dead men do tell tales: The strange and fascinating cases of a forensic anthropologist. New York: Doubleday.
- Mulhern, D. M., & Ubelaker, D. H. (2001). Differences in osteon banding between human and nonhuman bone. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 46(2), 220-222.
- Ousley, S. D., & Jantz, R. L. (1996). FORDISC 2.0. Knoxville: The University of Tennessee.
- Rathbun, T. A., & Buikstra, J. E. (1984). Human identification: Case studies in forensic anthropology. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
- Reichs, K. J. (1998). Forensic osteology: Advances in the identification of human remains (2nd ed.). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
- Rhine, S. (1998). Bone voyage: A journey in forensic anthropology. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Snow, C. C. (1982). Forensic anthropology. Annual Review of Anthropology, 11, 97-131.
- Stewart, T. D. (1970). Personal identification in mass disasters. Washington, DC: National Museum of Natural History.
- Stewart, T. D. (1979). Essentials of forensic anthropology. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
- Taylor, K. T. (2001). Forensic art and illustration. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (1990). Positive identification of American Indian skeletal remains from radiograph comparison. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 35(2), 466-472.

- Ubelaker, D. H. (1991). Perimortem and postmortem modification of human bone. Lessons from forensic anthropology. Anthropologie,  $24(3)$ ,  $171-174$ .
- Ubelaker, D. H. (1996). Skeletons testify: Anthropology in forensic science. Yearbook of Physical Anthropology, 39, 229–244.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (1997). Forensic anthropology. In F. Spencer (Ed.), History of physical anthropology (Vol. 1). New York: Garland.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (1999a). *Human skeletal remains, excavation, analysis,* interpretation (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: Taraxacum.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (1999b). George Amos Dorsey. In J. A. Garraty & M. C. Carnes (Eds.), American national biography (Vol. 6). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (1999c). Aleš Hrdliçka's role in the history of forensic anthropology. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 44(4), 724-730
- Ubelaker, D. H. (2000a). The forensic anthropology legacy of T. Dale Stewart (1901–1997). Journal of Forensic Sciences, 45(2), 245-252
- Ubelaker, D. H. (2000b). T. Dale Stewart's perspective on his career as a forensic anthropologist at the Smithsonian. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 45(2), 269-278.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (2000c). Facial reproduction. In C. H. Wecht (Ed.), Forensic sciences (Vol. 1). New York: Lexis, Matthew Bender.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (2000d). Cranial photographic superimposition. In C. H. Wecht (Ed.), Forensic sciences (Vol. 1). New York: Lexis, Matthew Bender.
- Ubelaker, D. H. (2000e). A history of Smithsonian-FBI collaboration in forensic anthropology, especially in regard to facial imagery. Forensic Science Communications, 2(4).
- Ubelaker, D. H. (2000f). Methodological considerations in the forensic applications of human skeletal biology. In M. A. Katzenberg & S. R. Saunders (Eds.), Biological anthropology of the human skeleton. New York: Wiley-Liss.
- Ubelaker, D. H., & Adams, B. J. (1995). Differentiation of perimortem and postmortem trauma using taphonomic indicators. Journal of Forensic Sciences, 40(3), 509-512.
- Ubelaker, D. H., & Scammell, H. (1992). Bones, a forensic detective's casebook. New York: Harper Collins.

# **Illness Narratives**

#### Ron Loewe

### THE ILLNESS AUTOBIOGRAPHY

Over the last quarter century the illness biography or "pathography," as some prefer to call it, has emerged as a popular literary form as well as a primary data source for medical anthropologists. Through vivid, personal stories seriously ill patients have attempted to educate medical professionals and the general public about the impact of disease on work, family life, identity, and self-image as well as to recount their experiences with impersonal, bureaucratic, medical institutions. While such narratives have been written by people from various walks of life, and deal with a variety of different medical conditions, the stories share many common narrative elements: mystery (disease is unexpected or difficult to diagnose), betrayal by one's *own* body, conflict with medical professionals or medical bureaucracies, the failure of medical science to heal, the need for self-reliance, and, generally, but not always, a return to good health. An early and successful prototype of the new genre was Norman Cousins' *Anatomy of an Illness* (1979), a poignant account of the author's struggle with a painful collagen disorder which sat atop the *New York Times* best seller list for more than 40 weeks. In *Anatomy*, the former editor of the *Saturday Review*, not only questions the value of high-tech medicine by describing how he substituted "laughter" (by watching Alan Funt films) for the toxic anesthetics he was given in the hospital, but celebrates the power of human creativity and emotion by describing how the great Pablo Casals would daily relieve his swollen, arthritic fingers in an early morning rendition of Bach's *Wohltemperierte Klavier* or a Brahms' concerto. "… [H]is fingers now agile and powerful, raced across the keyboard with dazzling speed. His entire body seemed fused with the music; it was no longer stiff and shrunken, but supple and graceful and completely freed of it arthritic coils" (Cousins, 1979, p. 73). While Cousins' narrative was clearly less critical of medicine than many subsequent illness narratives—praising physicians at the same time that he excoriated hospitals and other medical behemoths—*Anatomy* can be seen as an early attempt to show how the Cartesian mind/body dualism on which medical science depends is an obstacle to good health. At the same time, by selecting Rene Dubos to write the introduction, and citing numerous works by Dubos and other anthropologists in the bibliography (Comaroff, 1976; Fabrega, 1976), Cousins revealed a debt to cultural anthropology.

In the wake of *Anatomy* have come many more illness autobiographies including; Arthur Frank's, *At the Will of the Body* (1995), A. Manette Ansay's *Limbo: A Memoir* (2001), Lisa Roney's *Sweet Invisible Body: Reflections on Life with Diabetes* (1999), Norman Cousins', *The Healing Heart* (1983), a sequel of sorts to *Anatomy*; anthropologist, Michael Dorris's *The Broken Cord* (1990), *The Body Silent* (1987) by Robert Murphy, another cultural anthropologist who worked in central Brazil, and Stephan Jay Gould's "The Median is Not the Message (1998)." In the latter, the eminent Harvard paleontologist not only recounts the circumstances surrounding his diagnosis with an abdominal mesothelioma, a rare and deadly cancer associated with asbestos exposure, but breaks the mold by showing how one can fashion a hopeful narrative from the raw materials of science itself. Gould's doctor is reluctant to direct him to the relevant medical literature, because as the paleontologist soon discovers, the median mortality for his disease is eight months. However, after recovering from his initial shock, Gould uses his knowledge of statistics and human variation to create a more comforting scenario. He discovers that he possesses the characteristics which place him on the right half of the curve (e.g., good overall health, youth, health insurance) and that the curve has a long tail, suggesting that he may actually have many years of good health in front of him. Unlike many other mesothelioma sufferers, he is also aware that the clinical trial he is participating in may ultimately shift the whole distribution to the right, increasing the median mortality. In short, while medicine and epidemiology, and the institutions they serve, can lose sight of individuals, illness biographies, if nothing else, are about individuals and about hope.

Even physicians have contributed to this literature (Broyard, 1993; Jamison, 1995; Morrison, 1991; Sacks, 1984). In *A Leg to Stand On*, for example, the neurologist Oliver Sacks recounts a catastrophic injury he suffered while hiking through the Alps. As a result of an unusual fall, Sacks severs the ligaments in his right leg and must drag himself in excruciating pain to a small village to obtain help. The greater catastrophe, however, occurs in the London-based hospital where he attempts to convince his surgeon and the other medical staff that he is something more than the sum of his rather tenuously connected body parts. As a result of his traumatic injury Sacks loses his sense of prioperception, his ability to think of his leg as part of a larger, integrated body that he himself controls. In fact, in his tragi-comic style, Sacks describes his inability to "find" his leg even after the operation is complete and his surgeon, a self-described "carpenter," has successfully reattached all the ligaments. However, the more Sacks tries to explain the nature of his problem and his inability to walk—the more he is viewed as a quirky, non-compliant patient. Indeed, Sacks' status as an eminent physician does little to mitigate his new status as a patient. As Sacks concludes, the first thing one learns as a patient is "to be patient."

# **ILLNESS NARRATIVES IN ANTHROPOLOGY AND BEYOND**

The use of narrative to describe *other* people's experiences of acute or chronic illness is also something of a growth industry. In the last few years, analyses of patient narratives have been used to explore everything from autism (Gray, 2001) to temporomandibular joint syndrome (Garro, 1994). In between one finds studies of breast cancer (Langellier & Sullivan, 1998), depression (Kangas, 2001), diabetes (Hunt, Valenzuela, & Pugh, 1998; Loewe & Freeman, 2000), HIV (Bloom, 2001; Ezzy, 2000), mental illness (Goodman, 2001), and schizophrenia (Lovell, 1997), to mention just a few of the more recent ones. Ironically, though, as Byron Good notes, there are relatively few studies that take an explicitly cross-cultural perspective (Good, 1994), or venture beyond the borders of the author's native land. Some that do, include: Evelyn Early's study of the informal stories Baladi (Egyptian) women tell to clarify illness episodes and garner emotional support (Early, 1985), Laurie Price's use of illness narratives to understand gender relations surrounding care-giving in Ecuador (Price, 1987); Sam Miglione's study of "nerves" among Sicilians living in Canada (Miglione, 2001), Byron Good and Mary Del Vecchio Good's study of epilepsy, and the possibility of healing through narrative, in Turkey (Good & Del Vecchio Good, 1994); and Paul Farmer's discussion of how a model of AIDs was gradually developed through stories about afflicted individuals in rural Haiti (Farmer, 1994).

In the latter, *AIDS—Talk and the Constitution of Cultural Models*, Farmer is in the unique position of studying a disease which is in the process of emerging, and is able to follow the evolution of thinking about AIDs from the early 1980s, when many Haitians had not heard of the disease, and there was nothing that could reasonably be called a "story," through 1989 when local conceptions of the disease began to stabilize. In particular, Farmer is able to trace changing concepts of AIDS from a variant of tuberculosis in 1983–84, to an ill-defined blood disease in 1986, to a Duvalier conspiracy in 1987, and, finally, to a type of "sent disease" (e.g., voodoo). As a type of disease that can be "sent" through microbes, AIDS was new wine in old bottles; however, according to Farmer, it was not simply the insertion of a new disease into an old paradigm which lent stability to the public's

#### **44 Illness Narratives**

conception of disease, it was the narratization that occurred when villagers began to witness and discuss the suffering and eventual death of individuals they knew, like Manno, the Do Kay school teacher. "Manno's sickness," writes Farmer, "offered a 'plot' for stories of great immediacy to those living in a small village" (Farmer, 1994, p. 807).

The second irony is that many of these studies, including those authored by cultural anthropologists, presuppose a Western or biomedical nosology. Despite frequent references to the "social construction of disease," and various attempts to highlight differences in the way particular cultural groups respond to pathogens or chronic conditions, work in this area reveals a disease focus in the sense that the topics selected (e.g., diabetes, AIDS, hypertension) could be drawn from *The Physician's Desk Reference*. In this way, authors inadvertently undercut the argumentation contained *within* otherwise quite persuasive articles.

Although it can be dangerous to attempt to identify a single source for a pervasive trend, it seems safe to say that the emphasis on illness narratives, and the hermeneutic tradition within medical anthropology more generally, can be traced back to the work of Arthur Kleinman. By arguing that disease was an "explanatory model," and, thus, part of culture rather than nature—or at least the result of a complex interaction between the two— Kleinman helped open a discursive space in which alternative explanations of the etiology, course, and treatment of disease were worth exploring through patient accounts. And in his more recent work, *The Illness Narratives: Suffering, Healing and the Human Condition* (1988), Kleinman continues his effort to persuade physicians to listen closely to what their patients say.<sup>1</sup> However, as noted in the first section of this study, the illness narrative was a cultural phenomenon before it was cultural anthropology. As always, social theory follows social life.

A discussion of narrative should also make reference to Levi-Strauss's *The Effectiveness of Symbols* (1963a), although this anthropological classic might be more appropriately termed a "therapeutic narrative" than an illness narrative. Here, as some readers will recall, Levi-Strauss examines a Cuna shaman's use of narrative and vivid visual imagery in order to help a pregnant woman through a particularly difficult delivery. The delivery is complicated because Muu has "exceeded her functions" (p. 187) and has absconded with the *niga purbelele*, the soul or vital essence of the afflicted women. To resolve

#### **Illness Narratives in Clinical Medicine 45**

the "impasse," the shaman narrates a heroic journey through the depths of "Muu's way" (the uterus or vagina) where he and the *nuchu* (tutelary spirits) "wage victorious combat" in order to retrieve the *niga pubelele* and open a path for the fetus. As Levi-Strauss notes, the treatment was purely "psychological" because the shaman neither administers a remedy nor touches the woman. Instead, he provides the afflicted woman with a "*language* by means of which the unexpressed psychic states … can be immediately expressed … [and] which induces the release of the physiological process …" (p. 198, emphasis in the original). Through this essay, and *The Sorcerer and His Magic* (1963b), Levi-Strauss not only reveals the power of the story, but attempts a rapprochement between indigenous healing and Western medicine, particularly psychotherapy. Other, more recent studies that examine the power of words to heal include Csordas (1983, 1988), Finkler (1983), Kapferer (1983), and Laderman (1991).

# **ILLNESS NARRATIVES IN CLINICAL MEDICINE**

Because symptoms are by definition the patient's interpretation of a malady, illness narratives have always been considered a part of clinical medicine. As Greenhalgh and Hurwitz note in *Narrative Based Medicine: Dialogue and Discourse in Clinical Practice* (1998), even in the most autocratic, doctor-centered redoubts of clinical medicine the patient retains a special status as an information bearer, and the most effete professors will exhort their students to "listen to the patient; she's telling you the diagnosis" (p. 6). What role the patient narrative plays in medicine, of course, varies greatly from subspeciality to subspeciality as well as across space and time. While the practice of medicine by epistle in the 18th century obviously required a detailed written narrative (and a welleducated patient), the development of new technologies, such as MRI and CAT scans, which allow physicians to visualize the deepest recesses of the human body, and the emphasis on medical testing, make patient narratives seem almost dispensable. Ironically, as Kay and Purvis note (1998), the development of electronic medical records may contribute to a similar decline in *doctor* narratives, depending on whether, or to what extent, they allow physicians to enter unstructured comments or free text (pp. 192–193).

The ambivalence toward patient narratives in modern medicine is also symbolized by the structure of the medical record, the so-called SOAP note, which divides the clinical encounter into four distinct moments: "subjective," "objective," "assessment," and "plan." While the "subjective" heading (the patient's account) seems to guarantee a place for illness narratives of *some sort*, the juxtaposition of the patient's subjective account with the doctor's purportedly objective account clearly minimizes the importance of the former.

However, notwithstanding the rapid growth of medical technology and evidence-based medicine, or, perhaps, as a response to these trends, there seems to be a growing interest in narrative as a part of the therapeutic process, as well as an aid to diagnosing disease and to educating medical students.

The idea of narrating one's way to better health is certainly nothing new. Freud's patient recognized this when she uttered the immortal phrase "talking cure." However, the way in which narratives are viewed, and the relationship between doctor talk and patient talk does appear to be different in the postmodern era. Instead of treating patient narratives as a treasure trove, a mysterious place where therapists can discover secrets buried in the patient's subconscious, the emphasis is now on jointly creating appropriate new stories (Launer, 1998). In this process, form is emphasized over content; as long as the story coheres and makes sense to the patient, there is little concern over his or her difficult past. For example, in discussing recent research on adult attachment disorder, Holmes (1998) describes a system for classifying patient narratives into four domains—secureautonomous, insecure-dismissive, insecure-enmeshed and disorganized—and notes that admission to the first category requires the ability to speak "logically and concisely about the past" (p. 180). Not surprisingly, as Holmes implies further on, the therapist functions primarily as a competent editor, providing "shaping remarks" (p. 182) for an enmeshed patient (e.g., we'll come back to that in a minute), and author queries for the dismissive patient (e.g., when did you begin to feel miserable?).

In addition to diagnosis and therapy, illness narratives, especially those found in contemporary fiction, are increasingly being used in medical education to overcome the gap between knowledge of a disease and the patient's experience of it. In *Teaching Humanities in the Undergraduate Medical Curriculum*, for example, Squier (1998) discusses how Ethan Canin's *We Are Nightime* *Travelers* helped a group of second-year medical students look beyond the outcomes described in three clinically oriented articles on hip replacement surgery. Initially, as Squier notes, the students had difficulty thinking of the social or familial consequences of such surgery—the articles looked "pretty complete"—however, after reading the tale of the elderly couple, their health problems, and the husband's valiant attempts to rekindle their marriage by sending poetry to his wife, the students begin to ask a new set of questions. What would happen if the diabetic husband should need surgery? What if the wife, the strong partner, were to break a hip? While the emphasis among medical educators is to use narrative as a way of teaching empathy or "moral imagination" (Scott, 1998), an understanding of narrative may also serve as a way of better understanding medical decision-making (Hunter, 1991).

### **NARRATIVE AND THE NARRATOLOGIST**

While the word narrative now appears with notable regularity in the titles of anthropological studies of illness or disease, there are relatively few studies that explore the philosophical or ontological basis of narrative, or that avail themselves of the large body of writing on narrative in literary criticism, philosophy, or linguistics. Indeed, like the social science "interview" analyzed by Briggs in *Learning How to Ask* (1986), "narrative" is often conceived of as a more or less transparent medium for obtaining or revealing information about disease X from the perspective of ethnic group Y or interest group Z. In other words, what linguistic anthropologists like Briggs describe as the referential function of language (e.g., the world of objects) is privileged over the pragmatic or metacommunicative functions of language. Nevertheless, as Good notes in *Medicine Rationality and Experience* (1994), anthropologists, and social scientists more generally, are becoming increasingly concerned with questions like: "To what extent do the stories report or depict events or experiences as they occurred? …Does a good history mirror events and experience, or does it select events and organize them culturally? To what extent is social life itself organized in narrative terms?" (p. 139).

Using the work of William Labov as a baseline, it is also possible to detect a shift in the way these questions are answered, although there is clearly no consensus, and, undoubtedly, never will be, about what a narrative is. As several authors have noted (Langellier, 1989; Mishler, 1995; Reissman, 1993), the prototype for examining orally produced texts is found in an article by Labov and Waletsky, "Narrative Analysis: Oral Versions and Personal Experience," published in 1967. In this early work, which focused on stories African-American teenagers tell to members of their peer group (and, of course, Labov & Waletsky), narrative is a very restricted speech category. Minimally, to be considered a narrative, a speech act must describe an *actual* event that occurred sometime in the *past*, and is remarkable or *extraordinary* in some way. A *fully* formed narrative, in turn, contained six additional attributes: (1) an *abstract* or summary of the story that followed, (2) an *orientation* which set the story in time and place, (3) a *complicating action* or plot (e.g., a sequence), (4) an *evaluation* or interpretation of the events by the narrator, (5) a *resolution*, an account of how things turned out, and, finally, (6) a *coda*, a summation which brings the audience back to the present.

Moreover, according to Labov and Waletsky, narrative was representational rather than constitutive of reality. The storyline is not only chronological, it reflects the order of events in the narrated world. As the two authors note, events move in a linear way through time and the "order can not be changed without changing the inferred sequence of events in the original semantic interpretation" (p. 21).

If the early work of Labov and Waletsky provides a convenient starting point for discussing narrative analysis in the social sciences, it is clear that anthropologists have not been constrained by the definitions proposed in this piece. Indeed, "Narrative Analysis" serves more as a monument to change than a guide for analysis, since virtually all the assumptions about narrative in the article have been challenged.

For one thing, the separation between narrative description and the narrated world is considered highly problematic in the post-modernist context. In *Healing Dramas and Clinical Plots*, for example, Mattingly (1998) argues that narratives are so compelling because life itself is structured narratively; "patients have a need for narrative" and experience contains "the seeds of narrative." By positing a homology between experience and narrative description, or better, by suggesting that the experience we are concerned with is the "experience and action created by *telling* the story" (p. 43), not the experience described *in* the story, narratologists, like Mattingly, avoid some of the methodological

#### **References 47**

conundrums that surfaced in correspondence theories or mimetic theories like Labov's. After all, since we learn about events *through* stories, how could we ever determine whether the story matches the *actual* event, except through another narrative? And, then, how does one adjudicate between different narratives? Since illness narratives are by many accounts "polyphonic" this is, indeed, a difficult nut to crack.

By intentionally focusing on ordinary therapy sessions (p. 86) and routine activities (e.g., checkers games), Mattingly also raises the question: What is it, or who is it, that makes narratives extraordinary? While nothing, it seems, is *inherently* interesting, or eventful; any event a walk down a corridor, combing one's hair—can become so, if the therapist figures out "what story [she's] in" (p. 72), and how a sequence of activities connects to the patient's new life story. Indeed, Mattingly departs from other contemporary writers, such as Becker, Gay (1994), by arguing that narrative has more to do with locating *desire* or overcoming a gap than with attempting to maintain or restore a semblance of unity to a badly disordered body (p. 107). In short, what makes narrative extraordinary is not a unique sequence of events, but the many small acts of *interpretation* through which the therapist/narrator uniquely connects an activity or event with an individual patient.

The idea that narrative is singularly concerned with *past* events is also viewed as overly restrictive (Langellier, 1989). For example, in describing illness narratives in Turkey, Good (1994) notes that stories not only tell of past events, but project them forward in time, "organizing our desires and strategies teleologically, directing them toward imagined ends or forms of experience which our lives … are intended to fulfill" (p. 139). And in *Doctor Talk and Diabetes* (1998), Loewe, Freeman, Schwartzman, Quinn, and Zukerman argue that physician narratives are even more future-oriented. While patients are often uncertain about what the future will bring, or are simply caught up in the act of daily life, physician time, rooted in epidemiological models, can be thought of as "organic time in the sense that it is marked by the progressive and relatively predictable breakdown of specific organ systems" (p. 1271).

In recent years, narratologists have also moved away from the assumption that narratives of any type are the product of an individual author (Jefferson, 1978; Langellier, 1989; Mishler, 1995; or that stories are passively consumed by a listening audience. Whether

narratives emerge out of a medical consultation (Mishler, 1995), an occupational therapy session (Mattingly, 1998), a family squabble (Stein, 1985), or an interview, they are increasingly seen as joint productions. Similarly, Good, following Ricoeur, Iser, and the reader response theorists, asserts that the plot of the story is not simply there for the taking, but is composed moment by moment by the reader/listener as he or she proceeds through the text.

Finally, as Good (1994) suggests, illness stories may not provide very much resolution (Labov's fifth criteria), since the narrators are "still engaged in the striving, in the quest for a cure" (p. 146), and may be considering several alternative outcomes at a given time. Indeed, as Price (1987) notes in her study of illness narratives in Ecuador (p. 328)—or for that matter as Garcia-Marquez and Rabasa (1996) suggest in *Chronicles of a Death Foretold*—there can be six different ways to account for an illness and there are many ways to interpret a death.

### **NOTE**

1. American and Chinese medical systems in several works (Kleinman, 1980; Kleinman, Kunstadter, Russell, & Gate, 1978).

### **REFERENCES**

- Ansay, A. M. (2001). *Limbo: A memoir*. New York: William Morrow.
- Becker, G. (1994). Metaphors of disrupted lives: Infertility and Cultural Constructions of Continuity, *Medical Anthropological Quarterly 8*, 383–410.
- Bloom, F. (2001). "New beginnings": A case study in gay men's changing perceptions of quality of life during the course of HIV Infection. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 15*(1), 38–57.
- Briggs, C. (1986). *Learning how to ask: A sociolinguistic appraisal of the role of the interview in social science research*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Broyard, A. (1993). *Intoxicated by my illness and other writings on life and death*. New York: Fawcett Columbine.
- Comaroff, J. (1976). A bitter pill to swallow; Placebo therapy in general practice. *Sociological Review, 24*(1), 79.
- Cousins, N. (1979). *Anatomy of an illness as perceived by the patient: Reflections on healing and regeneration*. New York: Bantam Books.
- Cousins, N. (1983). *The healing heart: Antidotes to panic and helplessness*. New York: Norton.
- Csordas, T. (1983). The rhetoric of transformation in ritual healing. *Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 7*, 333–376.
- Csordas, T. (1988). Elements of charismatic persuasion and healing. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 2*, 102–120.
- Dorris, M. (1990). *The broken cord*. New York: Harper Collins.
- Dubos, R. (1965). *Man adapting*. New Haven, CT:Yale University Press.