# **Tuareg**

#### **Susan J. Rasmussen**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Kel Tamajaq ("People who speak Tamajaq"); Kel Tagelmust ("People of the Veil"); Targui; Touareg; and also names designating groups from the different regions and confederations, for example, Kel Air ("People of the Air region"); Kel Ewey ("People of the Bull", a political confederation), descent groups or clans ("Kel Nabarro"; "Kel Tafidet"), and the pre-colonial social strata, for example, Imajeghen (designating the aristocracy); Inaden (smith-artisans); and Imghad (tributaries).

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Most Tuareg today live in Saharan and Sahelian regions of West and North Africa: in the present-day countries of Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, Algeria, and Libya. They are believed to have originated in the central Saharan Fezzan region of Libya. Some Tuareg from Mali and Niger have fled from recent drought and war, to refugee communities in Mauritania. In addition, many men travel extensively on caravan trade to Nigeria and labor migration to Nigeria and other countries, where they reside long term. Language spoken: a Berber language, Tamajaq (alternative spelling: Tamacheq), with several regional dialects: for example, Tamahaq in the Ahaggar Mountain region of southern Algeria and Tayrt in the Air Mountain region of northern Niger.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Estimated population: between approximately 750,000 and one million (Decalo, 1996; Rasmussen, 2001).

### **History**

A number of sources—oral traditions recorded by Rodd (1926), Bernus (1981), and Nicolaisen & Nicolaisen (1997), Saharan rock art, and Arab chronicles—relate the early origins and migrations of various Tuareg confederations. As early as the 7th century AD, there were extensive migrations of pastoral Berber peoples, including two important groups related to many contemporary Tuareg: the Lemta and the Zarawa. Invasions of the Beni Hilal and Beni Sulaym Arabs into Tuareg regions of Tripolitania and Fezzan pushed the Tuareg more southward toward the Air Mountain region of present-day Niger. By the 14th century, the Tuareg had become prominent as stock-breeders and caravanners on Saharan and Sahelian trading routes that led to the salt, gold, ivory, and slave markets in North Africa, the Middle East, and Europe. Later, however, caravans declined when much trans-Saharan trade was diverted to the West African coast, and 19th-century European exploration and military expeditions in the Sahara and along the Niger River led to the incorporation of the region into French West Africa by the early 20th century (Claudot-Hawad, 1993; Decalo, 1996; Porch, 1984; Rasmussen, 2001).

## **Economy and Occupations**

French colonial domination, as well as recurrent droughts and intermittent conflict with central state governments of the independent nations where Tuareg reside, have profoundly affected local subsistence. The French colonial administrators disrupted many local systems of adaptation and the natural ecological balance of the Sahara and Sahel. In some regions, they destroyed traditional irrigation and well systems, replacing them with artesian springs which attracted mosquitoes, and installed gasoline-powered pumps which altered the distances between herds, pasture, and water. Colonial policies imposed limitations on the trans-Saharan caravan trade, taxed subject populations, and encouraged sedentarization and the growing of cash crops which were hard on the soil and displaced many populations farther into the pastoral nomadic zone. Some Tuareg, in particular nobles, initially resisted secular schools as threats to local culture and magnets for census and taxation counts. The traditional aristocracy at first sent the children of their slaves to these schools. Consequently, until recently Tuareg of noble origins tended to be underrepresented in the new occupations of the governmental and urban infrastructures. Recently, however, attitudes toward education have been more favorable.

Most Tuareg today practice a mixed economy of livestock herding, oasis gardening, caravan and other itinerant trading expeditions, and labor migration. A series of recurrent droughts, however, has diminished the livestock of many herders, pressuring them toward greater sedentarization and more intensive gardening. In addition, there are more specialized artisan activities traditionally performed by smiths, an endogamous, hereditary occupational social stratum. Recently, some Tuareg have also become active in tourism.

### **Social and Political Conditions**

Pre-colonial Tuareg society was organized into hereditary, hierarchical, specialized occupational groups or social strata who were also, in principle, endogamous: at the top of the social pyramid were nobles (called *imajeghen*), who controlled large livestock, managed the caravan trade, and collected tribute from peoples of varying degrees of tributary (*imghad*) and servile (*ighawalen* and *iklan*) status, and practiced mutual client-patron rights and obligations with their attached smith/artisan (*inaden*) families. These relationships featured some pollution beliefs, for example, belief in the activation of destructive powers by smiths upon nobles' neglect of obligations toward them. In addition, Islamic scholars *(ineslemen*, also popularly called "marabouts") served as scribes, ritual specialists, legal councils, and Quranic healers. Despite its marked stratification, this social organization has always been characterized by considerable flexibility and negotiability (Keenan, 1976; Nicolaisen, 1997; Rasmussen, 1999). Leaders in the recent nationalist/separatist Tuareg rebellion have called for wider identification beyond kinship and social stratum, on the basis of the Tamajaq language, its Tifinagh script, and Tuareg cultural identity. In many rural areas today, the most intact relationship is between persons of noble origins and smith/artisans: the latter continue to act as political gobetweens, assist at arranging noble marriages, perform praise-songs, serve food and tea at noble weddings, manufacture jewelry and household tools for noble patron families, and dress nobles' hair, in exchange for remuneration. Nowadays, however, many nobles are impoverished and experience difficulty fulfilling their obligations toward smiths. Tuareg political structure included local drum chiefs who headed noble clans or lineages, who elected the sultan (*amenukal*) or their larger regional confederation. In many groups, the drum chief office was inherited through matrilineal descent, although personal qualities of the chief were also important. Under the domination of first, the French colonial administration and later, the central governments of independent nationstates, Tuareg political leaders experienced modifications in their powers. Some chiefs' powers were diminished, others' were increased (Claudot-Hawad, 1993). In rural communities, elders and Islamic scholars adjudicate locallevel dispute cases.

### **Family and Kinship**

Most communities are predominantly semi-nomadic nowadays, and many household compounds are enclosed by either a fence or adobe wall, and contain adobe mud houses, usually owned by men, and the more traditional nomadic tent, owned by married women. In most Tuareg groups, descent is now bilateral: vestiges of ancient matrilineal institutions have become submerged within patrilineal institutions introduced upon conversion to Islam (Claudot-Hawad, 1993; Murphy, 1967; Nicoliasen, 1997). Many clans trace their descent to founding female ancestresses/culture heroines. In some groups, succession to the chiefship passes from maternal uncle to sister's son. In many groups, there are prominent symbols of matriliny and pre-Islamic cosmology alongside those of patriliny and Islam in rites of passage and healing rituals. There are alternative forms of property transmission, in pre-inheritance gifts called "living milk" (*akh ihuderan*), in which some property (herds, date palms) is reserved for sisters, daughters, and nieces. This is intended to compensate women for Quranic inheritance (*takachit*), in which brothers receive twice the amount sisters receive. While living milk property once constituted women's primary source of economic independence, its future is now uncertain since the advent of nation-state laws and Quranic rulings which tend to favor patrilineal inheritance and droughts which have diminished many women's livestock herds.

### **Religion**

The local "pre-Islamic" or "popular Islamic" belief system interweaves with more "official" Islamic beliefs and practices. Tuareg converted to Islam under the influence of Sufism and Almoravid marabouts between the 7th and

#### **The Context of Health 1003**

11th centuries; (Norris, 1975, 1990). Some Tuareg initially resisted Islam, and many Arab explorers disapproved of them for some "laxness" in Islamic observances, in particular for not secluding women, who among Tuareg may travel, receive visitors, and interact freely with unrelated men. In many groups, Islamic scholars are very respected and play important roles in ritual, healing, and politics. Offerings of dates and stones are made to tombs of marabouts and ancient ruins of the People of the Night or the People of the Past (*Kel Nad* or *Kel Arou*). During daytime many people pray at these tombs and occasionally consult them in divination. At night they are believed to be haunted by evil spirits. There are spirit pantheons integrating Islamic and local cultural cosmologies: for example, spirits called *djinn* (mentioned in the Quran) and spirits called the People of Solitude or the Wild (*Kel Essuf*) figure prominently in local folktales, rituals, and healing. Persons may become possessed by these spirits, and undergo special rituals to cure them. There are frequent practices to ward off evil spirits, malevolent humans such as thieves, and other misfortunes such as birth defects: for example, use of amulets made by both smith/artisans and Islamic scholars/marabouts, and observance of many ritual restrictions or "taboos." There are diverse "witchcraft"-like powers or forces, each designated by a distinct Tamajaq term, believed to operate upon violation of various "taboos," for example, those of jealousy or covetousness upon greedy consumption of (often scarce) food, or upon too ostentatious display of possessions (Rasmussen, 1998a, 2001). Additional cultural values in moral conduct, such as *takarakit* or shame/reserve, and *imojagh* or dignity, are also significant as constraints in interpersonal relations and limitations on conduct: too-openly boasting, for example, invites catastrophe. Many taboos, therefore, serve as "leveling mechanisms," limiting accumulation of wealth or power and moderating consumption by any single individual or social stratum. Ideally, they serve to restrain undisciplined or selfish conduct in an environment that requires, ideally at least, balanced reciprocity, sharing of resources, and mutual aid.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Most Tuareg still live in rural communities, in the Sahara desert and in the Sahel savanna areas along its fringe. Except in the mountain massifs (Air in Niger, Ahaggar in Algeria, and Adragh n Ifoghas in Mali), which offer somewhat milder conditions, the climate is among the harshest in the world. It is subject to a very short and unpredictable rainy season (approximately July–August), recurrent droughts, and temperature extremes: for example, temperatures in the Sahara may reach 130F in the hot season (April–July), and may plunge to freezing (32F) at night during the cold season (December– March), when there are also high winds sometimes reaching 80 miles an hour, and sandstorms, locally called the Harmattan. In the northern regions of Mali and Niger above the agricultural line, the soils require daily irrigation.

Many diseases and environmental dangers are regional and season-specific. Malaria mosquitoes, while less prevalent in the desert regions than further South, pose a threat in the desert near oases gardens and standing pools of water. Local pests such as scorpions are ubiquitous in the rainy season. During the cold dry Harmattan season, conjunctivitis, streptococci, and meningitis are common. Intestinal parasites and wound infections tend to occur more rarely than they do in the forest zones.

Tuareg diets vary according to degree of sedentarization and urbanization, and have changed over the past half-century. In more nomadic camps, the principal foods consumed are millet and dates from caravan trading, and, when rains and pasture are sufficient, dairy products such as milk and cheese from goats, sheep, and occasionally camels. Meat tends to be eaten only at festivals, religious holidays, and rites of passage. In semi-sedentarized villages and on oases, in addition to these more traditional items, grains (maize, wheat, barley) and vegetables (potatoes, onions, tomatoes) and a few fruits (usually citrus) are consumed. Additional products obtained less regularly from trade and, more recently, food relief aid agencies and some small shops, include macaroni, manioc flour, rice, peanuts, and beans. Since the early 1990s, millet has become more expensive because of droughts in regions of Niger and Mali where it is grown; thus an important cereal source of high-protein has been somewhat more difficult to obtain, in some cases now supplemented or replaced by store-bought manioc or refined flour. If this trend continues, it has ominous implications for local nutrition. In urban areas, the diet reflects more multi-ethnic influences: for example, rice is a status food, and if funds permit, it is eaten not solely at festivals (as in the countryside), but more often, nearly on a daily basis. In some towns with large livestock markets, meat is consumed much more frequently than in the countryside,

in sauces over rice, millet, or maize. In the towns, many dishes from the countryside—for example, the nutritious beverage made of millet, dates, and goat-cheese and several wheat dishes—while valued by urban Tuareg, are more seldom prepared since some ingredients are more difficult to obtain.

According to many elderly persons, food was scarcer and less varied in the past, yet healthier. It was necessary to move about more often in order to find food (in nomadism and some hunting and gathering). They indicated that, although foods today are more abundant since one can find many sold in shops, such processed foods are more expensive and less nutritious. In the past, many people ate wild plants and grasses nowadays consumed only as herbal medicines. Periodic droughts threaten many herbal medicinal plants and trees, which traditionally constitute a rich local pharmacopoeia, particularly in more mountainous regions. Some foods are famine foods: for example, the core of the doum palm and thorns of various species of trees, pounded and grilled.

Most countries where Tuareg reside today are poor. For example, Niger has one of the lowest per capita incomes in the world, estimated at US\$260 in 1987 (World Bank, *World development report*, 1989, p. 14). This income has declined in the past decade from World Bankimposed economic austerity measures. Life expectancy in many countries where Tuareg reside is low; in Niger, for example, this was estimated at 45 years in 1987, and the infant mortality rate was estimated to be 135 deaths per 1,000 live births (World Bank, *World development report*, 1989, p. 226). More recently, infant mortality was estimated at 123 per 1,000 births (U.S. Department of State, *Background notes, Niger*, July 1994). The central government budget in 1994 was estimated at US\$291.4 million (adjusted for devaluation in 1993 of the French West Africa C.F.A.). The 1994 investment budget (capital and development expenditures) was at \$190 million (U.S. Department of State, *Background notes, Niger*, July 1994).

Private medical insurance and other benefits are not available to the vast majority of patients in many countries where Tuareg reside. Governments do not reimburse hospitals directly for the care of their employees, so the programs for government employees are in effect exemptions from payment. Throughout Niger, for example, public facilities administered by the Ministry of Public Health provide most of the biomedical health-care. There are two tiers of prices: private sector patients pay higher fees than public sector patients for private hospital rooms, diagnostic exams, and surgical procedures (Weaver, Wong, Sako, Simon, & Lee, 1994, p. 566). Only a small percentage of the population is employed by large companies and receive insurance benefits from them (Rasmussen, 2001, p. 13).

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Types of traditional medical practitioners in Tuareg society include herbalists; bone-setters; Islamic scholars or marabouts; diviners; and spirit possession ritual exorcism specialists. Some of these specializations overlap, many practitioners refer patients to each other, and many patients consult more than one practitioner for a given illness. Herbalists are predominantly though not exclusively women; many are called "medicine women" (*tinesmegelen*). Many inherit their profession in clans and apprentice with an older female relative. These practitioners do diagnostic, healing, and referral work and cure mostly stomach afflictions with leaves, barks, and roots and also, sometimes, with medicines purchased in markets or brought into the region by trade. They diagnose through massage with special focus upon the stomach. Herbalists also practice some psycho-social, particularly marital, counseling and, along with Islamic scholars/marabouts, are often consulted to treat women's fertility problems. Many herbal medicine women emphasize their complementary, rather than competitive relationship to Islamic scholars/marabouts in healing, describing these healers as being "like husband and wife," and referring some patients to marabouts (Rasmussen, 1998b). Some herbal medicine women perform non-Quranic divination, through dreaming; this specialty is called *asawad*, denoting "to look or see," and its practitioners called *imaswaden* (sing. *amaswad* or *amanai*, fem. *tamaswad* or *tamanai*) (Rasmussen, 2001). Some herbalists also know bone-setting, while other practitioners set bones, but do not practice herbal medicine: they are called *imadasen* (sing. *amadas*, fem. *tamadas*). Other non-Quranic diviners are called by the Hausa-derived term *bokaye* (sing. *boka*); these diviners tend to be male and practice more often in the towns, whereas the herbalist/diviners tend to be female and practice more often in the countryside. *Bokaye* diviners work with plants as well, but supplement them with scents (usually perfumes, but also some herbal medicines inhaled through the nose) and other ritual paraphernalia such as cowrie shells. They are believed to work with a tutelary spirit, in a pact with the *Kel Essuf*

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 1005**

spirits of the Wild, whom they must propitiate at intervals with sacrifices (Nicolaisen, 1961, 1997). Their position among the Tuareg is ambiguous, and some residents express ambivalence toward them, suggesting that this specialty originated from outside Tuareg society, perhaps from the neighboring Hausa people (Rasmussen, 2001). Islamic scholars or marabouts (*ineslemen*) are active in healing organic and non-organic illnesses, many of which are defined as caused by spirits. They also do psychosocial counseling. Marabouts cure with the Quran, which has special verses that cure diverse illnesses. Marabouts make amulets from these verses, to be worn around the neck or against the skin. Many men and some women see marabouts, although the latter sometimes feel intimidated by them, or find them unsympathetic and undergo alternate cures, seeing additional healers when their illnesses do not respond to marabouts' healing, explained locally as caused by spirits who do not respond to Quranic verses. In such cases, patients are referred to other healers, such as exorcism specialists who preside over a musical spirit possession ceremony called *tende n goumaten*, featuring drumming and singing believed to "please" and placate certain non-Quranic spirits alternately called *goumaten* or *Kel Essuf*, which predominantly afflict women (Rasmussen, 1995). These practitioners consist of musicians, who are often relatives and close friends of the possessed: namely, a female chorus who perform songs addressing the spirits and also containing critical social commentary; a woman who strikes the *asakalabo*, a calabash floating in water; and a drummer, usually a smith/artisan man or a woman of any social origin, who strikes the *tende* drum, constructed from a mortar with goat-hide stretched across its top.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Despite some influence of hospitals and clinics, particularly in the towns, Tuareg cultural understandings concerning illness, particularly in the countryside, include many alternatives to the biomedical paradigm. Fundamental to the local paradigm is a continuum, rather than rigid opposition, between body and mind and between organic and non-organic illnesses. Much Tuareg medicine features counteractive theories of balance and harmony, for example, "hot" versus "cold" states of the body and diseases caused by imbalance of these forces. These states are gender-linked; for example, women should ideally be cool, and men should ideally be warm, but these states should not become too pronounced or intensified, for example, a man can become too hot and ill (Figueiredo in Claudot-Hawad, 1996, pp. 113–137). Too intense cold or heat, or conversely, accumulation of the opposite of the ideally-dominant quality brings illness, and requires a cure. These conditions of "hot/cold" and associated afflictions are sometimes literal, sometimes non-literal or metaphorical in connotations, for example, "hot" illnesses (*tuksi*) are believed to be caused by too much heat, from "hot" foods (dates, tomatoes), sunlight, or moon-beams (these latter may cause illness from direct contact, as in sun-stroke, or, alternately, by sitting on warm mats or from their reflections inside doorways). *Tuksi* may also result from anger and other strong sentiments. These require counteractive treatments with herbal medicines, ritual precautions, or dietary remedies (such as "cold" foods, e.g., millet). Many of these illnesses include stomach ailments. "Cold" illnesses *(tessmat*) are the counterpart of "hot" illnesses. These include urinary tract problems and STDs. Treatment is sought from herbalists, who often prescribe plant remedies and ritual bathing (Rasmussen, 1998b). Other diseases may be caused by the wind and aromas; covering the bodily orifices is important to prevent them.

There are additional conditions that defy neat classification into organic and non-organic, and have only approximate, rather than exact, translations into the English language and Euro-American established biomedical paradigms: for example, *anoughou* refers to a condition caused by a sudden change in routine with subsequent deprivation of the usual nourishment or habit; *tamazai* refers to a condition approximating depression, in which one suffers from a long-term hidden wish or resentment that cannot be directly expressed. This latter relates to important Tuareg cultural values that discourage direct or explicit speech and encourage indirect expression by allusion. Sometimes, many residents believe, this condition results from unrequited love or other love problems *(tarama*). It often provokes *goumaten* spirit possession. A stomach ailment called *karambaza*, usually diarrhea, is believed to be caused by the mystic ritual powers of smith/artisans (*tezma* or *ettama*), activated automatically when they are refused a present or denied a request. *Karambaza* attacks children or livestock of the offending party, often a noble patron. Its remedies involve seeing an herbalist, and also gathering up the sand in the smith/ artisans' footprints and throwing it into the fire.

Other illnesses may result from negative gossip (*togerchet*) by anyone, behind one's back (Casajus, 2000; Rasmussen, 2002). More lethal is an affliction believed to be caused by sorcery, called *ark echaghel* (literally denoting "bad work"). This is practiced surreptitiously and considered very dangerous and anti-social, for it requires the assistance of a marabout who is willing to misuse his powers destructively (Nicolaisen, 1961; Rasmussen, 2002). Sorcery almost always causes the death of the targeted victim. It is often transmitted through contamination of food, burying of harmful amulets beneath the ground where one walks, or through contact with the victims' clothing or other possessions or bodily fluids. Sometimes, an animal such as a dog may be sent to harm the intended victim.

Prominent in theories of health and illness among the Tuareg are concepts of the body and soul. The head (*eghef*) is considered the place where spirits reside, once they have entered the liver (*tessa*) and stomach (*tedis*). The stomach is also the symbol of the matriline, whereas the back (*aghuri)* is the symbol of the patriline. If herbal medicine women diagnose spirits "dancing" in a patient's stomach, they refer the patient to a marabout, who treats the patient in seclusion with counseling and the Quran, often also divining with the Quran and various cabalistic formulas. The liver is considered the seat of sentiments such as anger and love, and is the place where non-Quranic spirits often enter; these require the *tende n goumaten* spirit possession ritual, whose public curing with music and a large, diverse audience who encourage the possessed person in trance in her dancing, constitute an effective form of group therapy. Sometimes, patients see diverse healers in succession for the same ailment, for example, *bokaye* non-Quranic diviners after seeing herbalists and marabouts. *Bokaye* treat non-organic illness through non-Quranic divination methods; they diagnose with scents and oils. The soul (*iman*, also denoting life and breath), is believed to leave the body during sleep and walk about. Upon death, the soul may be contacted through dreams or through offerings to graves. The heart (*ewel*) is connected to sentiments such as generosity and compassion, and is closely associated with the soul and the liver in psycho-social and non-organic connotations; many non-organic illnesses such as spirit possession are referred to as "illnesses of the heart and soul."

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Tuareg differ from some of their neighbors in the marked degree of free social interaction between the sexes, and in the generally high prestige and economic independence of Tuareg women. Unrelated men and women may visit each other, flirt, and conduct courtship. Conversation between the sexes is considered extremely important. Women may travel, visit, and receive male visitors before and following marriage (Murphy, 1964, 1967). Women may initiate divorce, and own the tent and inherit and manage livestock.

There is some variation among the different Tuareg confederations concerning pre- and extramarital sexual mores. In some groups, women and men may conduct preand extramarital affairs freely; in others, particularly among the more devoutly Muslim clans of Islamic scholars/ marabouts and in some chiefly families, there is a tendency to frown on this. Illegitimate children bring shame to the mother, and are often hidden and raised in distant regions.

Most women in semi-nomadic rural communities bear approximately six to eight children. There are indications that with increased sedentarization, many families prefer more children to assist with oasis gardening. Precise statistics from large samples are not available, but many local residents indicate that in the past, nomadic lifestyles discouraged having many children and there were efforts to space children. Although Tuareg women's status is not solely dependent upon childbearing, and Tuareg recognize that men as well as women may be responsible for childlessness, nowadays wives feel greater pressure than in the past to bear children, and fear that husbands may contract polygynous marriages if they are infertile.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Local beliefs surrounding reproduction include the idea, expressed in local slang, that during menstruation, a woman's eggs (pl. *chikikaten*) are "broken"; at other times, they are whole. Some beliefs appear gender-based; for example, men describe women as being like "containers" or "leather sacks" during pregnancy; whereas women describe female reproductive physiology as centered on the stomach (*tedis*) and womb, called *ehan n barar* ("the child's tent"), and tend to place greater

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 1007**

emphasis upon love as important in conception. The male is believed to transmit "heat" (*tarraf* ) during conception. Iblis, the Devil, is considered to be the ultimate source of reproductive force.

Women must protect themselves from malevolent spirits believed to cause birth defects and infant mortality. During menstruation, there are ritual restrictions against praying, touching Islamic amulets, handling animal hides, and dressing hair. These measures are believed to protect *al baraka* in living things, and by extension, the yet-to-be born child (Rasmussen, 1991). Conception should not occur outside the tent under the moonlight, nor before the end of the week-long wedding. At childbirth, the earth opens up and threatens the woman in labor (Worley, 1992, pp. 54–64). In rural communities, babies are born within the mother's tent, with elderly female relatives attending. A baby should not be left in a doorway (at a crossroads); this action is believed to cause mental disabilities. New mothers are secluded for 40 days following birth, to protect them from jealous spirits threatening mother and child. A knife (metal is believed to ward off spirits) is stuck in the sand near the mother's bed, and Quranic amulets are prominently displayed. There are also ritual practices to promote fertility, for example, animal sacrifice followed by the married couple's consumption of specified foods: the animal's lungs, fresh rather than dried (symbol of life and breath), and eggs with Quranic verses written in vegetal ink.

#### **Infancy**

In the countryside, infant mortality is approximately 60%. Spirits are believed to sometimes mistake babies for goat-hide water-bags, and pull them back into the spirit world. Efforts are made to keep newborns in the world of humans. The firstborn male wears a tuft of hair on top of the head "in order to be pulled by the Prophet up into paradise" in the event of death. If a baby is stillborn, no condolence or nameday rituals are held; if a baby dies after crying, a condolence ritual is held as for deceased adults. Babies are often called "stranger" until they are 1 week old, then are given several names, Quranic by the father and marabout, and non-Quranic by the maternal grandmother, at the nameday ritual. The marabout writes Quranic verses in vegetal ink for the baby's mother to drink, to protect from malevolent spirits and humans. Special names are given to babies when a previouslyborn sibling died, in order to distract the spirits, for example, Tekle (denoting slave). Twins are regarded as somewhat demanding of scarce resources, but efforts are made not to make them angry. Mothers are supposed to treat each twin in identical ways: for example, they are given alliterative names (e.g., Alhassane and Alhouseini), are breast-fed at the same time, and arranged in the same sleeping positions. Babies are breast-fed for approximately two years. They sleep with their mother, and parents practice a postpartum sexual taboo for approximately two years; a child born before this time is considered shameful, and some birth defects are attributed to a lapse in practicing this taboo. There is no transitional baby food; small children are encouraged to eat adult food. Small children are toilet-trained gradually and casually: mothers encourage them to go far from the household to relieve themselves, with other children.

### **Childhood**

Children are encouraged to assist with adult chores. In some regions, toddlers are given chickens to raise as pets to practice for future herding of their parents'livestock. Small children are encouraged to explore their physical environment freely, and corporal punishment is rare, although adults in rural communities keep a watchful eye on children's activities. Toddlers begin to wear protective religious amulets around weaning age. At around eight years, young girls begin to assist their mothers in cooking and fetching water. At this age, boys traditionally start to accompany their fathers on caravan trading expeditions, help in the oasis gardens, and smith/artisan boys begin apprenticeships at the forge with an older male relative. Children of both sexes herd livestock. Nowadays, more girls and boys of diverse social origins go to both Quranic and secular schools.

#### **Adolescence**

Despite children's full participation in adult tasks, Tuareg recognize adolescence as a distinct phase, and a Tamajaq term designates an adolescent: *ekabkab* (fem. *tekabkab*). Local concepts of the life course are, nonetheless, not strictly linear, chronological, or biological, but rather these phases are socially and ritually defined (Rasmussen, 1997). For example, females are considered to "become women" at marriage, rather than upon menstruation; males are considered marriageable upon taking up the men's face-veil, at approximately 18–20 years of age. Adolescents of either sex, but particularly women, are believed to be vulnerable to jealousy of spirits and humans at life transitions.

#### **Adulthood and Middle-Age**

Women and men among Tuareg are considered full social adults upon becoming parents; children are extremely important to mature, adult status. Informal adoption is often practiced in cases of childlessness, but rituals promoting fertility convey the importance of having children, and eventually, children-in-law (Rasmussen, 1997). Sons-in-law contribute important economic resources to their affinal household through bridewealth and groomservice. There is an extreme respect/reserve relationship between a man and his parents-in-law, particularly the mother-in-law. Thus, while Tuareg women generally enjoy high social prestige and some economic independence throughout life, these ideally increase upon their children's, particularly daughters' marriages.

There is equal access to medical care, both traditional and established bio-medical, for Tuareg men and women throughout life; the problem of unequal care principally affects Tuareg generally, regardless of gender, and arises from the predicament of most Tuareg as a marginalized group within the nation-state, from the geographic inaccessibility of rural communities, and general poverty of those nation-states where most Tuareg reside.

### **The Aged**

Aged persons are ideally respected. Children are supposed to care for ailing parents. Elderly persons of either sex reside next door to children, and participate prominently in Islamic and pre-Islamic rituals. Many elderly persons continue to work (herding, caravanning, and gardening) as long as their health and energy permit, although more arduous labor (fetching well water and firewood) is usually performed by younger relatives.

Physical problems of older women are attributed to aging processes in general, rather than specifically from the cessation of menstruation (Rasmussen, 2000, pp. 91–116). Herbal medical specialists and other women report few symptoms associated with the "menopause" model in western established bio-medicine. Postchildbearing women's ritual and social roles apparently compensate for any perceived physical problems, and many such problems merge with other age-related problems in local medicine.

### **Dying and Death**

Mortuary beliefs and practices interweave local Tuareg and Islamic cosmoligies and rituals. Dead souls are believed to wander in the vicinity of graves, and some communication with them is possible through dreams and divination. Funerals (called *iwichken* or *iban*) are held within 3 days of death, and consist principally of condolences at the home of relatives, during which special foods are served and the marabout comforts the bereaved, ritually spitting in a goblet in order to "calm" them. The body is prepared for burial by elderly same-sex living persons: it is washed, wrapped in a white shroud, and carried to the cemetery, accompanied by chanting from the Quran. Men and marabouts officiate at the burial. Two lines are formed in order to allow the angel of death to pass through. Thereafter, the name of the deceased is not mentioned. Graves are not individually marked, although stones are piled higher on tombs of prominent marabouts and chiefs, and offerings made to them. In keeping with Islamic beliefs, marabouts emphasize judgment day following death, when angels measure the relative weights of bad and good deeds of the deceased in life. While ancestor cults among Tuareg appear less elaborated than in some other African societies, there are commemorative rituals (*takote*) for deceased at intervals following death, which feature animal sacrifice, alms-giving, feasts, and reading from the Quran.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

Many rural Tuareg initially feared hospitals because they appeared implicated in colonial and post-colonial schemes to dominate and control: for example, many medicine distributions were accompanied by census counts, taxation records, and political speeches. Some viewed hospital and clinic staffs as unsympathetic and hostile to local culture (Rasmussen, 1994, 2001). More recently, many Tuareg are less fearful of hospitals and clinics due to their staffing, since the Peace Pact of 1995, with more local and Tamajaqspeaking personnel. Nevertheless, most rural people still go to traditional local medical practitioners before clinics and hospitals because of difficult access to hospitals, located only in the major towns—and travel there is often difficult. Prescription medicines are irregularly stocked and expensive. Some pills are now sold at cheaper prices at vending tables on the street; these are, however, often dangerous, uncontrolled, and unlabeled. Recently, in the wake of economic austerity and privatization policies initiated by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, private practitioners have sprung up in capital cities, but most rural residents cannot afford their fees.

#### **Location and Linguistic Affiliation 1009**

## **REFERENCES**

- Bernus, E. (1981). *Touaregs Nigeriens: Unite d'un peuple pasteur*. Paris: Editions de l'Office de la Recherche Scientifique et technique de l'Outre-Mer.
- Casajus, D. (2000). *Gens de Parole: Langage, poesie et politique en pays touareg*. Paris: Editions la decouverte textes a l'appui/anthropologie.
- Claudot-Hawad, H. (1993). *Touareg: Portrait en fragments*. Aix-en-Provence: Edisud.
- Claudot-Hawad, H. (1996). *Touareg et Autres Sahariens entre Plusieurs Mondes*. Aix-en-Provence: Edisud.
- Decalo, S. (1996). *Historical dictionary of Niger*. Lanham, MD, London: The Scarecrow Press.
- Figueiredo, C. (1996). Identite et concitoyennete. La reelaboration des relations entre hommes et femmes aux marges de la societe Kel Adagh (Mali). In H. Claudot-Hawad (Ed.), *Touareg et Autres Sahariens entre Plusieurs Mondes* (pp. 113–137). Aix-en-Provence: Edisud.
- Keenan, J. (1976). *Tuareg: People of Ahaggar*. New York: St. Martins Press.
- Murphy, R. (1964). Social distance and the veil. *American Anthropologist, 66*, 1257–1274.
- Murphy, R. (1967). Tuareg kinship. *American Anthropologist, 69*, 163–170.
- Nicolaisen, J. (1961). Essaie sur la religion et la magie touaregues. *Folk*, *3*, 113–160.
- Nicolaisen, I. and Nicolaisen, J. (1997). *The pastoral Tuareg*. Rhodos, Copenhagen: The Carlsberg Foundation.
- Norris, H. T. (1975). *The Tuareg: Their Islamic legacy and its Diffusion in the Sahel*. Wilts, England: Aris and Phillips.
- Norris, H. T. (1990). *Sufi mystics of the Niger desert*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Porch, D. (1984). *The Conquest of the Sahara*. New York: Knopf (Random House).
- Rasmussen, S. (1991). Lack of prayer: Ritual restrictions, social experience, and the anthropology of menstruation among the Tuareg. *American Ethnologist, 18*, 751–769.

- Rasmussen, S. (1994). Female Sexuality, Social Reproduction, and the Politics of Medical Interventions in Niger: Kel Ewey Tuareg Perspectives. *Culture, Medicine, and Pshchiatry*, *18*, 433–462.
- Rasmussen, S. (1995). *Spirit possession and personhood among the Kel Ewey Tuareg*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Rasmussen, S. (1997). *The poetics and politics of Tuareg aging: Life course and personal destiny in Niger*. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University Press.
- Rasmussen, S. (1998a). Ritual powers and social tensions as moral discourse among the Tuareg. *American Anthropologist, 100*, 458–468.
- Rasmussen, S. (1998b). Only women know trees: Medicine women and the role of herbal healing in Tuareg culture. *Journal of Anthropological Research, 54*, 147–171.
- Rasmussen, S. (1999). The slave narrative in life history and myth. *Ethnohistory, 46*, 67–108.
- Rasmussen, S. (2000). From childbearers to culture-bearers: Transition to postchildbearing among Tuareg women. *Medical Anthropological Quarterly, 14*, 242–270.
- Rasmussen, S. (2001). *Healing in community: Medicine, contested terrains, and cultural encounters among the Tuareg*. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Rasmussen, S. (2002). Betrayal or affirmation? Transformation in witchcraft technologies of power, danger, and agency among the Tuareg. In H. Moore & T. Sanders (Eds.), *Magical interpretations, material realities* (pp. 136–160). London: Routledge.
- Rodd, F., Lord of Rennell. (1926). *The people of the veil*. London: Anthropological Publications.
- U.S. Department of State. (1994, July). *Background notes. Niger*. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- Weaver, M., Wong, H., Sako, A. S., Simon, R., & Lee, F. (1994). Prospects for reform of hospital fees in sub-Saharan Africa: A case-study of Niamey National Hospital in Niger. *Social Science and Medicine, 38*, 565–574.
- World Bank. (1989). *World development report*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Worley, B. (1992). Where all the women are strong. *Natural History, 10*, 54–64.

# **Wape**

#### **William E. Mitchell**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Wapei, Wapi.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Wape live on the large island of New Guinea located just north of Australia. Their country, Papua New Guinea, occupies the eastern half of the island; Sandaun Province, where the Wape reside, is situated in its northwest corner bordering Irian Jaya and is one of the country's poorest and the least developed. "Wape" is a term given by Westerners to the culturally similar Olo speakers. It is derived from the Olo word *metane wape*, which denotes a human in contrast to a spirit. Olo is one of the 47 languages of the Torricelli Phylum that is provisionally divided into 7 stocks and 13 families. Olo is classified