## **Bernoulli, Jacob**

Jacob Bernoulli (1654–1705), the son and grandson of spice merchants in the city of Basel, Switzerland, was trained to be a protestant clergyman, but, following his own interests and talents, instead became the professor of mathematics at the University of Basel from 1687 until his death. He taught mathematics to his nephew Nicolaus Bernoulli (1687–1759) and to his younger brother Johann (John, Jean) Bernoulli (1667–1748), who was trained in medicine, but took over as professor of mathematics at Basel after Jacob's death in 1705. As a professor of mathematics, Johann Bernoulli, in turn, taught mathematics to his sons, including Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1782), known for the St. Petersburg paradox in probability, as well as for work in hydrodynamics. Jacob and Johann Bernoulli were among the first to read and understand Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz's articles in the *Acta Eruditorum* of 1684 and 1686, in which Leibniz put forth the new algorithm of calculus. They helped to develop and spread Leibniz's calculus throughout Europe, Johann teaching calculus to the Marquis de Hopital, who published the first calculus textbook. ˆ Nicolas Bernoulli wrote his master's thesis [1] on the basis of the manuscripts of Jacob's still unpublished *Art of Conjecturing*, and helped to spread its contents in the years between Jacob's death and the posthumous publication of Jacob's work in 1713 [2]. In the remainder of this article, the name "Bernoulli" without any first name refers to Jacob Bernoulli. (Readers should be aware that many Bernoulli mathematicians are not infrequently confused with each other. For instance, it was Jacob's *son* Nicolaus, also born in 1687, but a painter and not a mathematician, who had the Latin manuscript of [2] printed, and not his *nephew* Nicolaus, although the latter wrote a brief preface.)

As far as the application of the art of conjecturing to economics (or finance) is concerned, much of the mathematics that Jacob Bernoulli inherited relied more on law and other institutional factors than it relied on statistics or mathematical probability, a discipline that did not then exist. Muslim traders had played a significant role in Mediterranean commerce in the medieval period and in the development of mathematics, particularly algebra, as well. Muslim mathematical methods were famously transmitted to Europe by Leonardo of Pisa, also known as *Fibonacci* [6]. Rather than relying on investments with guaranteed rates of return, which were frowned upon as involving usury, Muslim trade was often carried out by partnerships or companies, many involving members of extended families. Such partnerships would be based on a written contract between those involved, spelling out the agreed-upon division of the profits once voyagers had returned and the goods had been sold, the shares of each partner depending upon their investment of cash, supply of capital goods such as ships or warehouses, and labor. According to the Islamic law, if one of the partners in such an enterprise died before the end of the anticipated period of the venture, his heirs were entitled to demand the dissolution of the firm, so that they might receive their legal inheritances. Not infrequently, applied mathematicians were called upon to calculate the value of the partnership on a given intermediate date, so that the partnership could be dissolved fairly.

In Arabic and then Latin books of commercial arithmetic or business mathematics in general (geometry, for instance, volumes of barrels, might also be included), there were frequently problems of "societies" or partnerships, which later evolved into the so-called "problem of points" concerning the division of the stakes of a gambling game if it were terminated before its intended end. Typically, the values of the various partners' shares were calculated using (i) the amounts invested; (ii) the length of time it was invested in the company if all the partners were not equal in this regard; and (iii) the original contract, which generally specified the division of the capital and profits among partners traveling to carry out the business and those remaining at home. The actual mathematics involved in making these calculations was similar to the mathematics of calculating the price of a mixture [2, 7, 8]. (If, as was often the case, "story problems" were described only in long paragraphs, what was intended might seem much more complex than if everything could have been set out in the subsequently developed notation of algebraic equations.)

In Part IV of [2], Bernoulli had intended to apply the mathematics of games of chance, expounded in Parts I–III of the book on the basis of Huygens' work, by analogy, to civil, moral, and economic problems. The fundamental principle of Huygens' and Bernoulli's mathematics of games of chance was that the game should be fair and that players should pay to play a game in proportion to their expected winnings. Most games, like business partnerships, were assumed to involve only the players, so that the total paid in would equal the total paid out at the end. Here, a key concept was the number of "cases" or possible alternative outcomes. If a player might win a set amount if a die came up a 1, then there were said to be six cases, corresponding to the six faces of the die, of which one, the 1, would be favorable to that player. For this game to be fair, the player should pay in one-sixth of the amount he or she would win if the 1 were thrown.

Bernoulli applied this kind of mathematics in an effort to quantify the evidence that an accused person had committed a crime by systematically combining all the various types of circumstantial evidence of the crime. He supposed that something similar might be done to judge life expectancies, except that no one knew all the "cases" that might affect life expectancy, such as the person's inherited vigor and healthiness, the diseases to which a person might succumb, the accidents that might happen, and so forth. With the law that later came to be known as the *weak law of large numbers*, Bernoulli proposed to discover *a posteriori* from the results many times observed in similar situations what the ratios of unobserved underlying "cases" might be. Most people realize, Bernoulli said, that if you want to judge what may happen in the future by what has happened in the past, you are less liable to be mistaken if you have made more observations or have a longer time series of outcomes. What people do not know, he said, is whether, if you make more and more observations, you can be more and more sure, without limit, that your prediction is reliable. By his proof he claimed to show that there was no limit to the degree of confidence or probability one might have that the ratio of results would fall within some interval around an expected ratio. In addition, he made a rough calculation of the number of trials (later called *Bernoulli trials*) that would be needed for a proposed degree of certainty. The mathematics he used in his proof basically involved binomial expansions and the possible combinations and permutations of outcomes ("successes" or "failures") over a long series of trials. After a long series of trials, the distribution of ratios of outcomes would take the shape of a bell curve, with increasing percentages of outcomes clustering around the central value. For a comparison of Jacob

Bernoulli's proof with Nicolaus Bernoulli's proof of the same theorem, see [5].

In correspondence with Leibniz, Bernoulli unsuccessfully tried to obtain from Leibniz a copy of Jan De Witt's rare pamphlet, in Dutch, on the mathematics of annuities—this was the sort of problem to which he hoped to apply his new mathematical theory [4]. Leibniz, in reply, without having been told the mathematical basis of Bernoulli's proof of his law for finding, *a posteriori*, ratios of cases, for instance, of surviving past a given age, objected that no such approach would work because the causes of death might be changeable over time. What if a new disease should make an appearance, leading to an increase of early deaths? Bernoulli's reply was that, if there were such changed circumstances, then it would be necessary to make new observations to calculate new ratios for life expectancies or values of annuities [2].

But what if not only were there no fixed ratios of cases over time, but no such regularities (underlying ratios of cases) at all? For Bernoulli this was not a serious issue because he was a determinist, believing that from the point of view of the Creator everything is determined and known eternally. It is only because we humans do not have such godlike knowledge that we cannot know the future in detail. Nevertheless, we can increase the security and prudence of our actions through the application of the mathematical art of conjecturing that he proposed to develop. Even before the publication of *The Art of Conjecturing*, Abraham De Moivre had begun to carry out with great success the program that Bernoulli had begun [3]. Although, for Bernoulli, probability was an epistemic concept, and expectation was more fundamental than relative chances, De Moivre established mathematical probability on the basis of relative frequencies.

## **References**

- [1] Bernoulli, N. (1709). De Usu Artis Conjectandi in Jure, in *Die Werke von Jacob Bernoulli III*, B.L. vander Waerden, ed., Birkhauser, Basel, pp. 287–326. ¨ An English translation of Chapter VII can be found at http://www.york.ac.uk/depts/mathes/histstat/bernoulli n.htm [last access December 13, 2008].
- [2] Bernoulli, J. (2006). [Ars Conjectandi (1713)], English translation in Jacob Bernoulli, *The Art of Conjecturing together with Letter to a Friend on Sets in Court Tennis*, E.D. Sylla ed., The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.