# 15

# **Election Commission** and Electoral Process

Sushma Yadav

elections are the most significant aspect of contemporary political systems, democratic or otherwise. For, they remain the first and foremost touchstone on the basis of which the parameter of representation and legitimacy of a system is to be judged. In fact, elections are complicated political processes which provide a link between the society and the polity and between the traditional social systems and evolving political structures. Therefore, the elections must be analyzed within the context of the complete political and social system. Besides being a formal act of collective decision, they involve a stream of connected antecedent and subsequent behaviour and a concatenation of thousands of events, significant and trivial. Nevertheless, elections perform different roles in different political systems. In some situations, they are central while in others they may be peripheral. They may contribute to political development in some, to political decay in others. They may sometimes be used as veiled disguises for authoritarianism, while in established democracies, they are the institutional procedures for system-maintenance and also the instruments for support-building, interest-aggregation, peaceful and orderly transfer of power, recruitment and training of leaders, and above all for an increasing democratization of the political system. Thus, the elections are devices for legitimacy, identification, integration, communication, political education, participation, socialization, mobilization, conflict-resolution, political choice, political control, and are inextricably linked with the distinctive characteristics, traditions, experiences, values, and goals of different political systems.

Broadly, election may be regarded as the procedure for authoritatively aggregating political preferences of the mass electorate. At a conceptual level, it may be defined more generally as "a form of procedure recognized by the rules of an organization, whereby all or some of the members of the

organization choose a smaller number of persons or one person to hold office of authority in the organization."

Elections induct an element of accountability into a political system and make it possible for the citizens to exercise a genuine and meaningful degree of political choice and control. This, in turn, makes the system itself a democratic and effective instrument of governance. In short, Norman Palmer seems to be most apt when he observed, "Elections are particularly conspicuous and revealing aspect of most contemporary political systems. They highlight and dramatize a political system bringing its nature into sharp relief, and providing insights into other aspects of the system and the basic nature and actual functioning of the system as a whole. During an election, so to speak, a political system is on display, even though the features that are most obviously on display may be only a small part of the iceberg that lies beneath."

Gerald Pomper describes elections as "the great public ceremonies of American Iife." This is even truer in developing countries where elections are newer and often more exciting experiences. In India, for instance, the elections are massive spectacles mobilizing millions of people into the political process. They are, thus, not only great festivals providing entertainment and excitement for virtually the entire population but have also acquired what Albinski and Pettit have termed as *"*a sacramental or commemorative *aspect"* and have become a conspicuous symbol of nationhood and social purpose." This is true, as in the words of Morris-Jones and Biplab Dasgupta, "Elections in India provide the occasion for the widest degree of popular participation; they constitute the most important single arena for genuine competition between political groups: they are the principal agency through which recruitment to a significant part of the political elite is affected; and the skills and resources which they especially call forth figure prominently in political life in general. Elections in India can now be seen not merely as useful indicators but actually as the events through which the party system and hence, in a measure, the political system achieve their evolution."

The elections tend to be complex events in a developing democracy, like India since they involve individual and collective decisions and, thus, directly affect the total political and social process. Unlike most of the new states in the developing world, elections in India have been central, not peripheral to the system. They have, no doubt, been conditioned by the ancient, heterogeneous and basically traditional nature of the social system and the general environmental factors; they have also greatly influenced the nature and evolution of the entire political system termed as 'the immense transformational impact of our electoral system' by Imtiaz Ahmed.

#### **Basic Constitutional Provisions**

The provisions regarding franchise and elections are contained in Part XV of the constitution which consists of six articles (Articles 324-329). Article 324 provides for a single Central Election Commission to superintend, direct, and control all elections to Parliament and to the state legislatures and to the offices of President and Vice President. The article provides that the Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and such number of other Election Commissioners (ECs), if any, as the President may from time to time fix. It also provides for the appointment of Regional Commissioners at the time of general elections. The word "elections" under this Article, as interpreted by the Supreme Court in *Union of India vs. Association for Democratic Reforms* & *others* (2002), is used in a wide sense to include the entire process of election which consists of several stages and embraces many steps. The jurisdiction of the Election Commission is also wide enough to include all powers necessary for smooth conduct of elections. Article 325 lays down that there shall be a general electoral roll for every territorial constituency for election to either House of Parliament or of a state legislature. No person is ineligible for inclusion in any such roll on the ground only of religion, race, caste, or sex nor can anyone claim to be included in any special electoral roll for any such constituency on any such ground. Article 326 provides for adult suffrage as the basis for elections to the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of every state, namely, a vote for every citizen not less than 18 years of age who is not, otherwise, disqualified under the law on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice.

Article 327 vests legislative power in Parliament to make laws relating to all matters concerning elections to either House of Parliament or of a state legislature, including the preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other matters "necessary for securing the due constitution of such House or Houses."

Article 328 confers similar powers on state legislatures to make laws relating to elections to the House or either House of legislature of the states, insofar as provision is not made on that behalf by Parliament by law.

Article 329 bars the jurisdiction of courts to enquire into the validity of laws regarding the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies. It also lays down that no election may be called in question except through an election petition, presented to such authority and in such a manner as may be provided for by law.

Political commentators have hailed the provisions as "revolutionary, in the context of the Indian political and social environment. They envisioned an electoral system that would be quite different from any that had prevailed before." However, not many know that representative form of government existed in many parts of ancient India during the Vedic and post-Vedic period where every adult male had the right to vote and to be present in the general assembly which decided all public matter. Nevertheless, India underwent a change during the medieval period under the Muslim rule and later under the British East India Company rule when there was no democratic system of election at any level. It was only during the last years of British rule that elections were introduced on a limited scale, with a restricted franchise, based mainly on property and education, and with separate electorates for certain minority groups, especially the Muslims.

However, it was also during the last years of British rule that Indian National Congress had started demanding a democratic system based on universal direct suffrage, with no communal electorates. As early as 1931, the Congress adopted a resolution drafted by Jawaharlal Nehru emphasizing that the franchise shall be on the basis of universal adult suffrage. Thus, when the members of the Constituent Assembly considered the legislative provisions of the Draft constitution regarding elections, they agreed without much discussion or opposition on the desirability of electing members of the lower house of the central legislature by direct, universal suffrage, by a single vote system and mainly in single-member constituencies. The question of the reservation of seats for communal minorities was debated at greater length and eventually it was agreed that separate electorates for them should be abolished.

From the beginning, there was almost a consensus of opinion among the members of the Constituent Assembly on the issue that the right to vote should be treated as fundamental right of the citizen and that, in order to enable him to exercise this right freely, an independent machinery to control elections should be set up, free from local pressures and political influences. There was considerable discussion on these issues in the Fundamental Rights Sub-committee and the Minorities Sub-committee. However, discussion centered mainly on the question whether the chapter on fundamental rights was the proper place for laying down these matters which, in fact, pertained to electoral law. C. Rajagopalachari, P.R. Thakur, and B.R. Ambedkar differed in their opinion on this. Ultimately, a compromise solution suggested by G.B. Pant was accepted following which the Advisory Committee recommended that, instead of being included in the chapter on fundamental rights, the provision regarding the setting up of an independent Election Commission, along with the other two proposals regarding adult franchise and free and fair elections to be held periodically, should find a place in some other part of the constitution.

Similarly, while there was a complete unanimity on the need of having an independent Election Commission there was considerable discussion on the question whether there should be a central commission under union auspices or there must be separate provincial Election Commissions so that state government were not deprived of all power. K.M. Munshi, H.V. Pataskar, B.R. Ambedkar, Kuladhar Chaliha, and H.N. Kunzru differed in their opinion on the issue. Eventually a compromise formula was evolved that the power of the President to appoint the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners would be subject to law made by Parliament and that the power of the President to make rule regarding the conditions of service and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall also be subject to law made by Parliament.

Besides the provisions embodied in Articles 324-329 of the constitution, the elections are conducted on the basis of two statutes, namely, the Representation of the People Act of 1950 and 1951, both shaped by B.R. Ambedkar, one of the principal architects of the constitution. The Act of 1950 embodies provisions regarding the delimitation of constituencies, allocation of seats, appointment of election officers and preparation and revision of electoral rolls, whereas the Act of 1951 deals with qualifications and disqualifications for membership of central and state legislatures, corrupt practices and electoral offences and also with the entire machinery and procedure for the conduct of elections. Both the Acts empower the central government to make rules thereunder. Two such important sets of rules are the Registration of Election Rules, 1960, and the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.

One of the major revisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, were implemented in 1966, when a new machinery for disposal of election petitions was provided. The Act abolished Election Tribunals and empowered the High Courts to dispose of the petitions whose orders are final and no appeal could be filed against them, except by grant of special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the constitution.

During the emergency, the Election Laws (Amendment) Bill was rushed through the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 5th August 1975, and on the next day it received Presidential assent. It amended certain provision (especially, explanation to Sections 77 and 123) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in order to meet the challenge posed by the Allahabad High Court judgment which had set aside Indira Gandhi's election to the Lok Sabha. This judgment had disqualified her for a period of 6 years. Within 5 days, the constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Bill was also rushed through the Parliament. The Act inserted Article 329(A) in the constitution containing special provision regarding elections to Parliament in case of Prime Minister and Speaker, and also put the Election Amendment Act in the Ninth Schedule which is immune to judicial scrutiny. In effect, Indira Gandhi succeeded in her appeal against the Allahabad High Court judgement due to amendment of the election law retrospectively in her favour. However, this Act was repeated by the constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.

Thereafter, Rule 90 of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, was amended to raise the ceilings on election expenditure from `35,000 to `1 lakh in 1964 and to `4,50,000 in 1979 in respect of a parliamentary constituency. Similarly, the limit of expenses in respect of elections to the legislative assembly of a state and Union territory has also been raised to `1,50,000 in 1994. Another major step in the direction of cleaning our public life was the enactment of the constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, popularly known as the Anti-defection Law. This has been further modified and updated by the constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003. Besides, the Representation of People (Amendment) Act, 1996, the Representation of People (Amendment) Act, 2002 and the Election and other Related Laws (Amendment)

#### **282** ✽ CHAPTER 15

Bill, 2003 have sought to bring greater transparency and accountability into electoral process by making it mandatory for all contestants for both the Parliament and the Assembly elections to declare their assets and liabilities and also disclose their criminal antecedents.

## ❑❑ **Electoral Machinery**

#### **Election Commission**

The constitution, thus, provided for an Election Commission consisting of CEC and such number of other ECs, if any, as the President may from time to time fix. As is apparent, the constitution did not prescribe any specific qualifications, i.e., administrative, legal or judicial for eligibility to the post of the CEC nor did it lay down any procedure of his appointment. However, all the persons appointed to this high office have been illustrious in their own way. They include names, like Sukumar Sen, N.V.K. Sundaram, S.P. Sen Verma, Nagendra Singh, T. Swaminathan, S.L. Shakdhar, R.K. Trivedi, T.N. Seshan, J.M. Lyngdoh and T.S. Krishnamurthy. Except for S.P. Sen Verma who was a legal luminary and S.L. Shakdher who was the Secretary General of the Lok Sabha, others came from the Indian Administrative Service and had served in the highest positions before becoming the Chief Election Commissioner. Still, there have been doubts in the public mind that if the government keeps appointing retiring government officials, they may remain beholden to the government and may not function as independently as is expected. It was suggested by a committee that members of the Election Commission be appointed by the President on the advice of a committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition (or a Member of Parliament selected by the opposition) in the Lok Sabha and the Chief Justice of India.

#### **Regional Commissioners**

Besides the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, there is also a provision under clause (4) for the appointment of Regional Commissioners,before each general election, to assist the Election Commission in carrying out the functions. Two such commissioners were appointed in 1951-52 with their headquarters at Bombay and Patna. However, the practice was replaced at the time of second general election with the appointment of Deputy Election Commissioners in 1956 which continues and has proved to be quite successful. The expansion of Election Commission was also recommended by the Joint Select Committee of the Lok Sabha on Electoral Reforms in 1972, and later, by the already mentioned Joint Parliamentary Committee on Electoral Reforms. Both the committees also recommended the appointment of Regional Commissioners for a more systematic conduct of elections.

The Election Commission discharges a number of very important functions, including the preparation, maintenance and revision of electoral rolls, the notifications, scrutiny, withdrawals and polling, registration of and recognition to political parties, allotment of election symbols, the appointment of a Chief Electoral Officer (a state government official) for each state, and Electoral Registration Officers and Returning Officers and Assistant Returning Officers for each assembly and parliamentary constituency, and the receiving of election petitions and the appointment of Election Tribunals to consider such petitions.

The Election Commission faces certain disadvantages at times as it has no power to recruit and regulate the conditions of service of its secretarial staff. It depends for its staff requirement for the preparation of electoral rolls and conduct of elections on the central and state governments. Realizing this, one of the Chief Election Commissioners, S.P. Sen Verma, had suggested to the government in 1970 that a permanent election organization/ machinery independent of government at the centre and the states be set up in each state to ensure smooth and fair poll all over the country. It was pointed out that the estimated expenditure was trivial (just about `50 lakh annually), but it could create an enormous sense of confidence among people. The government, however, referred it to a parliamentary committee headed by former Law Minister A.K. Sen which met once on 27th December 1970, before the dissolution of the fourth Lok Sabha and that was the end. No action has been taken since to provide a permanent staff to the Election Commission.

However, a small permanent unit of electoral machinery headed by the Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) does exist in every state and union territory for carrying out works relating to election process. The CEO is nominated by the commission from the panel of names submitted by the state government and is normally a senior secretary to the government. He is assisted by a Joint or a Deputy Chief Electoral Officer who is appointed a full-time officer to attend to the election work although the post is yet not recognized by law. The recommendations of the Election Commission regarding strengthening of election machinery at state level had been considered by the Joint Committee of the Lok Sabha, most of them were approved also, but they are yet to be implemented.

At the district level, a District Election Officer (DEO) is provided for to supervise and co-ordinate the work of the Electoral Registration Officers (ERO) as well as Returning Officers. The ERO is supposed to prepare and revise the electoral roll in each constituency. However, in actual practice, no such officer has been appointed.

Although the Election Commission has acquired enormous respect and stature, there is need to augment the staff at the headquarters as well as at the state and district levels. It is not a simple task to hold regular elections based on universal adult suffrage in a country like ours with nearly 590 million electorate and nearly 5.5 lakhs of polling stations including those located "in sky high and snow-clad mountains in North, scattered tiny islands in South, thick forests in East and vast tracks in marshy and desert lands in West."

Seeing the vastness of the task, the government should seriously reconsider the plea of the Election Commission for creation of an independent election department or an independent secretariat which was not accepted by the 1972 parliamentary committee.

The success of electoral politics in India gets confirmed by the results of elections to the eleventh Lok Sabha, while women and minorities remain under-represented accounting for 6.5 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively, the number of backwards and agriculturists increased considerably going up to 23 per cent and 51.8 per cent, respectively. Thus, giving the Parliament a 'distinctly rural flavour' or 'an earthy touch' to be more apt. What is all the more significant is that more than 50 per cent of the members have entered the Lok Sabha for the first time. Another notable feature of the election results is the increasing rationalization of the Lok Sabha. Although the trend was discerned as early as in 1983-84 on the basis of first seven national elections, the results to the eleventh Lok Sabha establish it beyond doubt.

Elections are part of a larger political process which includes nominating procedures, campaigning, and the actual voting. In short, "all those means, whereby a person becomes a member of an elected assembly" can be termed as the 'electoral process' which operates in a still wider network of social and political institutions and largely accounts for the interesting phenomenon that the elections often operate very differently and serve different functions even when they seem to be similar in form and conduct.

W.J. Mackenzie has laid down four conditions for free elections and for the successful functioning of an electoral system, namely, an independent judiciary to interpret electoral law; an honest competent, non-partisan administration to conduct elections; a developed system of political parties, well enough organized to put their policies, traditions and teams of candidates before the electors as alternatives between which to choose; and a general acceptance throughout the political community of certain rather vague rules of the game, which "the struggle for power because of some unspoken sentiment that if the rules are not observed more or less faithfully, the game itself will disappear amid the wreckage of the whole system."

No developing country can claim to meet these conditions fully, however, India comes closest to meeting them in comparison to others. It can rightly boast of an independent judiciary and a non-partisan election administration despite certain aberrations. Although India cannot claim to have 'a developed system of political parties there is nonetheless a general acceptance of certain rules of the game' which has gained deeper roots with time. The eleventh national election (1996) confirms this. The electorate has more than trebled, the number of people seeking election is steadily on the rise, and a reasonable level of voter turnout has been maintained over the years which are considerably high based on the continuing belief that elections make a difference. After a detailed study of politicization and partisanship in India, Osgood Field comes to conclude: "... elections have become the principal mode of leadership selection at all levels; and ordinary citizens have been encouraged to become politically involved and to use the competitive process for their own benefit."

It is established that elections have acquired a central place in the Indian political system. Not only are they "more than just important political events" they have been a kind of national festival, or *tamasha,* a source of entertainment, education, and excitement for countless millions of people. The campaigns are lively and colourful marked with intense political debates, symbolic processions or *yatras* and increasing use of electronic technology; audio-cassettes, video-cassettes and Radio-TV broadcast by major political parties. Visual symbols acquire greater importance in India due to widespread illiteracy; as such voters identify the candidate with the help of the symbol allotted to him/her. Issues in form of slogans become critical at times, like '*garibi hatao*' (remove poverty) in 1971, '*Indira hatao*' (remove Indira) in 1977, '*Indira lao, desh bachao*' (bring Indira, save India) in 1980, corruption in terms of Bofors scandal in 1989, and *hawala* scam in 1996. Argument over ideology or policy-issues as such are debated during campaigns as all parties make almost similar promises/pledges to eradicate poverty and unemployment, combat corruption, preserve national unity, etc. Despite the common knowledge/belief that politicians are engaged in a battle over power as an end in itself or as a means to money, people acclaim the arrival of elections and celebrate them as momentous events. The wisdom of their judgment has left even the worst of critics dumb-founded and the election results confirm what Morris-Jones observed in the 1971 elections are one of the things Indians do well. Surprisingly, despite poverty and illiteracy the people have displayed maturity of judgment through their native intelligence and commonsense in choosing, and also changing the government according to their choice.

### ❑❑ **Electoral Politics**

The evidence found in election studies shows that the most powerful factor determining party choice is where religious, linguistic, and regional cleavages coincide as for example as with the Aakali Dal in Punjab. The combination of region and language comes after this as with the prominent parties in Tamil Nadu (DMK, AIADMK, and recently TMC), Telugu Desam in Andhra Pradesh, Asom Gana Parishad in Assam. With increased democratization/politicization, the political parties have tried to exploit the caste factor for election purpose which in turn, enables parts of some castes to get inducted into the political process and get mobilized to influence the political system. Myron Weiner noted this phenomenon as early as 1962,"... *as economic growth has occurred in India and political awareness has grown within political parties, ascriptive identifications are playing a prominent* 

*role and the major social institutions (with the exception of family and kinship units) have associations that articulate their interests: ... increasingly such groupings have had their political manifestations."*

The caste associations in India, began much before independence as agents of Sanskritization seeking to secure educational, service, and other facilities to raise the status of their caste in social hierarchy. But, their post-independence role has become much more important and complicated since now they combine the roles of "pressure groups in economic and political field as well as agents for the political mobilization of their respective castes." The caste associations have made people conscious of their rights and privileges. Their most important contribution lies in making the illiterate masses participate effectively in politics. Through this process, politicization of caste has reached a stage where not only is the caste regarded as one of the main issues for deciding in favour of a candidate by the voters, but caste is also one of the most variables in the distribution of election tickets and formation of ministries. Thus, the caste connections of leaders, command over their caste men and the ability to form coalitions of castes for the purpose of political gains came to play significant roles. Moreover, with the introduction of universal adult franchise, the backward castes became conscious of their potential power due to their sheer numerical size and mass-base. Initially, they were patronized by the upper-caste leaders who wanted to expand their power-base.

Lately, caste-solidarity has acquired tremendous importance. People tend to vote either for a party with which their caste or sub-caste is identified, or for a respected member of their caste standing for election irrespective of the party he/she belongs to. What Brass observed in 1965 in the context of a state is truly apt in national context in 1995-96, "The role of caste in elections is easily the most discussed aspect of contemporary Indian political behaviour." However, the interaction between caste and electoral politics/democratic politics has resulted in traditionalization of politics, on one hand, and politicization of caste, on the other hand. As Rajni Kothari observed, "The alleged casteism in politics is, thus, no more and no less than politicization of caste. By drawing the caste system into its web of organization, politics finds material for its articulation and moulds it into its own design. In making politics their sphere of activity, caste and kin groups, on the other hand, get a chance to assert their identity and to strive for positions." In the democratic process, politics has penetrated into the deepest recesses of village India. Political consciousness and participation have increased among all segments of the society awakening them to the power of their votes in determining the fate of political leaders. Thus, at times electoral process has been the route to social mobility as in the case of Yadavas in Bihar and MY (Muslim-Yadav) factor in Bihar and UP. Awakened to its political weight by force of numbers, the community has dominated the political scene in the states since the mid-1980s. The logic of electoral politics has also compelled the political parties to broaden their bases. Thus, anti-Brahmin parties, like the DMK had to co-opt Brahmins to make their regional identity more inclusive while the upper caste and urban parties, like the BJP have had to reach out to the middle and lower castes and rural periphery to challenge the Congress dominance.

#### **Dangers to the Electoral System**

Nevertheless, the working of the Indian electoral system has witnessed considerable drawbacks and malpractices. One cannot ignore the discrepancy between the votes cast for a party and the seats it gains in parliament, the multiplicity of political parties, personality cult in party system, exploitation of caste and communal loyalties, role of muscle and money power, misuse of governmental machinery, fraudulent practices including booth-capturing, intimidation and impersonation have become increasingly prevalent with each succeeding election. Practices range from the physical capturing of booths and stuffing of ballot boxes to the organization of youth-wings of parties or goon squads who could target and terrorize particular communities before the poll to prevent them from casting their ballots. There have been allegations of ballot-box tampering also. Even the poll staff is either bribed into active connivance or intimidated into passive acquiescence. The menace of booth-capturing has been in vogue since the second general election of 1957, especially in Bihar where, according to the report of the Election Commission, "politicians and their supporters and workers belonging mainly to three dominant castes, to whatever party or parties they belong, take leading part in arranging or instigating booth-capturing by organized *goondas* and hoodlums in large numbers, with the result that in good number of cases, reports are received from the presiding officers and returning officers necessitating re-poll or fresh poll in the polling Stations." The phenomenon gradually spread over the country in different forms and dimensions. The fact that in 1989, 1991, 1996, 1998 and 2004 re-poll had been ordered in hundreds of polling stations, even in the Prime Minister's constituency, is a clear proof of the extent of violations of the norms. There is a positive side also that this also is a proof that there are enough honest officials who could be depended upon to report these violations to the Election Commission for a poll reorder.

The increasing need for the muscle power in elections necessitated more input of money too. Earlier, voters used to be bribed individually, and then it was found to be more convenient to buy musclemen who could ensure victory by capturing booths or intimidating voters rather than buying individual voters. This has led to progressive criminalization of politics and the emergence of politician-underworld nexus. Gradually, the criminals themselves have started contesting elections instead of letting out their talent to others. This can be gauged from the scale on which most of the high officials are changed with the change of a government. This is done to condition the bureaucracy to act in favour of the ruling party during elections. The police department's intelligence-wing is used to collect information on political rivals. The state functionaries come handy in hiring crowds, intimidate targeted sections of voters, creating local tensions, conditioning staff for poll duties, enrolling additional voters or removing certain names from the voters' list, etc. They also, in turn, allow the bureaucracy to make some money so that they remain vulnerable. In the process, significant sections of bureaucracy get incorporated into what has often been called the politicianunderworld-bureaucracy (PUB). In its efforts to cleanse the electoral process, the Election Commission under T.N. Seshan has put a ban on transfers and promotions after the elections are announced. Although revolutionary, the step can be of limited value as the final dispositions of the bureaucracy can and are usually made much in advance. Other practices of misuse have also been banned by the subsequent CECD under the Model Code of Conduct that has come to be more strictly insisted on and adhered to.

#### **Role of Money**

Electioneering tends to be an expensive exercise in modern democracies. In a vast country, like India, this is more so because the electoral constituency is usually very large both in terms of size and population. With mass illiteracy, a candidate is required to make extensive personal contacts with the voters which involve enormous expenditure. It comes to lakhs of rupees even for an assembly election. One important reason, besides many others, for the elections to have become so expensive in our times is the growing distance of political parties from the people. A politician of earlier days explains it as, "The elections were not as costly in 1952 as they have become today. Besides the higher value of the rupee all round, the political parties had field-cadres and organization networks and this, in turn, meant less expenditure to canvass for an election. That was an era when the ideals of service and sacrifice were very much in the air. Political leaders and workers did not expect much in return for their work in the elections. Many workers considered it unethical to work with a desire for reward and return. After a period of 10 years, the organizational structure of political parties began to crumble. Altogether a new machinery had to be organized for every election. Transport, publicity, and maintaining the campaigners involve a handsome amount in present days. Moreover, the desire to win an election at any cost, and the increasing reliance on muscle-power in elections have necessitated unbelievably enormous expenditures collected through dubious means, by the political parties and their candidates."

The gap between expenses incurred in an election and legally permitted is increasing with time. Ceilings on campaign expenses being absurdly low, and inflow of black money in the form of generous donations to the election funds of the political parties or powerful leaders has become an established norm. It is estimated that 90 per cent of all election funds comes from the business community in expectation, naturally, of special favours or patronage.

The scams involving crores of rupees from the financial institutions of the country is enough proof of the impact of money-power in the electoral system of India. It not only eliminates men and women of undoubted ability from electoral contest for want of financial support, but also promotes criminalization of politics.

#### **Misuse of Governmental Machinery**

There are a number of other ways in which the government power and machinery can be misused by the parties in power at the Centre and in the states. Some of those can be listed as follows:

- 1. Holding official functions attended by ministers during the election period;
- 2. Coverage of such function by the official radio or television;
- 3. Combining official tour of ministers with election work;
- 4. Use of government vehicles or aircraft by ministers for election purposes or during the election period;
- 5. During the election, advertisements of government achievements in newspapers at government expenses;
- 6. Use of jeeps, buses or other vehicles belonging to government and local bodies, public corporations and undertakings, for election work of any political party;
- 7. Use of Public Works Department (PWD) or government contractors for erecting rostrums for election meetings of ministers or their party;
- 8. Announcement of new government policies, making promises or starting new projects, grant of allowances or loans, waiving of interests on loans and increase in salary on the eve of election, or after the notification of election schedule, and
- 9. Transfer of government officers after the notification of election schedule.

#### **Electoral Reforms: A Survey of Attempts Made**

The need to reform the electoral machinery and electoral process was realized quite early in India and attempts in this regard have been made by opposition parties, various committees, and commissions appointed for the purpose, lawyers, jurists, and concerned scholars. First, such major concern for electoral reforms was discernible in 1971 when a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Amendments to Election Law was appointed in pursuance of a motion adopted in the Lok Sabha and concurred by the Rajya Sabha on 22 and 25th June 1975. Under the Chairmanship of Jagannath Rao, the committee submitted the report in 1972. The report was in two parts. Part I contained recommendations for amendment to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and 1951, while Part II dealt with matters like voting-age, electoral system, etc. The reforms could be helpful in removing certain distortion but none could be, implemented.

In 1974, Jayaprakash Narayan as the President of the Citizens for Democracy (CFD) set up a committee under the chairmanship of Justice V.M. Tarkunde to study and report on a scheme for electoral reforms to combat various forms of corrupt practice including use of money-power, misuse of official machinery, disparity between the popular vote, and the number of seats under the present system of election, defects in existing law and administration, etc. This committee also known as the Tarkunde committee submitted its report in February 1975. On the basis of this report, Jayaprakash Narayan launched the first ever people's movement against corruption and for electoral reforms and presented the People's Charter to the presiding officers of both Houses of Parliament on 6th March 1975, after a massive demonstration. Urging the Parliament and assemblies to be "more responsive to popular aspirations", the charter demanded that "the unanimous recommendations of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Electoral Reforms be implemented without delay."

However, emergency was proclaimed soon after and whatever amendments were made to the election laws went on distorting the system further instead of reforming it. After the 1977 election, Janata government was formed. For the first time that year, the national and state political parties were given time on radio and television to broadcast election messages during the state assembly elections. Besides passing the constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act to remove distortions brought a cabinet sub-committee to consider proposals for electoral reforms. The committee was headed by the then Union Home Minister, Charan Singh. At the same time, the then CEC, S.L. Shakdhar, made significant suggestions on various issues ranging from election expenses to "booth-capturing." An agreement to reduce voting age from 21 to 18 years was also reached. But the Janata party government had to resign from office before it could initiate any electoral reform.

Another committee on electoral reforms was constituted by the National Front government under V.P. Singh in January 1990, after discussing various aspects of electoral reforms with the representatives of political parties in Parliament. Comprising MPs and experts and headed by the then Law Minister, Dinesh Goswami, the committee did laudable and prompt work and submitted its report in May, 1990 itself. On the basis of the proposals therein, the government introduced four bills in the Parliament to give effect to its recommendations. But the government had to resign on 7th November 1990, before these bills could be enacted.

A further attempt, in this regard, was made by the P.V. Narasimha Rao government which summoned a special session of the Parliament to get two bills. The constitution (Eighty-third) Amendment Bill, 1994, and the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill, 1994, passed. However, the Bills were withdrawn before introduction.

The united front coalition succeeded in partially fulfilling its promise to the people to reform the electoral process in form of the Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Bill on 25th July 1996, which was passed unanimously on the same day. The Bill has the following features:

- 1. Candidates will not be allowed to contest in more than two seats at a time.
- 2. Non-serious candidates will be eliminated from contesting parliamentary and assembly elections through a manifold increase in the security, from `500 to `5000.
- 3. Elections will not be countermanded because of the death of a candidate, in the case of a candidate of a recognized political party, the party will have the authority to nominate a replacement within seven days. No such replacement will be allowed in the case of an independent.
- 4. The campaign period is reduced from 21 days to 14 days.
- 5. Names in a ballot paper will be arranged in an order which would give priority to the candidates of recognized political parties. The same would be followed by the candidates of regional and other registered parties. The last category would be of independent candidates.
- 6. Fresh delimitation of Lok Sabha constituencies will be on the basis of the 1991 census report.
- 7. Penalties on officials put in charge of election work will be imposed for breach of official duty.

The reforms, though minimal to begin with, can prepare ground for more thorough and comprehensive overhauling of the system with a majority government in power.

# ❑❑ **Agenda For Electoral Reforms**

There is enough evidence to feel that comprehensive legislation on electoral reforms is required in India to remove obstacles in the way of free and fair polls to 'carry forward the process of democratization' and to establish a 'moral polity'. However, reforming the electoral process is too broad a subject to be confined to mere amendment of the election law and of the rules and procedures relating to the conduct of elections. It has to involve a multi-pronged effort towards cleansing public life. Nonetheless, one can start with the following agendas.

#### **Change in the Electoral System**

An electoral system must progressively democratize the representative arena. There is a glaring gap between the ratio of votes and seats in our present system where no single party has ever won a majority of votes in any of the Lok Sabha elections, but has been able to capture absolute majority of the legislative assemblies many times. Over the years, the system has come under severe criticism, especially from the non-Congress parties. Therefore, opinions have been expressed to either change to a system of proportional representation with the list system or a combination of both the systems. While L.K. Advani and C.P. Bhambri advocated proportional representation way back in 1970, the Tarkunde Committee recommended a variant of the German system in 1975. Lately, S.L. Shakdhar and L.P. Singh have argued for a combined system of voting in which 50 per cent of the seats in the Lok Sabha and legislative assemblies would be filled by direct voting and the remaining on the basis of proportional representation. The Tarkunde committee had also given an innovative suggestion to combine the present system with a list system, *i.e.,* with declared elected directly, while the remaining seats may be filled from party lists according to the proportion of votes for each party with some relaxation for independents. Although, all systems have their drawbacks, one can always search 'the best' out of them by minimizing the pitfalls, enhancing the plus points and keeping in mind the requirement of the system as well as changes taking place with time.

#### **Restructuring the Election Commission**

One of the basic proposals of those advocating electoral reforms since long had been that of making Election Commission a multi-member body. The Tarkunde and Goswami committees advocated a regular three-member Election Commission for independent functioning. This seems to be the intention of the constitution makers too. Most of the CECs have opposed it on the ground that quick decisions are required in the fast-moving electoral affairs which may be impeded by different commissioners. With the 1993 constitution Amendment Act and the 1995 Supreme Court judgement, multimember commission has come to stay. However, the manner in which the ECs were appointed and the provision of majority-decision under Article 324(A) raise the suspicion that the executive may, at any point, appoint as many ECs as would constitute a majority and would, thus, control the commission's decision. Therefore, a regular three-member EC with a fixed term of five years can be a more respectable solution. A statutory requirement of consulting the Chief Justice of India and the Leader of the Opposition prior to the appointment of the CEC and ECs can go a long way in ensuring a non-partisan character of the EC.

Their salary and service conditions should also be part of the constitution as it is in the case of other independent constitutional offices. A ban on all post-retirement appointments by the government will eliminate the tendency/possibility of the CEC trying to please the government.

#### **Strengthening the Electoral Machinery**

There is an imperative need to augment the present electoral machinery by: (1) setting up the secretariat of the Election Commission; (2) appointing Regional Commissioners with statutory recognition and powers to assist the EC; (3) appointing judicial officers as Chief Electoral Officers (CEOs) and Returning Officers (ROs); and (4) empowering the EC with (1) an effective disciplinary control over the CEOs and ROs, and (2) with statutory powers to inquire into cases of misuse of official machinery and to reprimand those found guilty of such misuse.

#### **Curbing the Influence of Money and Muscle Power**

To get rid of the growing influence and show of money-power, the effort should be towards fixing reasonable ceiling on election expenses by law and strict enforcement of such law as was done during the 1996 elections like a legal requirement for every political party to publish annually an audited account of its income, mentioning the sources and the names of all donors whose contribution exceed `10,000 in a year and ultimately statefunding of elections (accepted and recommended by all the committees on electoral reforms).

To prevent increasing criminalization and violence there is an urgent need to implement the EC's proposal of keeping out persons with proven criminal record from electoral context, issue of photo identity proofs to voters, maintaining and updating electoral rolls with accuracy, progressive use of electronic voting machines, and statutory sanction for the Model Code of Conduct formulated by the EC. Gradually, ways must be found to implement the voters' right to recall as well as the right to reject candidates who fail to perform.

#### **Ensuring Free and Fair Electoral Process**

For administrative problems caused by multiplicity of candidates, dummy candidates should be discouraged, the practice of a candidate contesting simultaneously from more than one constituency should be banned, measures to ensure political parties' democratic functioning have to be undertaken, the existing law related to electoral offences needs to be strengthened in some respects, *e.g.,* increased penalty for impersonation, booth-capturing, carrying firearms or lethal weapons on polling day, and for officers on election-duty found guilty of acting for candidates or influencing voting; holding bye-elections within a specified period (may be six months) of a seat falling vacant must be made mandatory by the constitution; steps should be taken to ensure decisions on election-disputes and appeals within a stipulated period (6-12 months); reserved constituencies should be rotated in every election; the anti-defection law must be amended to balance the Speaker's unqualified powers in disqualifying elected members, the Central or state governments should function only as a caretaker government during election period and should include leaders of the opposition parties so as to avoid allegations of misuse of government-machinery and office.

In a representative democracy of India's size, the importance of political parties cannot be undermined. Therefore, not only should the political parties be clearly defined by law, but apart from the present registration with the Election Commission for allocation of symbols, their registration must also be made obligatory under law. The firm stand taken by the CEC on the issue of running the party affairs in accordance with democratic norms, inclusion of all party expenditure on a candidate's election with his knowledge as expenditure to be accounted for by the candidate, making it essential for parties to file return of income for each assessment year in accordance with the Income Tax Act, appointment of 1500 election-expenditure-observers (during the 1996 election), the announcement of unilateral Model Code of Conduct, and the recent judgement of the Supreme Court on making parties accountable will go a long way in enforcing financial discipline.

More recently, the Election Commission's new initiatives and directives in terms of computerization of the Electoral rolls, introduction of photo-identity cards, use of Electronic Voting Machines, appointment of poll-observers to monitor polling across the country, close monitoring of postings and transfers of senior officials, not allowing politicians to inaugurate state projects and to seek time slots for regional parties in the government-run-electronic-media; the Supreme Court's repeated directives for declaration of educational qualifications, assets, liabilities and criminal antecedents by the candidates at the time of elections; latest parliamentary enactment ensuring greater transparency and accountability into election funding, restriction on public-financed government and campaigns all seeks to ensure a level playing field for the contestants as well as to make the election process free of unhealthy extraneous influences.

No doubt, the electoral process cannot be cleansed or perfected merely by a comprehensive legislation, as there are aspects of politics which cannot be dictated by law such as political culture, etc. Therefore, enlightened citizens who are prepared to uphold political norms and punish those who transgress them can be an effective instrument to implement norms of clean electoral politics. Strengthening the intermediary political and civil institutions, whose collapse has accelerated electoral malpractices, can also be helpful in removing the defects of electoral democratic process. A survey of the 'recent history of electoral reforms' clearly indicates the lack of political will for obvious reasons. In such a situation, the only alternative lies in people's initiative as Jayaprakash Narayan had rightly urged,"Let every citizen who realizes the paramount importance of a moral regeneration of our politics, lend a helping hand in whatever way possible to this process."

#### **Notes and References**

- W.J.M. Mackenzie, "The Functions of Elections" in *International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences,* edited by David L. Sills, The Macmillan Company & Free Press, 1968, Vol. 5, p. 2.
- Norman D. Palmer, *Elections and Political Development: The South Asian Experience.*  New Delhi, Vikas Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., 1976, p. 1.