# **Nutrition and Health**

#### **Gun Roos**

### **INTRODUCTION**

Patterns of diet and activity, and nutritional and health status vary across cultures and historical periods. For example, currently there are populations living as hunter–gatherers and also groups subsisting on diets high in fat and refined carbohydrates. The nutrition and health situations in developing countries have been exemplified by nutrient deficiencies, such as protein-energy malnutrition, iron deficiency anemia, vitamin A deficiency, and iodine deficiency, in addition to periodic famine and high prevalence of infectious diseases. In contrast, over the past 100 years nutrition-related non-communicable diseases (obesity, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, some types of cancer) have mainly been a challenge in Western industrialized countries. However, today changes in work patterns, lifestyles, and food systems (e.g., global availability of cheap vegetable oils and fats) are contributing to an increase in non-communicable diseases also in developing countries, particularly countries in rapid economic transition. As a result these countries are facing a growing risk of a double burden: the persisting problem of undernutrition plus the rising prevalence of obesity (Drewnowski & Popkin, 1997; Popkin, 2002).

The relationships of food, nutrition, society, and culture are highly relevant for population health and welfare. Food is integrated into all aspects of life, and is, therefore, also studied in a wide range of disciplines. In nutritional sciences food is mainly viewed in terms of its nutrient composition and effects upon the body's metabolic processes and health status. There has been a special interest in developing methods for measuring nutrient intake and defining essential, adequate, and optimal intakes of nutrients. Anthropological perspectives, which are broad and holistic, tend to look at food and nutrition in populations as complex systems influenced by many factors, including the environment, genetic inheritance, culture, and socioeconomic circumstances. Anthropological research on food and nutrition examines the origin, development, and diversity of the human diet and tries to understand how and what people in different cultures and contexts eat. Food is often viewed as a system of communication; it conveys meanings and social relations. Cultures distinguish themselves from one another in part through their different eating habits, manners, and conceptions of eating. Class, gender, age, and ethnic distinctions are also manifested through food practices and rules about eating.

Food and nutrition within anthropology is a diverse field, which broadly can be divided into two groups based on the main focus: nutritional anthropology and anthropology of food. Nutritional anthropology is a subfield of medical anthropology in which nutritional implications of food intake, food as carrier of nutrients, nutritional status, human growth, and health are the focus. Studies in nutritional anthropology draw on theories and methods from both biological and social sciences. In contrast, anthropology of food focuses on the cultural and social significance of food and eating. Food is studied as a way of understanding social and cultural processes and to reveal symbolic structures. For example, anthropologists have examined the reasons why only a limited selection of all that is theoretically edible in a culture is actually consumed as food and how individuals learn culturally defined rules of what and how to eat. A number of authors have undertaken reviews of the most significant perspectives in anthropology and sociology of food (e.g., Beardsworth & Keil, 1997; Caplan, 1994; Murcott, 1988). Classic pieces by Claude Levi-Strauss and Mary Douglas in addition to more recent anthropological texts from social, symbolic, and political–economic perspectives have been collected into a reader on food and culture (Counihan & Van Esterik, 1997). In addition to anthropology of food and nutritional anthropology, a third subfield, food systems and food policy studies, has been suggested (Pelto, 1996). Food systems research focuses on the linkages between economic and social policy and food production and distribution, as well as food and nutrition policy implementation and program evaluation.

The objective of this entry is to provide an overview of the anthropological literature on nutrition and health. Because nutritional anthropology is the most

#### **Theoretical Orientations and Methods in Nutritional Anthropology 179**

health-oriented subfield of food and nutrition within anthropology, the focus will be on nutritional anthropology. This entry has three goals. First, to describe briefly the history of nutritional anthropology. Second, to present the main theoretical orientations and methods used in nutritional anthropology. Finally, to provide examples of themes that have occupied nutritional anthropologists.

## **HISTORY OF NUTRITIONAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

The early history of nutritional anthropology dates back to studies of food and social organization in non-industrial societies in the 1930s. The British anthropologist Audrey Richards (1939) is often described as the first one who explicitly focused on food. She studied economic and social factors affecting food among the Bemba in central Africa. Her work was part of the British applied anthropology movement, which was associated with colonial governance and welfare.

In the 1940s, studies of nutrition and the culture of eating were stimulated by the circumstances related to World War II. Committees that included anthropologists and nutritionists were set up in the United States and the United Kingdom to plan food rationing and to ensure adequate nutrition for the troops and support personnel. The U.S. Committee on Food Habits was directed by a well-known anthropologist, Margaret Mead (Wilson, 2002). Between 1950 and 1970 food- and nutritionrelated themes were included in some anthropological studies, but nutrition was not in generally a central focus of anthropological study.

In the 1970s food and nutrition within anthropology was revived as nutritional anthropology in the United States. Pelto (1986) traces the development of the field to four social forces: the world energy and food crisis in the early 1970s; growing interest in the role of nutrition in health and diseases; the emergence of ethnicity as a social and political phenomenon; and an interest in gourmet food and cooking in affluent societies. The rise of cultural ecology as a theoretical perspective in anthropology was also central to the development of nutritional anthropology. The American Anthropological Association organized sessions on the biocultural perspective of nutrition in response to the increased interest in the 1970s and this resulted in a widely used publication (Jerome, Kandel, & Pelto, 1980). The Committee on Nutritional Anthropology was established in 1974 as a special interest group within the Society for Medical Anthropology. The committee became the Council on Nutritional Anthropology (CNA), which has been a separate unit of the American Anthropological Association since 1987. There has been and still is a broad diversity of interests within the group ranging from theory to application.

# **THEORETICAL ORIENTATIONS AND METHODS IN NUTRITIONAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

As with other fields of anthropology a wide variety of theoretical perspectives and methods are used in nutritional anthropology. A range of ecological, symbolic, materialist, and political perspectives has been used to explain patterns of food selection, nutritional consequences, and the relationships of nutrition to sociocultural, economic, and ecological processes.

What foods people eat and how much they eat are determined not simply by physiological needs, but also by political and ecological factors that determine the availability of food, and cultural factors that shape the acceptability and preparation of food. Therefore, it is not surprising that the biocultural approach has been widely used in nutritional anthropology. This is also reflected in the title of a recent edited volume on nutritional anthropology *Nutritional Anthropology: Biocultural Perspectives on Food and Nutrition* (Goodman, Dufour, & Pelto, 2000). Evolution and adaptation are central theoretical concepts in the biocultural or ecological approaches. Biological anthropologists have tried to assess the role of nutrition in human evolution and adaptation to different physical environments and climates. They have attempted to understand subsistence patterns and nutrition, population differences in nutrient utilization, and the evolution of favorable nutritional patterns, cooking methods, and dietary preferences. Focus on energy flow and the systems framework have given rise to studies on the problems of the food system, including inadequacies in the food supply or specific nutrient deficits (Haas & Harrison, 1977). However, the ecological approach has been criticized for ignoring political and economic factors and, as a consequence, political economy has more recently been given increased attention (Himmelgreen, 2002).

Pelto (1996) has provided a framework for organizing nutritional anthropology research. She has grouped research questions in nutritional anthropology into the following main headings: (1) sociocultural processes and nutrition; (2) social epidemiology of nutrition; (3) belief structures and nutrition; and (4) physiological adaptation, population genetics, and nutrition. Nutritional anthropological research on sociocultural processes and nutrition examines the nutritional consequences of social and cultural forces. The basic question is: What is the impact of sociocultural processes on nutrition? Sociocultural processes refer to both long-term and short-term evolutionary changes, such as transformation of subsistence from hunting–gathering to agriculture, the introduction of new technologies, modernization, or migration from rural to urban areas. In studies classified as the social epidemiology of nutrition the central issue is the identification of the determinants of, or the factors associated with, food intake and nutritional status. The emphasis is on the nutritional condition, and anthropologists aim to recognize the role of social factors in the etiology of that condition. For example, they have studied the factors that determine malnutrition or deficient levels of intakes of specific nutrients. Some of the nutritional anthropology research focuses on the relationships between cultural beliefs and nutritional outcomes. By examining the links between cultural idea systems (e.g., the humoral medicine system of hot/cold beliefs or modern rational models of diet) and nutrient intake, the strengths and weaknesses of dietary systems can be assessed and sociocultural barriers to change and potential avenues for facilitating improvement in dietary practices can be revealed. The group of studies labeled physiological adaptation, population genetics, and nutrition include research that addresses how the nutritional history of a population has formed or affected its physiological or genetic characteristics (e.g., low birth weight, growth, obesity). For example, nutritional anthropologists have studied the differences in the capacity to maintain production of lactase, an enzyme required for the digestion of milk, beyond early childhood from one population to another.

A considerable part of the work in nutritional anthropology is applied in nature; anthropological theories and methods are used to understand and improve specific nutritional problems and alleviate malnutrition. In the 1940s, work focused on solving the nutritional problems of feeding the army and populations during war. Since the 1970s a growing number of anthropologists have participated in the planning, implementation, and evaluation of nutrition and health programs and policies. For example, anthropologists have played a part in identifying the social and cultural variables that have the greatest impact on nutrition and health. In the 1990s anthropology moved from critique to greater involvement in action, and this can also be seen in applied nutritional anthropology (Pelto, 2000).

When the research problem, ethnographic context, and theoretical orientation are set, an appropriate methodology is selected. Over recent years, flexible and eclectic combinations of theoretical approaches and methods have become more common. Nutritional anthropologists utilize a wide variety of data-collection methods drawn from anthropology as well as from the nutritional sciences. Special training manuals and guides provide assistance on methodological issues for nutritional anthropologists (Pelto, Pelto, & Messer, 1989; Quandt & Ritenbaugh, 1986). To understand nutritional problems, anthropologists tend to examine the problems at several levels: the individual, the household, the society, and the region. The unit of data collection is often the individual, but the primary focus has traditionally been the community.

Often more than one technique is used; qualitative and quantitative methods are combined in a holistic approach. Dietary intake usually is measured by food record methods (weighed or estimated) and food recall methods (diet history, food frequency, 24-hour food recall). An individual's nutritional status is measured using anthropometric methods (measurements of the human biology, such as height, weight, and skin folds), energy expenditure, and growth. For example, measures of childhood growth and development are used to reflect the biological consequences of nutritional intake.

Data on cultural practices and rules related to diet and nutrition are collected by anthropological methods, including traditional fieldwork, archival research and the use of observational techniques, interview techniques, and written respondent records (questionnaires, diaries). Anthropologists have participated in the development of improved methods to measure food and nutrition-related variables, and tools and manuals for rapid or focused ethnographic investigation and assessment have also been developed (Pelto, 2000). However, it is important to consider that rapid assessments may provide only a limited understanding of a problem and may not be the best choice of method in studying some complex problems, such as malnutrition (Dettwyler, 1998).

## **THEMES IN NUTRITIONAL ANTHROPOLOGY**

The anthropological literature on nutrition- and healthrelated issues has become vast over the last decades and it also has a broad geographic spread. Nutritional anthropologists have covered a wide variety of topics, ranging from nutritional adequacy in prehistoric populations to various forms of malnutrition in late modernity. The different types of malnutrition studies include proteincalorie malnutrition, micronutrient malnutrition, and overnutrition. Next, two themes have been selected to illustrate some of the variation in nutritional anthropology research and the contribution of anthropology to advancing our understanding of nutrition and health: (1) hunger and malnutrition in low-income countries, and (2) the possible effects of our nutritious past on human health and well-being today.

### **Hunger and Malnutrition in Low-income Countries**

The production and distribution of adequate food is a serious health problem facing the world's population. The concept of food insecurity is often used to describe the limited or uncertain access to nutritionally adequate and safe foods for households and individuals. Hunger and food insecurity are highly relevant problems for health policies and intervention programs because malnutrition has functional consequences both at the individual and societal levels. Women and young children represent a large section of the chronically undernourished and are especially vulnerable groups.

Anthropological research on hunger and malnutrition indicates strong links between low household income and undernutrition, but it is evident that most of the malnutrition in low-income populations does not have one single cause. Research has suggested complex relationships between nutritional status and a wide variety of macro-level and micro-level factors, such as agricultural production, economic strategies, women's roles and time allocation, nature of local diet, food availability, intrahousehold allocation of food, breast-feeding, weaning practices, sanitation, and infections. Therefore, there are no easy solutions and strategies for preventing malnutrition and hunger; programs to improve health need to address the various causes of malnutrition.

The first two years of a child's life is the time of rapid growth and the nutrient requirements are therefore great. Good growth is an indicator of good health in children, and stunting and wasting are measures of lack of adequate food in childhood. Stunting often occurs in association with the weaning period. The question Is being short a sign of unhealthiness? caused a debate in the 1980s. David Seckler, an economist, proposed a "small but healthy" hypothesis, namely that a short but not thin child or a stunted but not wasted child is healthy. According to Seckler only those children who show clinical signs of malnutrition are malnourished. If the "small but healthy" hypothesis were true, the prevalence of malnutrition would be smaller, and this would have political implications. However, the hypothesis was heavily criticized and others showed that the process of stunting is not healthy. Research has shown that child growth deficits and deficiencies of iodine or vitamin A may have permanent effects on cognitive development and work capacity in adulthood (Martorell, 1998).

Today Sub-Saharan Africa is among the poorest regions in the world. Dettwyler (1994, 1998) studied child malnutrition in Mali in the 1980s, a country with very high rates of child malnutrition and mortality. She applied a biocultural approach and used both anthropometric measurements and sociocultural ethnographic data (e.g., socioeconomic status, cultural infant/child feeding practices, and beliefs) to study the relationships between growth and development of children and the sociocultural environment in Mali. The data indicated that the relationship between socioeconomic status and malnutrition is not simple; some children from relatively poor families grew well while some children from relatively well-off families grew poorly. Dettwyler's research suggested that growth status was not just a consequence of dietary quantity or quality but resulted from the interaction of a number of complex biological, social, and cultural factors, which also have to be considered. Local agricultural production and the marketing of food were central factors, but in addition cultural beliefs and rules led to the late introduction of solid food to children in Mali and feeding those in the household who had to work was prioritized.

Nutritional anthropologists have been interested in understanding the role of domestic life or intra-household processes in explaining variations in diet, nutrition, and health found within groups and households (Messer, 1997; Sharman, Theophano, Curtis, & Messer, 1991). Interrelationships between several factors, such as cultural beliefs and practices, a shift to a market economy, women's work, time allocation, cash income, child care, and dietary planning in specific ecological and economic settings have been studied. Anthropological research can help to predict or identify the nutritionally vulnerable within households and help others design more effective interventions. Messer (1997) compared ethnographic studies in India, Nepal, Madagascar, Mexico, and Peru for an analysis of intra-household allocation of food and health care. Her aim was to clarify the cultural, economic, and biological factors that contribute to discrimination or neglect based on gender and age within households. The studies included in the analysis indicated non-egalitarian allocation of food within the household. However, according to Messer, the data suggest that there is no intent to discriminate, but culturally prescribed rules may have a negative impact on nutritional outcome. Allocation rules seemed to mainly aim toward "household maximization"; those members who were perceived to be more active (often male income-earners) were generally perceived to have greater nutritional needs. Messer concluded that household food security might not be a good predictor of adequate individual intake, especially among children and women.

Baer (1998) studied social factors related to malnutrition among Cacti households in Sonora in northwestern Mexico, which is an area of contrast between old and new and with unexpectedly high rates of stunted, malnourished children. Data were collected through a combination of qualitative methods (ethnographic and archival research) and quantitative analyses of income, diet, and nutritional status. The study suggests that income level does not explain differences in the quantity and quality of foods consumed in households, but that the "invisible variable of available income," the amount of money actually available to those responsible for household expenditures, may be important in understanding dietary patterns. Available income incorporates the effects of several social and cultural variables (e.g., rural to urban migration, ethnicity, prestige, women's roles) on the amount and allocation of available income. Baer shows that households with similar available incomes may differ in their food expenditures and consumption due to context and culturally acceptable ways of allocation of available income. She underlines the relevance of identifying the social and cultural variables that have the greatest effects on available income in a particular area in developing food policy and intervention programs.

#### **182 Nutrition and Health**

Anthropologists have studied development policy and food policy issues related to food production, supply, distribution, and consumption. Changes in traditional food production and distribution in the developing countries have resulted in decreases in the diversity of available foods, nutritional status, and food security in general. For example, the effects of agricultural commercialization (increasing production of cash crops, i.e. crops produced to be sold for cash) on food consumption and nutritional status have been examined (DeWalt, 1993). Kathleen DeWalt reviewed 14 studies of the impact of commercialization conducted at the micro level in various locations (e.g., Kenya, Swaziland, Guatemala, Mexico, Philippines) in the late 1980s. The review shows that impacts vary because they depend on a mix of "intervening" variables, such as the nature of the crop, the control of production and income, allocation of household labor, land tenure, and pricing policies for cash crops and foods. These intervening variables have more effect than crop choice on the nutritional status of rural people. DeWalt suggests that policies and programs that focus on the most vulnerable population instead of commercialization are more likely to have a positive effect on food security and nutritional status.

Nutritional anthropologists have especially contributed to our understanding of malnutrition by addressing and showing the importance of the underlying conditions of nutritional risk and by providing descriptions of economic and cultural factors and processes that influence malnutrition.

### **Our Nutritious Past and Today's Health**

The major diseases and health problems affecting people in the modern world, such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, obesity, diabetes, and some forms of cancer, are related to diet. This implies that present-day Western dietary habits, characterized by high intakes of fat and low intakes of fiber, may have a role in causing modern health problems. It has been suggested that humans may not be well adapted to eating dairy products and grains because we have lived as hunter–gatherers for almost all of our history. It was approximately 12,000 years ago that the first human populations shifted to agriculture. Some have proposed that contemporary human health could be improved if we were to imitate our hunter–gatherer ancestors' diets. In the food and nutrition literature there is currently considerable interest in

#### **References 183**

exploring what our ancestors' nutrition might mean for our health and if our bodies' physiology and genes are suited for the contemporary patterns of diet and activity (Kiple, 2000).

Nutritional anthropologists have developed biocultural evolutionary models that offer holistic explanations for the interaction of genes and culture in an evolutionary context. They have described what our prehistoric ancestors may have eaten based on archeological skeletal remains and through cross-cultural comparison of what currently living hunter–gatherer populations eat. For example, diet and activity patterns of !Kung San modernday hunter–gatherers who live in the Kalahari Desert in southern Africa have been studied. They consume mostly plants (approximately 70%–80% of the food by weight), have high levels of physical fitness, low blood-cholesterol levels, and adequate and well-balanced nutrition. Stone age diets have been estimated to have consisted of wild game meat and wild plants. Compared with modern diets in industrialized societies they probably included more protein and dietary fiber and less fat (Eaton & Konner, 1985; Eaton, Shostak, & Konner, 1998).

Food shortages have been common in human prehistory and history. Nutrition was often a matter of feast and famine, and, therefore, those individuals who during times of feasting were able to store energy reserves in the form of fat to survive famines would have enjoyed a considerable survival advantage over those who did not have this capacity. But today this genetic adaptation for coping with a very small supply of nutritional glucose is blamed for causing health problems. The "thrifty genotype" was introduced in the 1960s by the geneticist James Neel and has since been debated. In the 1980s anthropologists demonstrated the lack of fit between the "thriftiness" of the glucose metabolism system and a diet characterized by a lot of carbohydrates. This was identified as a "New World Syndrome." Studies of Native Americans, Australian Aborigines, Pacific islanders, and Alaskan Eskimos have reported higher rates of type II diabetes and obesity when traditional diets and patterns of physical activity have changed (Ritenbaugh & Goodby, 1998).

Obesity is an increasing problem in low-income countries. Both genes and lifestyle are involved in the etiology of obesity. Most research on obesity has focused on medical issues, but it is also a focus of anthropological, sociological, and psychological approaches. An anthropological approach to obesity involves both an evolutionary and a cross-cultural dimension. Brown and Konner (1998) argue that traits that cause obesity were selected because they improved the chances of survival and that fatness may have been directly selected because it is a cultural symbol of social prestige and reflects general health.

Nutritional anthropologists have demonstrated the complexity of eating worldwide, and the relevance of context and cultural and social factors on nutrition and health. They tend to view nutritional health as shaped by the interaction of social and biological forces operating in different physical environments.

### **REFERENCES**

- Baer, R. D. (1998). *Cooking—and coping—among the Cacti: Diet, nutrition and available income in northwestern Mexico*. Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach.
- Beardsworth, A., & Keil, T. (1997). *Sociology on the menu: An invitation to the study of food and society*. London & New York: Routledge.
- Brown, P. J., & Konner, M. (1998). An anthropological perspective on obesity. In P.J. Brown (Ed.), *Understanding and applying medical anthropology* (pp. 401–413). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Caplan, P. (1994). *Feasts, fasts, famine: Food for thought* (Berg Occasional Papers in Anthropology, No. 2). Berg Publishers Ltd: Oxford, UK.
- Counihan, C., & Van Esterik, P. (Eds.). (1997). *Food and culture: A reader*. New York & London: Routledge.
- Dettwyler, K. A. (1994). *Dancing skeletons: Life and death in West Africa*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Dettwyler, K. A. (1998). The biocultural approach in nutritional anthropology: Case studies of malnutrition in Mali. In P. J. Brown (Ed.), *Understanding and applying medical anthropology* (pp. 389–401). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- DeWalt, K. M. (1993). Nutrition and the commercialization of agriculture: Ten years later. *Social Science & Medicine, 36*, 1407–1416.
- Drewnowski, A., & Popkin, B. M. (1997). The nutrition transition: New trends in the global diet. *Nutrition Reviews, 55*, 31–43.
- Eaton, S. B., & Konner, M. (1985). Paleolithic nutrition: A consideration of its nature and current implications. *New England Journal of Medicine, 312*, 283–289.
- Eaton, S. B., Shostak, M., & Konner, M. (1998). Stone agers in the fast lane: Chronic degenerative diseases in evolutionary perspective. In P. J. Brown (Ed.), *Understanding and applying medical anthropology* (pp. 21–33). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Goodman, A. H., Dufour, D. L., & Pelto, G. H. (Eds.). (2000). *Nutritional anthropology: Biocultural perspectives on food and nutrition*. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Haas, J. D., & Harrison, G. G. (1977). Nutritional anthropology and biological adaptation. *Annual Review of Anthropology, 6*, 69–101.
- Himmelgreen, D. A. (2002). "You are what you eat and you eat what you are": The role of nutritional anthropology in public health nutrition and health education. *Nutritional Anthropology, 25*, 2–12.