remains are subsequently exhumed and cremated—to prevent similar misfortune befalling kin. These beliefs are no longer widespread. There is usually no change to the living arrangements of the remaining spouse with the existing kin.

### **REFERENCES**

- Amara Pongsapich et al. (2001). Current status of civil society organizations in health sector in Thailand, unpublished report, Social Research Institute, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok.
- Bamber, Scott. nd. *Lom*: A term in association with Illness in traditional Thai medicine, unpublished paper.
- Chantaphen Chupraphawan et al. (1995). *Health survey of Thai over 50 years of age* (in Thai). Bangkok: Health Research Institute.
- Cohen, Paul. (1989). The politics of primary health care in Thailand, with special reference to nongovernment organizations. In P. Cohen & J. Purcal (Eds.), *The political economy of primary health care in southeast asia* (pp. 159–176). Canberra: Australian Development Studies Network.
- Gray, Alan., & Sureeporn, Punpuing. (1999). *Gender, sexuality and reproductive health in Thailand*. Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Guest, Philip., & Tan, Jooean. (1994). *Transformation of marriage patterns in Thailand*, Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Hanks, Jane. (1963). *Maternity and its Rituals in Bang Chan*. New York: Cornell University Press.
- Komatra, Chuengsatiensup et al. (2000). Community drug use in Thailand, unpublished report, Faculty of Pharmacy, Chiang Mai University.
- Kritiya, Archawanichakul et al. (2001). Domestic violence against women: The scale of the problem, its impact and solutions, (in Thai). Research Report, Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Lyttleton, Chris. (1996). Health and development: Knowledge systems and local practice, *Health Transition Review, 6*, 25–48.

- Medhi, Krongkaew. (1992). The reawakening of the Thai economy, paper presented at the Thailand Update Conference, Sydney 16 October.
- Ministry of Public Health (MOPH). (1999). *Health Situation 1997–1998* (in Thai). Bangkok: Ministry of Public Health (English version at http://eng.moph.go.th).
- Mulholland, Jean. (1979). Thai traditional medicine—The treatment of diseases caused by the Tridosa. *The Southeast Asian Review, 3*(2), 29–38.
- Osborne, Milton. (1995). *Southeast Asia: An introductory history*. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books.
- Pasuk Pongpaichit., & Baker, Chris. (1996). *Thailand's boom*. Chiang Mai: SilkwormBooks.
- Pimpawun Boonmongkon et al. (2000). *Thai adolescent sexuality and reproduction: Implications for developing adolescent's health programs in thailand*. Center For Health Policy Studies, Mahidol University, Thailand.
- Pramote, Prasartkul. (1998). Population projection for development planning of Thai children. *Family Planning and Population*, *2*(1), 1–4.
- Tangcharoensathien, Viroj et al. (2000). Health impacts of rapid economic changes in Thailand. *Social Science and Medicine, 51*, 789–807.
- UNDCP. (2001). 'Global Illicit Drug Trends 2001'. Available online at, htttp://www.undcp.org
- UNDP (2003). Thailand Human Development Report 2003. Bangkok: UNDP.
- Van Griensven, F. et al. (1998). *The use of mortality statistics as a proxy indicator for the impact of the AIDS epidemic on the Thai population.* Bangkok: Institute of Population Studies, Chulalongkorn University.
- Vichai, Poshyachinda et al. (2001, October, 3–6). The future outlook of HIV infection among substance abuse population in Thailand. Paper presented at the 6th International Conference on AIDS in Asia and the Pacific, Melbourne.
- World Bank. (2000). Thailand's response to AIDS: Building on the success, confronting the future, (unpublished report), *Thailand Social Monitor V* World Bank: Bangkok.
- Wyatt, David. (1982). *Thailand: A short history*. New Haven: Yale University Press.

# **Tongans**

#### **Barbara Burns McGrath**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Tongans originate from the Kingdom of Tonga, formerly known as "The Friendly Islands." Due to out-migration, there are more Tongans living overseas than within the country, primarily settling in New Zealand, Australia, and the United States. Outside of Tonga, Tongans are included under the more general category of Polynesian or Pacific Islander.

### **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Kingdom of Tonga is made up of 170 small islands, approximately 40 of which are inhabited. These are spread over 700,000 sq km of the South Pacific about two third the way from Hawai'i to New Zealand. They are characterized as high islands formed by geologically recent volcanic activity, and low coral limestone atolls. The climate is sub-tropical with temperate weather and

#### **Overview of the Culture 981**

high humidity. Rainfall is moderate and regular so that most crops are planted and harvested throughout the year. Cyclones and hurricanes occur every few years, and can result in extensive damage to buildings and crops. Tongan is in the Proto-Polynesian branch of the Austronesian language family. Tongan and English are the main languages spoken. The literacy rate in Tonga is 98%.

### **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Tonga is a relatively homogenous society (most of its population of approximately 105,000 are Polynesian) with a highly stratified social structure headed by the monarch at the national level, and by chiefs and chiefly lineages at the local level (Marcus, 1978). The first ruler, Tu'i Tonga reigned during the late 9th century. He was the son of Tangaloa, the god of the sky, and Va'epopua, an earthly mother. Succeeding holders of the title of Tu'i Tonga descend from Tangaloa and form the top of the pyramidshaped social organization, the base of which is made up of commoners. In 1643, the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman noted the long-established peace and stability of the islands, which he felt were due to the system of reciprocal relations that existed between the chiefs and commoners. In 1845, Tupou I united the islands that were ruled by a number of competing chiefdoms (Campbell, 2001; Latwkefu, 1974).

Much of the early history of Tonga is recorded in oral tradition with genealogies providing a chronology of events. They continue to be used to evaluate rank, seniority, and status, and are called upon to mediate disputes involving land allocation and title succession (Herda, 1990). Poetry and dance are another means used to record both culture and history. These often link events to specific localities of the Tongan landscape emphasizing the connection between the people and their environment. This ecology-centered concept of culture and history (*tala-e-fonua)* is being explored by contemporary Tongan scholars to examine past events from a new perspective (Hau'ofa, 2000; Mahina, 1993).

Despite a long history of European contact, Tonga is the only island group in the Pacific to avoid colonization. It became a constitutional monarchy in 1875 and a British protectorate in 1900. Tonga acquired its independence in 1970 and became a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. The government reflects the hierarchical social structure with decisions being made primarily by the monarch (King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV), the nobility, and a few prominent representatives of the commoners. Calls for constitutional change and government reform began in the 1970s and 1980s and coincided with increased efforts at economic development in Tonga. The 1987 general election is considered a turning point in modern political history with the addition of new representatives who then spawned a pro-democracy movement (Campbell, 1994). This political movement is challenging traditional assumptions about power and rank, and subsequently having far reaching consequences in the country beyond the political system.

Missionary influence, beginning in 19th century, was very successful with the result that today Tonga is a strongly Christian nation. The major religions are Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga, Catholic, Free Church of Tonga, Anglican, and Seventh-Day Adventists. More recently, The Church of the Latter-Day Saints has been growing in popularity with 46,000 members, giving Tonga the distinction of having the highest percentage of Mormons of any country in the World.

The economy is based on the cultivation of tropical and semitropical crops including squash, coconuts, bananas, and vanilla beans. Agricultural exports make up two third of total exports. Demand for imported food (primarily from New Zealand) and manufactured goods and products that are unavailable locally have resulted in a sizeable trade deficit. Overseas aid and remittances from Tongans living abroad are critical aspects of the economy, and in turn have great influence on the affairs within the country.

The *'api* or household is the basic unit of the society. *Kainga* is another important unit, and describes extended family, or in some cases, those persons loyal to a particular chief (James, 1990). Mutual support with formalized obligations and privileges are realized within *ka-inga* social relations. Considerations of rank and status affect daily life and are organized along a strict hierarchy. Although the father is the head of the household (*'ulomotua*), sisters have higher status than brothers, with the father's eldest sister (*mehekitanga*) having great power within a family (Rogers, 1977). Other factors such as birth order, age, and mother's personal rank determine an individual's rank in relation to another person. Both religion and kinship determine the rank of chiefs (Campbell, 2001). Prestige that was dependent on birthright and rank in the past is now also available to those who are able to achieve individual success such as with an advanced college degree, a job with high status, or personal wealth.

Adoption and fosterage among kin is very common and parents who give up their children (perhaps to a childless relative) are looked upon as generous. Migration has had a more recent effect on adoption practices in Tonga with children living overseas being sent back to Tonga to live with relatives for varying lengths of time (Gailey, 1992; James, 1991). It may be a temporary solution until the parents have established a stable home, or an arrangement for children to live with relatives for a few years as a way to ensure that they learn Tongan ways and proper behavior. In other cases, if the child is doing poorly or in trouble with the law in the new home, he or she is sent back to Tonga in hopes that the family, often the grandparents, can exert some control over the child.

Tongans are highly mobile and have a long history of travel, both sea-faring voyages and for more permanent settlement. Today there is a pattern of kin based migration resulting in a very transnational population of Tongans. These diaspora communities have an impact on affairs in Tonga because, in addition to sustaining the economy through their remittances, they are a conduit for new ideas and practices from the outside. Because of the Internet, communication among all the diaspora communities and Tonga is very free flowing. Most of the web sites have chat rooms where dialogue and gossip can occur.

In Tonga, as in most places around the world, globalization is viewed with mixed feelings. There is popular appreciation and pride for the fact that certain cultural values and traditions are key to Tongan identity (love, respect, sharing, etc.). This is accompanied by explicit efforts to retain these aspects of the culture, and reflected in slogans or tourist marketing schemes that proclaim Tonga as the most traditional island in Polynesia. At the same time, participation in a global economy and having access to some of the benefits (material and nonmaterial) of modernization are also desired (ease of travel, health care, etc.). Some changes are being welcomed, but there are also unintended consequences that are cause for concern (alcoholism, suicide, unemployment).

## **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

The health care system of Tonga may be characterized as a medical pluralism with coexisting paradigms. It

includes more than one medical ideology and more than one system of services so that an individual has a choice of receiving care from a traditional Tongan healer (*faito'o fakatonga*), or a physician or registered nurse who has been trained and who practices within the biomedical tradition. There is a range in attitudes toward biomedicine and traditional practices with some families relying on a single system. Most however, use both approaches when treating illness or seeking health. Health is not simply the absence of disease, but also includes having a good life, being lucky or fortunate, and being satisfied that you are fulfilling duties to God, your country, and family. Health includes all of these states, and illness strikes when any one is out of balance.

William Mariner is a popular source of information regarding healing practices of early Tonga (Mariner & Martin, 1981). In 1806 he was aboard an English ship that was attacked and burned. Mariner's life was spared and during his four years in Tonga he recorded his observations of healing practices, including the skill used in performing operations, such as removing an arrow point lodged in a man's lung, and in setting broken bones. Historical accounts, together with interviews conducted in the first part of this century (Beaglehole & Beaglehole, 1941; Bott, Salote, & Tavi, 1982; Collocott, 1923; Ferdon, 1987; Gifford, 1929) create a picture of healing among the chiefly class in early Tonga with the supernatural at the center of the medical paradigm. In order for a cure to be successful, the god or the spirit of a deceased ancestor who was causing the trouble had to be appeased. This was done with sacrifice and invocation. Tongans had a reputation with the other islanders in the Pacific as being also knowledgeable about herbs and internal remedies (Macpherson & Macpherson, 1990). In 1990, it was estimated that there were over 200 healers practicing on the main island of Tongatapu.

The more recent history of biomedicine is intimately tied to the history of Christianity in Tonga, as it is in much of the Pacific. Missionaries quickly learned that villagers who would not attend church for a sermon, traveled great distances for medicines, and the dispensary was soon part of the mission structure (Latwkefu, 1974). Although it is unlikely that missionary medical treatments of the time were any more effective than what was being practiced, they did offer an alternative (Shineberg, 1978).

Today there are two hospitals in Tonga with outpatient departments, dozens of public health clinics, and a few private physicians who practice primarily in the capital,

#### **Medical Practitioners 983**

Nuku'alofa. Health care that is provided at a government facility is free for all citizens and administered by the Ministry of Health. Patients are often referred to New Zealand for medical care that is unavailable in Tonga. The leading causes of death are cardiovascular, neoplasm, diabetes and related conditions, respiratory, and hypertensive conditions. Life expectancy is 68 years.

### **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Health care providers in Tonga may be divided roughly into two types: traditional healers (*faito'o fakatonga*) who prescribe herbal cures, set bones, and use therapeutic massage, and biomedical practitioners (physicians and registered nurses) who are located in the hospitals and clinics.

#### **Traditional Healers**

Both men and women can be healers, though there appear to be more women. Entry into the profession varies, but most individuals are young adults when they begin to practice. Recruitment is informal with a tendency to choose a relative. The person who is selected may be one who showed an early interest or aptitude, or one the healer decides is appropriate to receive the skill. When it is time for a healer to retire, he or she will transfer the knowledge and skill to the successor. This ritual has a name, *fanofano*, but may be as simple a saying a few words, "I give you my *faito'o.*" Other healers learn of their ability by accident or are told about it in a dream. If they are able to effect cures in people previously labeled as incurable, they are described as having *mana.* Healers live ordinary lives, receiving minimal material benefits. They receive gifts from patients, but these are more tokens of gratitude than payment. These can be as small as a few cigarettes or as valuable as woven mats or bark cloth for a particularly impressive cure. During the treatment, *kava* or food is often shared. Because the healer is merely the *vaka* ("vessel") for the healing power of God, abuse of this divine gift will result in the healer losing the ability to cure. The sins of greed or pride put the healer at risk for possession by the very spirit being fought (Cowling, 1990).

Healers tend to be specialists, not general practitioners, and those who claim to have cure-alls have little credibility (Parsons, 1985). As in the past, infusions and poultices made from herbs, leaves and bark are prescribed. New ones are always being added to the pharmacoepia, and in 1992, a botanist collected information on 77 that are commonly known for their curative properties (Whistler, 1992). The art of massage is practiced throughout Polynesia for a variety of external and internal ailments. Other specialties include pediatrics, midwifery, setting bones, and treating spirit possession.

#### **Biomedical Practitioners**

Following the influenza epidemic of 1918 that took the lives of 8% of the population, Queen Salote established a Department of Health with free medical care for all. Most practitioners studied medicine in Fiji, and later in Samoa (Wood-Ellem, 2001). Today there are approximately 70 physicians, most of whom trained in Fiji, New Zealand, or Australia, and 340 nurses (Young Leslie, personal communication, 2002). Nurses attend the nursing school in Tonga for their basic education and study abroad for advanced training.

The oldest and largest hospital is on the main island of Tongatapu with 200 beds, running at 50–60% occupancy. The average adult duration of stay is 10.1 days. The reasons for hospitalization match the recorded leading causes of mortality in Tonga: diseases of the circulatory system, neoplasm, intestinal infectious disease, respiratory disease, and digestive disease.

When a person is admitted to the hospital, it is assumed that a relative will be available for personal care such as bathing and feeding. The caretakers of the patients create an informal system within the institution. Physicians and nurses receive respect as individuals who have gifts for healing, however, many people view the hospital with a mixture of relief and fear. Relief that Tonga now has a modern facility to care for its citizens, and fear because it seems that everyone who is admitted dies there. The hospital is referred to as *fale mahaki*, house of sickness. The medical response to the fear of death is that statistics do not confirm this perception, but what does happen is that people wait so long before coming in that it is too late to save them, and the mortality rates are higher than they need be. For their part, health care workers express ambivalence toward traditional practice. One would be hard-pressed to find an individual who has not experienced the therapeutic effects of massage when skillfully administered, but traditional methods are also described as dangerous, and should not be 984

used in conjunction with biomedical therapeutics. Their use may also hinder a person from seeking medical care. This problem is being addressed in a very interesting public education campaign currently underway that is attempting to assist traditional healers make a differential diagnosis between spirit possession and schizophrenia in order to avoid the harmful delay of medical treatment for major psychotic disorders (Puloka, 1999).

## CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS

The concepts of mana and tapu are central to an understanding of health and illness. Mana refers to the degree to which objects and persons are endowed with supernatural powers. Having mana offers some protection against misfortune and bad luck, and it is the force that allows healers to act as a vessel for the healing power of God. Tapu is also a complex concept that combines a number of distinct notions (Radcliffe-Brown, 1952). Tapu is sacred, and describes a connection with the gods. It also describes those things that are forbidden or prohibited (the English word "taboo" is derived from this Tongan term). It is in this sense that the early Tongan chiefs and objects touched by them were tapu. These two dimensions of social control also have cosmic consequences, so that breaking a *tapu* or misusing *mana* may result in misfortune through the agency of spirits (Levy, 1973; Shore, 1989).

Illness is talked about in a number of different ways. One system distinguishes Western illnesses from indigenous ones. Conditions thought to be introduced by Europeans, or at least best treated with Western therapies, are mahaki faka Palangi ("European sickness"). The category mahaki fakatonga includes everything else (Parsons, 1985). Another classification that is used describes those misfortunes caused by "natural" events as *mahaki pe* or *puke pe* ("just sick"), as opposed to problems caused by spirits. The latter are *mahaki* (or *puke*) faka tevolo (McGrath, 2000).

The word *tevolo* is a complex term, most often glossed as "devil," but more accurately refers to ancestral and nameless spirits (the older term for tevolo is fa'ahikehe, "other side" (Ka'ili, personal communication, 2002). Puke faka tevolo implies supernatural agency. The cause of an illness is an action or behavior by the person, or someone in the family, that is offensive or disrespectful to God, an ancestral spirit, a chief, or to a superior on earth who is in a higher social position. In addition, failure to fulfill one's responsibility to family or church is implicated in cases of misfortune. Breaking a tapu leaves one open to punishment until forgiveness is requested and granted. In some cases even though forgiveness is given, the punishment will be a lethal illness. This does not negate the importance of correcting the wrong. If forgiveness is not granted, the punishment will be passed on to descendants and they will suffer for many generations. Spirit-caused illness is most often a result of improper behavior, but spirits also play tricks on people or act mischievously (McGrath, 2003). The actions of tevolo, and the way people use them, demonstrate their ambiguity and instrumentality. This allows for humorous explanations of the intentions of tevolo and offers the potential for human interpretation and deception (Poltorak, 2002). Sociopolitical purposes may also be served by tevolo. Mageo (1998) notes that in the Pacific, discourse on possession has a countercolonial aspect to it, as well being oppositional vis-à-vis Christianity.

While spirit-caused illness is not as common an ailment as in the past, every community has a healer who knows what to do, a faito'o faka tevolo. The treatment must not only cure the symptoms (with methods such as massage or herbal poultices), but deal with the cause of the trouble by first identifying the offended spirit, and then by righting the wrong. Prayers to God are often added to the therapy. A special case of spirit possession is āvanga, which seems to occur most often with young unmarried women. The person may act in ways that are considered socially improper, exhibit altered mental status, unusual strength, and increased sensory awareness (Gordon, 1996). Treatment provided by the *faito'o* faka'āuanga includes medicines as well as a discussion with the family concerning the cause.

There are certain conditions that are clearly spiritcaused, and going to a doctor will do little good, just as there are a number of conditions that can only be treated in the hospital (e.g., automobile accidents, tuberculosis). However, even in these situations, if the primary therapy is not progressing, there is some room for flexibility by adding alternative treatments as adjuncts. There is also movement between systems (going to see a healer or a physician) with the most common type of conditions, those described as *puke pe*. This category is used with a

wide variety of conditions that are self-limiting or seem to respond in a predictable manner to treatment.

There are a number of traditional interventions available when a person is *puke pe.* Massage is frequently used for a range of ailments, both internal and external. It can be done gently with the tips of the fingers, superficially with the whole hand, or deeply for underlying muscles. Bone fracture reduction is also done with massage. Some healers work with dry hands, other use water or coconut oil ("Tongan oil") as a lubricant. Tongan oil may also be used as the medium for herbal medicines. The plant parts used in healing are the leaves, leaf buds or young leaves, the inner bark or trees, and the root or rhizomes of ferns and ginger (Whistler, 1992). These are crushed and placed in a bottle of Tongan oil, or boiled in water, to drink, or to place on the skin as a poultice.

Disease categorization is of interest, but does not necessarily dictate treatment. There are a number of options available to a person who is sick, and illness is usually accompanied by much discussion with the result that diagnosis is most frequently made retrospectively what treatment worked defines the condition. Decisions about where to go for care then are based primarily on pragmatic factors. Even though the ideologies of biomedicine and traditional healing are very different, it is often practical considerations that determine where care will be sought. Family and friends' influence are important, as are past experiences with illness, and accessibility to care providers.

The official (government) position supports modern biomedicine, and encourages the best students to enter medical and nursing schools. There are also strong proponents in Tonga of the value of traditional methods, especially if they are used in a complementary manner with biomedical approaches. There has been a call for rigorous study of herbs so they can be standardized (Bloomfield, 1986; Finau, 1981) Tongan medicine is a common topic in the local newspaper, with interest in its survival. A concern is that many of the healers are getting old and their children seem uninterested in following in their footsteps.

Tonga, like other Pacific Island nations, is facing serious health problems as a result of changing diet and activity levels (Englberger, Halavatau, Yasuda, & Yamazaki, 1999; Evans, Sinclair, Fusimalohi, & Liava'a, 2001; Sinoue, 2000). The effects of "modernization" or "Western lifestyle" with a high-calorie diet and low physical activity lead to obesity-related conditions such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease (Crews & MacKeen, 1982). This is true in Tonga, where diabetes is so common, a Diabetes Centre was established in 1993 to focus and intensify efforts to prevent and treat the disease (Vivili, 'Eseta, Finau, & Lutui, 1999) and among Tongans living overseas who (along with other Polynesians) suffer disproportionately high rates of type 2 diabetes (Bathgate, Donnell, Mitikulena et al., 1994; Collins et al., 1994; Simmons, 1997).

Research from New Zealand suggests knowledge about the need for dietary change is widespread, but the changed behavior is difficult to achieve. In Polynesian cultures, the value of food is in its ability to preserve traditions and help develop the community's unique identity. Its social value is perceived to be greater than the health value, with certain foods having higher social values than others (i.e., imported food, or meat with high fat content) (Small, 1997). Food continues to be an important way social relations are managed between kin and neighbors as evidenced in the everyday greeting, "ha'u tau kai" come let us eat (Young Leslie, 2004).

Large bodies are a reflection of *mana* in the case of chiefs, but in general reflect personal and familial rank and power. Cultural role expectations also contribute to the high rates of obesity in women (39%). Value is placed on a large and motionless body so that women should remain still, indeed to stay seated whenever possible. Their prototypic forms of labor, such as beating tapa, weaving pandanus mats, washing clothes, and caring for children, is done sitting down. Schoolgirls participate in active sports, but for many, this stops as soon as they leave school and must begin to behave like proper adults (Tupoulahi, 1990; Young Leslie, 2004). Typically, men's lives include more physical activity such as working in the gardens or fishing. As more families engage in wage labor in the city, adopt a more sedentary lifestyle, and shift their diets to more convenient and available "fast foods," it can be assumed that diseases related to obesity will increase. Stress is thought to be another consequence of changing lifestyle. A study in Samoa using biomarkers to measure stress suggests that those adolescents who experience social status incongruity as a result of culture change also experience greater stress (McDade, 2002). A similar pattern may be assumed to exist in Tonga with nontraditional, Western ways of living often being at odds with long-standing practices, thus posing challenges for individuals who wish to participate in both (Foliaki, 1999).

### **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Gender relations in Tonga follow the pattern of much of Polynesia where women enjoy high status, yet men have greater power (Schoeffel, 1978; Tongamoa, 1988). Women are *fahu*, they have specific rights and certain privileges over their brother's children, maternal uncles and their children (Moengangongo, 1988). This status is usually exercised at social occasions, such as weddings or funerals. While sisters exercise a controlling power (*mana*) over their brothers, and are thus honored and served by them, as wives they are expected to serve their husbands and submit to their authority. Women's sexuality is viewed as under the control of her father and brothers, who keep a close eye on the young women of the family.

The topic of sexuality and reproductive health are considered to be very private, and it is *tapu* to talk about these things when brothers and sisters (biologic or classificatory) are together. When there is discussion about sex, it tends to be in the form of humor using metaphor and double entendre.

Gender liminal men in Tonga, or *faka leitW*, and their counterparts throughout Polynesia have a long tradition and are variously accepted into their communities. Besnier defines *faka leitW* by their characteristics: the demeanor exhibits stereotypically feminine qualities; many cross-dress and engage in sexual activity with "straight" men; they are associated with domestic spheres of activity; and work in activities associated with women such as mat weaving, tapa cloth beating, keeping house, or work in the hotel or entertainment industry (Besnier, 1996). A form of transsexualism, *faka leitW*, resists easy generalization and is undergoing change as a result of globalization and increasing transnationalism. The influence of Western gay culture is a topic of discussion within the community. There is very little known about these gender identity issues among women.

Chiefly marriages in the past were arranged for politically strategic purposes. Social relations continue to be important considerations when choosing a partner, particularly the qualities of the potential in-law family. Although not all couples include their families in their plans to marry, most decisions are made after all sides have given their approval. Once this is obtained, the parents and other important relatives meet to discuss the wedding arrangements, including the exchange of gifts. If the couple chooses to elope, the marriage can still be acknowledged by attending the church services the following Sunday wearing ritual fine mats. Most marriages occur when the couple are in their 20s, and they often live, at least temporarily, with parents of one side or the other. A young wife who lives with her husband's family faces challenges as she is of lower status than her affines, especially her husband's sisters.

Having children is very important and fertility is valued as an expression of femininity. Although infertility is cause for concern, adopting a child can moderate the social stigma. Fertility rates vary, with some rural families having six or more children; in the city two or three children is more common. Overall the fertility rate is gradually decreasing. The government and a few of the churches promote family planning, but because of feelings of modesty about sexuality, and personal religious beliefs, few couples use contraceptives. Children are viewed as future providers for the family, and blessings from God, so there is pressure to have a large family. This presents a conflict for the increasing number of families with both parents working outside the home.

### **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Pregnancy is considered a special and potentially dangerous time. A pregnant woman is taught by other women about the multiple prohibitions (*tapu*) she must observe to ensure the health of her baby. She is told that her behavior, what she eats, her relationships with others, and even how she moves her body all influence the physical and mental being of the baby inside (Morton, 1996). The mother breaking a *tapu* may be offered as the explanation for a miscarriage, stillbirth, a physical deformity, or mental or behavioral problems of the child.

Prenatal care is available at government public health clinics in the villages, and by midwives (*ma'uli*). The majority of births (over 80%) occur in the hospital attended by nurse-midwives and physicians (Morton, 2002). Some women deliver their babies at home by choice; others do so because they are unable to travel the distance to get to a hospital or because they miscalculate the dates and find themselves in labor on an outer island.

#### **Infancy**

Traditional practices, such as burying the placenta near the home, are followed to a varying degree throughout

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 987**

the islands. The Tongan term for placenta, land, and grave are the same, *fonua*, signifying the cyclical nature of life, and a connection between person and place (Mahina, 1999). After childbirth, the mother and infant return home for a period of rest and seclusion. Ideally, female relatives will appear and provide help for the household. The Christening, which occurs at three months, marks the end of the seclusion, acknowledges the child's membership within the *kainga*, and is accompanied by gift exchanges. Naming the child is an honor often given to a person of rank or a relative of high status, such as the *mehekitanga*.

During the first few years of life, the baby receives almost constant attention from both men and women of the household, and sleeps next to the mother at night (Spillius [Bott], 1960). Breast-feeding is the norm, and lasts until the baby is about 8 months old. Babies are frequently massaged with scented or herbed coconut oil to prevent ailments or deformities, or to treat fussiness or fever. This massage is done by the mother or other female relatives. Massage of the skull soon after birth is done by a *faito'o* to ensure the fontanel closes properly. The first birthday is cause for great celebration with an elaborate feast attended by the *kainga*, the minister, and neighbors in the village.

#### **Childhood**

Most of the following data on childhood and adolescence in Tonga are from Helen Morton (1996). Children, both boys and girls, are highly valued and bring meaning to life and to social institutions such as marriage. Early childhood is marked by love and affection from indulgent adults. It is the responsibility of the mother to teach her children to act properly, but as the child grows, all adults of the community, as well as older sibling and relatives, act in parental ways. As they get older, boys have more freedom to wander, whereas girls are expected to stay at home and do chores, be better behaved, and act more responsibly.

#### **Adolescence**

The whole span of childhood and adolescence is regarded as a time for molding behavior to become a fully adult person. The importance of kinship relations and the values of love (*'ofa*), respect (*faka'apa'apa*), and obedience (*talangofua*) are described by many Tongans as the key to their cultural identity and inform proper behavior. These exert a powerful influence on children and are reinforced not only in the home, but also in the church and at school. Transgressions are viewed as bringing shame on the whole family. Physical punishment is a common form of discipline with children explaining their parents do it out of love. This issue poses problems for migrant communities where the distinction between discipline and abuse is not necessary shared (McGrath, 2002).

There are no initiation rites to mark a girl's passage to womanhood. Male circumcision is done as a boy enters puberty, either at the health clinic, hospital, or performed by an elder male.

#### **Dying and Death**

Death ideally occurs in the home, with the person surrounded by close family members. Although there is no formal stage of terminal illness, there are different terms to describe the seriousness of an illness. If a sickness that initially is described as *puke pe* or *puke faka tevolo* is resistant to cure and progresses, the person is then *puke lahi*, or very sick. Typically, he or she will remain in bed, or on a mat on the floor. A piece of barkcloth or fabric may be hung up to separate the space where the person lies from the rest of the house. Children are not allowed to play nearby or make loud noises. During this time when recovery is not expected, last advice, *tala tuku*, is given. Not all families have this tradition, but parents are likely to make this their last formal act with their children. *Tau'aki* describes a more serious state, usually marked by loss of consciousness, with death occurring within hours or at most, days. This is a special time with sanctions against improper behavior imposed by the family. Only specific relatives are allowed near the dying person. *Tapu* prohibitions must be respected and a sister will not be close to her brother, and vice versa. They will remain on the other side of the cloth divider. Personal care is performed by females, usually daughters and other female relatives, who are of the same or higher rank as the individual. Expressions of strong emotions are to be avoided around the time of *tau'aki.* It is thought that it will be more difficult for the person to leave if those around are very sad or having a hard time. Similarly, physical contact such as touching also makes it difficult for the spirit of the person to leave when its time has come to depart. After death, the body will be washed with water, the skin rubbed with coconut oil, powder, and for the funeral. Funeral rituals are very elaborate, and a point of pride among Tongans. Pulotu, the Tongan afterworld, was the focus of funeral rituals before widespread conversion to Christianity, and although heaven has replaced this image in many respects, there continue to be frequent references to it in song and poetry, suggesting that the image of Pulotu may not be far from the minds of many present at funerals (Filihia, 2001). Aspects of status and rank which are less important in everyday life become central at a funeral (Kaeppler, 1993). These are also times to reaffirm Tongan traditions and pass them on to the next generation. Principles of rank are enacted with those attending the funeral placed according to their relationship to the deceased. Those higher are *fahu* and have certain rights and obligations, those lower are *liongi*, and are expected to take care of other tasks. The rituals begin with the *'apo-*, or wake, in the home. Everyone who has a connection to the person will come by to pay respects. While some relatives are inside the house keeping watch over the body and welcoming mourners, the relatives who are *liongi* are outside preparing and serving food and drinks. The main activity outside is the gift exchange. *Koloa*, literally wealth or valuables, are ritually presented. These may include very finely woven mats (some of which are named) and bark cloth (Filihia, 2001). These will be re-distributed during the following days. The burial in the cemetery occurs within three days.

Graves in Tonga are very distinctive with shaped mounds of white sand that are then decorated by women. These decorations, or art forms, respond quickly to cultural change and prevailing taste so that now in addition to more traditional crushed coral and woven flowers one finds beer bottles or plastic syringes carefully arranged on the grave (Teilat-Fisk, 1990).

After the burial, the head of the household invites the entire community to a feast and announces how long the mourning period is to be. The time of mourning is marked by special clothing, *ta'ovala putu*, a mat wrapped around the waist, and prohibitions against sporting games, dances, music, and beating tapa in the village. Ten days of village mourning was the norm in the past, now one or three days is more common. There have been other changes in funeral rituals: the body may remain in the hospital morgue to wait for overseas relatives to arrive; coffins (rather than wrapping the body in tapa) are being used; and while funerals are still important social occasions to strength kinship ties, often those of the nuclear family are often emphasized over ties with the extended *kainga*.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

A caution must be raised concerning the nature of this description of the Tongan culture and health care. Generalizations about beliefs and practices have the potential to smooth out all difference and present a picture of an essential Tonga that is unchanging and without variation. This is not the intent, nor is it an accurate representation of Tonga or of Tongans. One of the tenets of medical anthropology is that the body is a site for social action, so that healing becomes a useful way to examine cultural transformations. In Tonga, as everywhere, all individuals do not experience the culture in the same manner. Knowledge and behavior around health and illness are dynamic and reflect the diversity that exists based on gender, class, education level, and so forth. Research and analysis of these issues, as well as the influence of political, economic, and social change on health is currently underway by a number of Tongan scholars whose works will make important contributions to the literature based on their deep understandings of the culture.

### **REFERENCES**

- Bathgate, M., Donnell, A. Mitikulena, A. et al. (1994). *The health of Pacific Islands people in New Zealand. Analysis and monitoring report 2*. Wellington: Public Health Commission.
- Beaglehole, E., & Beaglehole, P. (1941). *Pangai, village in Tonga*. Wellington, NZ: The Polynesian Society.
- Besnier, N. (1996). Polynesian gender liminality through time and space. In G. H. Herdt (Ed.), *Third sex, third gender: Beyond sexual dimorphism in culture and history* (1st pbk ed., pp. 285–328). New York: Zone Books, Distributed by MIT Press.
- Bloomfield, S. F. (1986). *It is health we want*. Fiji: University of the South Pacific, Suva.
- Bott, E., Salote, T., & Tavi. (1982). *Tongan society at the time of Captain Cook's visits: Discussions with Her Majesty Queen Såalote Tupou*. Wellington: Polynesian Society.
- Campbell, I. C. (1994). The doctrine of accountability and the unchanging locus of power in Tonga. *Journal of Pacific History, 29*(1), 81–94.
- Campbell, I. C. (2001). *Island kingdom:Tonga ancient and modern* (2nd rev. ed.). Christchurch, NZ: Canterbury University Press.
- Collins, V. R., Dowse, G. K., Toelupe, P. M., Imo, T. T., Aloaina, F. L., Spark, R. A., & Zimmet, P. Z. (1994). Increasing prevalence of NIDDM in the Pacific island population of Western Samoa over a 13-year period. *Diabetes Care, 17*(4), 288–296.