# **CONSTITUTIONAL ANTECEDENTS**

# ROHIT DE

## **I. INTRODUCTION**

WHAT are the antecedents of the Indian Constitution? For some, such as the Supreme Court of India, the answer is simple. It described the coming into force of the Constitution as the moment at which:

[T]erritorial allegiances were wiped out and the past was obliterated… at one moment of time the new order was born with its new allegiance springing from the same source for all, grounded on the same basis: the sovereign will of the peoples of India with no class, no caste, no race, no creed, no distinction, no reservation. 1

While the Constitution did usher in a new order, its claims to have obliterated the past remain unconvincing, even to contemporary commentators. The Constitution text contained aspects of imperial charters and colonial legislation, and in several cases reproduced sections verbatim.

Therefore the question of origin remains a fraught one. Traditionally, constitutional historians have traced the antecedents of the Constitution through a series of British colonial legislation that laid down the architecture of the State and introduced limited forms of representative government.<sup>2</sup> This canon produces a Whiggish narrative, where Independence and the republican Constitution appear to inevitably succeed the various colonial reforms, echoing British liberal justifications of imperialism as training Indians for self-rule.<sup>3</sup> The Constitution's perceived antecedents draw the ire of both the Right and the Left. Liberals and the political Left point to the structural and institutional continuities between the colonial State and the post-colonial, and argue that despite the institution of adult suffrage the constitutional order rests on the logic of authoritarianism. $\frac{4}{3}$  Organisations on the Hindu Right, pointing to these same provisions, have attacked the Constitution for being alien and inauthentic as it imposes structures developed by the British upon India. These anxieties about antecedents were reflected in the closing debates in the Constituent Assembly when members worried that the Constitution would fail as it was made by the 'slavish imitation' of Western constitutions.<sup>5</sup> K Hanumanthaiyya summed up the mood as he regretfully said, 'we wanted the music of *Veena* or *Sitar*, but here we have the music of an English band'.<sup>6</sup>

This chapter departs from traditional narratives of constitutional antecedents in three ways. First, it treats the Constitution as a set of interactions between constitutional texts, constitutional aspirations, and the quotidian practice of constitutional  $law<sup>7</sup>$  In treating the Constitution as a set of heterogeneous practices and expectations rather than a succession of legislation we avoid the teleological narratives of both the State and Indian nationalism, emphasising the contingency of events and the reception of ideas. As Arvind Elangovan has argued, the conflicts over the Constitution in its first two decades require us to shift the idea of the Constitution as a product of grand 'consensus underwritten by nationalism' to that of the Constitution as a product of a series of conflicts, several which were unresolved.<sup>8</sup> Finally, this chapter examines both aversive and aspirational borrowings, to recognise alternatives that were available but consciously rejected.<sup>2</sup>

The chapter opens with a critical reading of the various texts (charters and legislation) that emanated from above and established the architecture of power in colonial India from 1600 to 1948. The second section provides an overview of the various attempts by Indian groups to draw up constitutions or articulate claims against the State. Finally, the third section looks at constitutional practice examining legal strategies and judicial review in colonial India.

#### **II. CONSTITUTIONAL TEXTS**

#### **1. The Age of Charters**

Historians of British and American constitutionalism have focused on a particular transformation, the shift from an organic, unwritten constitution to a definite and written one. In contrast, modern constitutionalism in India begins with a written text on a precise date: 31 December 1600, the day that Queen Elizabeth granted a Charter to a company of London merchants to trade with the East Indies. Charters were grants of perpetuity in Latin addressed to a particular group and kept as a permanent record. The Charter of 1600 delegated both legislative and judicial powers to the governor appointed by the English East India Company (EEIC) in India 'for the better advancement and continuance of said trade and traffick…' including the power to administer criminal law. Since the Company was formed for maritime trade rather than territorial administration, many of the powers of the EEIC officials derived from the absolutism of martial law and naval discipline, including the power to make emergency regulations.<sup>10</sup> As the EEIC's territorial control expanded, new charters granted them powers of full territorial jurisdiction, including the powers to issue coinage, administer justice, and punish interlopers. Importantly, the charters incorporated a principle of repugnancy by requiring that all company laws had to be 'reasonable' and not contrary to the laws and customs of the English realm.

The Charter had only granted the Company the jurisdiction over English subjects, but it soon found itself dealing with claims of Indians. Recent scholarship has described the formation of an imperial legal culture over the seventeenth century through conflicts between Parliament, the Crown, and the EEIC as English subjects challenged the authority of the Company, and Indian litigants sought to take advantage of English law and rhetoric.<sup>11</sup> Initially the residents of the EEIC territories found that they had limited options. The Company enjoyed wide latitude over civil and criminal justice, and unlike the American colonies, made no procedural rules or appeals to the Privy Council.

The EEIC's growing power raised concerns within the British Parliament, particularly because of the Company's close association with the monarchy. Parliament sought opportunities to check the independent legal authority of the Company, and by the early eighteenth century forced a new constitution upon the Company. $\frac{12}{2}$ 

The Charter of 1726 established an 'Anglo-centric' legal order in Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta, which brought the Indian territories firmly into the British legal world.<sup>13</sup> It explicitly provided that the law of the Company settlements in India was to be that of England, to the extent that circumstances would permit. It set up mayor's courts headed by aldermen who were tenured for life, guaranteeing a degree of independence and explicitly provided for appeals to the Privy Council.<sup>14</sup> These courts were

instructed to make their decrees according to 'justice and right'. The Charter also granted EEIC governors legislative powers akin to those enjoyed by royal governors in America, which were subject to the approval of the EEIC directors in London and not repugnant to the laws and statutes of England. As the growth of litigation against the Company in its own courts indicates, by the late seventeenth century, there was a growing belief across British territories that a publicly available printed charter was both a source and a limit of governmental authority.<sup>15</sup>

The EEIC struggled to contain the behaviour of the courts in India, as neither the officials in India nor the directors in London retained any power to overturn decisions or to change legal practices. Structural factors, like distance, also played a role; the mayor's court often reached its verdict well before legal advice from London reached India. Unlike other EEIC officials who were bound by their employment contracts to obey the directors of the Company, judicial officials, particularly members of grand juries (which occasionally included Parsi, Hindu, and Indo-Portuguese residents) were not. As Fraas has painstakingly shown, these bodies frequently protested deviations from authority and procedure laid down within the Charter. For instance, the grand jury in Calcutta frequently released prisoners being held without trial by the Governor, delivering scathing rebukes for violating terms of the Charter.<sup>16</sup> While the conflicts were framed as a tension between English law and liberties and the Company's authority and local practices, Fraas demonstrates how the courts were less concerned with strict application of English law than with shoring up the authority and independence of the mayor's courts.<sup>17</sup>

It is important to note that despite the Charter, the impetus towards creating a constitutional order did not come from above. Neither Parliament nor the Privy Council sought to impose the new constitutional principles upon the Company administration; instead, it developed from litigants who determined the issues that were to be contested.

# **2. Parliamentary Control and Mughal Constitutionalism**

The English victory at Plassey in 1757 caused the first major disruption to this imperial constitutional order. With the grant of the Diwani of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa, the EEIC found its powers dependent on two sources of authority, through a Charter by the British Crown and as a vassal of the Mughal emperor. Successive military victories transformed the EEIC territories from a clutch of cities and factories to a large landed power. The EEIC's military successes in India corresponded with fiscal problems in London and gave the British Parliament an opportunity to restructure the EEIC government in India to check 'abuses in administration'. The Regulating Act of 1773 introduced three fundamental changes that would set a path of dependency for the Indian administrative framework. First, it transformed the relationship between the three presidencies by placing Bombay and Madras in subservience to Bengal. Previously, each presidency lay with the Governor-General in Calcutta. This gives India a longer history of local centralised authority when compared to the British colonies in North America, Africa, and Australia. Secondly, it formalised the idea of cabinet government by vesting authority with the Governor-General and his council of four. The original Act named the first four councillors, the majority of whom were known political opponents of the Governor-General. By limiting the term of the Governor-General and his councillors to five years, it gave British parliamentary convention statutory authority.<sup>18</sup>

Finally, section 13 of the Regulating Act established a Supreme Court of judicature at Fort William

which, apart from the civil, criminal, ecclesiastical, and admiralty jurisdiction, also had the jurisdiction to 'hear and determine all complaints against any of His Majesty's subjects for any crimes, misdemeanours, or oppressions … and also to entertain, hear and determine any suits or actions whatsoever, against any of His Majesty's subjects  $\ldots$ <sup>19</sup>

The wide jurisdiction of the courts set the stage for political conflict between the Supreme Court and the EEIC. The Supreme Court now had a mandate to govern matters relating to all British subjects and Company employees (which included Indians). There was considerable ambiguity over the definition of a Company employee, which allowed Indians who were not British subjects to take action against the Company. As Lauren Benton has shown, many Indians attempted to defeat local representatives by appealing to more distant authorities like the Supreme Court in Calcutta, and in the process simultaneously challenging and strengthening the legitimacy of the colonial State. These repeated appeals helped strengthen a legal authority that was removed from both metropolitan power and the need to derive legitimacy from local politics. $\frac{20}{20}$ 

The period from 1781 to 1833 saw a constant legislative battle to secure parliamentary control over the EEIC and the Indian territories. Searching for new principles that could resolve the anomalous situation of a private company exercising sovereignty overseas, partisans of both sides used Mughal constitutionalism (or what they assumed was Mughal constitutionalism) as a guide for the colonial State.<sup>21</sup> Warren Hastings, attempting to shore up the authority of the Company-State, argued that its absolute powers were premised on a notion of Mughal absolutism, and argued that all property rights to land ultimately vested in the EEIC as the successor to the Mughal emperor. Philip Francis, Hastings' opponent on the council and later in Parliament, recognised Mughal despotism but argued that it was not arbitrary, and that private property rights existed under Mughal benevolence. $22$ Scholars have suggested that when legal appeals to classical Rome and the Anglo-Saxon past were ideologically exhausted, Burke turned towards Indo-Islamic republicanism as an alternative source of constitutional legitimacy. Edmund Burke, in his opposition to Hastings, argued that Mughal rule was not despotic but was stable and had a legal basis for governance, and challenged Hastings' use of Mughal constitutionalism as a cloak for arbitrary authority. Francis and Burke echoed contemporary Whiggism in their defence of the rights of the Indian nobility and landowners, which were based on very poorly understood notions of Islamic law and Mughal governance.<sup>23</sup>

The Acts of 1781 and 1784 and the Charters of 1813 and 1833 gradually marginalised the role of the EEIC in governing India and placed governance structures under strict parliamentary scrutiny. The cabinet government imagined in the 1773 Act was diluted when an amendment in 1793 provided that the Governor-General and provincial governors could act in extraordinary cases without the concurrence of the Council, inasmuch as that power would 'tend greatly to the strength and security of the British possessions in India, and give energy, vigour, and despatch to the measures and proceedings of the executive government  $\ldots$ <sup>24</sup> This clause essentially gave Governor-Generals enormous powers to act independently, which individuals like Lord Cornwallis and Wellesley used to expand territory and transport local administration.

It also gave statutory recognition to the personal laws of Indians, by requiring that the Supreme Court's jurisdiction over Indians would be on condition that 'their inheritance and succession to lands, rents, and goods, and all matters of contract and dealing between party and party, shall be determined, in the case of Mahomedans, by the laws and usages of the Mahomedans and where the parties are Gentus, by the laws and usages of the Gentus  $\ldots$ <sup>25</sup>

The increased parliamentary control from London was balanced with the reduction of judicial

opposition in India. Under the Act of 1781, the Governor-General and his Council were exempt from the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court for all Official Acts. $\frac{26}{10}$  The power of the Supreme Court to intervene in questions of revenue was also strictly contained,  $\frac{27}{2}$  a feature that would now continue until 1947. The tribunals run by the EEIC were formally recognised by Parliament and in 1813, an attempt was made to amalgamate the Company and Crown courts. Similar conflicts would play out with the establishment of the Supreme Court of Bombay in 1823, which culminated in Governor Elphinstone challenging the Chief Justice to a duel, and the entire Supreme Court going on strike when the government refused to obey its writs of *habeas corpus*. <sup>28</sup> Lord Macaulay charged the Supreme Court for creating 'a reign of terror, heightened by mystery… it consisted of judges not one of whom was familiar with the usages of millions over whom they claimed boundless authority… no Mahratta had ever spread through the province such dismay as this inroad of English lawyers'.<sup>29</sup> The challenge posed by the courts was sought to be redressed by the introduction of a law member in the Governor-General's Council, who would be conversant in common law, and would ensure that legislation was free of defects. The Law Member was imagined as a constitutional authority located within the executive. The push to codify civil and criminal procedure was partly to discipline wayward judges and courts.

Was constitutionalism in India between the eighteenth and early twentieth centuries entirely a discourse between the English? In terms of practice, cases and appeals brought by Indian litigants were instrumental in putting the system into operation, and petitions to Parliament spurred figures like Burke into action. At the level of ideas, there is only limited evidence of competing indigenous ideas of constitutionalism. However, Ghulam Hussain Tabatabai's contemporary account of the decline of Muslim power and the rise of the British in Bengal, provides a few interesting fragments of what Indians thought of British administration. Ghulam Hussain argues for a comparable notion of an 'ancient constitution', noting that all conquering powers had absorbed an established structure and practices which even ideologically driven rulers like Aurangzeb did not tamper with. The English appeared to be ignorant of these rules (or chose not to follow them), thus depriving people of the benefits of governance.<sup>30</sup> Partha Chatterjee notes that Ghulam Hussain's concept of Mughal political tradition lay not in a theory of sovereignty but in the function of government in looking after the people, a task that Hussain believed the English had ignored.<sup>31</sup>

## **3. The Viceregal Age: Petitioning and Representation**

In November 1858, Queen Victoria was proclaimed Empress of India and the Indian territories brought under direct control of the British government in London. The Proclamation went on to assure native princes that their treaties would be 'scrupulously maintained'; present territorial possession would not be extended; all natives in Indian territories would enjoy the same privileges as all British subjects; anyone, irrespective of their race or creed, could be admitted to offices; all religious observances would enjoy equal and impartial protection of law and there would be no interference with religious practice; and the Proclamation assured her subjects that 'all rights' connected with land inherited from their ancestors would be protected and in framing laws due regard would be paid to 'the ancient rights, usages and customs of India'. The Proclamation of 1858 had sought to address the perceived causes of the revolt of 1857, securing the loyalty of the princes and zamindars, as well as addressing fears of interference with religious and social matters.

However, the Proclamation took on a life of its own and was frequently referred to as a 'magna carta' by Indians in various walks of life. Glimpses of the Queen's Proclamation appear in more informal settings; for instance in 1884 Dennis Fitzpatrick, the Lt Governor of Punjab, reported that 'a Mussulman' quoted constitutional principles at him demanding that he overturn an order by a district magistrate that placed a local ban on cow slaughter. The petitioner argued that the 1858 Proclamation protected his right to slaughter cattle for religious purposes.<sup>32</sup> Almost half a century later, Muslim groups from Mysore petitioned the Viceroy asking him to intervene to overturn legislation by the Mysore Assembly banning cow slaughter on the grounds that it violated the 'Magna Carta of Queen Victoria'.<sup>33</sup> These arguments carried a lot of political traction with the executive but had little impact before the courts of law. In *Queen Empress v Tegha Singh,* the temple custodians who had been arrested for violating the Arms Act by storing weapons in the temple premises argued that the Arms Act violated the Queen's Proclamation of 1858 that guaranteed no one would be molested by reason of their religious faith or worship. As the High Court had acknowledged that the firearms in question were worshipped in the temple, the custodians should be exempted from the operation of the Act. The High Court rejected the contention, implying that the Indian legislatures could enact a law in contravention of the Queen's Proclamation.<sup>34</sup>

Mithi Mukherjee argues that the royal Proclamation was not a shift just in political control but in the discourse of imperial justice itself. She identifies two separate strands: 'justice as equity', which placed the British State in the role of the mediator between various communities in India, and 'justice as liberty', which offered the promise of self-governance in some distant future. These notions of justice are located in the figure of the monarch and not in some form of 'ancient constitutionalism' or natural law.<sup>35</sup>

These forces were reflected in the emphasis the constitutional changes of the next fifty years placed on questions of representation. The Indian Councils Act of 1861 reconstructed the Governor-General's Council by separating the legislative functions from the executive through the creation of a legislative council, at least half of whose members were required to be non-official persons. The Act also designated that a member be appointed specifically for public works. This separation of powers between the executive and legislature was softened by the requirement that any matters relating to public revenue or debt, religion, military, or naval affairs required *prior* sanction of the Governor-General. All legislation required the Governor-General's assent before being enacted into law.

An attempt was made to decentralise administration by restoring the independent powers of legislation of the Bombay and Madras Presidencies, which had been revoked in 1833. There was also a rudimentary division of legislative subjects between the centre and the provinces, with the requirement that in certain subjects the Governor-General's permission was required before legislating. Further, all local Acts required the assent of the Governor-General as well as the Governor.

Thus, these reforms provided the promise of freedom but deferred it through strict controls for both quotidian and extraordinary situations. The 1861 Act limited the Governor-General's power to proclaim an emergency to six months. Ironically, the national emergencies were first declared to achieve administrative aims, such as Lord Mayo's imposition of an additional half per cent of income tax, or the exclusion of certain border districts from the jurisdiction of regular courts.

The Indian High Courts Act that was enacted simultaneously in 1861 abolished the troublesome Presidency Supreme Courts and replaced them with High Courts. The reforms were ostensibly intended to create a uniform legal system across the country, and were to be followed by the enactments of the Penal Code, the Code of Civil Procedure, and the Criminal Procedure Code.

Finally, the bureaucracy was transformed with the enactment of the Indian Civil Service Act 1861, which regularised all irregular appointments to the bureaucracy in the past, but now mandated a formal appointment system for members of the covenanted services. Until 1857, the colonial bureaucracy was not a professional body, as it later came to be. Appointments were an important source of patronage for EEIC officials and the lucrative nature of the jobs was premised on opportunities for rent seeking. The services were notionally open to all British subjects in India, though the nature of the selection process meant that very few Indians would be eligible.

The carving out of executive, legislative, and bureaucratic spheres was followed by a series of reforms in 1891 and 1909, which sought to increase the representation of Indians within the various councils of government. In 1892, the number of nominated members in the Governor's Councils was increased with a promise of introducing electoral representation in the future. The Indian Councils Act of 1909 (Morley–Minto Reforms) brought into being limited electoral systems to elect some members to the provincial and central legislative councils. While official members (usually bureaucrats) would be the majority in the central legislature, non-official members would be the majority in the provinces. The electoral process reflected a corporatist understanding of Indian society, with members being elected from separate electorates representing particular special interests. While a bulk of these were municipalities and local boards, they also included merchants' chambers and federations of commerce, universities, planters' associations, landlords, and significantly, Muslims. The demand for separate electorates for Muslims had been first articulated in 1906 in a memorial submitted by the Muslim League to the Viceroy.

Can we describe this account of legislative reforms as constitution making? It is important to recognise that all these reforms were prompted by a surging demand from below for greater representation. Unlike the reforms of the previous century, every legislative change was brought about by a vigorous campaign by members of the public. Each reform failed to meet expectations and led to splits between political parties; for instance, dissatisfaction with the changes of 1892 led to the extremist group emerging within the Indian National Congress. As Dietmar Rothmund observes, a curious dialectic began to be established between popular agitation and constitutional reform, with each set of reforms designed to fulfil certain agitational demands, but in the process sparking further agitations.<sup>36</sup> Therefore until 1919, this dialectic of constitutional reform dominated the nationalist movement, evolving a constitutionalist discourse similar to China, Persia, Turkey, and Egypt, which all saw variations of a 'constitutionalist revolution' in the early twentieth century. $\frac{37}{2}$ 

### **4. The Last Acts of Empire: The Government of India Acts of 1919 and 1935**

In a lecture first delivered in 1923, Dr BR Ambedkar told his students:

The Constitution of British India is contained in an enactment called the Government of India Act, 1919. A student of the Constitution of India therefore has not to search for the constitution as the student of the English Constitution has to do. His position is very much like the position of the student of the American Constitution, whose problem is nothing more than to understand and to interpret the statute embodying the Constitution of the United States.<sup>38</sup>

It is only in the 1920s that we see the popularisation of the notion of Indian constitutional law and its

introduction as a separate subject for study in law faculties. $\frac{39}{2}$  This was partly due to consolidation. The Government of India Act 1915 finally repealed the unrepealed provisions of over forty-seven Acts going back to 1772 and consolidated them into a single legislation, building in the idea of the Constitution as a single statute.

The Government of India Act of 1919, which codified the Montague–Chelmsford proposals, broke with the earlier reforms in two important ways. First, unlike the Morley–Minto reforms, Edwin Montague categorically stated that this concession to India was with a view to the 'progressive realization of responsible government in India as an integral part of the British empire'.  $\frac{40}{ }$ Recognising that this move could only come in phases, it introduced a system known as 'dyarchy' within the provincial governments. This system divided the areas of functioning into 'transferred' and 'reserved', the former being looked after by ministers responsible to a popularly elected assembly and the latter (more crucial subjects) held by executives. While the Governor was to govern on the advice of the ministers with regard to transferred subjects, he had the discretion of rejecting such advice when he had 'good reason' to.<sup>41</sup>

More exclusions from popular rule were built into the reforms as the Montague-Chelmsford report had acknowledged that all provinces contained 'areas where material to build political institutions was lacking' or were seen as 'civilisationally backward'. Provincial governors applied for excluding a variety of territories from the operation of the Act, including almost the entire States of Assam, Orissa, and the Chota Nagpur plateau. Almost all the exclusions applied for were granted. While regimes of exception had existed in colonial India since the eighteenth century, this was the first time the exceptions were codified and made permanent.

Despite the celebratory tenor, the Constitution of 1919 angered both the colonial officials in India and the Indian public. The reforms were followed almost immediately by the draconian Rowlatt Act, which curbed existing rights and remedies under the Penal and Criminal Codes, limited the jurisdiction of courts, and sought to extend the powers of the executive to detain and try political prisoners. Despite the vehement opposition of every non-official member in the legislature the bill was voted into law using the brute official majority. The Rowlatt Act led to popular unrest and the massacre at Jallianwala Bagh, further discrediting the reforms. The first elections held under the 1919 Act were officially boycotted by the Indian National Congress.

While the new legislatures became important venues for debate and critique, diarchy itself failed in practice as government departments were by nature independent and constituted an indivisible unit that was hard to separate. KV Reddi, a minister in the Madras government, would wryly remark that he was the 'minister of development minus forests, minister for industries without factories, electricity or labour and minister for agriculture without irrigation'. $\frac{42}{1}$  The Reforms Secretary, William Morris, had to admit that they had created a 'cumbrous, complex, confused system having no logical basis … rooted in compromise and defensible only as a transitional expedient. The difficulties in the scheme were quite incurable by mere alterations of acts and rules.<sup> $43$ </sup>

Importantly, the Montague-Chelmsford Report had a clause stating that the working of the Act would be reviewed after a period of ten years, making it clear that the constitutional text was not enshrined in permanence. The review commission itself, headed by Viscount Simon and consisting entirely of British members, outraged all shades of political opinion and led to a systematic boycott from major political parties. The report of the Simon Commission in 1929 was followed by three Round Table Conferences, where a variety of Indian leaders from British India and the Princely States were invited to discuss constitutional reforms with British political leadership across parties.
Because of the Congress Party's boycott of two of three Round Table Conferences and the heady politics of the civil disobedience movement, the drier discussions in London have been dismissed as of little importance. However, the conferences were important for the first articulation of several new arguments, be it the women's representatives rejecting the idea of reserved constituencies for women or the repeated insistence on a Bill of Rights by the delegations representing women, minorities, and labour.<sup>44</sup>

The Government of India Act 1935 was finally enacted amid stiff opposition from the Conservative Party and brought into being the Indian federation comprising both British provinces and the Princely States. The Act reflected many of the recommendations of the Simon Commission, including the idea that the Constitution should contain within itself a provision for its own development, and should not be rigid. Implicit in the notion of constitutional progress was the idea that representative government could only evolve in India through stages. While the Constitution was a statute, the preamble acknowledged that the convention within the British Empire was that the details of the Constitution would not be exhaustively drafted but would develop naturally through conventions or terms of instruction issued from London. It rejected the possibility of temporality defining the stages and said there was no requirement for periodic commissions of inquiry.<sup>45</sup>

Importantly, it removed the system of diarchy for the provinces, increased franchise to about 14 per cent of the population, and provided for popularly elected ministries in the provinces. Significant emergency powers were retained by the Governor to maintain law and order and protect minorities. The Union government was left unchanged, to mollify Conservative opinion, except that the size of the legislative assembly and the franchise were both increased. Significantly, as the third section of this chapter will demonstrate, it established a Federal Court in Delhi, which would have jurisdiction over constitutional questions as well as disputes between provinces.

While agreeing to contest the first provincial elections, the Congress Party denounced the Government of India Act as a 'slave constitution that attempted to strengthen and perpetuate the political and economic bondage of India'.  $\frac{46}{5}$  It charged the creation of the federation as an attempt to maintain British control by checking popular forces with the help of 'reactionary feudal classes', referring to the powers given to the princes as well as groups like the landlords and zamindars, who were represented in the second chamber. While the members of the Lower House of the central assembly would be indirectly elected from provincial legislatures, the members of the Upper House would be directly elected from special constituencies. Despite the idea of an evolving constitution, the Indian legislatures did not have the power to amend the Constitution, but could only pass resolutions recommending amendments on certain questions, such as the extension of franchise, method of election, etc. $\frac{47}{1}$  It noted that the assembly envisaged would continue to be a non-sovereign body subject to the British Parliament. $\frac{48}{10}$  The 1935 Act had greatly expanded the powers of the Governor-General, leading Churchill to remark that it would arouse Mussolini's envy. The Congress noted that the 'new constitution' was worse than that of 1919 because it made explicit many of the emergency powers that were implicit. Not only did the Governors continue to enjoy the power of veto, unlike 1919 they were also given independent powers of legislation.

The Congress also launched a more substantive critique of the Constitution for failing to address questions of economic and social deprivation. While health and education were starved of finances, the top-heavy administration focused on law and order. The 1935 Act made it difficult for elected governments to aid Indian trade or industry and constitutionally protected British financial and trading interests in the country. For instance, the Federal Legislature was given very limited control over the

Reserve Bank. The Railways, in which a substantial amount of British capital was invested, were to be controlled by a special statutory body of bureaucrats called the Railway Board. While the 1935 Act had no Bill of Rights, it specifically prohibited laws imposing sanctions upon British subjects domiciled in the UK with regard to either entry into India or to the 'acquisition, holding or disposal of property, the holding of public office, or the carrying on of any occupation, trade, business or profession'.<sup>49</sup> This effectively created a non-discrimination clause that applied only to Britishdomiciled persons. Corporate personalities were also protected, with the Act guaranteeing that a company incorporated in the UK would not be subject to Indian company law. British entities were also ensured non-discrimination in questions of taxation and of eligibility for government grants.<sup>50</sup>

The idea of the economy held captive by the Constitution was powerful, given how central economic development was to the nationalist discourse. It is perhaps not coincidental that the Congress Party set up the National Planning Committee in 1940 to focus on State intervention to bring about social and economic development and redistribution.

## **III. CONSTITUTIONAL ASPIRATIONS**

In terms of checking the rising tide of nationalism, the constitutional settlement of 1935 was a spectacular failure. Not only did the princes, the bulwark against the nationalists, refuse to participate in the federation, but also the Congress Party decided to contest elections and performed spectacularly, forming governments in most provinces. Within days of the election, eight provinces and the central legislative assembly had passed a resolution asserting that the Government of India Act 1935 'in no way represents the will of the people' and 'has been designed to perpetuate the subjection of the people of India'. They demanded the repeal of the Act and its replacement by a constitution for a free India framed by a Constituent Assembly elected by universal adult franchise.<sup>51</sup> How does this act of 'constitutional defiance' then fit into a history of the Indian Constitution? $52$ 

In this section, we briefly explore the history of constitutional aspirations, which is 'the passionate insistence that the constitution must be (or in other words must be made to be) a recognition and expression of legitimate aspirations'.  $\frac{53}{11}$  It is an account of how the constitutional texts discussed in the previous section were received and reimagined by Indians over the years. This section focuses on readings and understandings of rights, though one could do the same exercise for questions of federalism, separation of powers, or local self-government.

The earliest sets of rights claims against the colonial State emerged in the new urban centres of Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta. As scholars have long recognised, the most articulate statement of liberal constitutionalism came from Rammohan Roy in early-nineteenth-century Calcutta. Roy, who has been usually cast into the teleology of Indian modernity, has recently been located within a global trend of demanding liberal institutions across the world in the early nineteenth century. His centrality to this world was recognised by the decision of Spanish liberals to dedicate the Cadiz constitution of 1820 to Rammohan Roy. $54$  Roy's liberal constitutionalism was not a product of Western education, but arose from a particular urban social milieu at the turn of the nineteenth century, when an association of non-official Europeans, mixed-blood Eurasians and Portuguese, and the new Indian elites of Calcutta formed 'a novel, even if unstable and short-lived early modern formation seeking to assert the freedoms of the subject against arbitrary and absolute power'.<sup>55</sup> English migration to India

increased in the early nineteenth century, and Englishmen who were not associated with the Company found that their traditional liberties of appeal to the British Crown were severely restricted, and made common cause with others similarly disenfranchised by influential social groups. Rammohan Roy began to represent himself as being born within British dominions and 'entitled to all the privileges of the natives of Great Britain'. Among his early tracts were his vociferous defence of the freedom of the press as 'an invasion of civil rights', the restriction of appeals to the Supreme Court, restrictions on movement, and the exclusion of natives from juries. He set up a contrast between British and Mughal rule, noting that under the Mughals, the 'natives' had enjoyed all political privileges including the right to hold the highest offices of the State without disqualification or degrading restrictions. The loss of such political consequence under the British was to be compensated by the more secure enjoyment of civil and religious rights, and the failure to ensure this challenged the compact.

These urban coalitions, particularly in Bombay and Calcutta due to their proximity to Portuguese and French territories, were also influenced by the news of constitutional transformations in Napoleonic Europe. However, as Chatterjee points out, this cosmopolitan liberalism was short-lived; by the mid-nineteenth century racially mixed meetings became a rarity in Calcutta and the space for a creolized constitutionalism was eclipsed.

The other source of rights that Burke articulates as 'Mughal constitutionalism' and Roy as 'ancient constitutionalism' draws from pre-colonial traditions where antiquity itself was the chief source of rights, frequently asserted in the context of land or privileges of office.<sup>56</sup> The demands for protection of 'ancient customary liberties' by subjects ranging from Hindu widows demanding their inheritance rights to temple authorities resisting taxation formed the more broad-based secondary order of rights claims in colonial India. This order drew upon promises made by the colonial government in 1772 and in 1858 to apply Hindu and Muslim religious laws to matters concerning marriage and inheritance. These promises became sites of furious contestation between the State and various groups of citizens. As recent scholarship has suggested, the administration of Hindu and Muslim law did not merely resurrect scriptural authority, but transformed it through liberal ideas of equality, women's rights, and difference.<sup>57</sup> As Tanika Sarkar argues, rights were conjugated from messy encounters between scriptural law and the Anglo-American legal system, rather than through some form of systematic political thinking.<sup>58</sup>

The Queen's Proclamation of 1858 and the direct assumption of control by the British Crown saw an increasing number of Indians assert that as subjects of the Crown they were entitled to 'equal and impartial protection of the law'. Increasingly, elite Indians began to claim the rights of a citizen *within* the Empire rather than against it, despite express denial of the same by both London and the white settler colonies.<sup>59</sup>

The Indian legal public was not dissuaded by the illiberal nature of the colonial constitutions; as one textbook writer advised lawyers, 'the acts of parliament were mere bare skeletons into which the breath of life came from other sources'.<sup>60</sup> What were some of these other sources? One example comes from the Congress agitations against the Rowlatt Bill, which the Congress had condemned as 'interfering with the fundamental rights of the Indian people'. $\frac{61}{2}$  Given that there were no designated Bills of Rights, it is clear that by 'fundamental rights', they are referring to the rights of procedure, appeal, and review granted under the Criminal and Civil Procedure Codes. $\frac{62}{ }$  The idea of these procedural law codes as guaranteeing rights continued even after Independence, when Special Tribunals that carved exceptions to these norms, for instance for oral admission of evidence or to trial by jury, were condemned by the Supreme Court.<sup>63</sup>

The other major source of constitutional imagination remains the multiple constitutions drafted by different groups of the Indian public, beginning with Tilak's Swaraj Bill of 1895. The Bill provided for a small list of broadly worded rights that included rights to free speech and expression, property, personal liberty, inviolability of one's home, equality before law, equality to admission to public offices, and the right to petition for redress of grievances. Early articulations of rights, such as the Declaration of Rights of 1918 that the Congress demanded be included in the Government of India Act 1919, expanded the list of civil and political rights to include the right to bear arms, the right to life and liberty, and the freedom of press and association. However, by the 1920s the proposed Bills of Rights expanded to include social and economic rights culimating in the Resolution of Fundamental Rights and Economic Changes at the Karachi Session of the Congress in  $1931 \frac{64}{5}$  The resolution argued that in order to 'end exploitation of the masses, political freedom must include economic freedom'. Along with fundamental rights, the resolution also provided for the ending of bonded labour and child labour; free primary education; the expansion of a labour welfare regime protecting unions, women workers, and providing a pension and a living wage; providing for the redistribution of resources through the ending of usury and State control over key industries and national resources; and finally, recognising the communal problem, it laid out protections for minority rights. It was abundantly clear that any future Constitution of India would contain an extensive list of enumerated political, social, and economic rights. Almost all the rights enumerated in the Nehru Report and the 1931 Resolution found their way into Parts III and IV of the 1950 Constitution. The only right that dissappears completely is the constitutional right to bear arms, which, given the violence on the streets in 1946, is unsurprising.

## **IV. CONSTITUTIONAL CULTURE**

One of the key features of constitutional culture is a limited government, usually checked by the judiciary. Unlike the UK, the courts of the British Empire came to exercise judicial review quite early through the application of the doctrine of *ultra vires*. Since the colonial legislature was created through a British legislation, it was subordinate to the British Parliament. Therefore any law that transgressed the provisions of the parent statute that constituted the colonial legislature could be void.<sup>65</sup> In 1877, the Calcutta High Court acquitted two persons accused of murder on the grounds that the law that they were convicted under was *ultra vires* the Indian Councils Act 1861. <sup>66</sup> The Privy Council would reverse the acquittal on appeal but did not question the powers of the High Court to review legislation for constitutionality. The Privy Council observed that the Indian legislature had its powers expressly limited by the British Parliament and could not go beyond its limits.<sup>67</sup> While there was no express provision for judicial review in the 1935 Act, the discussions before the parliamentary committee had recognised that this would be a necessary consequence of a distribution of legislative powers betewen the centre and the provinces.

Despite the gradual centralisation of the executive and legislature after 1857, the judicial architecture of India remained fragmented. The Indian High Courts Act of 1861 abolished the old 'Supreme Courts' established by Royal Charter in Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras and replaced them with High Courts which acted as the Supreme Courts of appeal, reference, and revision from all subordinate courts in their province. Subsequent legislation duplicated the High Courts in other provinces, though in recognition of their former royal status, the courts in Bombay, Madras, and

Calcutta continued to enjoy a limited original jurisdiction within the limits of the original Presidency towns. <sup>68</sup> The final seat of judicial authority remained the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, which exercised wide powers of superintendence, as the royal prerogative to give special appeal could not be restricted by a law in British India. Despite frequent avowals of the superiority of the Privy Council and praise for its wisdom, by the 1920s the Indian legal profession had begun to articulate a demand for a Supreme Court in India. Not only were appeals to the Privy Council expensive, time-consuming, and available only to the super-wealthy, but institutionally, the limited awareness of Indian laws and the absence of dissenting opinions hampered the clarity that lawyers wanted. The Privy Council's lack of connection with public opinion in India was one of its greatest flaws.

Several provincial authorities and almost all the legal public bodies such as bar associations and vakils' associations favoured a Supreme Court in India in the 1920s. However, when the proposal for a court with an all-India jurisdiction was finally put forward during the Round Table Conferences, it was driven more by concerns of federalism than by judicial autonomy or unresponsiveness. The Round Table Conferences proposed to create an all-India federation of the British Indian provinces and the Princely States and to provide responsible government in the provinces. Support for a Federal Court came from both the Indian States that were concerned about being dominated by the central legislature and provincial politicians who feared that the unelected central executive would curb their powers, and from minorities, who were worried about the consequences of majoritarian electoral politics. These concerns would require an independent judiciary, which would have the power to declare *ultra vires* legislative acts that encroached upon minority rights or other spheres of government. The Federal Structure Committee decided to grant the provinces juristic personalities so that they could sue each other and the Union government before the Federal Court. $\frac{69}{2}$ 

In the Third Round Table Conference, there was an attempt by the delegates from British India to expand the proposed Federal Court into a Supreme Court with a much wider jurisdiction over appeals. This was strongly resisted by representatives of Princely States, who feared judicial encroachment into the internal affairs of their States.<sup>70</sup> The Joint Select Committee deferred the decision on the Supreme Court by providing that the legislature may expand the jurisdiction of the Federal Court in the future. The Government of India Act 1935 provided for a Federal Court that would have jurisdiction not only over the interpretation of the Constitution but also over the interpretation of any laws enacted by the federal legislature. The Court also had appellate jurisdiction over civil and criminal cases, which were certified by the High Courts as involving a substantial question of law. The Act provided for the appointment of judges by the King on the recommendation of the Secretary of State for India, in order to immunise the Court from local politics. Compared to the High Courts, Federal Court judges had greater security of tenure. Their retirement age was 65; they were paid handsome salaries out of the consolidated funds which were not controlled by the legislature; the legislature was prohibited from discussing the conduct of judges or changing their salaries and tenure; and perhaps most importantly, Federal Court judges could only be removed on grounds of misbehaviour or infirmity upon the recommendation of the PC.

The Federal Court was finally inaugurated two years after the commencement of the Government of India Act. Despite the initial fanfare, expectations were low. The federation that had been the motivating factor behind the Court had failed to come into existence due to the recalcitrance of the Princely States, leaving the Court with a much-reduced jurisdiction. The first three judges, while eminent legal figures, were not known for their independence or boldness of vision. The new Chief Justice Maurice Gwyer had been a civil servant in London and was the main draughtsman of the 1935

Act. His successor, Patrick Spens was a Conservative MP before his elevation. Of the Indian judges, Varadachariar had a distinguished but fairly non-controversial judicial career; Sir Shah Sulaiman had famously upheld the conviction of the revolutionaries in the Meerut Conspiracy Case; MR Jayakar had been a leading moderate politician, favoured by the establishment; and before his appointment, Zafrullah Khan had led the government benches in the central legislative assembly and had been a member of the Vice-Regal cabinet.<sup>71</sup>

The new Court faced opposition from the existing legal establishment. Both the Privy Council and the High Courts saw the Federal Court as a potential encroacher on their jurisdiction and privileges. Viscount Simon, the Lord Chancellor, repeatedly questioned the need for the Court. The Chief Justices of Bombay and Calcutta publicly protested efforts to expand the Federal Court's jurisdiction, noting that to 'interpose a new untried court in Delhi between them could only diminish the status and authority of the High Court and make the Privy Council more remote … diminishing the confidence of the Indian public in the administration of justice in this country'.<sup>72</sup> The location of the Federal Court in New Delhi, a city with an undistinguished local bar, was viewed with considerable scepticism.

The remarkable successes of the Federal Court are attributable not to institutional factors, but to the vision and judicial entrepreneurship of its judges, notably Sir Maurice Gwyer. At the inaugural session of the Court, Chief Justice Gwyer reminded his audience of the judicial role:

Obeying the old maxim that it is the *part of a good judge to enlarge his jurisdiction*, I have for a moment looked far into the future … It will always be our endeavour to look at the Constitution of India … not with the cold eye of an anatomist but as a *living breathing organism*, which contains within itself as all life must, the seeds for future growth and development ... The Federal Court will declare and interpret the law, and that I am convinced in no spirit of formal or barren legalism.<sup>33</sup>

The judges could have easily chosen to develop a narrow and strict construction of the 1935 Act, but instead they interpreted it widely to admit a greater range of cases and devise creative solutions. The Act also emphasised its role as the apex court in India. Explaining why they had rejected four consecutive leaves to appeal to the Privy Council, Chief Justice Gwyer reminded the Viceroy 'that we were not a subordinate court … we were not disposed to encourage Indian litigants to seek for decisions on constitutional questions other than in their own Supreme Court, the first Court sitting on Indian soil with jurisdiction over the whole of British India'. $\frac{74}{4}$ 

The outlook of the Court undoubtedly influenced its jurisprudence in two key areas of federalism and civil liberties.<sup>75</sup> During the wartime emergency, the Federal Court emerged as a champion for civil liberties using its limited jurisdiction to strike down government detention policies, declare special criminal courts unconstitutional, and liberalise the standard of prosecution for the offence of sedition.<sup>76</sup> This resistance was all the more striking given the deference shown by the House of Lords towards the executive on the question of detentions during wartime.<sup> $77$ </sup> The criticism of the Federal Court shocked the colonial regime and caused considerable difficulties in maintaining the emergency.

On the question of federalism, the Court remained acutely aware that for the first time popular legislative assemblies had taken over the administration of the provinces. The provincial ministries were led by nationalist leaders, who were elected on an agenda for social and economic transformation. Several of the new transformative laws disturbed the status quo and led to legal challenges before the Federal Court. MV Pylee, in his magisterial review of the Federal Court's jurisprudence, argues that 'the impression is strong and the conclusion almost inescapable' that the Court was bent on establishing provincial autonomy under the new federation.<sup>78</sup> While the text of the Constitution favoured the centre over weak units the Court evolved doctrines to balance the powers.

Several provincial legislation dealing with urgent social and economic questions, such as the United Provinces Rent Remission Act or the Madras Temple Entry Act, could have been declared invalid on a narrow reading of provincial lists or for their incidental encroachment of the central lists. Acknowledging the popular support behind the provincial legislation and recognising that the intention of the 1935 Act had been to increase self-government in India, the Federal Court ruled liberally.<sup>79</sup> In deliberating the federalism cases, the Court frequently turned to precedents from the United States of America, Canada, and Australia, both drawing on their experience but also locating the rather precarious Indian federation amid the most successful ones. Upon his appointment, MR Jayakar insisted that the library should contain authoritative textbooks on federal constitutions as well as a complete set of Federal Court reports from Australia, Canada, South Africa, and America.<sup>80</sup>

Unsurprisingly, the Federal Court over its first decade built up a constituency of support not just among lawyers but also among the general public. Nationalist leaders of every ilk, from Gandhi to Rajaji to the Indian National Army invited the judges and the courts to arbitrate on thorny political questions, leading to an editorial in the *Dawn* to caustically remark that the 'CJI has been put in the form of a moral mentorship next only to the position occupied by the Metropolitan Archbishop of India'.<sup>81</sup> The Federal Court's stellar defence of civil liberties led to an increasing recognition that the Supreme Court should have a formal role in the defence of civil liberties. The Sapru Committee report on constitutional principles recommended that 'difficult questions of constitutional law involving civil liberties and rights should directly go up to the Federal court through its original jurisdiction rather than a long and protracted trial in the lower courts'. $\frac{82}{ }$ 

The supportive role played by the Federal Court on federalism reassured nationalist leaders, who noted that the Federal Court did not have the power to grant special leave to appeal and its jurisdiction was limited to cases where an appeal was certified by the High Court. The Sapru Committee recommended that these powers be granted to the Federal Court, making it more accessible.

## **V. CONCLUSION**

Indian constitutional law became a subject for examination at Bombay University in the 1920s and one of the early textbooks attempting to define the constitution noted:

[T]he term constitution is used in two widely differing senses. It may mean the written instrument of fundamental law which outlines the governmental system, defines the power of governing bodies, enumerates and guarantees rights of its citizens and lays down other principles and rules to be observed in carrying on the affairs of the state. Or it may denote, the whole body of laws, customs and precedents either partially or not at all committed to writing, which determine the organization and workings of government.<sup>83</sup>

This chapter seeks to explore both meanings of the Constitution in pre-Independence India. Instead of rejecting earlier texts as 'imperial' and therefore contaminated, it recognises the active participation of several members of the future Constituent Assembly in the drafting and reception of these earlier documents. The members of the Constituent Assembly and their adivsors did not operate behind a veil of ignorance, but as this chapter outlines, carried a certain conception of the constitutional order in their mind.

The theme of dualism ran through the constitutional history of India. From the dual system of

administration in Bengal to the diarchy introduced by the Montague–Chelmsford reforms, colonial government had continually separated the seats of power and responsibility. This had proved particularly frustrating to the Congress governments that were formed in 1937 and caused a deep suspicion about the fragmentation of execu-tive authority. The gradual construction of a federal system with the integration of the Presidencies in the nineteenth century and devolution to the provinces in the early twentieth had made the workings of the federal government, both administratively and fiscally, familiar questions. From the late nineteenth century, there was a belief that Indians were entitled to certain rights and a gradually expanding support for enumerated rights that would address political, social, and economic questions. The stellar leadership of the Federal Court in the 1940s had created a broad consensus on the need for an independent Supreme Court with powers of judicial review. But perhaps most striking was a belief shared by politicans, bureaucrats, and judges across the ideological divide that constitutions would continually evolve and that constitutionalism meant a commitment to principles (there existed disagreement as to what these principles would be) rather than to a strict interpretation of a text.

<sup>1</sup> *Virendra Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh* AIR 1954 SC 447 [28] (Vivian Bose J).

<sup>2</sup> For a representative sample, see MV Pylee, *Constitutional History of India 1600–1950* (Asia Publishing House 1967); AB Keith, *A Constitutional History of India 1600–1935* (Methuen and Co 1969); M Rama Jois, *Legal and Constitutional History of India* (NM Tripathi 1984); VD Kulshrestha, and BM Gandhi (ed), *V.D. Kulshrestha's Landmarks in Legal and Constitutional History of India* (5th edn, Eastern Book Company 1995).

<sup>3</sup> Sumit Sarkar, 'Indian Democracy: The Historical Inheritance' in Atul Kohli (ed), *The Success of India's Democracy* (Cambridge University Press 1991) 23–46.

<sup>4</sup> The position is best encapsulated by Ayesha Jalal, *Democracy and Authoritarianism in South Asia: A Comparative and Historical Perspective* (Cambridge University Press 1995); Oishik Sircar, 'Spectacles of Emancipation: Reading Rights Differently in India's Legal Discourse' (2012) 49(3) Osgoode Hall Law Journal 527.

<sup>5</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 212, 5 November 1948 (Damodar Swarup Seth). The term 'slavish imitation' gained some currency among critics in the Constituent Assembly and was used a few times. See also *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 349, 9 November 1948 (Raj Bahadur).

<sup>6</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 11 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 616, 17 November 1949.

<sup>7</sup> Upendra Baxi, 'Outlines of a Theory of Practice of Indian Constitutionalism' in Rajeev Bhargava (ed) *Politics and Ethics of the Indian Constitution* (Oxford University Press 2009) 92–118.

 $8$  Arvind Elangovan, 'The Making of the Indian Constitution: A Case for a Non-Nationalist Approach' (2014) 12 History Compass 1. For the consensus model of constitution making, see Granville Austin, *The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of Nation* (New Delhi: Oxford University Press 1966) and Sarbani Sen, *The Constitution of India: Popular Sovereignty and Democratic Transformations* (New Delhi: Oxford University Press 2007).

<sup>2</sup> Kim Lane Scheppele, 'Aspirational and Aversive Constitutionalism: The Case for Studying Cross-Constitutional Influence through Negative Models' (2003) 1(2) International Journal of Constitutional Law 296.

<sup>10</sup> Arthur Mitchell Fraas, *'They Have Travailed into a Wrong Latitude': The Laws of England, Indian Settlements and the British Imperial Constitution 1726–1773* (unpublished dissertation, Duke University 2011) [<http://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/handle/10161/3954](http://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/handle/10161/3954)>, accessed October 2015.

 $\frac{11}{2}$  Arthur Mitchell Fraas, 'Making Claims: Indian Litigants and the Expansion of the English Legal World in the Eighteenth Century' (2014) 15(1) Journal of Colonialism and Colonial History.

 $\frac{12}{5}$  Philip Stern, The Company-State: Corporate Sovereignty and the Early Modern Foundations of the British Empire in India (Oxford University Press 2011).

<sup>13</sup> Arthur Mitchell Fraas, *'They Have Travailed into a Wrong Latitude': The Laws of England, Indian Settlements and the British Imperial Constitution 1726–1773* (unpublished dissertation, Duke University 2011) [<http://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/handle/10161/3954](http://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/handle/10161/3954)>, accessed October 2015.

14 John F Shaw, *Charters Relating to the East India Company from 1600–1761* (Madras Government Press 1887) 232.

 $\frac{15}{2}$  Mary Sarah Bilder, 'Colonial Constitutionalism and Constitutional Law' in Daniel W Hamilton and Alfred L Brophy (eds) *Transformations in American Legal History: Essays in Honor of Professor Morton J. Horwitz* (Harvard University Press 2009)