# 2

# **Colonial Economy**

*Himanshu Roy*

# ❑❑ **Agriculture**

#### **Pre-colonial Backdrop**

Agriculture in India has been the bedrock of economy since the Harappan days except in centuries<sup>1</sup> that preceded the post-Vedic society. The unit of agricultural economy since the Magadhan empire, and particularly in the post-Gupta period<sup>2</sup> was the village. A village, away from towns, was considerably autonomous in the sphere of economy and culture. But, it was not a 'republic'. The role of *beparis, mandis, ganjs, haats, melas, etc.*, were substantial in linking a village with the market.<sup>3</sup> A village was concerned with the state apparatus, by and large, only at the time of revenue payment. However, it is not to deny the other mundane linkages that existed between a village and the state. The land, by and large, was not the commodity to be purchased and sold. A village had certain customary rights over the village-land which was exercised through *panchayat.* The caste structure was an integral part of this economy which was, by and large, the politico-economic-cultural form of the present day class. Almost every village was horizontally stratified into different castes consisting of certain economically and culturally dominant castes, and certain economically and culturally subjugated castes. It was the economically and culturally dominant castes who used to dominate the village governance through the institution of *panchayat*, and exercised rights on behalf of the entire village. The cultivable land was not communally owned, neither was their agricultural produce. The village was not a commune, neither was the *panchayat.* The *panchayat*, though, on behalf of the entire village community performed numerous kinds of roles, like dispute settlement, development and religious works, maintenance of law and order, etc., and exercised rights over the grazing land, forests, irrigation canals, etc.,<sup>4</sup> but it was never above the caste structure of the village in which dominant castes used to control the affairs. No doubt, the *panchayat* also consisted of individuals of subjugated castes, but it remained an institution of dominance and governance of the dominant castes and, by and large, always played a conformist role. It maintained the property relations of the time existing in the form of horizontal caste structure*—dharma* order—in which the dominant castes enjoyed the customary religious rights, privileges, sanctions, etc., over the land and other forms of property. Though the *panchayat* sometimes went against the interests of the individual peasant families of the dominant castes, the phenomenon of domination-subjugation always continued irrespective of the mergers of tribal aboriginal and foreign invaders into the village society and additions of hundreds of new castes in the system.

The dominant castes could dominate the caste structure and the village governance because the major chunk of the village's cultivable lands were owned by them. The individual peasant families were the customary owners of the land and agricultural tools, like plough, sickle, spade, bullocks, etc. However, the actual ploughing, tilling, sowing, harvesting and thrashing, manuring, etc., were done by the subjugated castes, barring ploughing, did perform other functions of cultivation, but only as their secondary jobs<sup>5</sup>. The agricultural produce that came out of this cultivation was kept partly for revenue payment, partly for *Panchayat*, partly for household consumption and partly for the families of the subjugated castes for their services performed. Though the families of the subjugated castes did possess cultivable land of their own, particularly intermediate castes, like *teli*, barber, potter, iron/gold smiths, etc., enjoyed customary rights over their lands but the amount of their possessions were nominal which did not fetch them substantial grains required by their families in a crop year. Hence, their lands remained their secondary source of earning, the primary source being the grains earned from their *jajmans.* The division of labour in village society was not evident. In some matters, it was overlapping. The peasant families of the dominant castes, for example, performed some subsidiary functions, like cattle grazing, wood collecting, etc. Similarly, the families of the subjugated castes, besides performing the above-said functions including their professional, hereditary functions, like cultivation, making iron tools, ornaments, pottery, shoes, etc., for their *jajmans* also did cultivation for their own families either on their own land or on the land granted to them by their *jajmans* or *maliks* as subsidiary function.

Technologically, agricultural and other kinds of tools required by the villagers had undergone progressive transformation, like three-stage development of water wheels (*rahat*), improved techniques of artificial manuring (mentioned in *Krsi Parasa*), growing number of new crops or the new varieties of old crops, etc., but the pace of development was too slow. The European peasants while struggling against harsh nature developed in leaps and bounds, and possessed more aggressive will, were at constant lookout for better technology, but, the Indian peasantry remained slow, easy-going in technological development<sup>6</sup>, which hindered their material prosperity emanating from the technological development. Most villagers had scanty clothes, almost no shoes, lived in mud-thatched houses, ate on leaves or in earthen utensils, cooked in earthen utensils, used straw as mattresses in winter, and so on. The tools used by the peasants, either for cultivation or for handicrafts, saw no improvement for generations. The iron and goldsmiths, for example, kept on using charcoal, instead of coal, in their furnaces. Even their furnaces did not witness change for years. Instead of iron in their crushers, the oilmen used wood to produce mustard oil in the similar way they used to extract sugarcane juice. The cobbler, weaver, potter used same techniques which their forefathers had bequeathed to them. For cultivation, instead of iron, hard wood was used to furrow the fields by poor peasants; wooden buckets and leather bags were used for irrigation, pit wells rather than deep wells were more common in use. It is not that the uses of iron, coal, deep wells, etc., did not exist; rather, their use was spatially widespread across the subcontinent. But their usage in everyday life was lacking. By that time, instead of focusing on technology, people were more dependent on human labour or even on animal power.<sup>7</sup> The gap between the actual cultivation done by a peasant family in a crop year and the total cultivable areas it possessed was far wide which was more due to technological backwardness than anything else. If the total amount of cultivable areas possessed by a peasant family was, say, twenty acres, then the actual cultivation was done only in five-seven acres of land. The technological factors responsible for this gap were also the factors responsible for slow expansion of the cultivable lands in the villages.

Technological development, no doubt, took place in India, but its pace was outmatched by the European society. The political centralization of the European states against the fragmented polity of India compensated the rest of the better things which India had. At this historical backdrop, the British East India Company arrived at the political landscape, defeated its Indian adversaries one by one, expanded its political territory, and finally became the master of the land.

## ❑❑ **The Transformation**

#### **The New Policies**

The victory of the East India Company at the battle of Plassey in 1757 led to the formulation of some major new policies for India which saw the beginning of the demise of the traditional village economy and social relations associated to it. The first step in this direction came in the form of New Land Settlement in different stages and in different forms, in different regions. The crux of this policy was the imposition of ever-increasing heavy revenue on the *ryots*, irrespective of failure of crops, and commoditification of land and its produce. The second step was the adoption of policy of Free Trade, the opening up of the Indian market, the vast rural society, to the British industrial goods. The essence of this policy was the elimination of monopoly of trade of the British East India Company restricting it to only administrative roles, and the beginning of the free play of competitive market forces in the Indian society. The third major step was the introduction of Steam Age in India. The essence of this policy was the qualitative transformation of rural society into a classic colony of industrial capitalism of England.<sup>8</sup>The aim was to progressively convert the Indian agriculture into a branch of industry so as to accrue the agricultural produce for the English industrial society. The new policies that took shape in different stages came due to changes in the composition of the British capitalist class which led to changes in their interests in India. The changes were guided by the vilest interests, the consequences of which were the destruction of the traditional economy and social relations, emergence of capitalism in agriculture and the conversion of a section of Indians as the subordinate to the British capital. By 1947, India had sunk deeper into the problems and prospects of capitalism.

Let us now analyze the situation and necessities that led to the formulation of new policies by the East India Company.

In 1757, after the battle of Plassey, the Company, the part of the British mercantile class earned for itself, for the first time, the *zamindari* of the 24 *Parganas* was further extended to the districts of Burdwan, Midnapore, and Chittagong in 1760. By 1765, the entire Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa came under its purview. By 1856, entire India came under unprecedented economic power of the Company. It utilized the opportunity by first imposing an ever increasing heavy revenue on the peasantry and second, by controlling the entire trade and commerce of Eastern India. The excitement of this political and economic power was so intense that the Company had begun to fleece and plunder the Indian traders and peasantry, literally. The phenomenon became so monstrous that even Warren Hastings had to accept this fact. He says, "the government requires so large a proportion of the produce of the country, causes beyond the reach of human control will occasionally operate to render some indulgence in favour of its subjects indispensable, and the formality of agreements will, but ill-justify the vigour of exactions."<sup>9</sup> The rapacious greed of the Company to control the biggest amount of agricultural produce, which was beyond the Company's personnel to collect, in the initial few years of its rule led to two simultaneous phenomena. First, "the lands were … let out for a year on the best terms procurable. A strict preference was given and every indulgence shown to native inhabitants…. Hereditary *zamindars* were to remain in possession of their *zamindarees* as long this could be done with safety to the revenue."<sup>10</sup> The term of the contract, however, kept changing with minor modifications. Sometimes, it was given to the "highest bidder, whether they were the previous *zamindars* or not."<sup>11</sup> This change in the mode of revenue collection continued in Bengal till 1793 when Permanent Settlement was done by Lord Cornwallis. But, in spite of this settlement, one thing remained unchanged as the highest possible revenue collection by the *zamindars* continued. The second phenomenon that happened as the result of the first was "the lands … suffered unheard of depopulation by the famine and mortality"<sup>12</sup> which took place within twelve years of Company's rule and even then the collections violently kept up to their former standard had added to the distress of the country and threatened a general decay of the revenue."<sup>13</sup> Though draught, famine, etc., kept on recurring even in the later years of the Raj, the kind of situation Bengal faced in the initial years of the Company rule, that is depopulation of urban centres, fall in agricultural productivity, etc., didn't occur elsewhere with the same ferocity even at the time of transition in Madras and Bombay presidencies, in Sindh, Punjab, etc. In fact, after the New Land Settlement in different parts of India, the urban centres begun to thrive with ever-increasing population, agricultural productivity increased, and trade and commerce picked up with greater intensity.<sup>14</sup>The benefits though went to the British ruling class and his Indian partners, the masses had only the tickle down effect. Nevertheless, the New Land Settlement and later on, the Free Trade and Steam Age turned out to be historically progressive steps.

The New Land Settlement had different forms in different regions. In Bengal, Bihar, sections of North Madras (Northern districts), Orissa, and districts of Varanasi, permanent *zamindari* settlement existed. In parts of Central India and Avadh, temporary *zamindari*s settlement were in vogue. In Bombay, Sindh, Berar, Madras, Assam, etc., constituting 51 per cent of the territory, *Ryotwari* system was applied. In Punjab, parts of Central India, Northwest province, etc., *mahalwari* system existed. These forms of revenue collections were known by the units through which labour produce was sucked out of peasantry. In *mahalwari*, *mahal* was the unit of revenue collection. In *Ryotwari*, it was individual *ryots* who paid the revenue directly to the state. And in *Zamindari*, it were the *zamindars* who collected the revenue from the *ryots* and paid it to the state while keeping a portion for themselves as commission.<sup>15</sup>

For generations, all the three forms had existed in different regions, and in different stages of development in the pre-British India. Now under the British, their nature was transformed and they played a different role.<sup>16</sup> The resettlements of land laid the foundation of capitalism in agriculture and provided an in-built mechanism for the individual mobility to the subjugated castes. The subjugated castes, however, remained by and large subjugated even under the new social milieu. And the dominance of dominant castes continued. Their wealth, power, placement, status, etc., which they had inherited from history helped them in maintaining their position even under the new condition.<sup>17</sup>

The variation in the form of revenue collection that different parts of the country witnessed occurred due to the changing needs of the British. In pre-1973, in Bengal, the revenue collection was auctioned to the highest bidders. This became a practice to collect maximum revenue in the shortest possible time to finance the possible wars that may be waged by the Company in other parts of the country. It was also to ensure *"*the long-term reproduction of the conditions of appropriation"<sup>18</sup> which had declined in the 1770s and early 1780s. Most of the auction bidders were individuals of dominant castes or members of the Mughal state apparatus who were rich, influential, and powerful. Even after 1793, it was found convenient to continue with the same league of people because being influential, powerful, and rich, they collected and deposited the revenue to the Britishers on time and helped them in maintaining law and order in the society.<sup>19</sup>Their economic and political powers got linked with the British and they developed one state in existence during the British rule as their stake, which once upon a time, was tied up with the existence of the Mughal state. The 1793 settlement, however, proved to be an economic loss to the British, because as per their terms of contract they couldn't enhance the percentage of revenue to be paid to the state. The experience of the pre- and post-1793 periods made the English wiser. They abhorred to repeat the same situation in other parts of the country which came under their rule over the years. To come out of this situation, the best means they planned were to implement *ryotwari, mahalwari*, and the so-called 'permanent settlement' or *zamindari* in which approximately after every 30 years revenue was enhanced. The gap between the Permanent Settlement and other land settlements were more than 15-20 years. The British, in the meantime, had settled down, had no threat to their existence in India, had developed their own state apparatus, and had their fixed source of profit. They were not in a hurry to collect maximum possible revenue in shortest possible time as they did in Bengal. The company, thus, applied the most profitable systems of revenue collection in different circumstances in which it was placed in India from time to time. These systems were neither the figment of its imagination, nor the development of its better understanding of the Indian society.<sup>20</sup> On the contrary; these were the most profitable ventures as these went for in the given circumstances.<sup>21</sup>

While the land settlements were the products of the mercantile needs of the Company, the Free Trade and Steam Age were the products of the needs of the British industrial class who, as the most dominant section of capitalism had arrived on the British political scene in the 1830s. The opening-up of the Indian market in stages, after 1813, and the introduction of steam, after 1853, were the products of the pressure that this class had applied on the Company in India for their interests. The Company had outlived its historic role and was acting as barriers in the path of new class that had emerged in England after the Industrial Revolution. The industrial class, which had two clearly defined roles, no longer requires the commercial monopoly of the Company in India as it was obstructing them in their missions. Ever in search of market, this class found India to be the best dumping ground for their factory-produced products as it was a protected market under the Company. The 1813 and 1833 Acts provided the British industrial class a place for the free play of the market forces. But the inundation that begun after the Acts led to the glut in the market in the absence of the purchasing power of the Indians and finding no other means to come out of this economic rot, they were compelled to create the condition for the growth of purchasing powers of Indians that ultimately led to the beginning of industrial revolution in India.<sup>22</sup> The process began with the introduction of new techniques of cultivation of longstaple cotton yarns and strong silk filatures and got momentum with the introduction of railway and the establishment of textile and jute factories. The British, however, did not let go the benefits of technological development to the Indians without the price. They used these technologies particularly yarn, filature, railway, etc., more for their own benefits than for the Indians. To ward off threat from American textile, they helped in the development of long-staple cotton yarn for their factories in England. Similarly, they used railways for the transportation of military personnel in India, of British factory-produced goods from the port-towns to interior parts, and of agricultural produce and mineral resources from interior parts to port-towns for their shipment to England.

All these policies had wide-ranging impacts on the Indian society. The various inter-dependent and inter-connected forces, these policies unleashed during the course of their existence, led to qualitative transformation of the Indian society that was never witnessed in the past.

#### **The Impact**

The three major policies discussed above laid the foundation and expansion of mercantile capitalism in India in almost the first 100 years, and then of industrialist capitalism in the following ninety years. Since the British merchants, and later the industrialists were part of the social forces of Britain of the 18th and 19th centuries, hence it was obvious that their crucial policies were guided by their class interests that finally reduced their affairs to the commoditification of land, to the laws of trade and commerce and to the laws of the capital. Consequently, the first thing they did was to convert land and its produce into objects which began to be purchased and sold. These were given an exchange-value through commercial transactions; the auctioning of revenue to the highest bidders helped in their conversion of bidders into mercantile speculators, hoarders, and usurers which were mostly individuals of dominant castes. This set of people who emerged as class-for-itself in course of time created layers of middle men who were almost the mirror-image of the former albeit on smaller scale.<sup>23</sup> At the bottom of the ladder were the actual cultivators who, in course of time, begun to be converted into bonded labourers, landless peasants, share-croppers, tenant-farmers, agricultural proletariat, etc. Similarly, in the *ryotwari* and *mahalwari* are as the dominant families of the old days emerged as rich peasant proprietors, usurers, hoarders etc., and created almost the replica of social formation that existed in the *zamindari* areas.<sup>24</sup> Majority of the actual cultivators in India, in course of time, begun to lose their property in the battles of competition of wealth and capital that got fillip after the 1830s. The extra-economic concern that had begun before the 1830s compensated the unfinished tasks of uprooting of peasantry through their continued operations. Basically, there was no difference in the objectives of different forms of land settlements while *ryotwari* and *mahalwari* were the caricatures of the French peasant-proprietorship; the *zamindari* was the caricature of English landlordism. In fact, throughout the world, capitalism in agriculture has developed essentially in two forms; one was the French model; and the other was the English model. Both these models were applied in different parts of India. But, being a colony, the models turned out to be caricatures of the originals as the British were interested in their own benefits. Social development was never on the agenda for the British. The development that occurred was the by-product of the policies formulated for the surplus extraction from the Indians.

The land settlements sucked the Indian peasantry to their last grain. For example, in 1764, the revenue collected amounted to `8,180,000; in 1771, it went up to `23,400,400.<sup>25</sup> But, this was merely the tip of the iceberg, because these were only the officially recorded amounts which were paid to the government. The unofficial amounts extracted by the *zamindars* and the other middlemen were much higher than the official one, and multi-dimensional. The values of the commodities of the *ryots*, for example, collected by the *zamindars*, like milk, oil, curd, earthen utensils, grains, etc., during the family and village festivals were never paid. Similarly, the values of the labour that *ryots* spent on festivities for the *zamindars* were never paid. Above all, the labour spent by the *ryots* on ploughing, irrigating, harvesting, and threshing for *zamindars* were either low-paid or unpaid. The defiant were physically assaulted, including incidents of torching their houses, lifting of cattle, and molestation of women, and so on. The *ryots* having no clearly defined contracts with the landowners, under this system, were subject to all kind of arbitrary extractions. Hastings wrote, "It is the *zamindar's* interest to exact the greatest rent he can from the *ryots*. It is as much against his interests to address the deals by which the *ryots* hold their lands and pay their rents to certain bounds and defences against his own authority."<sup>26</sup> In the *ryotwari* and *mahalwari* areas, "the foundation of such a work was laid by the government itself."<sup>27</sup>As this defined and undefined revenue collection increased in proportion from year to year, so increased the rural indebtedness of the Indian *ryots.* The economic burden, consequently, led to the growth of tension in the peasant families which resulted in the division of landholdings, personal belongings, cattle, agriculture implements, houses, etc. The division of land, however, was the temporary solution from the daily bickerings of the families. In the long run, it didn't benefit the divided peasant families. Due to constant fragmentation of land, generation after generation, landholding per peasant family was considerably declined. As a result, they could not generate sufficient produce to sustain themselves under the laws of commerce and capital. They were compelled to sell or mortgage their lands and other properties to *zamindars, sahukars*, etc., to get some money for family needs. Once the money was borrowed, they were unable to return it and reclaim their lands. Majority of them kept paying the interests which continued for generations. In course of time, the properties of the debtors used to become the properties of the *zamindars, sahukars*, etc. The debtors used to be transformed into bonded labourers, landless peasants, agricultural, industrial proletariat, etc., from which they never redeemed themselves. A survey of the debt data amply demonstrated existence of this phenomenon. For example, in 1911, the Indian debt was `300 crore, in 1925, it went up to `600 crore, in 1929 it further went up to `900 crore, and in 1937, it jumped to 1800 crore.<sup>28</sup> This phenomenon, in fact, under the laws of capitalism operational in agrarian society was bound to occur or else capitalism would have ceased to exist. It created a kind of situation in which either one expanded his properties or gradually lost it. The debt, mortgage, and sale of lands and other properties of one became the wealth and capital for the others. Though, for a brief period, at the time of transition, this phenomenon hampered the growth of agricultural produce to some extent, but it did not continue for long. In course of time, some other persons substituted the former owners and the process of production once again resumed with a new vigour. The fragmentation of lands at one pole and their concentration at other pole continued to recur.

The ascendency of the industrial class on the political landscape of England in the 1830s, however, brought some redeeming features in agriculture in India which begun to be felt since the 1840s. The renovation of old irrigational canals and the construction of new ones, development of river and road communications, construction of barrages to regulate the flow of rivers, scientific development of cotton-seeds, development of agricultural tools, etc., were some of the redeeming features, though these were not short of motivation, "The industrial interests found that their trade declined instead of increasing. For the four years ending with 1846, the imports to India from Great Britain were to an amount of `261 million: for the four years ending in 1850, they were only 253 millions … They found out that the power of purchasing their goods was contracted in India to the lowest possible point ... Then came the short cotton-crop in the United States which caused them a loss of £ 11,000,000 in the 1850s, and they were exasperated at depending on America, instead of deriving a sufficiency of raw-cotton from the East Indies. Besides, they found that in all attempts to apply capital to India they met with impediments and chicanery on the part of Indian authorities … [Thus] the more the industrial interests became dependent on the Indian market, the more it felt the necessity of creating fresh productive powers in India."<sup>29</sup>Keeping this interest in mind, the British began some limited technological development in India and the benefits of which also trickled down to the *ryots*, though primarily it helped the Indian and British dominant classes. For example, the development of communication increased the intensity of the use of iron in agricultural tools and handicrafts. Most of the peasant families began to use iron instead of hard wood fitted in the ploughs for furrowing agricultural lands. Similarly, wood or stones used in crusher to produce oil or sugarcane juice was replaced by iron. The wooden buckets and the leather bags used by peasants to draw water from pit-wells or deep-wells for irrigation were replaced by iron buckets. Ropes manufactured out of grass and straw were replaced by jute ropes. Charcoal used by iron and goldsmiths in their blast furnaces was replaced by coal. Woods of *imali*, *kail*, oak etc., used by potters to bake earthen utensils was replaced by coal. Besides these, the construction of barrages and irrigational canals helped in the conversion of uncultivable and fallow land into cultivable lands and reduced the dependency of peasantry on the unpredictable monsoon. The technological development, thus, helped in enhancing the agricultural productivity and gave boost to commercialization of crops which had already begun due to the demand of revenue in cash.

Apart from these impacts, there were some other consequences of the new policies. There took place a change in the cropping-pattern. Particular areas begun to cultivate specific crops which provided monetary benefits. This was in contrast with the preceding village economy which used to cultivate almost everything required for everyday life. Monetization of crops led to greater circulation of currency. Frequency and volume of transactions of agro-products increased. Money began to play greater role in everyday life. Social relations progressively reduced to cash-nexus. Wage system gradually replaced the old *jajmani* system. Services castes became more professional. Old division of labour gave way to new division. Village life no longer remained attached to typical "combination of hand spinning, hand weaving, and hand-tilling agriculture" as once Marx had remarked. Oilman, cobbler, barber, potter, iron and goldsmiths, etc., no longer remained cultivators but were now regarded as professionals. The traditional disparity between domestic industries and agriculture broke down. The servicing castes could not match the time-saving and cost-effective products of the factories, and thus were doomed irrevocably.

The new class polarization began to substitute the old caste-class polarization. The old dominant-subjugated castes no longer played their respective roles. Though majority of the old dominant castes remained dominant and majority of the subjugated castes remained subjugated, their old defined roles changed. Extra economic coercion was replaced by economic expropriation. Individual's mobility in social hierarchy increased both in volume and frequency. Old concepts of pollution and purity were no longer applicable.<sup>30</sup> Polarization between cultivators and non-cultivators became sharper and irreconcilable with growing number of cultivators getting uprooted from their lands and number of non-cultivators expanding their properties. The situation became such that in 1926, over 10 acres of land in India was into the hands of 24 per cent of the population, while 35 per cent of the population had 1-5 acres of land and 23 per cent of the population had one acre or less of land. Region-wise, Madras had 19 non-working landlords per thousand in 1901. In 1911, it went up to 23 per thousand, and in 1921, it jumped to 49 per thousand. Bengal witnessed an increase of 62 per cent on non-cultivating landlords between 1921-31. On the other extreme, there was a steady increase in the number of agricultural labourers. Madras witnessed an increase of 84 labourers per thousand in 1901-31 period. Bengal had the growth of 50 per cent between 1921-31 period.<sup>31</sup> The above data, however did not reveal the growth of privatization of communal lands of villages appropriated by the dominant class, which increase with the development of productive forces, commercialization of land and its produce, and increasing pressure on land due to population growth.

The changes in the Company and social structure led to the growth of inter-dependence of the villages, from numerous local inter-dependence there emerged a national agriculture tied up with the international economy under the hegemony of the British capital. The social classes that emerged under this hegemony underwent similar transformations. They progressively acquired international character in their world outlook. The inalienated, vegetative, corporate life of the village symbolized by the *panchayat*  almost came to an end. The old cultural vibrancy and fatalism that once stalked the countryside were gradually replaced by the Gandhian and Marxian politics. Nationalism and socialism became the keywords of social development.

The British rule in India, as Marx had noted, thus, accomplished a double mission: one destructive, the other regenerating, the annihilation of old Indian society and the transplantation of western patterns in India. Both missions were actuated by the vilest interests. And it must have been sickening to witness the fulfillment of the two missions.<sup>32</sup> But the development of capitalism under colonial system proceeds in this way, as the world history shows, or else it would have ceased to be colonial capitalism for "people who are weak and who are left behind in this march of time invite trouble and ultimately have only themselves to blame."<sup>33</sup>

## ❑❑ **Industries**

#### **The Backdrop**

Since the Harappan days, the urban industries have been one of the dominant pillars of economy. They played a vital role in the enrichment of material life of Indians and the world community at large, particularly the upper strata of society. In the course of their evolution, they passed through successive phases of ruins and developments, expansions and contracts, qualitative and quantitative technological developments. They had no unilinear continuous growth. The post-Harappan society, for example, till the Buddhist time, had no urban industry. The Mauryan, Gupta, Sultanate, Mughal periods, etc., witnessed the revival and expansion of industrial economy after their interregnums. The industrial economy had relative autonomy from agriculture. The industries were located in the port-towns, in the state and provincial capitals, and in religious centres, particularly after the Gupta period. In the Buddhist and Mauryan periods, however, there was general growth of towns as the monarchical form of state was evolving and the numerous tribal proto-states were being incorporated into monarchical states. The industries were based on commodity production, export-oriented, and catered to the needs of the upper strata of the Indians and foreigners. The craftsmen were either slaves or free professionals working either individually or in *Srenis.* There existed division of works among the slaves working in the *karkhanas*, as it happened during the Sultanate period<sup>34</sup>, or among different *Srenis* having expertise into different arts, as it existed in the ancient India<sup>35</sup>, or among individuals working within a *Sreni.* A crude kind of wage system was operational. The wages were paid, sometimes every day, sometimes after the completion of work entrusted to a particular *Serni* or to an individual worker. The strength and the size of work place varied depending on the nature of industry and work. Some manufactories consisted of thousands of slaves<sup>36</sup> or free craftsmen, some consisted of twelve, fifteen or twenty workmen. The commodities coming out of the production centres were wide-ranging in nature. Pottery, sword, cotton-cloth, silk and numerous other items comprised the list. Out of this long list of items, textile and pottery were produced and exported even in the Harappan days.<sup>37</sup> In fact, the existence of commodity production industries and trade and commerce presupposes the existence of division of work, specialization and classes which were in vogue in Indian society ever since the Harappan days. The expropriation of surplus produce, from agriculture with ever increasing taxes to maintain ever-increasing luxurious life of the vassals reached its limit as the expansion of new village settlements in hitherto untouched areas stagnated. The stagnation checked the growth of volume of surplus produce. The top-heavy administration, which had grown in the initial years of expansion of agriculture and which sustained itself mainly through agricultural expropriation begun to feel the pinch of the stagnation; and as the stagnation continued, so increased the taxes on the peasantry to maintain their life-styles. While this vicious circle in agriculture continued, the shortage begun to be met by the imposition of heavy taxes on merchants. The merchants, after the initial let out, begun to feel the pinch with ever-increasing demand of wealth by the feudal lords to bridge the deficit of agriculture. The pressure on trade and commerce impacted the industry and the artisans. Thus, begun the economic crisis without any let-up under a dynastic rule. As this crisis deepened, the central authority become weaker in the absence of revenue and military power which were contributed by the feudatories. Simultaneously, the process of carving out independent provinces from the central empire by the powerful feudatories in order to maintain their lifestyle and power begun, thereby, finally leading to the disintegration of the empire. Thus, the crisis emerging from the agriculture and gripping the industry and trade and commerce ruined the Sultanate and Mughal dynasties as it had ruined the Guptas and post-Gupta dynasties. And by the time the next cycle of revival could bloom fully, the trend had started in Bengal and in other parts of India, there intervened the British East India Company which exploited the political division, captured the political power, and nipped the traditional cycle of economic revival under the traditional dynasties in the bud. Whether the economic revival could have led India to the path of capitalist development, it is difficult to say. But "for most features of economy the meager evidence processed so far suggests continuity rather than sharp change".<sup>38</sup>

#### **The Transformation**

The establishment and expansion of the British rule, at first, led to devastation of some of the major industrial centres and unbalanced the relationship between industry and agriculture and trade and commerce in the regions which came under their control. The revival of industry, agriculture, trade and commerce which had begun in the post-Aurangzeb phase at provincial levels, were dislocated. It all began with the extra economic control over production and distribution of goods which was different from the control over the industrial machinery and the production process that happened in England after the industrial revolution. The operational method of the Company has been described vividly by Warren Hastings. He says, "they (the Company and their collectors and chiefs of factories) force advances of money on the weavers, and compel them to give cloths in return at an arbitrary valuation, which is often no more than the cost of the materials, so that the poor weaver only lives by running in debt to his employers and, thus becomes slaves for life."<sup>39</sup> A magnified form of their control could also be observed in the writings of William Bolts which was operational in 1722 in very limited areas and became widespread, engulfing every sector profitable to the Company after 1757. He writes, "A number of these weavers are generally also registered in the books of the Company's *gomastahs*, thus, not permitted to work for any others; being transferred from one to another as so many slaves subject to the tyranny and roguery of every succeeding *gomastah.* The cloth, when made, is collected in a warehouse for the purpose called a *khattah*, where it is kept, marked with the weaver's name till it is convenient for the *gomastah* to hold a *khattah*, as the term is, for assorting and fixing the price of each piece: on which, business is employed an officer called the "company's *Jachendar* or assorter. The roguery practiced in this department is beyond imagination, but all terminates in defrauding the poor weaver, for the prices which the Company's *gomastahs*  and in confederacy with them the *Jachendars* fix upon the goods are in all places at least 15 per cent and in some even 40 per cent less than the goods so manufactured would sell for the public bazzar, or market upon a free sale. The weaver, therefore, desirous of obtaining the justifiable price of his labour, frequently attempts to sell his cloth privately to others, particularly to the Dutch and French *gomastahs*, who are always ready to receive it. This occasions the English Company's *gomastahs* to set his peons over the weaver to watch him and not infrequently to cut the piece out of the loom when nearly finished."<sup>40</sup> Since the textile industry of India-cotton cloth, silk, muslin, embroidery, brocades, etc., was world famous, and its products had the maximum demand, therefore, most profitable, hence it was the first target of control. The control over production was further extended to cash crops, such as indigo, spices, jute, tea, coffee, etc.

Actually, the term started with the misuse of *farman* which was issued by the Mughal Emperor in 1717. The *farman* had authorized the Company to trade in Bengal for export and import of goods "without paying taxes and the right to issue passes or *dastakas* for movement of such goods. The Company's servants were also permitted to trade, but were not covered by this *farman.* They were required to pay the same taxes as the Indian merchants."<sup>41</sup> But the Company's servants always misinterpreted this *farman*  and indulged in trade and commerce whenever they could manage without paying taxes. They even sold these passes to other merchants which earned them additional revenues. This evasion of tax by the Company's servants was a perpetual source of conflict ever since the *farman* was issued. After 1757, the Company's servants freely engaged themselves in the business and "monopolized the trade to the ruin of the native traders and thousands of weavers…. Warren Hestings said, "The collectors trade with the money they receive in the districts which affects the circulation as commerce of the country."<sup>42</sup> Thus, in the initial thirty years of the Company's rule, it were the Company and its servants who had total monopoly over trade and commerce in Bihar, Bengal, and Orissa. And as the political power of the Company expanded to other parts of the country, their control over trade and commerce as well as over production was extended. But the ferocity of the British rule in Bengal Presidency and the devastation it caused was never witnessed in other provinces. Bengal Presidency faced the severest brunt of their rule because the Company used it as a springboard to catapult over entire India. The revenue collected from Bengal Presidency was used to wage the relentless wars in other parts of the country, for capturing political and economic power. Therefore, the more revenue it could collect, the better it was for the Company as the money provided it more military strength and bargaining power with the native rulers. And it was more or less, with Bengal's revenue that the Company expanded and strengthened its military power, waged war in other parts of India and capturing the country entirely. The more the military wars the Company waged in India and abroad during that period, the more revenue was sucked out. Bengal Presidency being the first area of under the Company's rule, therefore, faced the greatest exploitation and devastation, and was made to bleed white.

The second step of the Himalayan loot of India by the Company came in the form of imposition of heavy taxes "levied on shops, looms, cattle, sundry profession, etc.," besides opium, salt, land, raw cotton, silk, etc. "Nearly three-fifths of the net revenue are delivered from land", observes Marx, "Out of one-seventh from opium, and upward of one-ninth from salt. These resources, together, yield 85 per cent of the whole receipts". The rest 15 per cent came from all the sundry property and professions levied. The *Motarfa* revenue collected from the Madras Presidency alone yielded £50,000 which was equivalent to the yearly dinners of East India House. The salt revenue collected in 1780-86 yielded £986,450 from which a 'reasonable share' was paid to the Company's servants as emoluments. In fact, one of the motives of the Company to raise the salt tax from 5-50 per cent was to pay higher emoluments to Company's servants to check the malpractices by the servants of the Company by indulging in personal trade for their personal fortune vis-a-vis the Company became a concern for the masters of the Company. "In order to put an end to corruption", Clive, 'the great robber', "proposed that the totally inadequate salaries of the civil servants should be raised and they should be absolutely prohibited from embarking on private trade." As a result, "new regulations were framed for increasing the duties of the Company on salt from 35 per cent to 50 per cent" which was earlier 5 per cent paid by *gentoo* and 2.5 per cent paid by the Muslims at Hooghly on the wholesale price of salt transported into the interior parts of the country. This taxation monopoly of the Company over salt trade and payment of 'reasonable share' as emolument from the net profit from salt to Company's servants continued till 1857 and further, in different forms. The Earl of Albermarle gives a vivid description of the corruption that was practiced in salt trade in those days in the following words: "A great proportion of the salt for inland consumption throughout the country is purchased from the Company by large wholesale merchants at less than four rupees per *maund;* these mix a fixed proportion of sand, chiefly got a few miles to the south-west of Dacca, and send the mixture to a second, or counting the government as the first, to a third monopolists at about `5 or 6. This dealer adds more earth or ashes, and thus passing through more hands, from the big towns to villages the price is still raised to `8-10 and the proportion of adulteration from 25-40 per cent... The Indian masses, thus, paid not only the higher amount for salt to the merchants' coffer, but also ate sand, ash, etc., more than salt and paid dearly to the merchants' coffer in terms of health which the Company brought along with its rule."

The third step of the Company in this direction came in the form of seizure of wealth of native rulers, merchants, and bankers. The local rulers, whether in the countryside or in the towns, were directly/indirectly forced to part with heavy amount to the Company's masters and servants, officially and privately, in the form of precious commodities, like stones and metals as well as landed property of importance. And it is a well-known fact that the Nawabs of Bengal including Mir Jafar and Mir Qasim paid lakhs of rupees to the Company and its officials. Beside this, the investment of Indian merchants and bankers, in the industries and trade and commerce, were also seized. Their movable/immovable property, whichever they could lay their hands on were confiscated. Even the property of the craftsmen, guild masters, textile-workers were seized, and were returned only after payment of bribe in the form of money, gold, silver or precious gem stones. The services performed by the barbers, cobblers, washermen, servants or the craftsmen, privately or officially for the Company's personnel were either low paid or never paid. The defiant were brutally thrashed in public as well as in private, jailed, dragged in streets behind the horse-drawn carriages or their hands chopped off. The ferocity of their rule was so intense that within twenty years of their existence as paramount power in Bengal Presidency the manufacturers, *ryats*, bankers, merchants, and other common people bled to white and threatened to cause the decline of the Company's ever-increasing amount of revenue collection, services performed, and the rapacious greed of the Company and its personnel. As a result of this, the Company was forced to mend certain ongoing state of affairs. The first step was to abolish numerous petty costume *chawkies*, through which the Company and its personnel were collecting heavy revenue from Indian merchants, officially and privately, and which was hampering the net profit of the Company's masters as a lot of amount was being pocketed away be the Company's servants. This withdrawal of custom *chawkies* provided some limited opportunities of trade to the Indian merchants. The second step was to stop the seizure of private property of the craftsmen and weavers, in general, in order to maintain production level of textiles, silk, muslin, pottery, embroidery, brocades, etc. Since these products had high demand and value in the world-market, hence to maintain the Company's economic fortune, it was necessary on their part to check the decline of the produce on the condition that a fixed amount was to be paid to the Company, or like throwing open the trade to the natives for a fixed period who had advanced money to the salt-farmers for its distribution to the labourers on the condition that a fixed amount of salt, at a fixed price, was to be delivered to the Company. Certain other reforms, such as fixing the prices of the articles and making it public, fixing the duties to be paid to the Company by the native merchants, or providing security to the commodities of the native merchants to reach the destinations unmolested, etc., were implemented. Thus, these highly-motivated reforms though provided some limited opportunities to the Indians to amass some lost wealth to a limited extent were intend to revive the dying trade and industries to keep the Company's revenue flowing which was vital for them, for their political and economic existence in India. It was also because "the British, by then, were in a secure position, over-shadowing all the others as the largest single buyer and for some varieties of superior cloth virtually the only buyer. Extra-market means and restraint on producers were no longer strictly necessary to ensure a monopsonistic structure.<sup>43</sup>

The consequences of the rule, till the mid-19th century, were profound and multi-dimensional. Rather than constructive, it was mainly destructive. The constructive aspect, as it begun after 1785-86, was limited to few technological developments in sectors, like the cotton-industry (baling presses), silk-industry (filature machine), mint (steam-machine), watchrepairing, shipping (steam-engine and intensive and extensive use of iron), etc., integrating the Indian market through higher volume of trade and commerce, growth of urban centres, and so on.<sup>44</sup> Though these introductions of new technologies were highly motivated for cost-effectiveness, time-saving, better competitive product, etc., nevertheless these laid the material condition for the future development of modern industrial economy in India after the 1850s. The technological changes after 1785-86 didn't replace the old organization of labour by the modern wage-labour system. The monopoly of the Company, dominated by merchants rather than by industrialists, in trade and commerce in India and its forcible rule over the Indians has hampered the industrialization in the other sectors of industries which didn't serve the immediate interests of the Company and, in which it did not feel threatened by other European competitors were the main factors in checking the growth of the modern wage system. The workers in these industries, as in others, though timely paid, were not free to choose their masters. They were forced to the subsistence level wages in contrast to freedom to choose their masters who employed them at higher wages in the earlier days. The company systematically eliminated/ subjugated the Indian merchants/bankers. By extra economic coercion, it eliminated the traditional craftsmen, textile workers, and other traditional workforce. The forced labour, reduced wages, increased price of resources required by the workforce, for manufacturing cotton, etc., introduction of limited technology, increased prices of grain (rice), imposition of taxes, like *motarfa* on loan, etc., forced the traditional workers to abandon their profession and seek asylum in villages, which consequently, led to the depopulation of towns, like Murshidabad, Dhaka, Patna, Lucknow, Tanjore, etc., in the first three decades of the Company's rule. This time, the economic factors become more effective than the extra-economic ones, and more rapid changes took place than occurred after the beginning of the free-trade and the steam age. Marx in his observation in 1853, noted, "It was the British intruder, who broke up the Indian loom and destroyed the spinning wheel. England began with driving out the Indian cottons from the European market; it then introduced twill fabric into Hindustan and in the end inundated the very mother country of cotton with cottons. From 1818-36, the export of twill fabric from Great Britain to India rose in the proportion of 1 to 5,200. In 1824, the export of British muslins to India hardly amounted to 1,000,000 yards, while in 1857 it surpassed 64,000,000 yards. But, at the same time, the population of Dhaka decreased from 150,000 inhabitants to 20,000. This decline of the Indian towns celebrated for their fabrics was by no means the worst consequence. British steam and science uprooted over the whole surface of Hindustan, the union between agriculture and manufacturing industry."<sup>45</sup> In fact, right from 1757, prior to the decline of high-value export goods and other items, the process of de-industrialization had begun. Though there was massive growth of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, as these towns were the seats of commerce and administration, as well as some new administrative centres, including Chapra, Munger, etc., the overall trend was declining at least during the first three decades of the Company's rule.

The elimination/subjugation of the Indian merchants/bankers from trade and commerce gave a fatal blow to the wealth of the country. Renowned Indian bankers, like Monahar Das, Dwarka Das, Bolaki Das, Fateh Chand, Jagat Seth, and others, who used to operate business from Delhi to Dhaka through *hundi* system, and chain of *kothi* established in all major towns, were gradually eliminated from the commercial and banking activities. The seizure of their property and snapping of their link with the industrial workforce led to the flight of urban workforce as the advance payment made to the working people for purchasing the raw materials required for manufacturing goods, stopped. This had provided security to the artisans in the form of existence of permanent customer (the bankers/merchants who had advanced the loan), the security vis-à-vis the fluctuating market (the amount of money advanced totaling to the price of goods in the market), and the security at the time of family's financial crisis when they could approach the bankers/merchants for monetary help. Once this system was snapped and was replaced by coercion and forceful appropriation of their labour, the working class began to desert their profession and the place of their livelihood. Though the third grade Indian moneylenders and merchants, who used to operate as retailers, continued to operate in the subjugated condition in the *quasbas* and *ganjs* but they were not in decisive position to arrest the general trend of decline.

The elimination of political rulers of India further hampered its industries particularly the industries related to luxury goods and war utilities. The production of war materials and luxury goods, such as swords, helmets, body armours, gold and silver embroidery, high-value metal pottery, etc., were hampered as the class of traditional consumers of these commodities were in flux. The ongoing political disturbances in India creating insecurity to the caravans carrying the goods further aggravated the problem. The return of the titular kings and Nawabs after the 1850s and the creation of new *zamindars* didn't help much in bringing old glory to these industries. At least, the glory never returned. The new political class didn't enjoy the same power and privilege, in the absence of traditional political system that the old feudatories had. As a result of this vital difference between the pre- and post-1757 political rulers, even these branches of industries were affected, adding further number of unemployed Indians to the total population of the country.

Thus, the beginning of the British rule was the beginning of the destruction of the traditional industries and its support base, namely, merchants/ bankers and feudatories at one pole, working people at the other pole, and towns in general. It was the beginning of the Himalayan loot of the Indians and the pauperization of its people without any sign of substantial technological innovations and new industrial products till the 1840s. The available data clearly show this. "Between 1772/93-1796/97 and 1818/19-1823/24 … While spinners' wages in Malda and eight other residences remained stagnant at `2.5 per month, the average price of raw cotton went up from. `12.8 to `16.5 per month and that of rice from `0.62 to `1.02 per *maund.* The weavers were getting from the English East India Company prices which were from 6 per cent to 83 per cent less than what private traders were offering. In 1974, weavers were incurring a loss of about 10 per cent to 30 per cent because of the difference between the Company's purchase price and raw material and labour input costs. The Company used its dominant position to fix the terms of exchange, pushing down the share of wages towards the subsistence level."<sup>46</sup> This state of affair was not limited to Bengal only, neither was it limited to only one segment of the workforce (the weavers), but it was spread to the entire British India and the industrial workforce. The wealth 'sucked out of the workforce and the natural resources of India were shipped to England, enriching the coffers of the masters of the Company and the political rulers of that country'. The trade and commerce linking every town, *Quasba, ganj* and *haat* with metropolis, like Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras was the medium. The military force was the midwife that helped trade and commerce to come into existence. The imports of different goods in Calcutta and the share of different provinces by sending these goods to Calcutta between 1812/13-1835/36 can be seen in Tables 1 and 2.<sup>47</sup>

The tables show: (1) an overall growing integration of national market, linking Calcutta with different towns of India; and (2) the nature of imports. Between 1812-36, there had been an overall growth in the value and per centage of trade. From `27.9 million, 83 per cent of the trade, it went up to `55.3 million, that is, 92 per cent of the trade. The import of commodities, including indigo, opium, raw cotton, raw silk, textile, sugar, and saltpetre were meant for either industries in England or for sale in the highly profitable European market. The benefit of this kind of trade was obviously, going into the pocket of the British ruling class either in India or in England. And the brunt was being borne by the working populace of Bengal Presidency, in the initial years, and later on by the working population of other parts of the country.

The shameless plunder of India facilitated the growth of Industrial Revolution in England which could have been delayed in the absence of wealth required for the research. The emergence of the Company as the paramount power in India in 1757 and the beginning of Industrial Revolution in 1760 was not merely a coincidence or chance. The Industrial Revolution which gave birth to the industrial capitalist however, killed the very Company and the merchant class which had helped in giving birth to it.

The Company's India loot activities, nevertheless, helped the economic integration of the country. The linkage of the metropolis with the provincial

|                | million `)<br>Value<br>( | Indigo               | w<br>Silk<br>Ra | Cotton<br>w<br>Ra | Sugar | Saltpetre                               | Bilalr | m<br>Opiu | Banaras | Cotton | Textiles                                 | Silk | % of total<br>trade |
|----------------|--------------------------|----------------------|-----------------|-------------------|-------|-----------------------------------------|--------|-----------|---------|--------|------------------------------------------|------|---------------------|
| 1812-13        | 27.9                     | 26                   | 9               | 4                 | 3     | *                                       | —      | —         | —       | —      | 41                                       | —    | 83                  |
| 1813-14        | 25.6                     | 29                   | 7               | 14                | 4     | 1                                       | —      | —         | —       | —      | 28                                       | —    | 83                  |
| 1814-15        | 32.0                     | 32                   | 11              | 11                | 5     | 1                                       | —      | —         | —       | —      | 28                                       | —    | 88                  |
| 1815-16        | 39.5                     | 39                   | 7               | 11                | 4     | 1                                       | —      | —         | —       | —      | 38                                       | —    | 90                  |
| 1816-17        | 48.8                     | 18                   | 3               | 15                | 7     | 3                                       | —      | —         | —       | —      | 38                                       | —    | 90                  |
| 1817-18        | na                       | 13                   | 8               | *                 | 9     | *                                       | —      | —         | —       | —      | 43                                       | —    | 89                  |
| 1818-19        | 39.7                     | 17                   | 4               | 18                | 12    | 2                                       | —      | —         | —       | —      | 49                                       | —    | 79                  |
| 1819-20        | 53.2                     | 20                   | 15              | 8                 | 9     | 5                                       | —      | 1         | —       | 24     | —                                        | 3    | 85                  |
| 1820-21        | 46.1                     | 17                   | 16              | 10                | 8     | 5                                       | —      | 2         | —       | 21     | —                                        | 4    | 83                  |
| 1821-22        | 50.4                     | 18                   | 17              | 9                 | 7     | 4                                       | —      | 1         | —       | 21     | —                                        | 6    | 83                  |
| 1822-23        | 47.7                     | 24                   | 16              | 6                 | 7     | 3                                       | —      | 1         | —       | 22     | —                                        | 6    | 85                  |
| 1823-24        | 40.5                     | 20                   | 17              | 5                 | 6     | 6                                       | —      | 2         | —       | 21     | —                                        | 6    | 8.                  |
| 1824-25        | 54.2                     | 20                   | 15              | 8                 | 7     | 3                                       | —      | 17        | —       | 11     | —                                        | 5    | 86                  |
| 1825-26        | 58.0                     | 27                   | 15              | 5                 | 4     | 3                                       | —      | 19        | —       | 13     | —                                        | 5    | 91                  |
| 1826-27        | 51.4                     | 16                   | 16              | 12                | 7     | 5                                       | 12     | —         | 4       | 12     | —                                        | 6    | 90                  |
| 1827-28        | 54.0                     | 28                   | 14              | 7                 | 4     | 2                                       | 15     | —         | 5       | 8      | —                                        | 5    | 88                  |
| 1828-29        | 53.3                     | 18                   | 19              | 7                 | 8     | 3                                       | 15     | —         | 5       | 7      | —                                        | 4    | 86                  |
| 1829-30        | 51.9                     | 26                   | 15              | 7                 | 8     | 3                                       | 15     | —         | 6       | 4      | —                                        | 4    | 88                  |
| 1830-31        | 52.3                     | 25                   | 16              | 6                 | 5     | 4                                       | 17     | —         | 7       | 4      | —                                        | 6    | 9                   |
| 1831-32        | 47.8                     | 25                   | 13              | 5                 | 4     | 5                                       | 17     | —         | 8       | 4      | —                                        | 8    | 89                  |
| 1832-33        | 49.9                     | 27                   | 12              | 6                 | 3     | 5                                       | 18     | —         | 7       | 4      | —                                        | 7    | 89                  |
| 1833-34        | 48.5                     | 20                   | 14              | 6                 | 5     | 6                                       | 17     | —         | 8       | 3      | —                                        | 10   | 89                  |
| 1834-35        | 50.2                     | 22                   | 11              | 8                 | 6     | 4                                       | 18     | —         | 9       | 3      | —                                        | 7    | 88                  |
| 1835-36        | 55.3                     | 18                   | 7               | 22                | 3     | 3                                       | 23     | —         | 12      | 1      | —                                        | 1    | 92                  |
| Co<br>Sources: | mputed by                | Marcia Frost, Depart |                 | ment of Econo     | mic   | History, University of Pennsylvania fro |        |           |         |        | m Report of the internal and External Co |      | merce of<br>m       |

Table 1 Imports into Calcutta from the interior of the Presidency (Percentage of total trade by value)

*Bengal,*1812.13 through 1835-36, India Office Records, P/174/24-47. na: data missing; \*: Less than 1%.

|         | presidency<br>Bengal  |                      |        |                | Major Stations' share of upper provinces custo |          |      |                                             | ms     |         |                                          |                     | prov<br>8         | provinces<br>Value of<br>upper |
|---------|-----------------------|----------------------|--------|----------------|------------------------------------------------|----------|------|---------------------------------------------|--------|---------|------------------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
|         | million<br>of `)<br>( | provinces<br>%upper  | Kanpur | khabad<br>Faru | Allahabad                                      | Bareilly | Agra | Mirzapur                                    | Meerut | Banaras | Ghazipur                                 | 5 Delhi<br>stations | stations<br>inces | million `)<br>trade<br>(       |
| 1815-16 | 69.4                  | 49                   | 14     | 8              | 10                                             | 7        | 27   | 9                                           | 9      | 7       | 7                                        | —                   | —                 | 19.4                           |
| 1816-17 | 7.7                   | 47                   | 12     | 8              | 11                                             | 6        | 31   | 8                                           | 12     | 7       | 9                                        | —                   | —                 | 22.9                           |
| 1817-18 | 8.2                   | 43                   | 12     | 9              | 11                                             | 7        | 33   | 8                                           | 11     | 6       | 8                                        | —                   | —                 | a                              |
| 1818-19 | 8.1                   | 41                   | 8      | 6              | 7                                              | 7        | 36   | 8                                           | 14     | 6       | 6                                        |                     |                   | 16.3                           |
| 1819-20 | a                     | —                    | —      | —              | —                                              | —        | —    | —                                           | —      | —       | —                                        | —<br>a              | —                 | —                              |
| 1820-21 | 7.6                   | 47                   | 13     | 5              | 7                                              | 4        | 36   | 8                                           | 14     | 5       | 6                                        | —                   | —                 | 21.7                           |
| 1821-22 | 7.9                   | 44                   | 11     | 6              | 6                                              | 5        | 38   | 10                                          | 10     | 6       | 7                                        | —                   | —                 | 22.2                           |
| 1823-24 | 6.4                   | 47                   | 10     | 6              | 6                                              | 6        | 41   | 10                                          | 9      | 5       | 7                                        | —                   | —                 | 19.0                           |
| 1824-25 | 6.6                   | 44                   | 7      | 6              | 6                                              | 6        | 41   | 11                                          | 8      | 6       | 8                                        | —                   | —                 | 23.8                           |
| 1825-26 | 6.1                   | 46                   | 10     | 6              | 6                                              | 8        | 39   | 11                                          | 6      | 5       | 7                                        | —                   | —                 | 26.7                           |
| 1826-27 | 5.7                   | 49                   | 8      | 5              | 7                                              | 5        | 41   | 14                                          | 6      | 6       | 8                                        | —                   | —                 | 26.7                           |
| 1827-28 | 6.2                   | 49                   | 7      | 4              | 5                                              | 5        | 47   | 10                                          | 8      | 6       | 6                                        | —                   | —                 | 26.5                           |
| 1828-29 | 6.2                   | 49                   | 8      | 5              | 5                                              | 6        | 47   | 10                                          | 6      | 6       | 6                                        | 18                  | —                 | 26.1                           |
| 1829-31 | 7.1                   | 49                   | 7      | 3              | 13                                             | 4        | 32   | 6                                           | 5      | 4       | 4                                        | 20                  | —                 | 30.9                           |
| 1831-32 | 6.5                   | 61                   | 6      | 2              | 14                                             | 3        | 28   | 6                                           | 7      | 4       | 4                                        | 16                  | 9                 | 29.2                           |
| 1832-33 | 7.1                   | 68                   | 5      | 2              | 16                                             | 4        | 27   | 6                                           | 6      | 4       | 4                                        | 16                  | 8                 | 33.9                           |
| 1833-34 | 6.0                   | 62                   | 6      | 3              | 14                                             | 4        | 25   | 7                                           | 6      | 5       | 5                                        | 13                  | 10                | 30.1                           |
| Source: | mputed by<br>Co       | Marcia Frost, Depart |        | ment of Econo  |                                                |          |      | mic History, University of Pennsylvania fro |        |         | m Report of the Internal and External Co |                     | m                 | merce of Bengal,               |

Table 2 North India's share of the internal trade of the Bengal Presidency (based on customs collections)

1812-13 through 1833-34, India Office Records, P/174/24-47.

*a:* data missing.

towns and villages for procurement of agricultural and industrial commodities facilitated by the development of steam-powered tug boats, flotilla, etc., which revolutionised river communications, created an integrated national economy based on the inter-dependence and inter-connectedness of the different scattered and autonomous production centres. And further linked the national economy, as a subjugated partner, to the English-European capitalist economy.

Thus, the period 1757-1857 saw momentous changes brought about by the numerous policies of the British, including *dadni* system (upto 1770s), contract system or *khatbandi* regulation (1770s to 1780s), the direct agency system (1793-1814), limited Free Trade (1814-34), and Free Trade (1834 onwards). It was momentous because it witnessed the beginning of systematic and cruelest destruction of the Indian political ruling class, merchants and bankers, industrial workforce, and industries and towns through the above-mentioned policies adopted from time to time. It was a degrading period, because it witnessed the transformation of a land from an independent, sovereign, chiefly exporting country to a subjugated country chiefly exporting commodities satisfying British interest, and then, to an importing country inundated with English twists and cotton stuffs'. It was the period which laid the foundation of converting India into a classic colony.

But, in spite of these transformations, there was no fundamental change in the organization of labour, neither was there any mass qualitative technological change in the production of commodities, except in the selected few areas discussed here. The "production and trade occurred within organizational forms and patterns which predate 1757 … Nor is there much evidence of dramatic technological change in either crafts or agriculture."<sup>48</sup> The Company threatened by the decline of revenue after the initial years of brutal rule tried to revive to a limited extent the old system of advance payment to the salt farmers and others through Indian merchants on given terms. But, overall, its rule remained mainly destructive, the formation of integrated national market and its linkage as subordinate partner to the international capitalist economy notwithstanding. The constructive aspect of the British rule could take place in substantial form only after the second half of the 19th century.

The growth of the modern, large-scale industry in India was the product of the necessity of the British industrial capitalist class. The inundation of the Indian society with English twists and cotton stuffs that had started since 1813 (the year of limited Free Trade) and it gathered momentum after 1834 (the year of Free Trade Act) that sunk down the exchange rate of rupees, reduced the power of consumption of the Indian masses and contracted the market of British goods could not have continued for long unless the ruling class of Britain would have revived the power of consumption of the Indian population which could become possible by establishing large-scale industries and providing jobs to millions of jobless workers. The requirement of the industrial resources (mineral resources, raw cotton, jute, silk, etc.) for churning out finish goods further created the necessity for the development of better transportation facilities which could rapidly carry the resources from village, town, and mines to ports for shipment to England. Thus, the dependency of the British ruling class on the Indian market and raw resources forced it to lay the foundation of modern large-scale industries and transport system. While the first problem (shrinkage of market share) was the creation of the Company's rule, the latter (the raw sources) was the requirement of the class that had come up as a result of general movement of society towards industrialization since the time of Industrial Revolution.

The result of these two necessities led to the establishment of jute and cotton mills and development of iron and coal mines between 1850-55 along with the introduction of railway in 1853. In 1879, there were 56 cotton mills in India. The number of jute mills, mainly owned by the European, rose to 20 in 1882. In 1880, 56 coal mines were operating the country. The number of cotton mills increased to 144 during 1894-95. In the same year, the number of jute mills rose to 29 and that of coal mines to 123 in the same year. In 1913-14, the number of cotton mills rose to 264 and that of jute mills to 64. Between 1890 and 1914, new industries, like petroleum, manganese, mica, and saltpetre, came into existence. Some rice and timber mills were also started. In addition, "engineering and railway workshops, iron and brass foundries, also grew rapidly."<sup>49</sup> The growth of railway like that of jute, textile, coal mine, etc., was faster than the other sundry industries, like paper, matches, or the heavy industry. From the first line built between Bombay to Thane in 1853 to the last built in 1846-47 during the British Raj, the density of rail lines grew to 159 per 10,000 sq km and all but few districts in remote regions were served by railway. Already at the beginning of First World War, India had the third largest railway network in the world. Similarly, by that period it had the largest jute manufacturing industry and the fourth largest textile industries. Between 1914-18 and 1939-45, due to the World Wars, there was comparatively faster growth of profit in the industries than in the preceding years of the wars. The value of exports of manufactured jute, for example, was £18,849 in 1913-1914 which rose to £35,101 in 1918-19. The port and cement registered production of 84,000 tons, about half the quantity imported in 1914. Similarly, the expansion of production capacities of old industries, creation of new and different kind of industries, like paper, sugarcane, matches, iron and steel, chemical, etc., and the growth in numbers of established industries, like jute, cotton were considerable. And not only that, "during the inter-war period, Indian manufacturing output grew at a rate well above the world average being exceeded during the whole period by only four of the 28 countries. India's manufacturing output grew at rate well above the world average being exceeded during the whole period by only that of the UK, the US and Germany."<sup>50</sup> However, in spite of these now rapid, now low growth of industries in India at the time of independence remained largely non-industrial and one of the poorest countries of the world. Industrialization could not engulf the entire sectors of economy nor its total effect was cumulative; rather the rate of industrialization was much slower than the rate of 'dis-industrialization' in the sense that employment generated by the modern industries fell far short of ruin it did to the traditional industries employing millions. The factor mainly responsible for this kind of growth was the class interest of the British. Some other minor factors, like lack of technical education in India, unsuitability of British imported machines to Indian environment, etc., also hampered proper growth.

Since the development of industries in India was the product of necessities of the British ruling class, therefore, the expansion of the industries was largely guided by these necessities. And throughout the British rule, we find that only those industries could develop, and with the desired intensity, which were desired by the British, barring the years of the world wars in which they were forced to concede the development of some new industries due to the military engagement of England, disturbances of sea routes and conversion of India into the military theatre of England in the east of Suez. As a result of this need, there grew mainly railway, cotton, jute, and coal industries which served their interests. There was a virtual absence of heavy and chemical industries, manufacturing machine tools, sulphuric acid, fertiliser, railway engines, ships, aeroplanes, automobiles, petroleum products, etc., which were against their interests. The existence of great demand of textile in the world market providing heavy profits to the British, and the labour-intensive nature of these industries providing jobs to millions, which was necessary for reviving the purchasing power of the Indians in order to sell the British manufactured goods, were the main responsible factors for the establishment of cotton and jute industries. Its establishment and growth were further facilitated by abundant coal-iron reserves in India, which were extracted from the pits at a very cheap price due to the supply of cheap labour-power, and constant supply of cheap raw cotton and jute. The low wages and the abundance of low-priced raw resources put the cost of manufactured goods very favourably vis-a-vis the Europeans and Americans. The demand of the Indian goods, therefore, was very high. Since India was a colony, hence the profit was being accrued by the British. Contrary to this, the setting up of heavy and chemical industries were either discouraged or not initiated due to economic fear. The low wages and cheap resources could have put the Indian heavy/chemical industries in a far better position than the British and could have paved the way for all-round development which could have been detrimental to the interest of the British.

The methods that were employed to check the growth of the industries were mainly financial and control over management, imposition or removal of tariffs on goods imported into and exported from India, and deliberate check on the spread of technical knowledge in general. While the latter policy adopted by the British, hampered the growth of scientifictechnological knowledge, research work, etc., required for manning the industries, the former two policies checked the expansion of production capacities, creation of economic/industrial infrastructure, and other such facilities required for the economic development of masses. Since capital is required for the establishment and growth of industries in capitalist society, therefore, the absence of capital meant absence of industries. The British ruling class did this successfully through various budgetary expenditure, tariff boards and management control. The expenditure on education was lowest, the duty imposed on the Indian goods in England undesired by the ruling class was heavy and that of desired goods was lowest. The goods coming into India was either not taxed or lowly taxed. The role of the banks in giving loans to the Indians' controlled industries was dismal, while the loans asked by the British was easily given, that too on soft interest. On the other hand, if loans were given to Indians they had very high rate of interest. The pressure of the Indian political masses put upon the British in this regard didn't affect the overall scenario much. It simply restrained the British, to some extent, in closing their economic tentacles over the Indian industrialists. Except for few modifications here and there, like increase and decrease of tariff, extension and withdrawal of subsidies, expansion and withdrawal of control of British capital and personnel from management, etc., which were being done from time to time after observing the overall political and economic situation in India, England, and the world, there was no fundamental, qualitative change in the state of affair.

The impact of industrialization on the Indian society was multidimensional, the most important being the creation of three different urban social classes, namely, the industrial proletariat, bourgeoisie, and pettybourgeoisie. Among the three the proletariat was numerically the most superior, followed by the petty-bourgeoisie and bourgeoisie. The interest of the proletariat and the Indian capitalists were antithetical, while the former was for abolition of capital and all modern property relations, stood for higher wages, better working and living condition, social security, etc. The latter stood for having more share in the total surplus value appropriated by the British and were anti-change vis-a-vis proletariat. The middle class vacillated between the two and lived in two minds. The one minor section aligned itself with the proletariat, the other major section joined the Indian capitalists. Nevertheless, all the three classes viewed the existing colonial rule as the principal political contradiction and fought jointly and separately against the British regime. The economic contradictions between the proletariat and the Indian capitalists were shelved temporarily, at least it was not brought to the fore.

The proletariat that grew out of the womb of old society mostly comprising the traditional weavers, craftsmen, and poor backward sections of the society swelled in numbers as the years rolled by. From the modest beginning of few hundred in the 1850s, working in jute and textile mills of Bombay and Calcutta it swelled to 951,000 in 1914 working in 2,681 registered companies and again to 17,000,000 in 1940 working in 9,000 factories of different nature. Tables 3 to 5<sup>51</sup> show the evolution of jute and textile industries in India from 1854-1914. It can be noted that technology used, like looms and spindles provided opportunities to the traditional weave and spinners.

Compared to the total Indian population, this number was a mere fraction of the populace. But in terms of militancy and consistency it outmarked every other class. Its condition of working was horrible and was not different from the condition of the working class in England, as noted by Engels in 1840s. The wages were meager, to the lowest subsistence level. And in the absence of trade unions it practically could not register any substantial growth till 1918 unlike the Charterists of England of 1830-40s. Though right from 1870 onwards, workingmen's club and associations begun to grow, and the journals espousing their cause begun to publish, but nothing concrete emerged either in terms of economics or politics. They continued to live in hovels, the children, males, females, all crouching together in small shanty rooms without any proper ventilation, lavatory, water, etc. Their diet consisted of *sattu*, rice, *litti*, salt, chilli, etc. They were forced to work for 18-20 hours a day in smoked, dirty factories, suffered from diseases, like

| Year    | No. of<br>mills | No. of<br>looms | Aveage<br>daily<br>employment | Average no.<br>of looms<br>per mill | Averge<br>employment<br>per mill |
|---------|-----------------|-----------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| 1854-55 | 1               | N.A.            | N.A.                          | N.A.                                | N.A.                             |
| 1868-69 | 5               | 950             | N.A.                          | 190                                 | N.A.                             |
| 1883-84 | 23              | 6,132           | 47,863                        | 266.6                               | 2,081.0                          |
| 1893-94 | 28              | 9,580           | 69,179                        | 342.1                               | 2,470.7                          |
| 1903-04 | 38              | 18,400          | 123,869                       | 484.2                               | 3,259.7                          |
| 1913-14 | 64              | 36,050          | 216,288                       | 563.3                               | 3,379.5                          |

Table 3 Number of mills, looms and employment in Indian jute industry 1854-55 to 1913-14

| Table 4<br>Growth of the cotton mill industry in India (1875-76 to 1913-14) |  |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|

| Year    | No. of mills | No. of<br>spindles<br>(thousands) | No. of looms<br>(thousands) | Average daily<br>employment<br>(thousands) |
|---------|--------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| 1875-76 | 47           | 1,100                             | 9.1                         | N.A.                                       |
| 1883-84 | 79           | 2,002                             | 16.3                        | 60                                         |
| 1893-94 | 142          | 3,650                             | 31.1                        | 130                                        |
| 1903-04 | 191          | 5,118                             | 45.3                        | 185                                        |
| 1913-14 | 271          | 6,779                             | 104.2                       | 260                                        |

*Source:* In Table 3, data before 1883-84 from D.R. Wallace, *The Romance of Jute "A Short History of the Calcutta Jute Industry,* 1855-1927 *and edn,* 1928). *Data for* 1883-84 *and after, from Moral and Material Progress and Condition of India.*

Data on the Cotton textile industry given in Table IV come from the annual reports of the Bombay Millowners Association.

|         |                | Mills                                |                       |                | Spindles                            |                       |
|---------|----------------|--------------------------------------|-----------------------|----------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------|
|         | Bombay<br>city | Elsewhere<br>in Bombay<br>Presidency | Elsewhere<br>in India | Bombay<br>city | Elsewhere<br>in Bombay<br>Presidenc | Elsewhere<br>in India |
| 1875-76 | 61.7           | 21.3                                 | 17.01                 | 74.3           | 13.4                                | 12.4                  |
| 1883-84 | 54.4           | 21.5                                 | 24.1                  | 67.5           | 13.6                                | 18.8                  |
| 1893-94 | 48.6           | 21.1                                 | 30.3                  | 55.5           | 14.7                                | 29.8                  |
| 1903-04 | 41.4           | 28.3                                 | 30.4                  | 49.5           | 20.1                                | 30.3                  |
| 1913-14 | 31.4           | 36.2                                 | 32.5                  | 44.4           | 25.8                                | 29.9                  |
|         |                | Looms                                |                       |                | Employment                          |                       |
| 1875-76 | 87.9           | 6.6                                  | 5.5                   | —              | —                                   |                       |
| 1883-84 | 73.6           | 14.1                                 | 12.3                  | 60.0           | 15.0                                | 25.0                  |
| 1893-94 | 58.8           | 19.3                                 | 21.9                  | 54.6           | 14.6                                | 30.8                  |
| 1903-04 | 53.2           | 22.3                                 | 24.5                  | 48.6           | 20.5                                | 30.8                  |
| 1913-14 | 46.8           | 332.2                                | 20.98                 | 42.3           | 26.2                                | 31.5                  |

Table 5 Regional distribution of cotton mill capacity in India 1875-76 to 1913-14 (per cent)

*Source: Annual Report,* Bombay Millowner Association.

tuberculosis, skin disease, etc., lean and thin, rag-tagged, but most humane this class of humanity suffered from all kinds of destitution. Cultural and caste differences, continued linkage of workers with the villages and land (at least in the first generation) checked their strength of collective bargaining which perpetuated their poverty. Illiteracy and lack of the critical comprehension of the functioning of the capitalist system checked them from political participation almost till the end of 19th century. It was only after the First World War that they could form powerful trade unions at national level and participated in the freedom struggle. Their leadership was, by and large, dominated by the middle class. From among the workers who could rise to the position were sucked into the ethos and methods of struggle of the middle class. Thus, the working class, in spite of vast numerical superiority, consistency, and militancy could not pose a powerful alternative, independent of bourgeoisie and petty-bourgeoisie as the Paris communards had done. On the contrary, instead of taking their movement, at their own strength, to the logical conclusion they remained (at least the majority) mere supporters of different political parties. Since their support was vital to pressurize the government for conceding concessions, hence every political party vied with each other for enlisting their support. The working class, politically speaking, could not form a "class for itself". They remained spellbound by the *vibhutis* (political leaders of different political parties). The era of *Lokaavtar* remained a distant dream.

The bourgeoisie, in contrast to the numerical strength of the workers, consisted of a fraction of the population, was most organized and a class that was conscious of its interests. Their umbilical cord was tied up with the British and European capitalism right from the 1850s, and they operated as their junior partners at system-level. The history of their subordination, in fact, started from 1757, when, after the systematic elimination of independent, powerful Indian merchants, the petty-Indian merchants, the retail suppliers of commodities in *ganj, quasba*, and *haat* began to play second fiddle to the British canoe for their economic survival. This economic tendency continued even after they began to convert their wealth in establishing modern industries, and gradually becoming part of the modern industrial capitalist process. Their politics emanating from their economic status, was the politics of compromise and gaining concessions. Since the economic interest of the British and the Indian capitalists was fundamentally the same, formation of capital, therefore, the use of political movements was limited to pressurize the British to concede some economic benefits rather than to go for revolutionary reconstruction which they could have done like the American Revolution of 1776, but which they didn't do due to the fear of the working class or state repression. They maintained a distance from political struggle to save themselves from the probable colonial state reprisal. The history of 1757 and 1857 worked very deeply in their minds.

It is well known that the Indian capitalists not only compromised with the British, but also with the nawabs, *zamindars*, and kings. The latter (a number of them) had converted themselves into merchants and industrialists; the former required them as supplier of finance (share holdings), raw resources for the industries, and seller of finished commodities in the villages. Thus, the common economic interest and a common ideology of wealth between the two branches of top capitalist strata (industry and agriculture) hampered the socio-economic transformation in the agricultural sector as well. The Indian capitalists never intended a radical rural-urban social transformation and, like the German bourgeoisie of 1848, they betrayed the working class and peasant movements that had built up over the years. They were the reflection of the social status quo. Their struggle against the British was the struggle of a bigger share in surplus value which the transfer of political power in 1947 gave them. It meant for them the removal of all colonial economic restraints, like tariff, loan, aid, management control, etc., which had hampered their economic maneuverability and checked them in expanding their capital. The fight of the Indian capitalists was the fight for removal of these economic restraints. It was never intended to share the benefits of technological development with the working class. The workers working in the factories of the Indian capitalists were never paid higher wages than the workers in the factories controlled by the British. The working and living condition remained the same. In fact, the workers of jute and cotton mills which were generally controlled by the Indians were the worst sufferers both in terms of wages and physical existence. Not only this, the Indian capitalists vehemently opposed the factory legislations in the ground that it will harm the Indian capitalists, that is, it is intended to give leverage to the British capitalists. The workers' strike in the factories of the Indian capitalists was as recurrent as in that of the British. The Indian capitalists, in fact, with less paid-up capital than the British were the biggest exploiters. The economic necessity of rapid capital formation was the reason behind this severest exploitation which could be done only by pushing the wages to the lowest subsistence level and increasing the working hours, the phenomenon that was prevalent in the initial years of capitalism. The hike in wages in the initial few years after the First World War was the result of trade boom, growing organized pressure of the workers and the technological improvement. The strike of the workers could have led to huge losses during a period when there was a general trade boom. In order to get benefit out of this opportunity, it was felt senseless by the capitalists to face organized workers almost everyday. The massive capital formation during the war years, the technological improvement and the reduced intervention of the state due to war constraints in the management leading to productivity further removed the hitch in the wage hike. Consequently, "wages in industrial centres rose steadily until 1921. In Bengal jute mills, by 1920, wages rose by 50 per cent over the 1914 wage level, and in Bombay, for the first time, a wage rise of 10 per cent in 1919 followed by quick rise till 1921 when there was nearly 130 per cent increase over the 1914 level."<sup>52</sup> But, in spite of this progress, the workers were still being dragged "through blood and dirt, through misery and degradation."

The late historical arrival of Indian bourgeoisie, that too under the colonial system, put them under so many constraints. Unlike the European-American counterparts, they could never enjoy the freedom of free trade and limited state. The colonial state always discriminated between the Indian and British capitalists. While the British enjoyed all the support and benefit for their expansion of the empire from this state and financial institutions, the Indian capitalists always suffered at the hands of the monstrous, monolithic structure. However, among themselves, the Indian capitalists enjoyed a brief era of free competition in the sense that they competed against each other freely, without any monopolistics domination. The monopoly among the Indian capitalists was yet to emerge. And, it could emerge only after the First World War. From the 1850s to the 1920s, for almost seventy years, the Indian capitalists thus enjoyed among themselves a phase of non-monopolistic competition, an era of free competition. The huge profit made during the First World War and in subsequent years altered the form of capitalism. From free competition stage it passed to monopolistic stage. The profit made during these years (for example, the rates of net profit to paid-up capital of the jute mills of Calcutta was given as 58 per cent in 1915; 75 per cent in 1916; 49 per cent in 1917, and 73 per cent in the first half of 1918)<sup>53</sup> out of free competition was channelized and invested in different branches of industries by few capitalists who succeeded in eliminating others in the race of capital, which, later on, gave them leverage in management. The growth of financial institutions, like banks after 1920s and their growing roles in the industrial development provided further impetus to their tightening control over different branches of industries. The financial oligarchy that grew after the 1930s finally sealed the fate of free competition. Thus, "a dozen individuals" writes Asok Mehta about those days of Bombay, "by their control over banks, insurance companies, and investment trust, occupy commanding position in the industrial life of Bombay. Sir Purshottam Das Thakur Das and his cousin Sir Chunilal Mehta, between them, hold directorships in every trust and in well-nigh every important concern in Bombay. They have facilitated or frustrated as it suited them many an amalgamation and absorption. Prem Chand Brothers, Jeejeebhoy Brothers, Cowasji Jehangir, in their ways exert similar influence, thanks to their financial power."54 Similarly, Tatas controlled numerous cotton mills and power and electric companies besides controlling one iron and steel works and airway company. The British already had their own trusts and cartels. Another feature of capitalism that was growing at this period was the growing volume of import of capital in India from England which had gradually replaced the other import items like cotton goods as primary importable commodity. Now, it was capital which was the primary import item. In 1933, as per the estimate of British Associated Chambers of Commerce, £1,000 million was invested in India. The role of finance capital within India and the import of capital from England further intensified the loot of India. The more capital was invested; the severe was the intensity of exploitation. As a result, the loot of India in the last 20 years of British Raj was manifold more than the loots put together in the preceding 50 years, like the loots that had begun after the 1850s was many times more and higher in intensity than the loot that begun after 1757. The different successive stages and forms of capitalism within the colonial system, thus, brought greater misery and degradation to Indians which finally culminated in the most inhuman Bengal famine of 1940s. But parallel to this, capital kept on expanding. The petty traders, through accumulated wealth of trade and commerce of the pre-1850s channelized their wealth in the modern industries of the post-1850s period, became petty industrialists. From petty industrialists they became monopolistic, financial oligarchies. Thus, the force that was let loose in the post-1757 period saw its maturity by the 1930s. The Indian capitalists, like an island, had arrived on the scene with the essential requisites of developed capitalism in the sea of famine struck humanity.

The third class, the modern, urban middle class was the first to arrive in urban India. While the proletariat and the bourgeoisie arrived after the 1850s, the middle class arrived in the 1820s itself after the 1813 Act when the British took conscious decision to spend money in education as a policy to produce brown skins who can handle the expanding administrative and trading functions of the Company and can act as interlocutors between the British and Indians. Even prior to 1813, the Company's personnel in order to understand Muslim and Hindu laws of the land which were necessitated in order to do business had opened two educational institutions, one at Calcutta and another at Varanasi. But they were mere peanuts. However, the process that begun after 1813, became intensified after the 1820s creating a vast strength of multi-layered middle class in India, which in course of its rule first helped the social reforms movement and then pioneered the political agitation for *swaraj.* The social reforms which broke the backbone of the evils of Indian society preceded by the economic necessities of trade and livelihood, encouraged the traditional Indians to join new educational institutions. The help of liberal philanthropists silently supported by the business community in order to expand consumers of the British commodities gave further push to this process. The beginning of industrialization acted as another milestone in spreading education. The new method of production and distribution required updated knowledge, both technical and theoretical, which forced the British to set up universities in industrial centres. The establishment of nationalist schools and colleges in the first decade of 20th century and later provided another boost to education. Thus, the economy followed by education steeped into liberal humanism and rationalism created a class that was urbane, suave, articulate, and yet volatile. It helped the demise of the Raj that had created it.

The educated unemployed that were created out of Macualay's policy over the years gradually became restless. Even those in administration were discontented with the discriminatory treatment meted out to them. The power of comprehending the functioning of the system that they developed after learning the English alphabet put them at forefront of agitation. The economic discontentment clubbed with the power of knowledge and their own frustration with the colonial system provide the fertile ground for the nationalist mass movement that begun to rock the system from the first decade of the 20th century. Their existence in every town, in every nook and corner of the country, organizing and teaching the workers, peasants and their own inactive class brethren gave power to the movement. However, as a class they resembled the characters portrayed in Harishankar Parsai's story, *Ek Madhyam Vargiya Kutta.* They barked at the sign of approaching danger that emanates in the capitalist and colonial society. The prospect of unemployment, the alienation and the guilt-consciousness of non-contribution to the society all created fear in them. But, at the same time, the fear of losing property, job or the fear of state-repression, harassment of family members, etc., restricted them from active participation. Majority sympathized with the cause of workers and peasants or the cause of freedom yet majority never participated actively for the cause. Since they belonged to the propertied groups, like rich gentry, traders, peasants, salaried professional, hence the fear of present and future haunted them strongly. Even those who didn't belong to the propertied group, but had some property in the past looked at the past instead of looking at the present and future. The ideology, like that of Hindi maxim 'my grandfather had eaten *ghee*, smell my palm' operated very strongly.

The political parties and associations that sprang up were virtually controlled by the middle class, particularly the top layer, as it were they who had helped in creating these organizations. They enjoyed decisive, crucial, decision-making powers, had indirect/direct linkage (barring the Communist Party) with the magnates of the industries, land, and trade. The policies that were formulated and adopted particularly by the Congress and Muslim League helped the development of capitalism rather than the cause of workers, as Bhagat Singh had rightly pointed out. The brief rule of the Congress and Muslim League in 1937 and the transfer of power ten years later proved him right. Thus, from social reforms movement of the 1820s to the transfer of political power in 1947, the middle class remained at the centre-stage of leadership. From motivating the British rulers to abolish *sati*  to forcing them to transfer political power through workers' and peasants' mobilization, the middle class helped building a society in which certain liberal political rights became the creed of future governance.

To conclude, the impact of the British rule on Indian industries was multi-faceted. It travelled through mercantile capitalism to industrial capitalism, and from free competitive capitalism to monopoly capitalism. In course of its journey, the different stages of growth had different kind and intensity of impact on the Indian socioeconomic structure. In the first stage that lasted up to 1853, the Company operated by and large, within the traditional parameters of production, and organization of labour system. The second stage marked the beginning of industrial revolution in India, the growth of free competitive capitalism, and its replacement by monopoly capitalism in the 1920s. The social classes that grew as a result of this economy, passed through numerous stages of development reflecting more or less the changing features of capitalism. While the Charter Act of 1813 and 1834 saw the growth of educated, urban middle class, and the beginning of social reform movement, the 1850s saw the growth of industrial bourgeoisie and the proletariat. The decade 1920 and after began to witness the growth of real workers' and peasants' movements in India. In between the 1850s and the 1920s, there were important sporadic revolts of peasants in various pockets of India which had considerable impact on the psyche of the masses as well as on administration, but it fizzled out in a year or two unlike the movements that began from the beginning of the 20th century. While the focus of the social reform movement was the elimination of caste and sex-based exploitation that had gripped the upper castes of the Indian society in course of history, the focus of the political movements, beginning from the first decade of the 20th century, was the elimination of the British rule. In between these, two social and political contradictions, there was another important contradiction that haunted the Indian masses since the beginning of 1757. The struggle between the peasant and *neo-zamindars* in agricultural sector and between the proletariat and bourgeoisie in the industrial centres, the continued now open, now subtle struggle, were equally important contradictions which were glossed over due to the existence the of British Raj. The development of mechanized transportation, hotels, and *dhabas* which facilitated the weakening of caste and cultural differences gave national character to the localized peasants' and workers' movements by linking them with common organizations. The common national education and the capitalist economy had already prepared the ground.

The British rule, as Marx had observed, with all its ulterior motives, thus, laid the promise for the material and moral emancipation of the Indians and put them into the comity of civilized humanity. As an unconscious tool of history, as a chaser of commodities and market, it battered all the Chinese Walls of local seclusion, self-sufficiency, caste, sex and cultural differences of the Indian society, and gave her a cosmopolitan character of production, distribution, and consumption.

#### **Notes and References**

- 1. For Pastoral Economy of the Vedic Society, See Romila Thapar, *From Lineage to State*, Delhi, 1990, pp. 24–27.
- 2. See D.D. Kosambi, *An Introduction to the Study of Indian History.* Bombay, 1956, pp. 222, 281.
- 3. For the Role of Market Forces in Rural India, See Sanjay Subrahmanyam (ed.), *Merchants, Markets and the State in Early Modern India.* Delhi, 1990, Chaps. VII, VIII.
- 4. For the *Role* of Village Panchayat, See John Mathai, *Village Government in British India*, 1915, p. 19: Burton, Stein (ed.). *Essays on South India.* New Delhi, 1976, pp. 69–70.
- 5. For the Upper Castes' Role in Agricultural Production, See Dharma Kumar (ed.). *The Cambridge Economic History of India, 1757-1970*, Vol. II, Delhi 1982, p. 10; Burten Stein (ed.). *The Making of Agrarian Policy in British India: 1770-1900.* Delhi, 1992, p. 40.
- 6. See Dharma Kumar (ed.), *op. cit.*, p. 16.
- 7. *Ibid.*, p. 1933.
- 8. See Bipan Chandra, *et. al., Freedom Struggle*, Delhi, 1992, p. 7.
- 9. Warren Hastings, *Historical Documents of British India*, Vol. I. Delhi, 1985, p. 160.
- 10. *Ibid.*, p. 150.
- 11. *Ibid.*, p. 15.
- 12. *Ibid.*, p. 12.
- 13. *Ibid.*
- 14. See Dharma Kumar (ed.), *op. cit.*, Chap. III.
- 15. B.H. Baden-Powell, *Administration of Land Revenue and Tenure in British India*, New Delhi, 1978, Chap. 8.
- 16. R.P. Dutt. *India Today.* Bombay, 1947, Chap. 8, Satish Chandra, *Medieval India: Society, the Jagirdari Crisis and the Village*, Madras, 1982, p. 105.
- 17. Burten Stein, No. 5, pp. 9–10.
- 18. *Ibid.*, p. 120.
- 19. *Ibid.*, pp. 38–39.
- 20. There is no denying of the roles played by Thomas Munro and the Utilitarian Ideology but even these two factors, in course of time, turned into profitable ventures.
- 21. Dharma Kumar (ed.), *op. cit.*, p. 41; Burten Stein (ed.), *op. cit.*, pp. 68–78.
- 22. K. Marx and F. Engels, *On Colonialism*, Moscow, 1978, p. 52.
- 23. Burton Stein, No. 5, p. 42.
- 24. *Ibid.*, p. 49.
- 25. Bipan Chandra, *Modern India*, New Delhi, 1986, p. 185.
- 26. Warren Hastings, *op. cit.*, pp. 144–145.