29

## **Political Economy of Employment Planning**

Kamal Nayan Kabra

lanning, by its very nature, is a goal-oriented activity or rather a means for purposively operating, regulating, guiding, and controlling various specified activities. In socio-economic sphere, the inevitable inter-connectedness of various activities enlarges the scope and range of planning activities to encompass at least the totality of the relatively more closely inter-connected activities. Another source for enlarging the scope of planning are the interconnections among the objectives of planning, their complementarities, trade-offs, and inter-faces. It is these features of the planning process which even without invoking its context and objectives, make planning—its methodology, principal-agent relationships, strategic decisions, decision-criteria, policies, programmes and implementation mechanisms and proceduresareas of intense political debates and conflicts. These debates are political because of their participants, be they theorists, technocrats, planocrats, politicians, social activists, businessmen, or workers, take their positions on the basis of their values, world-view, interests, and aspirations. No pure objective theoretical analysis or transcendental national interest or general principles of universal humanism in their abstract, quintessential form guide the course of these debates which inevitably turn into political conflicts using every possible fora and means. It is on account of such a character of the planning process and the catholicity of its applicability and relevance that no single social-science discipline by means of its pure and exclusive theoretical apparatus can do justice to the complex tasks of plan formulation, implementation, evaluation, and further refinement of the principles of planning.

Thus, planning is a subject which necessitates an integrated socialscience approach. As a part of such an approach, it becomes essential to go into the political economy of any major objective of planning in order to move towards grasping elements of its actual traverse.

## **512** ✽ CHAPTER 29

This approach becomes especially relevant and necessary in order to understand the fluctuating fortunes of the objective of attaining full employment which has, in one form or another, remained a constant accompaniment of India's successive Five-Year Plan and finds a prominent place in the election manifestos of various political parties.

In this paper an attempt has been made in the following section to consider the changing views and approaches of the planners (i.e., the official planning agency) to the question of ensuring employment opportunities to all the able-bodied and willing individuals (the principle 'he who does not work, neither shall eat' does not seem to have found acceptance in India). Following this, we will put forward some political economy hypotheses concerning the treatment accorded to the employment objective in Indian Planning.

Gainful productive work which steadily ensures means of maintenance and a reproduction to all the able-bodied adult, i.e., mechanisms which really, effectively, and symbiotically incorporate them in the economy, is still not considered a feasible proposition in the short-run at both mainstream academic and certain political levels, notwithstanding its undoubted desirability and significance. The Eighth Plan of the National Front government proposed to make a U-turn from the past insofar the place of employment objective in Indian planning is concerned (Manifesto of National Front, 1989; Planning Commission, 1990, para 3, 4, 6, and 14). It proposed to reject the trickle-down and indirect approach and work directly for employment, poverty alleviation, and equity (Planning Commission, March 1990).

Important theoretical and empirical issues as also questions of political and ideological stances are involved in these two diametrically opposed positions on the relative place, content, time-frame, and possibilities of the full-employment in development planning in countries like India. With a view to clarify some of the issues involved in this controversy, it is proposed to analyse and examine the evolution of the thinking of Indian planners over successive five-year plans on the strategy, priority, policies, and programmes concerning employment generation.

A retrospect of this kind throws helpful light on the present controversy regarding the feasibility and methods of attaining full employment as a guaranteed right say, over a medium term, with provision for compensation like unemployment allowance for those who fail to find such regular and secure work and with a level of productivity at least marginally higher than the currently obtaining level.

Having accepted employment generation as an important objective of planning, holding that "development is, in a sense, but another name for employment opportunities" the Indian planners tended, right from the First Plan, to adopt a rather cautious approach to the content of employment and its relative priority *vis-a-vis* output growth, capital accumulation, and technical efficiency. It was held that there were limited possibilities of increasing both real and money incomes in the short-run for the newly employed if inflationary pressures and a fall in the real income of those already employed has to be prevented. The gigantic size of the problem in terms of the backlog of unemployment, rising numbers, and low existing levels of productivity, the constraints on increasing capital-formation and technological advancement seem to have exercised considerable influence on the time-frame and methods for increasing employment. These factors argued in favour of the direct use of manpower for capital-formation without making a draft on the community's savings-a task for which the critical bottleneck appeared essentially as one of the organizations.

Quite different from the mobilization of idle manpower for building up social economic infrastructure was the problem of fuller employment at a higher real income. This was considered in a way, the quintessence of employment objective because in India the problem was mainly of underemployment which was considered "another facet of low productivity." It was maintained that under-employment, or low productivity is "due to a shortage of capital equipment and technical skills" and shortage of land. The task, therefore, was to utilize manpower for productive purposes so as to increase the volume of goods and services available in the country and to raise living standards all round. It is clear that this perspective makes the task of increasing employment distinguishable from that of increasing national income. Thus, the task was that of "increasing the productivity of labour so that larger employment can be provided at rising levels of real income. This is obviously linked to the whole question of capital accumulation and technical efficiency".

One may recall that similar role to capital accumulation has been assigned by the planners for development as such. It means fuller employment and economic development were treated as almost identical long-term tasks. However, one important aspect of complementarity visualized was that over a longer time period inadequate growth of one would exercise a check on the progress of the other. The idea seems to be that growth of employment without commensurate growth in output and productivity may lead to inflation and shortage of investible resources. A contrary process may invite complications owing to inadequate demand. Thus, the plan largely equated the problem of employment and development in a, long-term perspective.

The key proposition of this reasoning was that the processes of employment generation can get into swing 'only as capital-formation goes up'. Capital-formation leads to increase in national output and this involves an increased demand for labour, "especially if care is taken to adopt labour-intensive processes to the maximum extent possible". This is the classic statement of the basic trickle-down or pull-up approach under which investment-bred increases with income increase directly and indirectly with the demand for labour in order to enable the low-productivity under-employed population to share the fruits of growth. The planners implicitly recognized that, left to themselves, these processes may involve capital-intensive and labour-displacing technologies and hence the specific policy-guidelines, were explicitly enunciated. One, conscious adoption of labour-intensive technologies without compromising on efficiency. Second, in traditional large employment generating industries, replacement, and modernization should take care not to create technological unemployment.

Among the structural aspects of employment, greater need for employment in the industrial sector, particularly in small-scale and cottageindustries, and remoteness of the stage when tertiary sector employment would be able to absorb a growing proportion of the labour-force were recognized. It was maintained that changes in the occupational pattern are not ends of development but are "a corollary of development". Under this perspective, non-agricultural employment was to grow in stages as labourabsorption prospects in manufacturing sector were limited, particularly in view of the emphasis "on expanding producer-goods industries". In sum, it can be said that a conscious decision to approach the problem of unemployment and underemployment indirectly and in a long-term perspective was taken on the basis of a clearly spelled out process of reasoning. It is possible on this basis to spot out the missing links in the chain of arguments and subject this reasoning to a closer scrutiny, particularly in terms of the political economy of development.

The approach to the employment objectives evolved as a part of the development strategy devised in the First Plan document continued, in its essentials, right upto the Eighth Plan period with some modifications, refinements, fine-tuning, and in certain respects, greater degree of realism in some sectoral, regional, and programmatic aspects. In the following, we briefly examine the employment perspective and policies evolved as a part of different plans.

The Second Five-Year Plan recognized the poor performance on the employment front, leading to increase in the backlog of unemployment and under-employment. It happened during a plan which exceeded its output growth target. Even then the planners did not question, even in passing, the basic approach of indirectly dealing with unemployment and underemployment through capital-formation and technical efficiency as "the objective is increasing employment at rising levels of incomes." It maintained that "employment is implicit in and follows investment" and that "the volume of employment grows only as the supply of tools and equipment on the one hand and of the wage-goods on which the incomes of the newly employed come to be spent is expanded."

It is worth noting that along with "tools and equipment", there is an explicit mention of wage-goods as important determinants of the volume of employment. This should be viewed against the fact that the Second Five-Year Plan introduced the model of relatively higher priority for the capital-goods sector along with a plea to increase, the role of cottage and small-industries for augmenting the supply of consumers' goods. However, the thinking on employment continued to be dominated by the critical role of investment, labour productivity, the importance of the use of machinery, and new techniques for higher productivity. Making an empirical statement that the problem of endemic unemployment is not acutest in machine-using high productivity countries, it was argued that low productivity leads to low incomes, which in term inhibit the supply of "currently needed consumer goods and keeps down the size of the markets". Thus, the size of the market was made to impinge mainly on the level of productivity and not on the volume of employment. This may well be regarded as a preference for the market-deepening approach over the market-widening approach. In this restatement of the vicious circles tautology, the starting point is assigned to low productivity.

In fact, the link between rising investment and high productivity was visualized so strongly that even the case for labour-intensive methods of production was qualified because, for obtaining increases in employment "at rising levels of income" increased investment for the production of tools and equipment was considered necessary. This, in turn, required surpluses for investment and hence "it is nonetheless true that labour-saving devices in particular are often a necessary condition for increasing employment opportunities in the system as a whole" owing to their presumed contribution to reinvestible surpluses.

The plan went on to analyse the question of choice of techniques and its impact on the availability of surpluses considered crucial for longterm growth and full employment. In this analysis a distinction was made between "surplus generated" and "surplus available." Despite comparatively low surplus per person 'generated' by labour-intensive techniques, the surplus available may become larger if one took into account "the social and economic costs of maintaining those who would otherwise remain unemployed." This reasoning is true in the context of displacement of labour caused by capital-intensive techniques. One finds for the first time a reference to the 'social and economic costs' of unemployment, though without any practical results.

It may be mentioned that this dichotomy between low per worker surplus and larger total surplus has been recognized quite cogently by Kurt Mandelbaum and simply on the basis of the size of 'surplus' manpower involved at a relatively low level of productivity without bringing in the consideration of social and economic costs of maintenance of the unemployement and under-employeds.

The implications of this realization had the potential of changing the perspective of employment policy and plan priorities. But the availability of larger total surplus by means of labour-intensive methods was considered difficult to realize owing to "organizational" problems involved in its mobilization owing to a large number of small units involved.

## **516** ✽ CHAPTER 29

Mobilization of surpluses from the propertied, well-to-do group is very difficult because of their political clout and the power they wield in all spheres, even though their number is very small. This is clear from, widely admitted low elasticity of direct taxes and exponential growth of tax evasions and black economy. The manner in which indirect taxes cover the goods of mass consumption and contribute many a times more revenue than that contributed by the direct taxes (presumably meant to mobilize the surplus accruing to the propertied and the high-pay employees) (*Long-term Fiscal Policy,* 1985) shows that the euphemism of organizational problems cannot be taken seriously, particularly a factor like "a large number of small units" from whom surplus has to be mobilized.

In addition to the above, the Second Plan gave attention to break up the problem in terms of "sectors, regions, and classes" and evolved specific policy and programmatic guidelines. Its thinking on the sectoral pattern of employment became crystallized around the position that shift of workforce away from agriculture and towards mining and modern small and large industry and transport, construction, and communications is inevitably involved in the very process of development. Therefore, it opted for the policy of keeping further labour-absorption in agriculture to the minimum. One wonders if it was this perspective which made the planners deny the employment friendly implications of redistribution of land among the landless.

One can say, with the benefit of hindsight, that the implications of this view for broad based agricultural growth, particularly in the international comparative context of rates, labour-absorption in countries similar to India, have not been helpful. Further, these Second Plan formulations regarding the pattern of occupational structure came in for rude repudiation in the reality as seen in the form of structural retrogression India experienced.

From the point of analysis, the Second Plan advanced one proposition of great insight which one can see as a preview of later theories in which the phenomenon of under employment was reformulated in the guise of 'informal sector' work. The plan maintained that with development-leading to larger demand for labour in the tertiary sector "many types of work which at present get done within the household become distinct commercial services. In this way develop a large number of small business and trades offering opportunities for independent work." One wishes in this line of reasoning to have been pursued further for its policy implications. The questions of employment, income-earning opportunities and levels of productivity viewed jointly with costs of production and levels of living have to be seen in their organizational-institutional context for devising appropriate policies and the content and strategy of development.

The experience of Second Plan led to further disillusionment regarding the capacity of investment, increased the supply of tools and equipment, high productivity techniques, and faster growth to make a dent into the problems of unemployment. The Third Plan projections uncovered addition of three million persons to the backing of unemployment and underemployment (*Third Five Year Plan*). Instead of inviting a review of the basic approach to the question of employment, the suggestion of starting fire-fighting tactical moves in the form of rural public works programme with some emphasis on programmes of rural industrialization by means of a strengthened economic infrastructure and industrial estates may be regarded as the distinct contribution of the Third Plan to employment planning.

By taking local conditions into account, the rural public works programmes were intended to bring about increased agricultural production, especially in relatively backward areas. The plan emphasized the areaapproach in order to respect to the needs of specific occupational and skills groups.

The basic formulations in the plans remained unshaken in its commitment to the inherited approach, notwithstanding the empirical demonstration to the effect that "in industry, increase in investment and capacity does not lead to a proportionate growth of employment because new processes, especially in large-scale manufacture, generally have to be based on high productivity techniques." The conclusion which has been dawned upon the planners from the lack of a necessary positive elasticity of employment with respect to increased investment in industrial capacity was to go in for a balancing exercise "by a deliberate effort in other fields (non-industrial fields-KNK) to employ techniques which will be more labour-intensive and will save capital resources, specially foreign exchange." It is clear that the approach was to leave the choice of techniques in industries unaffected. Additionally, it was implicit that not only the policy of treating employment as a by-product of capital accumulation and growth of output should be continued but the choice of techniques need not to be integrated with questions of the pattern of income-distribution and choice of product-mix. One can see how selective choice of variable of analysis affect and is affected by powerful non-academic, broader social forces.

Against this background, the Fourth Plan sought to explicitly link "social justice and equity" and improvement of the condition of the common man and the weaker sections to "provision of employment and education" (*Fourth Five Year Plan*). It may be regarded as giving recognition to the importance of what has come to be called 'human capital'. The trade-off between restriction of modern (high-productivity capitalintensive) sector and increasing "employment and income opportunities for people employed in traditional industries" was recognized. However, the die remained cast in favour of the long-run, indirect, employment-benefits perspective, even though it was recognized that the short-run output growth-centred approach worsens the distribution of income and wealth as it "necessitates the concentration of effort in areas and on classes of people who already have the capacity to respond to growth opportunities."

Despite somewhat more strident reiteration of the interests of equity and. the welfare of the weaker sections, and the need for detailed specific and also local planning and implementation nothing really substantially different in terms of understanding, policies or programmes could emerge in the Fourth Plan formulations.

It was the plan when the need for lower level, micro planning in a multi-level planning framework was explicitly articulated, yielding a richer concept of district planning. Little wonder, therefore, that the inadequacies of the results obtained through rural-works programme were traced to the fact that "it was not integrated into local development planning." It argued a strong case for the local plans to take into account local needs for creating employment opportunities."

Following on the heels of a prolonged recession in industry and the switch-over to the Green Revolution strategy of agricultural development, the Fourth Plan faced quite a few difficult tasks. The organized manufacturing sector, primarily preservation of the private sector, came nowhere near the plan expectations regarding generation of employment opportunities. Therefore, the plan stressed the role of public sector investment in industry and infrastructure for making good the shortfalls. For dealing with the consequences of the 'betting on the strong' strategy initiated by the Green Revolution package, especially target-group oriented programmes like SFDA, IRDP, NREP, etc., were expected to open new possibilities of employment generation.

By this time, ILO has entered into the Third World employment scenario with its special programmes. The high point of these efforts was an attempt to come to grips with many aspects of low productivity, income differentials, and worsening situation in these respects. It was felt that the traditional concepts like underemployment and disguised unemployment were full of conceptual-theoretical inadequacies and turned out to be of little help in relieving these problems. The Fourth Plan formulations took explicit note of these strings and sought to redefine the concept of labourforce in the light of the preponderance of "self-employment and production within the household enterprises." These realizations beckoned to all the trappings of what came to be called the 'informal sector'. However, these realizations could change neither the basic indirect, long-term approach to fuller employment nor specific employment expanding policies, in term of inter- and intra-sectoral and regional and micro-level planning making use of and strengthening the informal work opportunities. It could not introduce any more realistic and effective thrust towards greater labour-intensity in the choice of techniques.

Hence claiming that the Fourth Plan development strategy has been "broadly in conformity with" the ILO approach, it went on to reiterate the old position that "emphasis has equally been placed on productive employment on a sufficiently high level of efficiency." It may also be noted that in the wake of the severe drought of the mid-1960s, the plan revitted the rural-works programme to 40 chronically drought-prone areas with a view to provide "unemployment relief in such areas." In the form of Maharashtra's Employment Guarantee Programme and Gujarat's scheme of 'Right to Work', the rural-works programmes acquired a new dimension towards the creation of such work-opportunities on a regular basis, though their integration under a local level plan and movement towards a livingwage remained far cries. Since these programmes were not regular in the sense of location, projects, and on-going employment to an identifiable group of persons, they offered only an opportunity for relief and were at best semi-productive.

The Fifth Plan built on the understanding and insights evolved by the Fourth Plan, particularly with respect to local level planning, especially for agriculture and unregistered sector in a multi-level fanning framework by proposing to strengthen planning machinery both at the states and local levels as a part of a comprehensive area approach (*Fifth Five-Year Plan,* 19-21). It was recognized that employment in various household industries had worsened and hence there was need for "regeneration of employment in the unregistered sector through an appropriate policy framework."

The Fifth Plan also continued its adherence to the basic approach adopted since the beginning of planning*.* The Fifth Plan adopted a redistributive agenda regarding consumption expenditure. Possibly reflecting this concern and reversing the position taken earlier, the Fifth Plan proposed to link rural employment to "augmenting agricultural productivity and rigorously implementing land reforms" in order to build a "productive smallfarmer base by means of tenancy reform."

The Sixth Five-Year Plan assessed the progress of employment generation under the plans and noted that the backlog of unemployment has increased. However, the task was taken to be the same as has been understood so far, *viz.,* "to generate more employment without affecting adversely the growth in production" (Sixth Five-Year Plan, 19-22).

At the basic strategy and policy-level, the Sixth Plan marked no departure from what has been under operation so far. Its main point was an attempt at more precise estimates of chronic, seasonal, and part-time unemployment on the basis of NSS data. On this basis, a more detailed and disaggregated data-base was created for undertaking many special programmes like NRF, IRDP, TRYSEM, Dairy Development Programmes, minimum needs programmes, programmes by SFDA as also special programmes for women, tribals, unorganized urban poor, and programmes for desert and droughtprone areas.

Since organized sector subscribe only about 18 per cent of the increase in labour-force and public sector employment, too, could not be expanded, the planners opined that "policy-measures should be guided for self-employment ventures." Carrying forward the ILO inspired Fourth Plan approach towards the informal sector, it was postulated that some special measures for helping urban self-employed belonging to the informal sector will be undertaken mainly by way of training and credit-facilities. Since decentralized special target group-employment projects mostly as centrally-sponsored programmes, were the main thrust possibly owing to limited employment impact of growth-oriented planning and policies, at the district level a nodal employment agency, District Manpower Planning and Employment Generation Council was to be set up in each district, which will *interalia,* prepare district 'employment budget' encourage group self-employment and will assess 'employment impact' of development and modernization projects.

It can be seen that owing to actually observed limited effectiveness in obtaining adequate employment impact through the investment, growth, and modernization based basic plan strategy, a series of special, targetgroup-oriented and *ad-hoc* programmes for providing relief and employment for a limited period to a large number of rural and urban poor became important supplementary, fire-fighting elements of the planned approach to the employment objective. The physical assets, income flows, inter-sectoral and macro-balances, and productivity aspects of these employment projects were downplayed compared to their purchasing-power disbursement intention. One may well say that in effect and, to the extent such programmes could be successfully and honestly implemented, they may be considered a watered down and indirect 'social security' programme to a greater extent than full-blooded employment programme. However, the employment target in terms of standard person-years by means of special programmes can provide, at best, *ad-hoc,* irregular income-earning opportunities. This kind of work cannot be equated with regular, secure employment in viable public, private or cooperative sector economic activities. It involves essentially a budgetary transfer.

The Seventh Plan continued the same approach of growth plus supplementary special programmes, with somewhat larger financial allocations and attempted fine-tuning in terms of specific categories of labour-force, sectorally and regionally, for achieving the employment objective of planning. It went on to state that "the growth of the economy should have the capacity to absorb the backlog of unemployment, underemployment, and a proportion of additions to the labour-force. To meet this end, supplemental programmes should have to be incorporated for specific targets-groups/ areas for employment creation, income generation and poverty alleviation" (Seventh Five-Year Plan).

Among the specific nuances attached to the basic approach of 'more of the same' with attempts to realize the advantages of learning by doing, notable advances were marked in areas of informal sector, involving selfemployment (both in modern and rural areas) with a view to evolve a policy package for the informal sector, especially regarding the welfare and the working and living conditions of unorganized labour. After the First Plan, for the first time, the question of wage-policy was explicitly raised again though without yielding anything like wage-policy. Among the special target groups bonded, child and women labour and educated unemployed came in for specific attention.

Recent emphasis on electronics, automobiles, and other sunrise industries was considered especially favourable to the employment of educated manpower. It was maintained that "objective of employment generation should not mean the adoption of static technology." Like the Sixth Plan, latest NSS data and projections regarding the size of the labour force, its age composition, employment status, and likely magnitude of remainder of unemployment were worked out and the need for developing "a proper linkage of economic planning with manpower and educational planning" was recognized.

We have seen that the abortive Janata Dal Plan's approach paper (*Towards Social Transformations*) made declarations regarding a basic overhaul of the approach to employment planning. However, with the change of government, the Eighth Plan (1992-97) returned to the former basic position on the employment objective, though at the level of rhetory, there were some strident references to the need to ensure adequate growth of employment to achieve full employment by the turn of the century (*Eighth Five Year Plan,* 1992-97). An important departure in this plan was the enunciation of the focus of the plan which, *inter alia,* mentioned the creation of a *social security net* through employment generation*.* Apparently, it might be meant for dealing with the recessionary effects of the stabilization programme initiated to tackle the acute fiscal and external payment crises. The plan suggested a target of creation of some 10 million jobs per year; on an average, employment for some 22 thousand persons a day. It implied an employment growth rate of 2. per cent to 2.8 per cent per annum. The dismal performance in terms of employment during the earlier plans was recognized but without working out any change in the Seventh Plan framework.

Given the context of Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) initiated in 1991, the prospects of a decline in growth rate and employment and an increase in unemployment for the first two–three years were recognized. Given this IMF-World Bank dictated perspective, and noting the absence of a wage policy, "excessive regulation of conditions of employment making labour adjustment highly difficult" was blamed for "restructuring employment expansion". Credit policy too came in for flak on the same count. Hence, placing reliance on the market-forces on giving employmentfriendly results, a plea was made "to reduce the overall degree of protection to labour." Since only a small part of the workforce has some kind of protection of employment a reduction in the protection available to a small number was deemed to contribute to social security for an overwhelming majority of workers with "completely insecure and unprotected conditions in the unrecognized sector." If this is not so, the only other reason for the reduction in the overall degree of protection to organized labour may be equality in sharing adversity-a policy of removing privileges not available to a majority. The major hassle with this approach is that it runs counter to the overall tenure of SAP, which is more of the same, of betting on the strong by improving incentives, rewards, and opportunities. The plan's detailed sectoral work on specific sectors seemed to lack co-ordination and regard for conditions for realising the sectoral potential. For instance, it is maintained that "fisheries can grow as fast as 7 per cent per annum because about 2/3 of the marine and inland potential is unexploited." What is missing squarely is the consideration of potential demand and domestic affordability of fish at the prevailing price and income levels.

In sum, the Eighth Plan and subsequently other Plans are basically a reiteration of an approach which has shown scanty results so far. This is understandable in the sense that the role, scope, and methodology of the plan have changed in directions which are hardly employment-friendly rather than overcoming the limitation of over-centralized initiative, bureaucratic, economistic, paternalistic, one-dimensional, growth-oriented planning, it has blamed the plan failures on being excessively statist and hence has advocated a policy of rolling-back the state. Naturally, employment, a part and parcel of the process of the empowerment of the people so that they make use of the state, markets and the plans for their indigenous, integrated set of objectives, has to take backseat. The apparent emphasis on employment seems to be based on misleading and inappropriate concepts, theories, and policies.

After nearly five and a half decades and in spite of considerable expansion, strengthening, diversification, and acquisition of resistance by the Indian economy, neither employment in the conventional sense, nor active and rewarding participation in the community's efforts to produce and distribute the means of livelihood in a sustainable manner has become available to a rather large number of Indians. We have seen the traverse of the employment question over the successive plans, which has neither been marked for its fruit-bearing or light-bearing character. We have travelled a great deal basically in order to remain where we were, except for the lost opportunities, its immense human and social cost, particularly for the generations of the unemployed who have receded in the past. As a simple but telling indicator of the failure on the employment front, it may be noted that our agricultural-labourers' households, who constitute 23 per cent of the total, get less than 180 days of employment in a year at wages which are generally lower than the statutory minimum and with working conditions reminiscent of the feudal era. Creating opportunities for every participant in healthy economic life, described generally as creating near full employment (*i.e.,* making the labour-market a sellers' one) was treated as presently nonfeasible and hence long-term objective during the 1950s. The same pleas are repeated presently when we are reaching the end of the century. In fact, the Eighth Five-Year Plan has placed the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) as the focus of the plan which is treated as superior to the plan objectives (*Eighth Five-Year* Plan, 1992). However, in keeping with the tradition of vexing eloquent on various 'desirable' objectives, the Eighth Plan reiterates the employment objective as well. But it has been demonstrated convincingly and accepted even by the votaries of the SAP that its immediate recessionary thrust would cause a net reduction in organized sector employment with similar repercussions in the unorganized/informal sector (*Alternative Economic Survey,* 1992). To put it straight, a plan with a focus on the implementation of SAP with negative employment implications cannot contribute to the attainment of fuller employment opportunities for its labour-force, howsoever, strident its articulation of the employment objective. There are other indications of how employment generation is finding a relatively low priority with the economic 'reformers' of the 1990s. Exit policy and deregulation of the labour-market have become dominant concerns in order to make India attractive to foreign investors. The main point of exit policy is to grant the management the freedom to 'fire' the entire workforce of the enterprise without any public regulation and scrutiny on the basis of its own decisions. In effect, this policy stance means that output growth, foreign exchange earning, modernization competitiveness, etc., are the prime concerns of the day and for this purpose, even if existing employment has to be sacrificed, let alone the question of creating additional employment avenues, the policy-makers will not hesitate to adopt such a course.

It is also clear that employment or avenues of meaningful, productive participants in the economic activities is something which matters to those who have no other means for it to save their labour. If for a certain length of time such a person fails to acquire access to means of meaningful participation or a scheme of social security, her/his supply price comes down or she/he is forced to adopt some informal 'survival' activity. This is an outcome which favours those who have under their direct command means of entering the circuit of economic activities as owners-controllers of the means of production and employers of the labour-power.

One need not labour the obvious class and social groups implications of the relative priority assigned to employment vis-a-vis other objectives in any highly differentiated society like ours. The very fact that employment effects of output growth were treated as important elements of the 'trickle-down' process and became the key means for the 'pull-up' exercises mounted by the public agencies highlights the social bias of those who accept a 'development' strategy incorporating 'trickle-down' or 'pull-up' mechanism for helping the poor by means of betting on the strong.

The politics of Indian planning failed to make the employment issue despite its live-wire nature-an arena of active purposive socio-political conflicts and sustained popular struggles over plan-priorities, and popular mobilization programmes, policies, projects, technological and locationchoices or short-run and medium-run macro-economic policies or the management of industrial relations. Partly, this became so owing to stated and declared concern for employment which was common between the ruling and the opposition parties. The sick industrial units were not allowed to close down, and quite a few were, in fact, taken-over, with a view, *inter alia,* to protect the existing employment avenues under trade union pressure. After the mid-1960s, massive absolute-size, special semi-productive employment programmes were taken up in rural India. The village and small-scale industries with the relatively higher rate of labour-absorption were given a special dispensation. As a result, a certain degree of operationally and credibility was acquired by the concern for employment, at least by way of special sectoral programmes and as a fire-fighting operation. Even the issue of reservations for the OBCs in public employment is related to preferential sharing of scarce job. These postures and taken steps helped generate some appropriate political responses and made for the survival of the essential window-dressing character of the stated employment-orientation.

Many people were duly impressed by the fact that thousands of crores of rupees were spent under the plans for creating millions of man-days of employment year-after-year. That effective employment remained a far cry and the overall impact of all the policies and plans taken together continued to increase the backlog of employment at the beginning of each new plan did not seem to have had so much visible impact on popular perception as the much advertised massive schemes of employment generation. Like the value of many much-touted democratic rights made available equally to everyone by the constitution (an instance of a type of democratic deceit) the employment rhetory and programmes tended to create among the literates, elites, and opinion leaders, a certain sense of complacency over the employment issue, particularly in view of the population explosion which contributed exponentially to the reserve army of labour and was treated as the villain of the piece-making unemployment an intractable problem for which they blamed the unrestrained and irresponsible reproductive behaviour of the poor themselves.

The frustration welling up among the unemployed youth, particularly those who either acquired some education or were school drop-outs was characterized by various political formations and socio-economic and political practices in such a diverse set of diversionary methods that nothing basic, far-going and really effective need to be conceded to these powerful, vocal potential centres of protest and worse. A telling and tragic instance of such an approach is the priority given to job-reservation for the OBC by the National Front government towards the end of the 1980s over its own promise of granting the right to work. Despite some indisputable merit of the reservation policy, its capacity to confer tangible benefits to the OBCs is rather limited (*The Third Concepts, 1989*)*.* 

The ruling party and other parties espousing similar interests and causes which are not serious about real employment-growth as a major correlate of development, recruited some vocal sections of the unemployed youth into the political arena as their storm troopers through the ubiquitous powerbrokers, in the electoral and non-electoral politics, making them share the crumbs from the rent and clout which became available to them as a result of the commercialization, and criminalization of politics. The growing non-democratic, oligarchic, self-perpetuating, and self-selecting nature of the political parties and their leadership with excessive top-downism, in which political investment of billions of rupees of ill-gotten wealth and the adoption of campaigns for marketing of leaders, with advantage of pedigree as additional non-competitive advantage, created from the centre down to the villages and hamlets a class of political, lumpenized youths as brokers, vote banks, and *mastaans.* Those who could not find place in these found their way into various regional, ethnic, sectional, and communal political formations and movements with varying degrees of open and concealed militancy. Some political parties complemented these tactics and devices by occasional, sporadic movements demanding right to work, unemployment insurance, vocationalization of education, etc., with highly visible forms of one-shot agitation like *morchas, bandhs, gheraos,* and *jail-bharos.* 

Some of the youth and students' wings of various political parties made these agitations, confined largely to their cadres, a hardy annual. These 'movements' and agitations hardly touched the really weak, unorganized, illiterate, and uncared-for youth, particularly from the rural and tribal areas. They could not conceive of integrating employment-oriented struggles with the overall policy-struggles over development issues. In fact, these activities cannot be sustained without grass-roots, direct, self-help programmes, for improving earnings and access to public goods. It is clear that heightened awareness of rights and possibilities which strengthen the will and capacity to struggle and define avenues of policy and programmatic reforms are related to the contexts, needs, and aspirations of people seeking a place under the sun. The youth wings of various political parties, even those of the left, have neglected these issues and adopted highly, sporadic actions which betray their highly centralized, non-empathic, alienated character-the politics from above which treats these constituencies basically as scaffoldings to 'power'.

Some beginnings in the form of presently fragmented micro-level NGOs shows a new avenue of hope and regeneration, though some black-sheep mar this scene as well.

There have been attempts to make planning a decentralized and participative exercise in order to make it a vehicle for the fulfilment of people's needs and aspirations. There can hardly be anything other than employment (not necessarily wage-employment) which can be a closet reflection of the needs and aspirations of the really marginalized. Thus, attempts to make Indian planning a multi-level exercise by instituting democratic decentralization and district level-planning should have acquired special orientation towards active manpower planning for full employment. However, larger socio-economic political and administrative factors saw to it that neither such a devolution of power nor granting of primacy to employment creation became really effective. Many studies of district planning and of Panchayati Raj institutions lend support to these views. Thus, the new constitutional provisions for strengthening local institutions may not be able to do much for employment generation.

It has been argued that without changing the socio-economic power at the village level, grassroots democracy may remain a chimera. For this to happen, a thorough programme of land deconcentration and redistribution is essential. Land reforms are also a direct contribution to employment objective, as land provides/supplements productive work. So are landaugmenting techniques like irrigation, electrification of rural areas, etc., or rural industrialization and non-farm employment. But, given the present power-balance and its sway, land reforms are unlikely to be implemented through conventional administrative-legislative measures*.* It means in the near future, the employment question is unlikely to acquire primacy in our political economy as it stands today. In fact, signs of growing incorporation and the increased clout of the MNCs and G-7, as reflected in the SAP of the 1990s, has replaced employment generation and expansion r of the domestic market by exit policy, National Renewal Fund, preparation of a National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Plan, increasing adoption of product-mix and technologies of the MNCs which by their very nature tend to be labour-saving and loss of employment opportunities. Thus, one finds that the policy orientation during the 1990s is the same with which we started out during the 1950s: investment and output growth with accent on modem technology, through a combination of trickle-down, pull-up and social security cover, will over time create gainful employment opportunities. There is little reason, therefore, to expect a better deal on the employment front. With degeneration of politics and a sharp drop in the quelling of governance, one sees little reason to be surprised at such a turn of development.

## **Notes and References**

- GOI, Planning Commission, (1953), *First Five-Year Plan,* New Delhi.
- GOI, Planning Commission, (1956), *Second Five-Year Plan,* New Delhi.
- GOI, Planning Commission, (1962), *Third Five-Year* Plan, New Delhi.
- GOI, Planning Commission, (1970), *Fourth Five-Year Plan,* New Delhi.
- GOl, Planning Commission, (1976), *Fifth Five-Year Plan,* New Delhi.
- GOI, Planning Commission, (1981), *Sixth Five-Year Plan,* New Delhi.
- GOl, Planning Commission, (1985), *Seventh Five-Year Plan,* New Delhi.
- GOI, (1973), *Report of the Committee on Unemployment,* New Delhi, Chairman, B. Bhagwati.
- T.N. Srinivasan and P.K. Bardhan (1974), *Poverty and Income Distribution in India,*  Calcutta, Statistical Publishing Society.
- J.H. Adler, (1972), "The World Bank's Concept of Development", in J. Bhagwati and Eckans (ed.), Development and Planning.
- J. Mouly and E. Costa, (1974), *Employment Policies in Developing Countries: A Comparative Analysis,* London, George Alien and Unwin.