# 8

# Demographic TransiTion in inDia

#### Leela Visaria

# **Introduction**

The present chapter on demographic trends in India covers the period since about 1971 until the most current times. Although some understanding of the situation that prevailed with regard to population size, growth, density, distribution, and factors affecting them, helps to provide a perspective on how and why the Indian population has attained its current size and composition and how the demographic transition was initiated and progressed, it is not possible to explore long-term historical material in this chapter. A few scholars have undertaken such reviews and analyses using data available from sources and other supporting information (Bhat 1989, 1998; Davis 1951; Dyson 1989; Mukharjee 1976; Pathak et al. 1994; Visaria and Visaria 1982).

For the period prior to 1970 population information was largely available from the decennial censuses of which India has an uninterrupted series since 1881. The age distribution, intercensal population growth and other data have been used imaginatively and explored to arrive at estimates of the fertility and mortality levels that prevailed in the country during the twentieth century. Since about the mid-1960s the country has witnessed an explosion in information on population parameters and also analyses by scholars of the time-series data to understand the contours of transition. The Sample Registration System (SRS) which came into existence towards the end of the 1960s has provided annual estimates of mortality and fertility now for more than 35 years.1 Besides SRS, data on cause of death statistics for rural areas on a sample basis from some primary health centres and for urban areas from some hospitals also began to be collected since about the mid-1960s.2 Additionally, the National Family Planning Surveys were conducted in 1970, 1980, and 1988 providing state-level estimates of fertility and contraceptive use. In the decade of the 1990s, two fairly comprehensive National Family Health Surveys (in 1992–93 and in 1998–99) were conducted, again providing state-level estimates of fertility, mortality, and a range of health indicators by several background characteristics. More recently, during 2004–05, the third National Family Health Survey was also conducted the preliminary results of which at state level are now available. With three comparable NFHS surveys, trends and changes in many population parameters in the recent two decades can be discerned; these should provide a wealth of data to researchers in the years to come. In addition, the population research centres that have been established in most of the major states periodically carry out a number of district-specific and other issue-specific in-depth studies which are often of exploratory nature.

However, the period between 1971 and 2001 has witnessed an unparallel increase in population growth due to a much faster decline in mortality which was not compensated by a decline in fertility until recently. This led to an emphasis by Indian planners and policy makers on collecting data on the levels and the patterns of fertility and the use of contraception. Academicians responded to this need by carrying out fertility and family-planning surveys. A large number of studies during the decades of the 1970s and 1980s were focused on estimating levels of fertility at both national level and state levels. Additionally, some studies were commissioned to, or carried out by, research institutes which explored a range of socio-economic characteristics which affected fertility levels, trends, and differentials.

Mortality and health-related work remained of secondary importance until very recently. In the 1970s and 1980s, it was accepted that the various vertical public health programmes aimed at eradicating major diseases were achieving their objective of lowering mortality. Also, there had been no major outbreak of any epidemic or a major famine for mortality issues to merit special attention. It is only in the past few years, in the wake of HIV/AIDS, threat of the re-emergence of some of the old communicable diseases along with the increasing importance of non-communicable diseases in the disease profile, that mortality and morbidity studies have begun to receive some attention.

This review chapter shall first examine research related to fertility transition which began in India in the 1960s, the identification of key factors associated with fertility decline, the reasons for variations in the onset and pace of the decline in various parts of the country, and the socio-economic and cultural explanations advanced by scholars for the transition. The next section will examine the various explanations offered in the demographic literature for the variations in each of the proximate determinants of fertility. Thereafter, theories and hypotheses will be explored to understand and examine mortality and health transition in the country. This review will not devote time and space to discussing the levels and trends of fertility and mortality, which have received a lot of attention and space in the Indian demographic literature.3

## **Fertility Transition**

The exploration of factors associated with the prevailing levels of fertility and of the determinants of fertility changes in India has always received a good deal of attention from researchers. In the 1950s and 1960s, the principal factors mentioned as affecting fertility were the same basic biological factors and the socio-economic variables that had brought European fertility down in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Factors such as a steady increase in the age at marriage, duration of breastfeeding, religion, and other ritual restrictions imposed on the exposure to sexual intercourse suppressed natural fertility to a certain extent.4 Among the socio-economic factors that were identified are urbanization, social mobility, status of women, family organization, level of living and cost of rearing children, decline of religious interest, increase in women's employment, occupation, education, etc. (Zachariah 1995). These factors differentiated high fertility groups from low fertility groups. Of course, education in general, and female education in particular, was considered a prime mover in lowering fertility. When the Indian government entered the field of population planning with its Family Planning Programme with cost-free services and educational efforts to promote the use of contraception, fertility fell further, albeit unevenly, with some states promoting the use of contraception more zealously than others.

#### *Determinants of Fertility Transition*

The available large data sets have been analysed by some scholars to identify the correlations of fertility variation and the changes over time. Among the large number of dependent variables that were quantified and studied for their association with the prevailing levels of fertility at a given point of time or with the changes in fertility levels over time, education of women was identified as the most important determinant.

In this regard, an important exercise was carried out by A.K. Jain (1985). The state-level analysis highlighted that a strong association existed between levels of female education, infant mortality, and fertility. These associations remained strong even after the influence of other factors was controlled. A quantitative study by Mari P.N. Bhat and Rajan (1990) also concluded that there was strong negative correlation between female education and fertility level. It showed that female education was important in lowering fertility. A district-level study by Mari P.N. Bhat (1996) found that less than 10 per cent of the fertility variation within the country was attributable to structural economic factors. However, differences in exposure to the mass media and levels of female education accounted for 40 per cent of the variation. M. Murthi et al. (1995) and J. Dreze and M. Murthi (2001) also found that the level of female literacy was the most important factor in accounting for fertility variation both between regions and over time. General development and modernization variables, which they explored in their analyses, were found to have only a small effect.

The pathways through which education works in lowering fertility have been discussed at some length even in Indian literature. It has been argued that increased education keeps girls longer in school thereby helping raise their age at marriage. Further, exposure to schooling or education could also give young women greater awareness of a range of health and other services, and confidence in accessing them for themselves and for their children. Also, since the level of female education is positively associated with child survival, improvements in the survival chances of infants and children may reduce the demand for a large number of children. These arguments are quite convincing and micro-level studies and analyses carried out by the Caldwells and their colleagues in Karnataka have supported these pathways (Caldwell 1982; Caldwell et al. 1985).

While most studies have shown that the increase in the level of female education is negatively associated with fertility, in the Indian context the widespread promotion of state-sponsored family planning programmes and the adoption of sterilization by illiterate women, no matter for what reasons, has raised some questions about the role of education as the prime mover in the fertility transition. Some of the recent analyses by the same scholars who once identified female education as a major factor triggering the fertility decline have shown that a large component of the recent fertility decline in India has occurred among women with no education. For example, Mari P.N. Bhat (2002) has convincingly shown that between 1981 and 1991, 65 per cent of all fertility decline occurred among illiterate women. By using data from censuses and surveys, he has shown that much of the recent reduction in fertility and the rise in contraceptive levels in India has come not from more women becoming literate over time, but from the changes in the reproductive behaviour of illiterate women themselves. He argues that while at the initial stages of demographic transition, the education of females exerts a significant negative effect on fertility, but as the transition progresses, this effect tends to weaken and the dominant pattern changes to one wherein the fertility level itself begins to exert a significant negative influence on the educational attainment of children, especially of girls. The first-born daughter appears to be the greatest beneficiary of the changing emphasis on quality over quantity in reproductive outcomes, as she is released from the burden of attending to younger siblings (Bhat 2002). This decline is attributed to ideational change, or the demonstration effect brought about through the influence of the mass media. A multilevel analysis by R. McNay et al. (2003) also found that fertility in some parts of India had declined among uneducated women due to increased use of contraception. The diffusion of new ideas and the aspirations for their children is leading even uneducated parents to limit the size of their families.

Levels of fertility have also been examined for their association with women's autonomy and/or status and kinship structures. T. Dyson and M. Moore (1983) attributed the lower fertility levels and earlier fertility declines in the southern region of the country to their less patriarchal kinship structures and the higher status accorded to the women. A.M. Basu's work (1992) among the migrants from both the north Indian state of Uttar Pradesh and the south Indian state of Tamil Nadu to the same neighbourhood of Delhi, also supported these ideas. She observed that women who had migrated from the southern state to Delhi enjoyed greater autonomy in their decision-making, had more interaction with the non-domestic world, and had lower fertility than their counterparts from northern India. The idea of personal autonomy is complex; it is, moreover, hard to practise in a patriarchal society at the individual level. Nonetheless, such studies do allude to the fact that autonomy is a cultural trait and is found in greater measure in certain social settings than in others. P. Krishnan (2001, 2002) also found that indices of female autonomy and the extent of patrilineal kinship were significant in accounting for regional differences in fertility between the major southern and northern states of India. While female literacy lowered fertility on its own, when measures of cultural traits such as female autonomy and patrilineal kinship were introduced in the analysis their combined effect on fertility decline was much larger and also varied over time. She argues that society matters and social interactions influence individual fertility decisions.

Some analysis, largely using the National Family Health Survey (NFHS) data, has been done to understand the fertility differentials in the context of preference for sons. This preference is widespread in India and both attitudes and behaviour are vitally influenced by a long-standing preference for sons which is deeply rooted in the cultural traditions of the society. Interestingly, the analysis showed that in the states where fertility is very high or very low, the effect of son preference on fertility is small. Evidently, in high fertility states most couples are able to have their minimum desired number of sons without exceeding their overall family-size goals. In low fertility states, son-preference is somewhat weak and so does not significantly contribute to fertility. In states with intermediate levels of fertility, the effect of son preference on fertility varies widely. Among the states with the total fertility rates of between two and three children, some exhibited very large effects of son preference on fertility. Overall, if gender preferences for children could be entirely eliminated, it was estimated that the level of fertility in India would fall by only about 8 per cent (Mutharayappa et al. 1997). Earlier, V.S. D'Souza (1994) also had argued that as demographic transition and modernization progress, the preference for the male child weakens. He found that in both Tamil Nadu and Kerala the ratio of the mean ideal number of sons and the mean ideal family size was closer to 0.5, suggesting no sex preference. However, the desire for an end to childbearing was higher in a one-child family if the child was a son. The odds of ending childbearing were also greater when both children were boys compared to when there were two daughters, and when there was a son and a daughter. Among families with three or more children, the odds of ending childbearing were smallest among families with only daughters.

The issues of why fertility fell earlier in some states of India, what factors triggered the decline among the early entrants, whether the pace of fertility decline between states has varied, and whether the factors responsible for fertility decline are different among late entrants compared to the earlier entrants are some that have been debated in the Indian demographic literature. The debate has also centred on what model of development triggers and sustains the fertility decline and why certain regions respond to these factors. Although there would be parallel developments in each region, and it is often very difficult to delineate the exclusive or dominant factors influencing the fertility decline, the existing hypotheses are examined in the next section.

#### *Regional Variations in Fertility Decline*

While the crude birth rate in India declined from about 37 per 1000 population around 1971 to 26 in 2000 and further to 24 by 2004, and the corresponding total fertility declined from around five births per woman to 3.2, the regional variations have not only persisted but also appear to have somewhat widened. The fertility decline began earlier and it continued to at a faster pace in the southern states compared to other parts of the country. This has led to fertility levels which are appreciably lower in the southern states of the country compared to the large north Indian states, and to an increase in the regional disparity over time. The total fertility rate has reached an even lower level than the replacement level of 2.1 births per woman in the southern states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu and is fairly close to the replacement level in the urban areas of several states such as Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, and West Bengal. Although fertility levels continue to be fairly high in the northern states, it is, however, noteworthy that despite their general socio-economic backwardness, fertility has started falling in all these states in recent years.

**Fertility Decline in Kerala.** Kerala was the first major state in India to experience a significant transition in its fertility. A number of studies undertaken to examine the determinants of fertility decline have concluded that after 1965, family planning was an important determinant of fertility decline in Kerala. But before 1965 increase in the age at marriage was the major factor accounting for the sizeable fertility decline (Zachariah 1984). It was further noted that the decline had occurred in all major socio-economic groups within Kerala since about 1980, so much so that the correlation between the fertility and economic indicators has become weak and fertility differentials narrowed. The 1991 Kerala fertility study carried out in three districts also confirmed the declining significance of socioeconomic factors, and that the steady increase in female literacy and status of women did not constitute necessary conditions for a sizeable fertility decline. The family planning programme was observed to have had a major effect on the behaviour of the people (Zachariah and Rajan 1997).

If that is the case, the pertinent question is how did the policies and programme strategies that are uniform for the country succeed in Kerala while they did not elsewhere? A range of hypotheses have been advanced to explain this. Most explanations have taken a historical perspective but are not always consistent with each other. J. Ratcliff (1978) has argued that the most important factor in Kerala's demographic transition was the structural change in the political economy since the early 1950s. Land reforms, minimum wages in agriculture and the organized sectors, and large public investments by the state government in primary and secondary education brought about egalitarian social structure and equity which, in turn, led to accessing of the available programmes by all strata of society. However, mass education contributed to demographic transition not directly but by creating a heightened political consciousness and effective political participation. This, in turn, led to a more equitable distribution of land, income, and services, including education.

The second hypothesis that has been put forward suggests that the government is able to penetrate society and extract resources. An analysis of 15 state data on the tax/GDP ratio indicated that Kerala had the maximum ratio and the highest percentage of government expenditure on welfare. It was argued that it is politics and not economics that determines fertility patterns. On the other hand, Krishnan (1998) has argued that the socio-economic changes that preceded Kerala's demographic transition altered the cost-benefit ratio of children to parents and to the society. The changes that preceded demographic transition over a long period of time in Kerala were primarily developments in public health and universal education. The increase in the number of surviving children, together with the parents' perceived higher cost of education for their children, raised the cost of child rearing in Kerala and paved the way for the successful practise of family planning methods.

Some scholars have also advanced the Malthusian hypothesis that Kerala has had a high density of population compared to the rest of the country. An increase in the age at marriage and the use of contraception were essentially a Malthusian reaction of a population subjected to high density, low income, poor employment chances, and a limited industrial base within the region. However, this continues to be debated. Whether the decline in fertility (and mortality) is a response to high density and poverty or to a relatively efficient political organization of the state or to its high population density continues to receive attention from political analysts (see Lappe and Schurman 1989).

On the other hand, analysing available secondary data to examine the various hypotheses for the decline in fertility in Kerala, Bhat and Rajan (1990) concluded that female literacy was the single most important factor in explaining the demographic transition in Kerala. The changes in the perceptions about children's costs and benefits came about due to the education of women. The egalitarian reforms, greater autonomy of women, and higher unemployment rates did not seem to have played any role in the fertility transition. Once the differences in adult female literacy and percentage of Muslims in the population were controlled, little difference in fertility remained to be explained between the districts of Kerala and also among the neighbouring districts of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.

Overall, it appears that there were several factors that were unique to Kerala. Scholars saw a close link between the early fertility decline and the pattern of social development, which began in the nineteenth century. Religious reforms were introduced to break the rigidities of the caste system, which, in turn, helped the spread of education among the lower castes. Undoubtedly, a better organized family planning programme which is accessible to all and which offers good, assured quality of services seems to have helped to increase the use of contraception to control marital fertility. Along with better contraceptive services, public health services helped to lower the mortality in Kerala and together with educational improvement, the two created additional demand for fertility control. Agrarian reforms, implementation of minimum wages, better working conditions, and land ceiling also seem to have helped to increase the desire for smaller families or fewer children. Improvement in women's education has helped improve their status and also increase the age at marriage and provide better care to infants and children thereby enhancing their survival chances. Once most children born are perceived to survive, the desire to replace the dead diminishes thereby lowering fertility. According to K. Srinivasan (1995), Kerala is unique in the sense that it typifies balanced top-down and bottom-up forces operating for fertility decline. The top-down force includes the political capacity and organization of the National Programme of Family Planning in the state, and the bottom-up forces are the demand for such services from the population.

**Tamil Nadu's Fertility Transition.** In the 1990s, the rapid fertility decline in Tamil Nadu received a lot of attention from demographers, and other researchers because its replacement-level fertility had been achieved in conditions of moderate social development (moderate increase in female literacy and in age at marriage), better than national average industrialization and urbanization, but with lower per capita income and a substantial proportion (37.8 per cent in 1987–89) of the population below the poverty line. This naturally prompted many population scientists to examine the plausible causes for the drastic decline in fertility in Tamil Nadu (Audinarayana et al. 2003; Kishor 1994; Ramasundaram 1995). They have identified several factors but have hinted that Tamil Nadu's achievements have been due to both social and economic development. Thus, factors such as modernization and the effects of the social reform movements by EVR 'Periyar' were combined with the political commitment by successive governments to bring down fertility fairly rapidly. The social reforms of Periyar, who propagated concepts like equality of women and men, education and employment for women, higher female age at marriage, small family size, and adoption of contraception to liberate women from the wheel of childbearing, became an integral part of the ruling leaders of the state who spoke about the desirability of a small family when they presided over marriage ceremonies (Srinivasan 1995).

Additionally, the well-run family planning programme, with a strong publicity component, and the noon-meal programme also seem to have worked to raise the aspirations about children among the Tamil couples who want to provide better levels of education and health care to their children, compared to what they themselves received as children (Ravindran 1999). It has been argued that poor parents have little choice but to invest in their children's education to enable them to get urban employment. Rising material aspirations, thus, seem to have given an impetus to the desire to reduce fertility.

V.K. Ramasundaram (1995) has further pointed out that other developments such as economic growth, development of infrastructure, especially public transportation which has improved access to heath care and family planning services, as well as the mass media, have played an important role in reducing the fertility aspirations of the people of Tamil Nadu. Cinema is part of the average person's life in rural Tamil Nadu, which provides a make-believe view of life which people want to emulate. Movies raise the aspirations of people for the good things of life, but when their income levels do not match their aspirations, the couples may decide to restrict their family size. This may explain the sharper fall in rural fertility compared to urban fertility in Tamil Nadu in the past two decades. Some scholars have labelled this as a poverty-induced or poverty-driven fertility decline (Basu 1986; Mencher 1980). Others, however, feel that the increasing gap between income levels and the aspirations of individual families due to increasing literacy and exposure to the mass media has resulted in a culture of consumerism. But the fact of the matter seems that the mass media has given people in Tamil Nadu exposure to modern ideas and to messages on education, health, and family planning (Ramasundaram 1995; Srinivasan 1995; Visaria 2000).

**Fertility Decline in Punjab and Andhra Pradesh.** Punjab too experienced a fertility decline relatively early on; economic development seems to have been a important factor. From the late 1960s, Punjab prospered from the Green Revolution in agriculture. This supported the rise of a flourishing industrial sector, and average incomes in the state rose significantly. Fertility was reduced even though levels of female literacy were low, levels of child mortality were relatively high, and there was a very strong degree of son preference (Das Gupta 1995). It was only in the 1980s and 1990s that more broad-based social development, in the form of improvements in female education, really began.

While social or economic developments within regions have induced a fertility decline in many regions, it has also been argued that the state-sponsored family planning programme has also played an important independent role in lowering the fertility levels in some states such as Andhra Pradesh. Several decomposition analyses have attributed a significant share of the overall decline in fertility to the effective implementation of the family planning programme which promotes the effective use of contraception, especially the terminal method of sterilization. In Andhra Pradesh, despite low levels of female literacy and the relatively young age at marriage of women, low levels of economic development and widespread poverty, fertility declined rather dramatically in the 1980s and 1990s, to the extent that the total fertility has reached replacement level (Balasubramanian 1999; James 1999; Rao et al. 1986). This achievement has led many planners and programme managers to advocate for the Andhra model for the other backward, high-fertility states—the model being vigorous promotion of family planning programmes.

In the context of Andhra Pradesh, the issue of poverty-driven fertility decline is also being raised. Is low demand for children in Andhra Pradesh responsible for the fertility decline? Or is the demand comparable to other states but the decline is because of a strong family welfare programme? Or in a low socio-economic context, is low fertility poverty induced? It is difficult to find exact answers to such questions but an analysis by Roy et al. (2003) indicates that the pattern of the relationship between the living standard and the demand for children in Andhra Pradesh was almost the same as in the three other states of Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, and Uttar Pradesh, thereby implying that the fertility decline in Andhra Pradesh is not poverty-induced to any greater extent than elsewhere.

It is argued that a large proportion of the available time of all health personnel at all levels in the state is devoted to family planning work and that the district collectors are playing a pivotal role in the promotion of family planning by coordinating activities with other departments to efficiently organize the sterilization camps. These have resulted in greater response to the use of family planning in the state (Prakasamma 2002).

However, the availability of more disaggregated data suggests that there are significant intra-state variations that need to be analysed in order to enhance one's understanding of the factors determining fertility transition. (Many of the Indian states in population size are larger than several countries of the world.) The district level analyses undertaken by Mari P.N. Bhat (1996) P.N. Bhat and F. Zavier (1999) and C.Z. Guilmoto and S.I. Rajan (2001) have shown that fertility transition has not followed the neat administrative boundaries; rather, the diffusion has been heavily conditioned by socio-economic and historical considerations. Also, the district-level estimates have indicated that within the relatively high fertility state, there are districts that appear to be the precursors of the likely trend in the years ahead.

Bhat (1996), for example, mapped the district-level estimates of the total fertility rate for the 1970s and 1980s and observed that fertility levels were often similar in contiguous districts despite being located in different states. He showed that fertility fell first in the coastal areas of southern India, and that the decline then moved inland, caming late to the country's heartland, that is, in and around the Gangetic valley. In the late 1980s, north Punjab, Haryana, and Himachal Pradesh emerged as the second area of fertility decline from which diffusion also occurred. Guilmoto and Rajan (2001) have also suggested that the spatial dimension of fertility transition became more intense as it progressed. A detailed analysis of the National Health and Family Survey (NFHS) data by Bhat and Zavier (1999) has indicated that in the 1970s and 1980s, fertility decline was faster in the contiguous belt comprising the country's southern areas and vast areas of the west and east. In India's Gangetic core, however, the fertility decline has been late and hitherto slow.

In-depth ethnographic studies have questioned much of the received wisdom about the factors associated with fertility transition or the pathways to fertility decline. For example, based on a detailed study of a community in the Bijnor area of Uttar Pradesh, P. Jeffery and R. Jeffery (1996) observed that women's autonomy and fertility were poorly correlated. Significantly, decisions regarding fertility and use of contraceptive methods—such as sterilization—were made at the household level, following negotiations between different family members. A study carried out in rural Tamil Nadu by Ravindran (1999), for example, has also questioned the standard association between the fertility level and factors such as education or women's autonomy. In fact, based on her extensive fieldwork in the region, she reported that men—*not* women—largely took the decisions related to childbearing. Increase in the aspirations of young men to provide better education and health care to their children prompted them to have fewer children. Women had very little say in the matter. If they expressed a view which contradicted the view of their spouses, they risked anger and even physical violence.

An ethnographic study by M. Saavala (2001) in rural Andhra Pradesh found that young women have increasingly turned to sterilization not because of the availability of cash compensation payments, but rather to gain prestige as well as to defy and undermine the authority of household elders and improve their position relative to that of their mothers-in-law. In addition, socio-economic changes and political movements in the state have raised the levels of confidence among the downtrodden sections of the population in general and women in particular. Clearly, more sociological and indepth anthropological studies are needed to unravel the mysteries of what determines the level of fertility at the individual, household, and societal level, and what triggers fertility decline and its pace.

#### *Proximate Determinants of Fertility*

The preceding section examined a range of studies which have explored the socioeconomic and related factors associated with fertility. Social scientists have viewed fertility as an outcome of social norms, economic, and cultural factors which influence and control the reproductive behaviour of couples. However, socioeconomic processes and human behaviour have to interact with the biological aspects of human reproduction. K. Davis and J. Blake (1956); and subsequently J. Bongaarts (1978); and J. Bongaarts and R.G. Potter (1983) identified a set of proximate determinants or intermediate fertility variables through which fertility is linked. Of the several such variables, at least four—marriage, breastfeeding, induced abortion, and contraception—are most important. Age at marriage, for example, controls the onset of exposure to socially sanctioned childbearing. Similarly, non-use of any form of contraception increases the probability of conception, other things being equal. If a proximate determinant changes over time, then fertility necessarily would change. Using the NFHS data, it has been possible to examine how fertility changes have been influenced by changes in the proximate determinants (Visaria 1999). This section will examine how various policy interventions have attempted to influence each of the four proximate determinants in India.

Virtually all childbearing in India occurs within marriage and, other things being equal, an increase in age at marriage for women or an increase in the proportion of women remaining single would suppress fertility. In India, marriage has remained virtually universal historically and continues to remain so, although there has been a steady increase in the average age at marriage of girls, which was less than 15 years 50 years ago and has increased to more than 19 today. By age 25, however, more than 94 per cent of women in India are married. Nonetheless, there are significant interstate variations in the age at marriage in India, with women in the southern states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu marrying at a relatively later age compared to their sisters in north Indian states. The variations in the entry in to marriage are associated with the increases in female education (more women in the southern states go to school and stay in school longer), exposure to modern, urban-based values through the mass media, and so on. There is considerable scope for the age at marriage to rise further in those states where it is still relatively low. Direct interventions by way of enactment of laws or punishments for violating the tenets of the Child Marriage Act, 2006 which prohibits marriage of girls under 18, have not yielded very positive results but measures such as the spread of female education, and improvements in communication and the reach of the mass entertainment media are expected to have far-reaching effects on raising women's age at marriage, which, in turn, will have an inhibiting influence on fertility, especially at young ages, thereby lowering teen pregnancies.

The length of breastfeeding is the principal determinant of the period of postpartum amenorrhea. In general, long durations of breastfeeding tend to have a powerful negative effect on fertility levels. Breastfeeding in India is prolonged and generally universal (Jain and Adlakha 1982; Visaria et al. 1995). Various studies have estimated the mean duration of breastfeeding in India to range between 22 and 26 months. However, there are indications that urban and educated women tend to breastfeed their children for a somewhat shorter duration compared to rural illiterate women. Breastfeeding for such a long period cannot and does not protect women completely from the risk of becoming pregnant, partly because the intensity of feeding declines as children grow older. The grown-up children are given other supplements, in addition to breastfeeding. However, the duration of breastfeeding is declining in much of the country and will probably continue to fall in the coming years. The same factors that are likely to be responsible for an increase in the age at marriage also seem to be leading to a shorter duration of breastfeeding. Urban values, exposure to the media, demonstration effects, and increase in the levels of education and employment away from home are factors which contribute to the shortening of the duration of breastfeeding.

Induced abortion has been legal in India since 1972. But no reliable yearly estimates of the number of abortions performed in the country exist. This is because outside the government facilities many providers, or many private facilities where abortions are performed, are not 'legal' and thus information on the number of abortions performed in such facilities has not been compiled. Also, in response to direct survey questions, it has been observed that women tend not to report abortions. Until recently, there was little research on issues such as why, in spite of being legal, women choose not to report such experiences—the decisionmakers within the family about abortion, women's own personal experience and acceptance of abortion, reasons for abortion (contraceptive failure, using it as contraceptive method), prevalence of sex-selective abortion, etc. However, a recent spurt in abortion research has helped improve the understanding of the issues surrounding abortion in India (CEHAT 2005; HealthWatch 2004; Patel 2007; Visaria and Ramachandran 2007). In any event, a rise in abortions has an inhibiting effect on fertility.

The use of family planning methods or contraception has undoubtedly been the major cause of India's fertility decline. As indicated earlier, the country adopted a family planning programme. After promoting various contraceptive methods, it finally opted for a 'cafeteria approach'. However, female sterilization has so far remained the main method of family planning in India. A number of studies have been undertaken to understand why despite the range of methods of family planning available under the programme such as vasectomy, IUD, and condoms they have not become popular in the country. The effectiveness of IUDs, its discontinuation rate, including failure and expulsion, and the complaints and side effects associated with its use are well documented in several studies conducted by the Family Planning Association of India (FPAI) in the late 1980s in different parts of the country (Kanitkar et al. 1988; Prabhavathi and Sheshadri 1988). The studies emphasized that side effects such as excessive bleeding, pain, and white discharge were major reasons for women to discontinue using IUDS. Factors such as convenience, women's status, lopsided programme promotion, etc., have been studied in order to improve method-mix in acceptance. However, female sterilization has remained the dominant method throughout the country including in the southern states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu where one would expect that the presence of factors which favour women's autonomy would also favour method-mix and promote the use of a range of methods of contraception.

Overall, fertility in India has responded to the increased use of modern contraceptive methods and most of the fertility decline has occurred due to increased dependence on female sterilization. The influence of the changes in the female marriage pattern has been rather limited so far. The postpartum period of infecundability has changed little so as to have any impact on fertility. Although resorting to abortions may have increased, data limitations preclude any estimate of its impact on fertility. Further, after a large amount of research undertaken in India, an understanding has emerged that even after the long period of the official family planning programme, fertility variations are observed and persist. Apparently, the policies and programmes that proved relatively effective in certain parts of the country appear to have failed to work well in other regions so far. The north–south divide in fertility levels and the pace of decline in it can, to some extent, be attributed to differences in the implementation of the same policies and programmes (Satia and Jejeebhoy 1991).

# **Trends in Mortality and Health Indicators**

The decline in mortality that started in India in the period beginning about 1921 has steadily continued since then. During the period beginning in 1970, the crude death rate fell from almost 16 deaths per 1000 population in 1970–75 to under nine by 2000. During the same period, the estimated infant mortality rate fell from about 134 infant deaths per 1000 live births to around 70 representing quite an impressive fall of almost 50 per cent in 30-year period. Furthermore, life expectation at birth for both males and females rose from about 50 years to around 61 years by 1993–97. Interestingly, the life expectancy of males, which exceeded that of females by more than a year during the earlier period, reversed by the mid-1990s and female life expectancy was reported to be higher than that of males. In a span of about 25 years, the gain in female life expectancy has been nearly 12 years; in the case of males it has been almost 10 years.

In this section, the studies related to this significant decline in mortality will be reviewed. How has this been achieved? Have all segments of the population experienced or gained from the benefits of the measures that are responsible for the decline? Information on the causes of death will also be reviewed to understand the changing profile of diseases in the country and the challenges that they pose for the future. Regional variations in the levels of mortality have also been observed, giving rise to a few hypotheses about why certain areas promptly respond to measures aimed at lowering mortality compared to others.

Despite the overall steady decline in mortality in the past 30 years, a somewhat sluggish decline or slowdown in infant mortality in the decade of the 1990s prompted some analysts to find explanations. Infant mortality declined from 80 per 1000 live births around 1980 to 70 by 1999 in spite of a huge scope for a larger decline. M. Claeson et al. (1999) and Measham et al. (1999) of the World Bank attributed the apparent slowdown to a decline in the provision of immunizations and other basic interventions in the 1990s decade. The data on immunizations and the utilization of infant and maternal health services available from the two NFHS survey rounds conducted in the 1990s supported this viewpoint. Apparently, there was only a marginal improvement—from about 52 per cent in 1992–93 to 55 per cent in 1998–99 in the proportion of children aged 12–23 months who were protected by three doses of the triple antigen vaccine that covers diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus. The situation has not improved according to the NFHS-3 conducted during 2005–06—only 55.3 per cent of children were reported to have received three doses of the DPT vaccine. Further, the rural–urban disparities continue to be quite large despite the presence of field-based health workers who are responsible for ensuring that all the children in their area of operation are protected against childhood diseases.

 Further, although the situation was not particularly good throughout the country, and contrary to expectations that basic immunization facilities should be available to all children by the end of the twentieth century, there were significant interstate differences. In some regions, the machinery seemed to have broken down and the actual coverage declined. For example, the DPT vaccine coverage in all the four large north Indian states of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh fell between the first and the second NFHS survey rounds. The trend with respect to vaccination against another childhood disease, measles, was also not much better. Often the inability to vaccinate all children is attributed to supply-side factors such as the shortage of vaccine, absenteeism of health-care providers from their duties, falsification of records, etc. The demand may also be a problem with mothers not being well informed about the need for vaccinating of their children. The performance of pulse polio, which has been taken up in a campaign mode, is viewed as being good, although some have argued that the lopsided emphasis on it has adversely affected other immunization and health programmes.

The other possible factors that may have contributed to this anomalous situation are the change in the SRS sampling frame and the reported faster pace of decline in mortality in the 1980s. Following the results of the 1991 census, the sampling frame of the SRS was changed and slightly enlarged in 1993–94, first for rural areas and then, over a couple of years, for urban areas. A fresh baseline survey was done. It is often suggested that a change in the sampling frame affects the estimates of various population parameters by increasing the birth and death rates, presumably because the population of the old sample would have aged compared to that of the new sample. Once the sample households are selected, the same households are surveyed every year for 10 years. Thus, the women in the age group of 20–29 in the initial year, for example, would become 30–39 years old in the terminal year. A new sample would have a younger population who would be in the family formation stage. Evidence in support of this hypothesis comes from the fact that following the 1971 and 1981 censuses, when the sampling frame was changed, the pace of decline in both fertility and mortality measures slowed down for a few years. However, even if this is true, it is confounded by other factors responsible for the sluggish pace of the decline.

Another possible reason put forward for the slow pace of decline in infant and child mortality in the 1990s is that the decline in IMR (infant mortality rate) in the 1980s was overstated. This implies that the machinery reporting deaths (and/or births as well) periodically breaks down or becomes more inefficient. The evidence for this would, at best, be only indirect, and would have to be examined at a disaggregated level and also in relation to other evidence.

The observed variations in the decline in the neonatal and post-neonatal components of infant mortality have also received some attention and have called for an explanation. Between 1971 and 1997, neonatal mortality declined by 33 per cent, whereas the post-neonatal mortality declined by 62 per cent thereby increasing the share of neonatal mortality in the total infant mortality from 51 per cent in the early 1970s to 65 per cent in the late 1990s. The NFHS data also corroborated this pattern. The slow pace in the decline of neonatal mortality is perceived to be linked to maternal factors such as early age of marriage and childbirth, low utilization of antenatal care and obstetric services; these result in poor maternal health and poor birth outcomes such as low birth weight and prematurity (Mudur 2003).

Another concern in India has been the gender differentials in infant and child mortality. Overall, after the first six months of life, the death rate among girls from age seven months onwards is higher than among boys. The gender differentials in child mortality have persisted over time even though mortality has come down. The preference of sons is widespread in India and analyses of the NFHS data, as well as a number of studies, have shown that behavioural factors, including careseeking practices, show bias against girls. Girls are less likely to receive treatment than boys, parents spend less money on medicines for them than for boys, and medical care is provided late and by less qualified care providers. Gender bias is very hard to identify since many of the discriminatory practices are subtle and covert and are observed within the core of intimate family behaviour (Das Gupta 1987; Chaterjee 1990; Filmer et al. 1998; Sen 1998; Visaria 1988).

In addition, there is mounting evidence that high levels of son preference are increasingly manifesting themselves in female-specific abortions in some parts of the country (Booth et al. 1994; Ganatra et al. 2001; George and Dahiya 1998). The sharp rise in the masculinity of the child population aged 0–6 years in the states of Haryana, Punjab, Gujarat, and parts of Maharashtra indicated by the results of the 2001 census is strongly suggestive of sex-selective abortions (Dyson 2001). According to the reports of women interviewed in the 1998–99 NFHS survey, the ratio of male to female last births in the country as a whole was 143 per 100, compared to a more normal figure of 107 reported for all previous births (Arnold and Roy 2002). The male to female ratio of last births in regions where the sex ratio has historically been much more adverse is even much higher than the national figure as was evident in a study conducted in Gujarat and Haryana states (Visaria 2007).

#### *Causes of Death*

Another dimension of mortality-related issues that has only in recent years, and to a limited extent, been studied is the cause of death. Available information has tended to be rather scanty because most deaths occur at home and there is little tradition of registering all deaths. For those deaths that may be registered, even reasonably accurate symptoms as cause are not always available or recorded. Both the coverage and the quality of information are problematic. Even the available data on the most important specific causes of death, compiled annually since 1966 from the Rural Cause of Death statistics, accounts for between 45 and 50 per cent of all deaths. Also, the comparison over time of the major causes of death is somewhat difficult because of some variation in the specific conditions listed under each broad category. Similarly, changes in the actual or reported diagnosis also affect the quality of data to make comparisons impossible over time. However, the available information does provide some broad indications of the changing nature of the disease pattern in India.

While there has been some discussion of the disease pattern evident over time and the significant changes in the share of various diseases elsewhere (Visaria 2004a), it is important to show that epidemiological literature does, by and large, support the shift in the distribution of the causes of death. There has been a gradual but steady shift from infectious diseases to diseases caused by non-communicable ailments, and the share of the communicable diseases in all the reported causes of death in rural areas has steadily declined while that of non-communicable diseases has increased. At the same time, the extent of transition has been rather slow and has prompted some to argue that India is currently experiencing the 'double burden' of both communicable and non-communicable diseases (Reddy 1998). On the one hand, there is the 'unfinished agenda' of combating the traditional infectious diseases that kill many, and on the other is the 'emerging agenda' of combating the changing lifestyle-induced illnesses that are making the population susceptible to diseases which are caused by changes in diet, work, and social activity. The upsurge in cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, and drug abuse has added to the strain (Gwatkin 1993; Murray and Lopez 1996). Health problems related to environmental factors and HIV/AIDS are also finding their place in the emerging agenda.

**Communicable Diseases.** Among the major communicable diseases tuberculosis, typhoid, and malaria have continued to remain the important causes of death throughout the past three decades. India has the dubious distinction of having the largest number of tuberculosis (TB) cases in the world. It is estimated that two to four million Indians develop the disease every year—most of them young adults in the most economically productive years—and about half a million people die from it. The long duration over which the treatment for TB needs to be administered leads to premature discontinuations and results in many unnecessary deaths. In fact, recent estimates suggest that tuberculosis is probably the single most infectious cause of death in the country (Krishnaswamy 2000).

With the spread of HIV/AIDS, the number of tuberculosis cases is almost certainly on the rise. A strategy for its effective treatment and control is urgently needed. Recently, the WHO recommended the DOTS strategy (directly observed treatment—short course) which is expected to overcome the limitations of traditional self-administered chemotherapeutic treatment (Dholakia 1997). Under DOTS a trained monitor is supposed to ensure that the patient's drug treatment regime is adhered to. However, to make this treatment effective, the diagnosis should be accurate and the supply of drugs should be regular; at the same time, there should be systematic evaluation and monitoring of the programme. Experience from other countries does suggest that DOTS can have a high success rate in both case-holding and eventual cure and therefore holds some promise of success in India, provided there is both political and administrative commitment.

The resurgence of malaria since the mid-1960s in India epitomizes the problems of the re-emergence of infectious diseases. The total number of reported malarial cases briefly surpassed six million during the mid-1970s (Cassen 1978) and it remained around 2.2 to 2.8 million in the 1980s and early 1990s, even though the number of deaths due to malaria has drastically come down. Under the National Malaria Control Strategy, the Government of India appointed an expert committee (Pattanayak Committee) in 1994 to identify high-risk areas and suggest remedial measures. However, the resurgence of malaria even in areas where it was not known to be endemic points to flaws in the control strategies as well as to the attitude and behaviour of the communities.

In a recent study undertaken in Kerala, environmental factors such as illventilated housing, open dug wells, along with non-compliance to treatment were found to be important in increasing the risk of malaria, in its persistence, and in relapse (Devi and Das, 1999). While in the short run control activities such as spraying of larvicide do interrupt the transmission of the disease, preventive strategies of vector control by eliminating potential breeding places of mosquitoes are needed to control the disease. There has been evidence for some time that anti-malarial drugs and insecticides are showing reduced efficacy (Akhtar and Learmonth 1985). Development projects and urban expansion have sometimes created new vector breeding grounds and malaria control has become a complex business. Many analysts consider that in the future, the management and control of the disease will require locally based community participation approaches to help restrict its transmission.

Although the contribution of gastro-enteritis and dysentery to overall mortality appears to have declined over time, diarrhoeal diseases continue to be an important cause of morbidity and mortality, especially in childhood. According to the NFHS survey of 1998–99, nearly one-fifth of children aged three years and under had suffered a bout of diarrhoea during the two-week period prior to the survey and only two-thirds of them were taken to a health facility for treatment. All the main infectious agents causing diarrhoea are transmitted via the foecal–oral route, and through contaminated water. Efforts to promote the use of oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to control diarrhoea at home can have limited beneficial effects. In India, studies point out that most women are aware of the importance of providing sick children with extra fluids and about oral rehydration therapy. However, the percentage of children treated with ORT when suffering from diarrhoea is small. Barely a quarter of the children are given ORS according to NFHS-3. While education may help increase the use of ORT, the availability of safe water and more hygienic means of disposal of human excreta are very essential to control the infections. These measures are still not available to much of India's population in both rural and urban areas. Also, behaviour related to sanitation and use of latrines is difficult to understand and change. UNICEF's efforts along with those of the Government of India in promoting the construction of low-cost latrines have not produced very positive results (UNICEF 2002) and much more concerted efforts are needed for a behaviour change.

Measles remains a substantial cause of morbidity and mortality in India. Although measles immunization is a proven and cost-effective primary healthcare intervention, and a single dose of the vaccine is enough to afford protection, only about half the children between 12 and 23 months were immunized according to the second NFHS survey, and about 59 per cent according to the third NFHS survey. Several micro-studies have also alluded to the limited coverage of children through the vaccine. More than the belief about its efficacy, access to the vaccine through the health-care delivery system is perceived as a major bottleneck, especially in rural areas. Periodic shortages of the vaccine cause the people to lose faith in the programme.

However, thanks partly to the campaign mode adopted in India, the eradication of polio appears to be a distinct possibility. The campaign began in 1995 and is based on the repeated administration of the oral polio vaccine to children less than five years of age. This campaign required the establishment of a cold chain stretching throughout the country and instructions to health workers to discard opened vials of vaccine if they were not used for more than a few hours. In spite of the well-coordinated efforts of voluntary agencies, the national and state governments, and international donor agencies, the performance in states like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh has lagged behind other states.

Overall, although mortality from many communicable diseases has declined, morbidity from them remains quite high. Contaminated water supplies and minimal liquid and solid-waste management, coupled with high levels of overcrowding, especially in urban slums, contribute to maintaining and spreading infections.

**Non-Communicable Diseases.** The share of non-communicable diseases in rural mortality has steadily increased in India. Bronchitis and asthma, heart attack, cancer, and paralysis, all have become more important in the overall mortality profile. Even ailments like coronary heart disease and hypertension have emerged as prime cardiovascular disorders, especially in urban areas. The greater susceptibility to coronary heart disease of people of Indian descent living in Western countries, compared to the general populations of those countries, may be a foreshadow what is likely happen in India as lifestyle changes spread and urbanization increases (Shaukat et al. 1997). Moreover, with an ageing population many chronic diseases will show increase.

Non-communicable diseases often require long-term and costly interventions, which most people cannot afford. These diseases also exert new pressures on the already overburdened health systems (Reddy 1998). Almost certainly the share of non-communicable diseases in India's total disease burden will continue to rise. Undoubtedly, the continued progress in controlling infectious diseases will produce this situation. At the same time, disease patterns are also altering in the country. One such alteration is the changes in the use of tobacco products.

To illustrate how lifestyle changes will affect future disease patterns, it is worth considering tobacco, which is the source of one of the major health burdens that India will face. Although the influence of tobacco as a risk factor for various types of cancer, cardio vascular diseases and respiratory conditions is now well established, according to current estimates, tobacco consumption is on the rise in India. Smoking has significant delayed effects on mortality and health. According to one estimate, 184 million Indians used tobacco products in 1996. Nearly 45 per cent of men above age 10 and 7 per cent of women were estimated to be regular users of tobacco or its several variants (Sudarshan and Mishra 1999). This study also pointed out that the overall incidence of use was greater among disadvantaged socio-economic groups and in rural areas.

A comprehensive strategy to curb tobacco use is still to be developed and implemented, particularly in the face of strong opposition from both the tobacco industry and the farmers. Because of the production of '*bidis*' in the unorganized sector, the heavy taxation on cigarettes has not yielded the desired results. The use of tobacco for chewing and eating in the form of gutka—a product that has made a late entry—has been banned in certain states but it is one of the most ineffective pieces of legislations. The sale of such products continues; the products can be smuggled in easily from the neighbouring states that have not banned them. Neither the consumers nor the sellers are brought under the purview of the law.

The number of people who are sick and disabled due to tobacco-related illnesses could be several times the numbers that die. Some scholars have made estimates of various ailments such as cancers of lungs, larynx, oral cavity, and oesophagus which can be directly attributed to the use of tobacco and have shown that the numbers are steadily increasing (Gupta and Gupta 1996; Rath and Chaudhry 1999). It also contributes to tuberculosis mortality. Tobacco is likely to be one of the country's largest killers in the early twenty-first century. Cosmetic measures such as banning Indian films which show smoking actors are most unlikely to change the behaviour of people. Educational efforts are needed from an early age.

Another major source of both mortality and morbidity in India are the high levels of both outdoor and indoor air pollution. The biggest source of indoor air pollution is the cooking stove. According to the 1991 census, nearly 75 per cent of rural households used unprocessed solid fuels such as dried animal dung, crop residues, wood, charcoal, and coal as fuel for cooking. Although this proportion has somewhat declined in 2001, more than 70 per cent of rural households still continue to rely on unprocessed fuel for cooking. When these substances are burnt in traditional and inefficient stoves, large amounts of hazardous pollutants enter the atmosphere (Parikh et al. 1997; Smith 1996). It is women who invariably do the cooking in poorly ventilated areas. Naturally, women and children become the victims of respiratory ailments caused by indoor pollution. A second somewhat less prevalent source of indoor air pollution comes from heating with biomass fuels, especially in high altitude areas in winter.

Accumulating evidence from epidemiological studies shows that there is a strong relationship between levels of household air pollution and acute respiratory infections among children and chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases among adults (Chen et al. 1990; Smith et al. 1999). An analysis of data from the 1992–93 NFHS found that young children (under three years) in households which used traditional cooking fuels faced the risk of acute respiratory infection, which was 30 per cent greater than that of children living in households which used cleaner fuels (Mishra and Retherford 1997). In the city of Ahmedabad, the incidence of cough and lung abnormalities was found to be appreciably higher among women who cooked with fuels which yielded a lot of smoke. Also, many women complained about the irritating effects of smoke, particularly on the eyes (National Institute of Occupational Health 1979).

The quality of urban air, on the other hand, is affected by vehicular emissions and by the atmospheric pollutants released by industrial units, which are often dispersed throughout residential locations. Efforts to improve public transport so that the number of privately owned single user vehicles can be significantly reduced on the roads have not been given priority in most cities in India. Thus the use of private vehicles for commutation has been spiralling upwards giving rise to unacceptable levels of vehicular pollution. In industrial towns, efforts to relocate industrial units to sites away from inhabited areas and cleaning up the effluents of toxic substances before releasing them into the air or water have not been very effective because various powerful lobbies, including political pressure, are at work. Since the adverse consequences of environmental pollution on human health are rarely evident in the short run, both individuals and the government tend to underestimate the gravity of the situation.

A major unknown in India is HIV/AIDS. According to a recent, and oftquoted, estimate, based on surveillance data, India reportedly has around 5.1 million infected persons. However, recent estimates derived using sounder methodology have suggested that the number of HIV infected persons in India could be much lower—around 3.2 million. However, this figure still puts India in the third position among the nations with HIV positive people. The spread of HIV/AIDS will certainly act to slow the overall rate of decline of mortality, partly because its presence in the general population will stimulate and interact with other infections such as hepatitis, diarrhoea, malaria, and tuberculosis. An HIV/AIDS epidemic can have a significant impact on the economy because of long periods of sickness and because people in the prime working ages tend to be generally affected. The disease is no longer restricted to the major metropolitan areas. It is spreading to the rural areas as well, carried by migrant labourers and workers such as lorry drivers. It has been estimated that in 80 per cent of AIDS cases in India, the probable source of infection is unprotected heterosexual sex, and the rest of the 20 per cent of cases are due to infected blood or blood products and sharing of needles associated with intravenous drug use (National AIDS Control Organisation 2000).

HIV is believed to be spreading among women at a faster rate partly because couples who have undergone tubectomy and vasectomy feeling safe, prefer to give up the use of condoms feeling safe, but they are exposed to the risks of infection. The disease is expected to spread among Indian women who are largely monogamous but have little control over their husbands' sexual behaviour. The number of children infected through vertical transmission is also expected to increase, as larger numbers of women become infected, since breastfeeding is virtually universal. Drugs, which might restrict vertical transmission, are rarely available even in urban areas (Bloom and Godwin 1997; Gupta 1998).

**Maternal and Child Health.** Among the other causes of death the share of deaths attributed to maternal and perinatal causes has remained almost unchanged for India in the last 25 years. In spite of the commitment to provide maternal health care to all, especially to disadvantaged women, and which has been articulated in all the Five Year Plans, National Health Policy, Population Policy, RCH documents, etc., maternal mortality is unacceptably high in India. A few estimates of the maternal mortality ratio (MMR) which are available have a large standard error: even at the national level, an MMR ranges between 450 and 540 per 100,000 live births. Using the SRS data, Bhat et al. (1995) have shown that the maternal mortality is likely to have come down by about 5 per cent between 1972–76 and 1982–86. The fertility decline has very likely helped to bring down the MMR by about one-quarter of the associated decline. At the same time, there are very likely large inter-state variations with the north Indian states having a maternal mortality ratio which exceeds 800, while it is comparatively lower in the southern states.

Similarly, the proportion of deaths attributed to prematurity has not declined at all in the past 25–30 years according to the data available from the statistics related to the causes of death. The information collected from the hospital births records and also from the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) on weights of children, indicates that Indian children are under-weight at birth and continue to be below the universally accepted standard. Some estimates have shown that close to a third of all live births in India have birth weight under 2,500 grams; and this proportion is very much greater than that estimated for any other country of the world, with the exception of Bangladesh (UNICEF 2000). Unfortunately, the voluminous data generated under the ICDS scheme on 3–6 year old children from all over the country are, not systematically analysed; researchers have raised questions about large measurement errors and about the quality of data. Some carefully monitored data for small areas has indeed pointed out that a significant proportion of young children in India continue to be two-standard deviations below the internationally acceptable norm. Recurrent infections of diarrhoea and of the respiratory tract, along with diet—which is not adequate in caloric content and nutritional value—result in both underweight and stunting.

As far as women's health during pregnancy and subsequent to delivery is concerned, the situation is rather grim in many regions of the country according to data collected at the state level by the two NFHS surveys. Detailed data has been collected on problems women reported during pregnancy, the type of care that was available to them during pregnancy, and the reasons for not receiving care. Information was also collected on the place of delivery and the reasons for choosing that place. For those women who did not deliver in any institution, information on the proportion of women who received check-ups in the postpartum phase and the proportion of women who experienced symptoms of postpartum complications was collected. Data was compiled on anaemia after measuring its level for all the women; severe anaemia was perceived to increase the risk of death due to obstetric haemorrhage.

For each of the two most recent births in the three years preceding the 1998– 99 NFHS survey, the mother was asked if, at any time during the pregnancy, she had experienced problems of night blindness, blurred vision, convulsions not from fever, swelling of legs, body, or face, excessive fatigue, anaemia, or vaginal bleeding. Night blindness, a result of chronic vitamin A deficiency, was reported by 12 per cent of women and blurred vision by 33 per cent of women nationally. Convulsions during pregnancy (not accompanied by fever) were reported by a third of women in the northern states but only by 2 to 6 per cent of the women in the southern states.

The antenatal package in India consists of three antenatal check-ups, one of which is during the first trimester of pregnancy, provision of tetanus toxoid injections (which help prevent neonatal tetanus also), and distribution of 100 tablets of iron and folic acid to lower anaemia level. Disturbingly, at the all-India level, a third of the women reported that they had not received or availed themselves of any antenatal check-ups during the three years preceding the NFHS survey; of course, there are large interstate variations in this regard. In Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, nearly two-thirds of the women had not received any antenatal check-up, whereas in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, virtually every woman had received some antenatal care. Although the situation was generally better in urban areas compared to rural areas, it was found that in the backward states, for close to a third of the births in urban areas no antenatal check-up was availed of. The huge regional variations are indicative of the unequal access to healthcare within the country. The northern belt of the country lives under conditions of scant health-care services. Women pay a much heavier price in terms of their health when access is problematic.

Among those who did not avail themselves of antenatal care, the predominant reason reported was the perception of the women that it was not necessary. It is likely that some women perceive that check-up is needed only if something is wrong. If the pregnancy is normal then they do not see the need for a check-up. Between 45 and 86 per cent of women, according to the 1998–99 NFHS, reported this to be the reason. The cost of a check-up, non-availability of transport, and lack of support from family were some of the other reasons reported by the women for not availing themselves of antenatal care. The situation with regard to the tetanus toxoid injection was, however, much better. Nearly two-thirds of the women had received the recommended two or more tetanus toxoid injections in the country as a whole. And the percentage was close to 90 or above in the states of Punjab, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu, and around 80 per cent in Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and Haryana.

Nearly two-thirds of births in India continue to take place at home according to the 1998–99 NFHS survey. Although there is a steady increase in institutional deliveries, according to the third NFHS survey only about 40 per cent of the births occurred in health facilities. The percentage of home births exceeds 80 in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and Assam and ranges between 70 and 80 in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana, Orissa, and Himachal Pradesh. Only in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, do the majority of the births occur in institutions. Traditional birth attendants (TBAs) generally assist home deliveries. An effort to improve the skills of such attendants has received priority attention since the 1970s. Both the government and the non-governmental sectors have been engaged in training the TBAs; however, hardly any systematic evaluations of the content of the training, or of the actual learning of the TBAs, or of the usage of the training in safe delivery practices have been attempted.

When a significant proportion of births takes place at home, and when women have little or no easy access to health-care facilities, it is the field-based health providers responsibility to visit the women very soon if not immediately after the delivery. Information from the NFHS-2 survey on the percentage of noninstitutional births for which a postpartum check-up was available showed that at the all-India level barely 16 per cent of the women received postpartum check-ups within two months of the birth; only a third of them (5 per cent) received it within a week of delivery. According to evidence from micro-studies, and international experience, a majority of women experience complications soon after delivery, or within a few days after delivery. Many lives would be saved if health workers could provide some emergency care to women and arrange to transport them to the nearest referral unit for emergency obstetric care.

The 1998–99 NFHS survey also asked a question on the postpartum complications, specifically about massive vaginal bleeding and very high fever, which are symptoms of infection leading to septicaemia. Overall, for 11 per cent of births, women reported having experienced massive vaginal bleeding, and for nearly 13 per cent of the births they reported very high fever. These are not insignificant proportions, and women who experienced these complications were most likely treated at private facilities incurring heavy expenses.

# **Conclusions**

On the whole the available evidence indicates that fertility and mortality transitions in India are very much underway, although the objectives specified in the National Population Policy of 2000, such as reducing the total fertility rate to 2.1 per woman, the infant mortality rate to 30 per 1000 live births, and the maternal mortality rate to 100 per 100,000 live births, all by the year 2010, seem rather unrealistic. At the same, time, some regions of the country would undoubtedly complete demographic transition by the end of the first decade of the twentyfirst century. The uneven pace of the fertility decline between different regions and the consequent implications for future population growth and age structure merit greater concern from India's politicians and planners. The bigger north Indian states will require large investments and more innovative family planning programmes.

From the available evidence, it also seems that the levels of morbidity due to both communicable and non-communicable diseases will not show a commensurate improvement for some time to come. Some of the communicable diseases may be eradicated but for this sustained efforts are needed. Malaria, for example, will continue to be a serious public health problem, perhaps posing an increasing threat in the absence of an effective vaccine and limited political and administrative will to introduce community-level measures for its control. Tuberculosis is another major disease which poses a formidable challenge as drug-resistant forms proliferate and the disease is spread fuelled by HIV/AIDS. At the same time, one cannot rule out the possibility of emerging newer variants of some of the ancient diseases. Nonetheless, various degenerative and other non-communicable diseases will continue to become increasingly prominent in India's health profile. Many of them are induced by changing lifestyles. Unless the new threats to health are addressed, the country will continue to see an increase in their incidence.

notes

- 1. The SRS employs a dual mechanism system to collect information. There is a continuous enumeration of vital events, which is checked and updated through retrospective half-yearly surveys. The data from these two records is matched and the unmatched events are verified in the field.
- 2. Under this scheme the paramedical staff attached to primary health centres (PHCs) collect information from the family of the diseased about the probable cause of death. The scheme was started in Rajasthan in 1965 on a limited scale on an experimental basis; over the next three years, it was gradually extended to cover the entire country with participation of nearly 700 PHCs.