- Pryor, F. L. (1990). *The political economy of poverty, equity, and growth: Malawi and Madagascar*. Washington: Oxford University Press (for the World Bank).
- Sharp, L. (1993). *The possessed and the dispossessed: Spirits, identity, and power in a Madagascar migrant town*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Sharp, L. (1994). Exorcists, psychiatrists, and the problems of possession in northwest Madagascar. *Journal of Social Science and Medicine, 38*(4), 525–542.
- UNICEF (2002). Madagascan statistics, available online at www.unicef. org/statistics/country. Last updated Feb. 1, 2002.
- United States Library of Congress. (2001). Madagascar: Public Health. *Country studies and area handbooks*, available online at http:// lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs

# **Malays**

#### **Ronald Provencher**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

There are no alternative names for Malays, but many Malays have sub-ethnic and regional identities based primarily on descent, dialect, customary ritual, and typical foods. Such identities are prefaced in conversation by the word *orang* (person), for example: *orang bugis*, *jawa*, *johor*, *kedah*, *kelantan*, *minang*, *patani*, or *selangor*. *Melayu* means "Malay" in the Malay language, the paramount trade language of Southeast Asia for centuries. It was the name of a seventh century AD trading state on the Jambi river in Sumatra, near the Straits of Melaka. The royal family of the port city of Melaka, which claimed descent from the Jambi monarchy, was among the first to convert to Islam, an effective foil against conversion of common people to the Christianity of European colonial regimes. From that time, converts to Islam who could speak Malay, whatever their natal ethnic identity, were said to have become Malays (*masuk Melayu*).

Who are the Malays? In Malaysia, according to federal law and everyday usage, the term "Malay" applies to anyone who habitually speaks Malay language and is a Muslim. Malay has been the primary language of commerce and the lingua franca of the Malayan Archipelago (modern Indonesia, Malaysia, southern Thailand, and Brunei) for many centuries because of the dominance of Malay speakers in trade.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

There are large populations of Malays in Malaysia, Singapore, the independent Malay nation of Brunei in northern Borneo, and in the southernmost provinces of the nation of Thailand (Pattani, etc). Other significant populations of Malay speakers live in many areas of Indonesia (especially in Sumatra, north coastal cities of Java, and Indonesian Borneo). Malay is the official national language of Malaysia, Indonesia, and Brunei; and one of the official languages of Singapore.

Malay language belongs to the Western Malayo-Polynesian sub-group of the Austronesian family of languages, which includes closely related languages spoken in Madagascar, Vietnam, the Malayan peninsula, island Southeast Asia, and western Micronesia (Bellwood, 1985, pp. 107–108). Most scholars believe that presentday Indonesia (particularly Sumatra) was the original homeland of speakers of Malay language.

Malay language has several registers (levels of sophistication of vocabulary and grammar) and a number of regional dialects. Regional dialects of the everyday register of Malay commonly coincide with sub-ethnic identities, and other languages and cultures closely related to Malay have been strongly influenced by it. For example, the everyday language of the Minangkabau of western Sumatra (in Indonesia) and of the Minangkabau in the state of Negeri Sembilan in Malaysia are dialects of Malay.<sup>1</sup>

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Modern Malay culture, like other complex cultures of the present, has absorbed much from neighboring civilizations, which in turn borrowed from Malay culture. As a particular civilization, it is at least as old as existing European cultures. Malay traders were probably involved in the maritime trade between East Asia and South Asia by the first century AD. Four centuries later they were described as long distance traders in Persian court literature. Malays may have sailed as far as the East African coast by that time. They traded luxury goods and ordinary commodities. Through a period of twenty centuries, as they interacted with other Southeast Asian, South Asian, East Asian, Middle Eastern, African, and European peoples (especially Portuguese, Dutch, and British) involved in long distance trade, they borrowed and adapted aspects of these other cultures. The result is a very complex culture and society that has long included urban as well as rural elements.

Probably, the beginnings of this civilization were based on the cultivation of irrigated taro (*keladi*) and rice ( *padi*) combined with river and coastal fishing and trade, economic activities still pursued by many. Chiefdoms developed at junctures of large rivers with the ocean, and strong chiefdoms conquered weaker, leading to the development of small states. As Malay kingdoms came into contact, through trade and warfare, with states of greater scale they absorbed knowledge of "world religions" such as Hinduism, Buddhism, and later Islam. Traditional Malay medical knowledge bears the imprints of all three of these world religions (especially in representations of spirits, curing rituals, word charms, healing prayers, sacred numbers, and therapeutic objects). Traditional medical knowledge also retains older, aboriginal elements such as the concepts of soul substance (*semangat*), and of intrusion of a foreign soul (*badi*), or loss of one's own soul ( *jiwa*) as causes of illness and death.

At the beginning of the 16th century AD, first the Portuguese and then the Dutch and English colonial regimes pressed European ideas about health upon the Malays. Those ideas, of course, were not clearly superior to those of traditional Malay medicine of that time. European medicine was still based largely on the humoral concepts of Greco-Islamic medicine (itself previously introduced to Malays by Arab traders) and certainly not those of modern cosmopolitan medicine, which was barely in its infancy. Cosmopolitan medicine came into being gradually, not becoming nearly what it is today until the beginning of the 20th century AD. It became available to colonial subjects in the Malayan Peninsula and the Indonesian Archipelago in small steps, about the same time that it became available to Europeans.

Colonial regimes promoted the continuation of Malay as the language of commerce and public communication. Many different kinds of people, with different languages and variations in medical beliefs, had become Malays by the beginning of the 20th century. Descendants of Indonesian immigrants to the Malayan Peninsula, such as the closely related Minangkabau as well as the more distinctive Bugis and Javanese, eventually accepted being members of that broader ethnic category used by colonial officials—"Malay". They took advantage of economic prerogatives, such as privileged access to land reserved for Malays. As members of the Malay communities they had joined, they contributed stories of health, illness, and curing appreciated by their Malay neighbors, adding to and reinforcing present-day Malay traditional medicine, which coexists with cosmopolitan medicine.

One result of the intensity and duration of relations with many other civilizations over a period of many centuries was the development of a traditional medical pharmacology, comparable to traditional Chinese pharmacology, too extensive and complex to begin to describe in an article of this length (Gimlette, 1971, p. 207).

## **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: CULTURAL, ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

The natural environment is not well reflected in traditional Malay medicine. Traditional Malay folklore does not glorify human settlement in the rainforest or jungle.<sup>2</sup> Very few houses in rural communities are isolated. They are usually within voice distance of neighboring houses, clustered in a hamlet, itself one of several hamlets connected by roads or broad trails to a central mosque (*masjid*) and school (*madrasah*). And/or the houses are within sight and hearing of their neighbors and clustered along highways, riverbanks or seacoast. Rural Malays prefer to be in their houses by nightfall. And given a choice, many prefer to live near or in market towns and cities. A young man should travel (*merantau*), usually to urban places, in order to gain experience before beginning a family. And if possible, every Malay should travel to Mecca at least once in their lifetime. Malays have been deeply involved in trade and urban places for centuries.

Basic concepts of health and illness in Malay culture have many origins. Some are clearly aboriginal and ancient. The concept of *semangat* ("soul substance"), for example, is clearly related to *mana*, *mano*, *manu*, etc. in many other Malayo-Polynesian languages of Southeast Asia and the islands of the Pacific Ocean. In these cultures, absence or loss of soul substance and intrusion of soul substance of another being are believed to be major causes of illness, especially mental illness.

Humoral and sensual concepts relevant to health have native Malay terms (*angin,* "air" or "wind"; *panas,* "heat"; *sejuk*, "cool"; *kotor,* "dirty"; *bersih*, "clean"; *manis*, "sweet"; *asam*, "sour"; *pahit*, "bitter"). These conceptual foci have been reinforced through early and continuous contact with other societies participating in the ancient long-distance sea trade involving China, South Asia, the Middle East, and the West. Some premodern aspects of medical knowledge systems, especially humoral concepts, from these other culture areas have merely reinforced native concepts.

Major themes in Malay culture are strongly reflected in traditional medicine. These themes include profound enjoyment of the details of: (1) food and drink; (2) registers (vocabulary and grammatical levels) and dialects of Malay and related languages; (3) systems and levels of courtesy in their own and other social systems; and (4) one's own social rank compared to others. One's rank visa-vis others depends upon such factors as relative age, ancestry, wealth, and authority in the community. This emphasis on expressing differences in rank has become more complex as Malays have become part of the modern industrial world. Basic consciousness of rank is embedded in sibling kinship terminology, in which gender is not noted in the term for younger siblings, but is noted in the terms for older siblings: *adik* for younger brothers and sisters; but *abang* for older brothers, and *kakak* for older sisters. Age is respected through use of a gender-specific term. Respect is good, but being the eldest of one's siblings often involves serious psychological trauma. Generally, a Malay baby is born into a world of adoring adults, and is spoiled by adults until entering school, where the child first meets serious discipline from adults. Male children are more spoiled than females, who by the time they enter school are already involved in responsibilities for the whole household. Also, the firstborn baby (*si long*) is fussed over and spoiled in ways that subsequent children are not. Nonetheless, the firstborn is, at a tender age, given responsibility for the younger siblings who have replaced him or her in the immediate affections of adults in the family. These family lessons concerning rank and its problems mark the lives of most Malays, because kinship terms are used in the everyday register of Malay language as seniority terms to address and refer to non-relatives in the community and workplace. Symbols of social rank are commonly important parts of curing rituals, where they are combined with symbols of "inappropriate" or "contaminated" food and social relationships.

Food and drink are connected to social relationships in all societies, of course. But the connection in Malay society is especially strong. Malays have an intense interest in food and drink. Their cuisine is enriched with fresh spices and many kinds of tasty vegetables and fruits. Rice is served not by the cup but by the plate. Malays routinely eat Hindu vegetarian and Muslim Indian foods, and they occupy most of the tables in Chinese Muslim restaurants. At the same time, an overwhelming majority of Chinese Malaysians are not Muslim, their food and drink are not *halal* (ritually pure), and they are viewed by many Malays as economic and political competitors. Malays love Western "junk" food, and eat at franchise restaurants that serve *halal* (ritually pure) versions of burgers and fried chicken. But more important are the traditional feasts (*kenduri*), which mark the major social events in everyday life: birth, coming of age, marriage, death, economic and social advancement, and the many Islamic holidays.

The greatest feasting occurs at the end of the Fasting Month (*Ramadan*) which is the annual celebration of God's greatest gift, the Holy Koran. Most individuals visit the homes of their parents, other relatives, neighbors, and friends. There, they feast on arrays of the great delicacies of Malay cuisine. They, too, in their own homes, must host relatives, friends, and neighbors. Hours are spent preparing and consuming food and drink. The monthlong fast that precedes this ceremonial weeklong feast is not absolute, of course. It is a fast (*kuasa*) that begins with the first daily prayer ( just at first light in the morning) and ends just after sundown each day of the

#### **Medical practitioners 807**

month of Ramadan. Evenings, into the early morning hours, are spent drinking iced sweet drinks, eating especially tasty foods, and performing and listening to the message and beauty of Koranic verses. Very few people lose and many gain weight during the fasting month.

Social rank, ritual, manners, and food are closely linked every day of the year. Traditional houses have formal "front regions" where guests are received and where rank behavior is celebrated. When a guest enters the front region (a verandah or front room), something should be offered, even if only water. The higher the rank of the visitor relative to that of the householder, the more elaborate the offering. Verbal greetings, gestures, and postures signal degrees of difference in social rank. The more formal the occasion or circumstance the more likely appropriate gestures and postures will be displayed by junior persons. The highest-ranking persons in social situations are not really required to perform the gestures and postures of rank courtesy, which is the work of persons of lower rank. Close friends and relatives come to the back door, the kitchen, a place of incredible informality.

Formal occasions are accompanied by formal serving of drink and food, by servers of low rank. Such feasts, although occasions of immense pleasure, are fraught with danger, because as a celebration of rank differences as well as a celebration of food, it is a "natural" setting for crimes of sorcery and affection magic through food (*santau*). Usually, the actual purpose is to make people incredibly fond of you, not to harm them.

Food and drink can be used to control individual behavior. A woman can force a man to be sexually attracted to her by adding word charms and her vaginal fluids to the rice that she cooks for him (*nasi uap*, "perfumed rice"), and a merchant can influence a customer to buy from him, even though his goods are bad and costly, by slipping a chemically potent and be-spelled concoction (*santau*) into his meal or drink. Illness or even death may result, but the intention is simply control over the customer.3 It is the responsibility of the host of a ritual feast (*kenduri*) to be certain that the cooks are clean (*bersih*), which includes the notion of good intentions toward guests. Guests routinely ask who the cooks are.

The Islamic requirement of religiously pure (*halal*) food and drink is a common and deep concern, which is strengthened by the presence of a large population of non-Islamic Chinese that is economically dominant and politically competitive in Malaysia, and simply dominant in Singapore.

There are other concerns about food and drink. Children's illnesses, for example, are often attributed to their excessive appetite for "cooling" (*sejuk*) foods, especially soft fruits, and slightly sweet and weakly acidic iced drinks. Western friends are routinely warned not to eat durian, a "heating" (*panas*) fruit, while consuming alcoholic beverages, which are not only "heating," but also forbidden (*haram*) by Islamic law.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

There are four commonly recognized categories of traditional medical practitioners: *bidan*, *bomoh*, *dukun,* and *pawang*. A *bidan* is comparable to a "midwife" in cosmopolitan medicine, but she is more. She helps pregnant women prepare for giving birth, attends and directs the birth, and deals with postpartum problems of the mother and child. She treats children's illnesses and female health problems. Any *bidan* knows a great deal about diet and the humoral qualities of foods. Most urban and many rural Malay women now give birth in clinics or hospitals; but even urban women consult with traditional *bidan* in such matters as diet, bathing, and positioning the fetus for easier birth, or preventing pregnancy after intercourse. In southern Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, traditional *bidan* are often incorporated into national health programs through additional training, licensing, and involvement in community clinics.

The *dukun*, who may be male or female*,* is a "general practitioner" in terms of knowledge; but may be recognized as a "specialist" (*tukang*) who is skillful in particular treatments—for example: *tukang urut* (massage), *tukang sunat* (circumcision), *tukang tulong* or *tukang patah* (setting broken bones). Also, a commonly used term for a *bidan* ("midwife") is *dukun beranak* ("birthing healer"). In some communities, successful students of a *bomoh* are made *dukun* in a formal ceremony led by the *bomoh* who instructed them. And the ritual is attended by members of the community. "*Dukun*" is a general term for a traditional healer of any sort.

*Bomoh*s are more knowledgeable and powerful than *dukun*s, especially in treating illnesses caused by social, psychological, and spiritual problems. They are general practitioners with a specialization in therapies similar to psychiatry in cosmopolitan medicine. Most *bomoh*s utilize a powerful theatrical therapeutic routine, *main puteri* ("playing the princess"), which varies depending on details of the patient's personal history. But they treat ordinary health problems as well. Teachers of "traditional personal self-defense" (*bersilat*) and master puppeteers (*dalang*) are also considered to be *bomoh*s because they utilize the same classical Malay knowledge system as medical *bomohs*.

A *pawang* ("wizard") is more powerful and knowledgeable than even a *bomoh*. He can heal all kinds of illnesses, and he can conduct public rituals that ensure an excellent rice harvest or protect the whole community from a plague. Most *pawangs* and *bomohs* began their formal careers as *dukun*s.

All of these kinds of traditional healers tend to treat patients rather than illnesses, sometimes attempting to help clients gain the affection of other persons, or even win the public lottery. Successful healers and needy patients are not necessarily place bound and many travel great distances, even crossing international borders between Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia.

Cosmopolitan medicine did not begin to successfully challenge traditional *bomoh* medicine until after the successful independence movements following World War II, when nationalized health facilities and services and university training of natives in cosmopolitan medicine expanded rapidly. Since then, from time to time, government publicity campaigns have been directed against traditional medicine. *Bomoh* medicine survives, even prospers, but many practitioners have become more selective in the health problems they accept for resolution; perhaps, in response to the rising proportion of patients whose ordinary illnesses are resolved expeditiously and inexpensively through cosmopolitan medicine at government clinics and hospitals. However, psychological disorders of almost any sort are still likely to be dealt with by a traditional healer, and it is in the treatment of these disorders that traditional medicine continues to be an especially important health resource for Malays, and even for some members of other ethnic groups.

## **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Many aspects of traditional Malay medicine are known to ordinary persons. Malay adolescents and adults usually know how to stop the flow of blood from wounds and how to clean and dress minor wounds so that the risk of infection is reduced. Those who live along the seashore know how to treat the stings of jellyfish by applying a dressing made from crushed fish or crustaceans that are naturally immune to jellyfish stings. And ordinary Malays know about some plants and parts of plants that cause illness. Some ordinary individuals know how to set and splint simple fractures, although a bone-setter (*tukang patah, tukang tulong*) is more skillful. Also, the bone setter would have a method for speeding the mending of the bone, for example, by teaching the patient to relate the feeling of the fracture to a rhythmic sound produced by the patient.

As noted above, illnesses can result from a diet that is not balanced according to commonly known humoral (non-thermal but sensual) concepts of "heating" ( *panas*) and "*cooling*" (*sejuk*) foods; but the most basic foods in traditional diets, rice, and fresh fish, are "neutral." This relates to the common knowledge prescription of fish soup with rice as part of conservative therapy for illnesses caused both by excessive "cooling" or by excessive "heating" elements in the diet. Virtually everyone knows that foods that are "heating" cause a feeling of warmth and foods that are "cooling" cause a sensation of coolness, but that the effect of particular foods and substances on individual patients may vary. Generally, "cooling" foods include juicy, sour (*masam*), or "almost bitter or unripe" (*kelat*) fruits and vegetables. Really bitter ( *pahit*) foods, as well as "filling" foods (carbohydrates, fats, and animal proteins) and salty foods are "heating" ( *panas*). Spicy foods, such as chili are "pungent" ( *pedas*) but not necessarily *panas*. Also, the terms "hot" ( *panas*) and "cold" (*sejuk*) are regularly used to characterize social relationships. This classification of kinds of food, and the emphasis on balancing the perceived effects of the different kinds of food, usually results in a balanced diet in terms of cosmopolitan medicine (Laderman, 1987).

Food and drink are also perceived as media that can be manipulated in order to control attitudes and actions of other persons. Word charms and potions put into refreshments or meals can affect the emotions and thinking of the person who consumes them. A *dukun* or *bomoh* may help a client to become more attractive to potential spouses, business associates, or even customers by "treating" the client or by providing the client with a prescription to "treat" other persons—a potential spouse, business associate or customer. When these ingredients are appropriately effective, it is an instance of "affection magic";4 but if they cause serious illness or death, it is a case of "poisoning" (*racun*), or "slow poisoning" (*santau*). There are traditional poisons for killing one's rivals and tormentors. But mostly, as in some cases of "perfumed rice" (*nasi uap*), illnesses or deaths are seen as instances of an "over-dose" and/or a result of the victim's resistance to magical persuasion.

Malays enjoy delicious foods and drinks, but they are deeply concerned with purity. This is related to Islamic rules regarding diet in which alcoholic beverages and pork are forbidden as well as the flesh of other mammals and fowl that have not been ritually slaughtered. Additionally, animals that are seen as "powerfully unnatural" (e.g., a fish with legs) or known to cause health problems if eaten are classified as *bisa*. *Bisa* also refers to deadly poisons applied to the blades of knives, spears, and swords; and to speech that causes others great pain or death (Gimlette, 1971).

There are some variations in the degree to which individuals apply *halal* (ritual purity) rules to their own diets; but all are deeply aware of the rules. Non-*halal* food is often referred to as "dirty" (*kotor*), just as *halal* food is said to be "clean" (*bersih*). And the distinction between dirty and clean food is also extended to include food or drink to which word spells or magical substances have or have not been added. Also, food and drink are necessary parts of the celebration of religious, familial, and organizational feasts, in which the complex formal rules of salutation and comportment regarding differences in social rank are prominent. Food, drink, and speech—clean, dirty, or poisonous—lubricate the celebration of rank differences. All three are strongly related to beliefs about health.

In Malay language, *angin* has many meanings (wind, air, intestinal gas, rumor, attitude, desire, or temperament), depending upon the conversational context. As a very common descriptive medical symptom it is usually associated with intestinal gas, or with swelling, or strong pain. It can also refer to patients' attitudes, desires, and temperament. All of these symptoms and problems are common among Malay patients. Some scholars have suggested that *angin* is a concept borrowed from Medieval European, Middle Eastern, South Asian or East Asian, ideas about the so-called four (or five) basic elements of material reality: earth (wood & metal), air, fire, and water.

Two behavioral syndromes, *amuk* (amuck) and *latah* (similar to LaTourette's syndrome), are relatively common in Malay populations. Both are probably related to the pressure of complying with complex rules of traditional social manners, which vary according to levels of formality in different behavioral settings and according to the ranks of different participants. The lower one's rank in a given setting the more one must know and perform proper terms of address, forms of gesture and posture, and registers of language. Symptoms of these two disorders differ markedly, but both are probably expressions of psychological depression and of individual resistance to the pressures of the traditional Malay social order.

*Amuk* is viewed as a temporary state of physically aggressive insanity. In a suicidal attack, the *amuk* person attempts to maim or kill virtually everyone present. Traditionally, if the *amuk* survived the defensive attacks of others and returned to normal behavior, he was allowed to go free on the basis of having been temporarily insane. This, of course, is no longer true. Cases of murderous *amuk* have been rare for almost a century; but instances of unseemly and abusive verbal and physical aggression by males and females toward members of their communities, rural and urban, occur and are often referred to as instances of *amuk*.

*Latah* continues to be fairly common, especially among low ranking women. Unlike *amuk*, *latah* does not involve physical aggression. Rather, the affected person seems to satirize traditional manners and to mimic the words and gestures of others with whom they are interacting. Many Malays are less offended than entertained by this stereotypic behavior, which can be initiated by startling the *latah* person, forcing the *latah* person to "perform" until she or he is exhausted. Most traditional healers do not consider *latah* or *amuk* to be curable health problems.

There are apparent instances of *latah* in which an individual who has never had *latah* behavior begins to yell obscenities and becomes aggressive, as in *amuk*. These instances are often diagnosed as a case of *tuju*, a victim of a magical curse (*jampi*) by a rival or person who feels jealous hatred (*dengki*) toward the victim, and who has directed an evil spirit to enter the body of the victim. The victim may be treated almost immediately by a knowledgeable person, who subjects the victim to excruciating but not damaging pain, while asking, "who are you." The question is directed to the evil spirit who has entered the victim's body. It is the spirit who feels the pain and cries out its name. Repeating the spirit's name forces it to answer all questions truthfully; so the *dukun* or *bomoh* asks it "who sent you." The truthful answer forces the intruding spirit out of the victim's body, and the victim recovers.

*Hantu dadah* (the evil spirit of drugs) has become a scourge of Malay youth and young adults in the last four decades. Traditional formulae for love magic and murder contain opium, and *ganja* (marijuana) is a common ingredient of traditional health elixirs consumed by Malays. Until 1952, in Malaysia, opium smokers had to register with the government, but were not otherwise prosecuted. Drug addiction was not seen as a serious public health problem among Malays until the late 1960s, when large numbers of adolescent Malay individuals began to migrate to urban centers to seek employment and adventure. Movies, television, and magazines sponsored the idea of personal freedom and individualism. Possession of addictive drugs became a capital offense, and many young Malays were hanged. *Ganja*, smoked (combined with tobacco, and/or filtered through a water-pipe device), became the usual drug of choice among most young Malay addicts, although there is some use of heroin and even cocaine, especially among the more affluent.

Traditional treatment usually involves cleansing the patient's body of the drug's "spirit" (*hantu dadah*). The first meeting of patient and *bomoh* is like that for most kinds of illnesses. A close family member or friend of the patient contacts the *bomoh*, describing the patient and symptoms, to set a date for the first visit. Then, patient, family members, and friends meet with the *bomoh*, who examines the patient to determine what the health problem is and whether the *bomoh* can cure it. The patient or a family member may have been instructed to purchase three, four or seven limes (*limau nipis*) for the latter purpose. Physical examination includes inspection of the eyes, mouth and ears, and palpitation of limbs and body. The patient's pulse is usually taken in a special way, with the first three fingers of the right hand of the *bomoh* on the radialis blood vessel of the left wrist of the patient. The "reading" of the first finger relates to health conditions from the feet up to the navel, the second from the navel to the shoulders, and the third to the neck and head. Other examination procedures may include inspection of the curve of the spine, elasticity of forehead skin, examination of nails and skin of the hands, neck pulse, thumping the back of the rib cage, listening to stomach noises, clotting time, and appearance of a drop of blood (humors). After the examination and some discussion with patient and family members, the *bomoh* may cut a thin slice from each lime, in turn, which fall into a bowl of water that has absorbed powerful words spoken by the *bomoh*. Some slices float peel-side up and others float peel-side down. The sequence and proportion of each of these two possibilities signals whether or not the *bomoh* will take the case. The details vary, of course (Provencher, 1984; Werner, 1986).

If the *bomoh* decides to take the case, she or he usually prescribes a routine of prayer and bathing, using *bomoh*-blessed water and herbs as additives to the bath water, and the patient is given instructions concerning diet, and scheduling of work and other activities. The patient or a relative is delegated to purchase ingredients (*ramuan*) to be used for treatment at home and for the next session. In subsequent sessions, the *bomoh* will probably: (1) administer herbal medicines that purge the contents of stomach and bowels; (2) provide other blessed ingredients to be added to bath water; (3) outline a course in religious devotion; and (4), if the patient completes the course of treatment successfully, celebrate success with a small ritual feast (*kenduri nasi guru*) with patient and family providing a special tray to feed any good spirits involved and a gift/payment to the *bomoh*.

The beginning and ending of treatment, the divining of whether or not the *bomoh* can cure the victim's illness and the payment/celebration in successful cases are standard. Details of diagnosis/treatment vary according to the perceived cause of the illness, and according to the routines of particular *bomoh*s. There are many different Malay "psychiatric" therapies, sometimes glossed in the literature as "playing the princess" (*main puteri*), in which the *bomoh* begins to pray, goes into a trance, speaks in another voice, collapses, revives, and magically extracts "dirty things" (*kotoran*) from the body and soul of the patient. The "dirty" extracted things vary: oddly shaped artifacts and thorns, parts of insects, hair, dirt, and rusty needles. And the means of extraction vary too, including: grasping odd shaped objects and insect parts out of thin air, collecting hundreds of red hairs by rubbing a ball of semi-dry dough over the body of the patient, collecting rusty needles and dirt by rubbing the body of the patient with an unbroken raw chicken egg, and collecting dirt and objects by rubbing the body of the patient with a previously unbroken betel nut pod. In all of these, the symbolism is that of "unnatural," "intrusive," or "dirty" things and food. From a Malay perspective, these broken dirty things symbolize broken and improper social relationships. *Bomoh*, patient's relatives and friends, and even the

#### **Health through the life cycle 811**

patient may join in trying to explain the "evidence." The explanation is the most important part of the cure. It works to the extent that the *bomoh* and her/his helpers know quite a bit about the patient and the patient's relationships with others. Successful practitioners usually have helpers, often knowledgeable practitioners, who gather information about the patient, the patient's family, work mates, other acquaintances, and friends. And the most successful of these *bomohs* write their cases in notebooks, which they read and reread for comparison with new cases.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Knowledge of sexual activity is gained early and naturally in the context of familiar and relaxed back region behavior of the Malay house, where dress, speech, and behavior are extremely relaxed and casual. Older children, especially girls, take care of their younger siblings. If a woman has no daughter, a son often takes the role of mother's helper, especially in the care of babies and infants. Malay children know the anatomy of gender and where babies come from. Most Malay couples share active and imaginative sex lives, and joke about the formality of what they imagine to be the standard position for sexual intercourse in English culture. Nonetheless adolescent girls are secluded and their virginity is protected, as much as possible, until they are married. Pregnancy before marriage is a matter of scandal. And, under Islamic law, a private meeting of a man and woman who are not married to each other constitutes the crime of *khalwat* ("close proximity"), which is punished under the jurisdiction of the Islamic courts. Adolescent boys and men, however, are expected to be sexually promiscuous before, and even after marriage.

Marriages are supposed to be arranged, and sometimes they are. But beginning in the 20th century, when Malays and most of the rest of the world began to experience rapidly increasing secularization through mass media, individuals more frequently exercised personal choice regarding marriage. For example, interviews in the 1960s of elderly Malay women who had migrated to Kuala Lumpur from Indonesia in the first three decades of the 20th century revealed that many had married more than once and that most of their marriages had been with men of their own choice. Nonetheless, even in the 1990s, the ritual details of most Malay marriages were traditional and they projected images of arranged marriage.

Some *bidan*s perform very early abortions for adolescent girls and unmarried women and for married women who do not want more children. Several common traditional methods do not utilize surgical instruments and are applied as soon as possible, usually just after the first missed menstrual period: (1) deep massage of the abdomen by a *bidan*; (2) bidan-made pills containing a mixture of drugs and other ingredients that are *panas* "heating"; and (3) the juice of plumbago root, consumed as a drink.<sup>5</sup> Often, these methods and others are applied in a single case.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Conception is easier if both male and female are "cool" (*sejuk*), so both prospective parents should watch their diets if they want to have children. Traditionally, conception is said to be possible only during the first three days, the three middle days, and the last three days of each month … a sort of "Malay roulette." At first the embryo is just a blood clot, a combination of the parents' seeds. Later, in the third month, it is said that the fetus's "elder sibling," the placenta, comes to join the fetus in its journey toward birth. As the pregnancy progresses into the seventh month, there is a formal ritual inspection and "rocking the belly" (*lenggang perut*), by the *bidan*, to verify or correct the position of the baby in the womb, so that its legs are up and its head is down, ready for an easy birth. If it is not in the proper position, the mid-wife, through massage and manipulation, can maneuver it into the proper position. It is said that a good *bidan* is more expert in this procedure than a doctor or midwife trained in cosmopolitan medicine. A male *bomoh* is not called to pregnancy cases unless there are serious complications, and his task is that of spiritual assistance. The *bidan* does the work of massaging the mother's abdomen to relieve pain and of applying gentle pressure appropriately to facilitate a difficult birth (Laderman, 1987). Traditionally, the umbilical cord is supposed to be cut with a bamboo knife, but nowadays steel scissors are used. The umbilical cord and placenta are set aside, to be buried with a viable coconut near the house where it will grow into a tree, from which the "elder sibling" can easily participate in the birth of future "younger siblings" (*adik*). Throughout the Malay world, since the 1960s, the frequency of hospital births has increased, but many, perhaps most Malay women still go to a *bidan* during pregnancy even if they intend to enter hospital for the actual delivery. A traditional 40-day postpartum period in which the new mother follows a restricted diet is still common in rural areas, but many (perhaps most) urban women follow diets compatible with cosmopolitan medicine.

There is no particular preference for boys or girls. Daughters perform more service to the family. Sons provide more opportunities for ritual display. Women often prefer the first baby to be a girl, so that the mother has a good helper early in the marriage (Provencher, 1971).

### **Infancy**

A woman's first baby, female or male, receives a great deal of attention from adult relatives, neighbors, and friends of the family. Subsequent babies receive less attention, depending on the spacing of births, and they are tended by older siblings. Roles of boys and girls begin to diverge at five or six years of age. Psychological problems in later life are more common among the eldest and the youngest of a sibling set, perhaps because as infants and children their experiences in the ranked relations between siblings were less balanced, lacking deep experience either of being junior or of being senior in a society where rank is the most basic aspect of social relationships (Provencher, 1999).

Female babies are brought symbolically into the fold of Islam at a much earlier age and with less physical trauma and social fanfare than males. Forty days after a Malay baby girl is born, adult female neighbors and relatives gather at the mother's home to celebrate the end of the postpartum period of the new mother and to perform a ritual clitorodectomy (actually a clitoridotomy) of the newborn baby girl (Laderman, 1987). In this Malay ritual, unlike the equivalent ritual in some other Islamic societies, the clitoris is not removed or even damaged. It is barely scratched. The physiologically equivalent traditional entrance to Islam for Malay boys, circumcision (*sunat*), comes at a later age and involves more physical and psychological trauma.<sup>6</sup>

#### **Childhood**

By the mid 1960s most of the serious epidemic diseases of childhood had been controlled or mitigated by public health systems of the post-colonial governments of Southeast Asia, and treatments for simple ailments with commercial patent medicines were easily available and inexpensive. Nonetheless, intestinal ailments remain common among Malay children. After they can walk, they move easily from one neighbor's or relative's house or apartment to others', eating and drinking as they go. Especially in instances of prolonged illnesses that have been treated but not cured by cosmopolitan medicine or patent medicines, traditional healers are consulted.

Infancy ends with the beginning of schooling, which can be a traumatic psychological experience for some Malay children, especially those who are spoiled (*manja*). In Malay folklore and popular culture, the spoiled child (*si manja*) is one who does not have serious responsibilities. In some instances, this is a female with many older sisters who do most or all of the household chores; or it may be a male who is the eldest in a sibling set (*si long*), but whose sisters are almost his age, so that he would not have done the household chores. Sometimes such a favored child, usually a boy, has great difficulty adjusting to the new disciplines of schooling, even to the point of having tantrums. A *bomoh* or *bidan* may be consulted if tantrums continue.

#### **Adolescence**

Adolescence is not a clearly marked age in traditional Malay culture. For example, most males are circumcized after religious instruction, sometime between 9 and 13 years of age, but the range is 6 to 20 years of age. Traditionally, the circumcision ritual and feast (*kenduri bersunat*) is a public event, sometime hosted by a single household with one or several boys and sometimes by several households in a neighborhood. In the latter case, an arbor or open-wall tent may be erected in an empty space near the street to ease access for on-lookers and guests. This also reduces costs and labor for each household, and the ritual of the feast and the actual operation of circumcision of each boy can be viewed by all who attend. After prayer, the circumcision expert *(tukang sunat* or *mudim)* pulls the foreskin over the end of the glans of the penis, clamps the foreskin with a traditional implement, and cuts off the excess foreskin with a bamboo knife. Then he applies a medicinal compound (*obat tasak*) and bandages (*tali kundang*). The boys, now fully Islamic males, lie down on cots or bedding dressed only in their sarongs, and are on public view the first day. Night-lights are lit in their houses until the wounds heal,

#### **Notes 813**

several days later. Health problems attending circumcision are rare, although newspapers occasionally print stories about a slip of the knife by an incompetent *tukang sunat*.

There is no similar coming of age celebration for girls. The onset of menarche does not define the beginning or ending of adolescence for Malay females. However, a part of marriage ritual involves an exhibition of the bride's ability to read and recite the Koran; and some female *bomoh*s have said that this is more equivalent to male circumcision than the cutting of the clitoris, because it is evidence of being fully Muslim. School systems in southern Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia provide another, institutional means, by which Malays discuss the stages (*darjah*) between childhood and adulthood.

The virginity of girls until their first marriage is closely protected through modest dress and careful chaperoning. And the possibilities of being attractive to boys through fashionable clothes are still dampened by the common requirement of school uniforms for public as well as private schools in Southeast Asia. Nonetheless, adolescents are regarded to be naturally *gatal* ("itchy" or easily sexually aroused), flirtations occur, and girls become pregnant. The pregnancy may lead to marriage, an early abortion, or birth, and informal adoption of the child by an adult relative. Adoption is not encouraged in Islamic law, but as a traditional practice among relatives in Malay society it is fairly common (McKinley, 1975).

Young unmarried men may be seduced or be driven sexually mad by a woman through her feeding him "perfumed rice" (*nasi uap*), a common diagnosis of young men caught engaged in lewd sexual behavior in public. Adolescent girls, too, are thought to be driven crazy by love magic. The cure may involve ritual discovery of the "real" perpetrator and/or sending the victim to live with a relative in a distant place.

Prostitution is common in towns and cities, and venereal diseases and AIDS are serious health problems. But these are dealt with almost entirely within the context of the cosmopolitan health services.

#### **Adulthood**

Marriage marks the beginning of adulthood, both for women and men. But full status as adults is attained only after one's first child is born. Rural women have more children than urban women. This is a choice based on the economic value and costs of children and on access to inexpensive birth control. A husband, to the extent that he is interested in girlfriends who might become secondary wives, is often viewed by his first wife as a health risk (venereal diseases and AIDS). According to law, a man must obtain formal consent of his present wife or wives in order to marry subsequent wives (only four wives are allowed). Most Malay women do not want co-wives because it reduces their own household income (by law, each wife is entitled to a separate household and reasonable household expenses) and they also understand the health risk. Sometime, however, as the first wife of a wealthy man ages she may welcome a husband's younger second wife, especially a friendly kinswoman without health problems who would also be an ally. Malay men who were born poor in rural places and have nonetheless become very successful in the modern urban world often suffer seriously from hypertension, obesity, and early death. This may be a matter of richer diet and less exercise than their ancestors.

### **The Aged**

The aged are revered in formal courtesy and are commonly cared for by their children in their last years. This care of elderly parents is often given as a reason for having children. Men are viewed as more likely than women to become senile, and women who live beyond childbearing years usually live long lives.

### **Dying and Death**

Death of a young or middle age person is often suspected to have been the result of sorcery or poison. Death of the elderly is viewed as natural and even a blessing. Funerals and burials follow standard Islamic practices. Notice is immediately given to close relatives and friends who will come to the wake, and the appropriate Islamic religious functionary is contacted to arrange for burial in an Islamic cemetery.

## **NOTES**

1. The basic difference between Malay and Minangkabau cultures is in rules of inheritance. Malay kinship organization is bilateral and Minangkabau kinship organization is matrilineal. This difference may be related to different regional strategies for effectively