- Métraux, A. (1946). Ethnography of the Gran Chaco. In J. Steward (Ed.), *Handbook of South American Indians*. Vol. 5, US Government Printing Office, Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, DC.
- Métraux, A. (1967). *Religions et magies indiennes d'Amérique du Sud*. Paris: Gallimard.
- Miller, E. (Ed.). (1999). *Peoples of the Gran Chaco. Native peoples of the Americas*. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Miller, E. S. (1967). *Pentecostalism among the Argentine Toba*. Doctoral thesis, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, CA.
- Miller, E. S. (1980). *Harmony and dissonance in Argentine Toba society*. New Haven, CT: US Human Relations Area Files.
- Nordenskiöld, E. (1912). La vie des indiens dans le Chaco. *Revue de Géographie, 6*(3), 4–130.
- Paulotti, O. L. (1948). Los Toba: Contribución a la somatología de los indígenas del Chaco. *RUNA 1*, 9–96.
- Peña, M., & Bacallao, J. (1997). *Obesity and poverty: A new public health challenge*. Washington, D.C., Pan American Sanitary Bureau, Regional Office of the World Health Organization, Scientific Publication No. 576.
- Programa NacyDef. (2000). *Informe interno sobre estadísticas vitales de la Provincia de Formosa para el año 2000*. Formosa, Argentina: Ministerio de Desarrollo Humano, Departamento de Vigilancia Epidemiológica.
- Ranaivoarisoa, M. Y., & Ventura, C. (1998). *Evaluación del estado socio-nutricional de los aborígenes formoseños a partir del censo de talla de escolares de primer grado*. Simposio, "Los pueblos indígenas y la salud", Academia Nacional de Medicina, Sociedad Argentina de Pediatría.
- Schmidel, U. (1970). *Viaje al Río de la Plata, 1534–1554*. Buenos Aires: Plus Ultra.
- Tola, F. (1999). Fluidos corporales y roles paternos en el proceso de gestación entre los Tobas orientales de Formosa. *Papeles de Trabajo, 8*, 197–221.

- Tola, F. (2000). La restricción sexual en la lactancia y la "lucha entre hermanos" en un grupo Toba de Formosa. *Anales de la Sociedad Científica Argentina, 228*(2), 27–38.
- Tola, F. (2001). Relaciones de poder y apropiación del 'otro' en relatos sobre iniciaciones shamánicas en el chaco argentino. *Journal de la Société des Américanistes* (in press).
- Torres, E. O., Cabutti, N. F. D., & Palatnik, M. (1973). *Aspectos biomédicos*. Genética de la población Toba del Chaco Argentino, Universidad Nacional de La Plata (UNLP).
- Uauy, R., Albala, C., & Kain, J. (2001). Obesity trends in Latin America: Transiting from under- to overweight. *Journal of Nutrition, 131*(3), 893S–899S.
- Valeggia, C., & Ellison, P. T. (2001a). Lactation, energetics, and postpartum fecundity. In P. T. Ellison (Ed.), *Reproductive ecology and human evolution*. New York: de Gruyter.
- Valeggia, C., & Ellison, P. T. (2001b, Spring). Nutrition, breastfeeding, and fertility: Changing lifestyles and policy implications. *DRCLAS News*.
- Valeggia, C., & Ellison, P. T. (n.d.). *Lactational amenorrhea in well nourished Toba women of Formosa, Argentina*. Manuscript submitted for publication.
- Valeggia, C., Faulkner, K. M., & Ellison, P. T. (2001). Crecimiento en lactantes de una comunidad Toba de Formosa. *Archivos Argentinos de Pediatría* (in press).
- Vitar, B. (1999). Prácticas abortivas entre las indígenas chaqueñas en el siglo XVII. In C. M. Cóceres (Ed.), *Ethnohistoria/CD-ROM*. Buenos Aires Argentina: Equipo NAyA (Noticias de Antropología y Arqueología).
- Wright, P. G. (1990). Crisis, enfermedad y poder en la Iglesia Cuadrangular Toba. *Cristianismo y Sociedad, 28*(3), 15–37.
- Wright, P. G. (1997). *Being-in-the-dream: Postcolonial explorations in Toba ontology*. Doctoral dissertation, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.

# **Badaga**

#### **Paul Hockings**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAME**

Burgher (early 19th century only).

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Badagas are peasant farmers only found on the Nilgiri Hills, a small district in the northwest of Tamil Nadu State, India, where they have lived for the past four centuries. They inhabit over 400 villages which are

not multi-caste; these are mainly between 5,500 and 6,800 ft in elevation, and lie about 11N of the Equator. The people speak Badaga, a language of the Dravidian family closely related to Kannada (Kanarese) and Kurumba; all three are in the South Dravidian subfamily.

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

A community of refugees from the plains to the north, the Badagas had to cut fields and village sites out of the forests,

#### **Medical Practitioners 573**

mainly during the period 1565–1800. Some swidden cultivation continued until the 1870s. In fields near the villages they grew millets, barley, wheat, and various European vegetables; also cows, buffalo, and poultry were kept. During the 20th century potato, cabbage, and tea became major cash crops, and many educated Badagas moved into urban, professional jobs. Today, except for some 3,000–4,000 Christians, the Badaga community consists of about 150,000 Hindus (2003), of whom a small minority are Lingayats.

Most villages have only several hundred inhabitants, some much less. Each village is surrounded by fields, and usually includes one or two Hindu temples in addition to the several rows of houses and a few cowsheds. These usually lie along the slope of a hill on its leeward side, as protection from the westerly monsoon. Most villages have piped water coming to communal taps, but not long ago the water supply was a nearby stream or at best an open channel running into the village from a stream. Recent water shortages caused by irrigating fields for the first time have led to some villages depending on water trucks. Each village has a green, used for grazing calves and as a danceground or playground, and for certain ceremonies.

The Badaga society was traditionally a chiefdom, and they are still nominally under a paramount chief. This is a hereditary position, always held by the chief of one particular village. Below him are four regional headmen, each traditionally in charge of all the Badaga and Kota villages in one quarter of the Nilgiri Plateau. At the most local level a village has its own headman, and a number of contiguous villages make up a commune with its headman too. At each level—village, commune, region, and Nilgiri Plateau—there is a council for Badaga affairs, its juridical authority now greatly undermined by modern lawcourts and the Indian legal system. Prior to the 20th century disputes would have been settled at one or another level of this council system; major land disputes, ceremonial improprieties, and cases of murder probably reaching the Nilgiri-wide council.

The community is divided into a number of ranked phratries which are mainly endogamous. A conservative Lingayat group forms the top phratry, the Wodeyas, while the headmen's former servants, the Toreyas, are at the bottom. Between these two extremes there are one other phratry of vegetarians and three more of meat-eaters. The Christian Badagas, springing from the first conversion in 1858, now constitute a separate meat-eating phratry. Each phratry is made up of several exogamous clans, which in turn are made up of various lineages.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

A modern biomedical listing of the most prevalent diseases among Badagas recently would include pneumonia, typhoid, dysentery and diarrhea, diphtheria, smallpox, rickets, intestinal parasites, tuberculosis, anemia, food deficiency diseases, conjunctivitis, and various skin diseases.

There is now an urbanized middle class consisting of educated Badagas who work in a wide variety of professions. Thousands of Badagas have graduated from South Indian colleges and universities, including medical schools. Modern biomedicine, practiced at several local hospitals and numerous clinics, is only one attractive profession, for doctors and nurses: many other graduates have been drawn toward law, teaching, administration, banking, plantation agriculture, and other specialized professional callings. As well as a hospital in each of the four neighboring towns, large villages have clinics staffed by the Tamil Nadu government medical department. Family planning campaigns have reached into most villages in the past 30 years. The relatively high rate of literacy in the late 20th century meant that thousands could and did read medical advice columns in regional newspapers or magazines, either in Tamil or in English.

# **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Although today the only practitioners found in the Badaga community are likely to be doctors and nurses trained in biomedicine and working in the state's health-care system, until perhaps 25 years ago there were therapists still functioning in an indigenous, mainly herbal system. While most of these were unschooled general practitioners, there were also some specialists in many of the villages. The commonest was the midwife, always an experienced older woman; a big village might have several. In addition one could encounter exorcists who were necessary in instances of ghost possession; bone-setters; and some specialists who only handled one type of illness, such as fevers. Although by the end of the 20th century the therapists had disappeared, some of the other specialized practitioners remained, for their services might still be needed. These thus included midwives (now with some medical training), exorcists, and perhaps specialists handling a particular kind of illness.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Since there are no Badaga medical colleges and no textbooks (this having been a non-literate society until the late 19th century), there has been no formalization of medical theory except by the present author.

Indigenous belief was based on a lack of knowledge of the internal organs, especially in the vegetarian phratries where nobody had ever butchered an animal. As a consequence, it was not known that the heart existed, and other anatomical knowledge was similarly inadequate. The following outline of human physiology was given to me by an elderly male therapist who had never been to school.

The chest contains one organ, the *nenju* (which would in biomedical terms encompass both heart and lungs), which is of no great importance in the Badaga understanding. For them the central organ is the belly. There are some 16 organs in the body and nearly all are somehow connected with the belly: this is responsible not only for digestion but for blood circulation, reproduction, breathing, smell, even sights and speech. Food goes through the mouth into a tube, and then passes down to a stomach. As with cattle (!) there is a second stomach adjoining it, where the body stores liquids, which reach it from the mouth by a separate tube. A third tube links the two stomachs. The mixing of food from these two stomachs occurs in the belly, which lies around and below the navel. Here blood is prepared from the mixed food and liquid, and is sent to all parts of the body through arteries. The actual digestion is assisted by worms about the thickness of a pencil, which live in the belly and eat the food there. They are essential to keep a person alive. An important unit within the belly is the colon (*karu*), which must remain erect, otherwise the person will die. When breathing occurs, the air passes through the nostrils, the mouth, the eyes, and the ears, by a single tube to the *nenju*, and then on to the belly, where it is needed by the worms for digestion. The evidence for this state of affairs is in flatulence, and in the occasional discovery of worms in someone's stool. The head is important for sense and understanding, and it is recognized that the brain does the thinking. It is not, however, linked with the eyes, ears, mouth, or any other organ. Speech originates in the belly, and the tongue helps in forming the words. The larynx has nothing to do with speech, being simply the gateway through which the several tubes pass carrying air, food, and liquid. The existence of a skeleton is recognized, and it is seen as God's gift to help people stand upright and work.

A biomedical model would recognize heuristically several rather separate subsystems: the nervous system, the reproductive system, the digestive system, the circulatory system, the skeletal system, the lymphatic system, etc. The Badagas in general only see one system operating, but there is a somewhat separate subsystem for reproduction. God has distinguished between the two sexes by giving facial hair to men, breasts to women, etc., and semen only to men but menses only to women. Inside the belly of women, but not men, there is a bag where the baby grows. The fetus is formed entirely from a man's semen, and so copulation is essential for a woman to conceive. After digestion has occurred in the pregnant woman's belly, blood goes to the fetus and it grows on this. After birth milk flows from the belly to the breasts, and it is sucked out through the nipples, which are thought of as the outer part of the *nenju*.

Badagas do not recognize any particular god as causing all disease, or being able to cure it. Five diseases, however, are brought by five "sister goddesses." These include the dreaded smallpox, as well as measles, chicken-pox, rubella, and acute conjunctivitis. Cholera is also caused by an angry god, but is thought to be contracted in the plains. Mental illness, like a form of hysteria, is caused by an ill-intentioned ghost or bad spirit getting into the patient, usually a woman. Non-Badaga sorcerers or shamans, commonly said to be Kurumbas, can cause an evil spirit to enter a person. Other mental problems may also result from the sins of one's ancestors. People sometimes think of "bad blood" in parents as causing abnormalities in their children. Some illnesses are caused by personal uncleanliness, or bad diet. Eating too quickly, or having insufficient dairy products, are thought to cause the body to "over-heat" and thus bring illness; buttermilk is a common cure. Over-exertion, including sexual excesses, can bring illness, usually because the colon or an artery gets dislodged, it is said.

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 575**

Among unweaned infants, the odor that accompanies coitus, or the "bad wind" that emanates from a corpse or from childbirth, can bring sickness and even death. Bites, stings, and burns are recognized as being caused by obvious external agents; but depigmentation of the skin is thought to be caused by "the bite of the blindworm" (which is actually harmless). Some more modern theories of causation may have their origin in scientific medicine. For instance, some people recognize that tiny germs cause tooth decay; and in the case of plague it is thought that mosquitoes carry the disease from rats to people. (This may be the effect of a mosquito eradication program on the lower slopes of the hills.)

As with any medical system, the techniques of treatment depend on the diagnosis. As there are many dozens of recognized ailments, there are dozens of distinct treatments, usually involving the swallowing of a herbal medicine made up by the therapist from freshly gathered wild herbs from the neighborhood. The general term in Badaga for "a medicine" is *maddu*, but it should be understood that this word also encompasses "magical potion," "opium," or "poison."

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

It is by God's grace that only women produce milk. Semen is likewise produced by the belly, whence it passes to the penis during coitus. The function of the testicles is simply to act as a sort of counterweight to aid with the erection. Since the fetus is formed from the father's semen, copulation is essential before a woman can conceive. Her subsequent role is to nurture the developing fetus with blood from her belly.

Adolescents may engage in some premarital sexual behavior, for example in cowsheds or in the forest, but modern requirements of schooling tend to reduce the opportunities for this. In previous times young people might spend much of the day watching the fields or the herds, and many opportunities for casual sexual relations occurred. Today girls expect to retain their virginity until marriage. At the same time, the usual age at marriage has increased from about 12–13 for girls to around 20 or more, and young men now marry in their early 20s too. The latter are now likely to have their first experiences with urban prostitutes, or sometimes with their elder brothers' wives.

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

If a woman has not menstruated for 40 days she will be taken to a midwife or other therapist, who will tell from the breasts whether the woman is pregnant, as the nipples become darker. Other signs are if she feels lazy about work, even about walking, experiences nausea, does not want to eat, or requires unusual foods. If pregnant, she should have no intercourse during the first 3 months, and thereafter seldom. The above signs tend to disappear after 60 days. Thereafter there are certain restrictions on the couple. The man should grow a beard and moustache, but should not kill a snake lest its spirit enter the fetus. The woman should not eat red onion or garden marrows, or the baby will have itches when born. The woman must not wash her clothes or put on clean ones, must not cross any large river, or the hamlet boundary, must not go to any festival where she might see something interesting. These restrictions only last till the 90th day. After that time the woman can become active again and eat what she likes. By now, she can feel something in her stomach. From the start of the fifth month the fetus moves occasionally.

In the fourth, sixth, and seventh months the woman can be carefree, and in the even numbered months, the fourth, sixth and eighth, she may cross the hamlet boundary and visit her father's house (Badaga villages are exogamous). If her eyes turn red, she gets diarrhea, feels uneasy, and her lips itch, then these are signs that the body is "heating": excess of "heat" may cause a stillbirth in the seventh or eighth month. Therefore the woman is given buttermilk or butter. Buffalo milk freshly milked into a pot in which there is some lime juice is another cure, if drunk immediately. This is given to her every morning for two or three weeks before breakfast.

In an odd-numbered month of the first pregnancy, generally the fifth or seventh, the couple go through a thread-tying ceremony on an auspicious day that confirms their marriage. The relationship has become stable with the pregnancy, although this is not mentioned during the event. Thereafter divorce becomes more difficult. Supposedly the couple sleep side by side that night, with a stick between them to symbolize the coming child, and they have coitus.

In the ninth month the woman is usually at her father's house, and this is where birth should occur. In the ninth or tenth month she will give birth in the presence of a midwife and a few other women, including some young ones interested in learning the craft. (Small girls are usually not invited.) If the pregnancy takes longer there may be twins; one of these is likely to be a weaker child. But both are cared for. In cases of a particularly difficult birth the woman is given a mixture of dried ginger, pepper, cumin, clove, crude sugar, sweet flag, coffee powder, and clarified butter, mixed in particular proportions with water. It is said that long ago a cesarian section might be performed sometimes, using the small knife with which the umbilicus is cut. Some midwives also know how to reach into the womb and remove a dead fetus. Should the woman die in childbirth, the fetus must be cut out before her funeral.

Male relatives, including the husband, must wait outside during the birth. If there are difficulties they will offer advice or go and fetch other women. Because the act of birth was considered impure it would not occur traditionally inside the house but on the veranda. Now it generally does occur in one of the outer rooms, but almost never in a hospital. The door is kept closed: the woman's body is naked during delivery, though a cloth may be draped over her shoulders for warmth. In earlier times the grindstone was in front of the woman, to hold onto. Now it is not unusual for the woman to lie down to deliver, in the modern way. Commonly the woman kneels on the floor, with a girl in front to support her. Her legs are apart, and the midwife is behind her to catch the newborn before it touches the floor. Gingelly oil is sometimes applied to the vagina to ease the delivery, and the midwife will check to make sure the umbilical cord is not around the baby's neck. Some can put a hand inside to help the baby out, but only as a last resort in a difficult case. If the feel of the stomach surface tells the midwife the baby is in the wrong position, then the mother is made to place her head on the pounding stone, which is set into the floor, and five or six women support her as she balances there, upside down with her legs in the air. The knowledgeable midwife then shakes the woman's legs until the baby comes into the right position for birth.

The newborn is laid on sacking on the floor. The umbilicus is tied with a piece of string (formerly a thread lampwick) some 8 cm from the belly. This curtails bleeding, and then the cord is cut with a penknife or razor blade, or formerly with a reaping blade. A couple of handfuls of cold water are poured on the infant's shoulders or dabbed on with a cloth. In particular the left shoulder is wetted if a boy, or the crown of the head if a girl, to make the child strong for carrying loads. It is then bathed in very hot water. Groundnut oil (formerly castor oil) is put all over the body. The mother also takes a bath in very hot water, and then sits to drink some cold milk. Some women now take a sip of brandy. A little opium in a cup of tea or coffee is a cheap alternative. A further dose of opium may be given on the following two days (it was a traditional Badaga product). The new mother is also given a little palm jaggery (crude sugar) and three or four cloves of garlic; one piece is put into each of her ears. The child is then given back to the mother, its face to her right breast (right is the auspicious side). It is given a drop of groundnut oil to drink, and then begins to suck. A lime is then cut in half, and on each cut surface someone puts fresh cowdung, a blade of Bermuda grass, and some clarified butter. An old lady takes the first half and runs it down the right side of the baby, not quite touching it, as she says: "This child belongs to both the father and the mother" (who remain unnamed). Thus the joint parentage is asserted. The half lime is sucked by the mother, touched to her child's mouth, and thrown away. The same thing is done with the other half lime, running it down the left side of the baby. Lime juice is thought to ward off evil spirits. The afterbirth comes half an hour later. In modern practice, some midwives, if properly trained, pull the afterbirth out. It is carried outside and buried somewhere distant from the village. A man may dig the hole but would not touch the polluting afterbirth.

#### **Infancy**

After the child has sucked the breast for the first time, he or she is given a small piece of bezoar. After a few days some burnt rhizome of the sweet flag is also fed to the baby. After a year or two the infant might be taken on a pilgrimage to a nearby temple, where during an annual festival mendicants were given consecrated pieces of banana mixed with crude sugar. This they chewed a little, then spat into the hands or mouths of devotees, who either ate it themselves or fed it to their children because it was believed to cure all disease. The main food of the infant is mother's milk, but the child will be weaned at about one year. If the mother eats too many sweet things, she may transmit small worms to her baby through the breast milk. She avoids going near any corpse, or the smell of another woman's birth, or the odor of anyone other than her husband in the early morning, or hearing any frightening story, for fear that any of these "bad winds" may

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 577**

cause her flow of milk to stop. Anyone who comes to look at the baby just after having had coitus, and without bathing first, puts the baby at severe risk; as does someone who has just come from a great distance, if he does not first rest outside the house for awhile.

Three or four days after the birth the mother begins to bathe her baby, perhaps with help from her own mother. The baby is bundled up in old rags, and always kept warm. Care is taken about keeping the face clean, mainly so that a cat will not harm the baby in some way. During the first few weeks the cranium is elongated by manipulation, using oil, though the practice is now rare. Early anthropologists, not knowing of this, commented about the anomalous dolichocephaly of a people whose origin was known to be among the mesaticephalic and brachycephalic peasants of Mysore.

Until the ninth day a baby is thought to have no understanding, though it has vision. After the 40th day mothers try to make the baby laugh, and also take something away to make it cry: this to determine that the child will not be dumb. While a child might be born dumb it cannot be born deaf; so until the fifth or sixth month people are careful not to make a loud noise near the child which could induce deafness. After the third month of its life, the mother will resume her normal work duties.

### **Childhood**

At about the fifth month the child is made to sit up, surrounded by blankets. In the sixth or seventh month he will start to crawl, and will then be allowed to sleep on the floor. People encourage him to crawl, stand, and walk. At around 12–18 months children begin to talk. For common things like sleep, mat, rice gruel, etc. there are baby words that people use. It is primarily the old people in the household who educate their grandchildren and greatgrandchildren. The parents may be out working in the fields much of the day. Now that most children are going to school, this interaction with the elderly mainly occurs in the evenings.

Small children are given relative freedom in their actions, and are usually disciplined with threats: the coming of sorcerers, ghosts, mendicants, demons, or vaccinators to take them away are common threats. Otherwise kindness and outright bribery are lavished on small children. Now between the ages of 5 and 7 years they find themselves being sent off to school. Virtually every village larger than a hamlet has at least one; some have several, and recently private English-language elementary schools have sprung up here and there, as Badagas place much stock in good education today. Children become enculturated partly through school activities, partly through doing things in the village with their friends, and partly from tales their elders tell them. As elsewhere in India, small children look to their older siblings for guidance and advice. Outdoor group games are popular with the very young, including hopscotch, string figures, and board games.

The progress of childhood is marked by a series of ceremonies: naming, before the 40th day of life; head shaving in a temple, within a year of the birth; ear boring, often done at the same time; the first tooth ceremony, if a boy gets his first tooth in the upper jaw; nostril piercing, done in a girl's ninth, eleventh, or thirteenth year on an auspicious day; tattooing, formerly done on girls at about the start of puberty; milking initiation for boys, which is no longer done now that most people have no cattle; and initiation for those boys who are of the Lingayat sect. Otherwise there is no observance for a boy's puberty, but complex ones for a girl's.

#### **Adolescence**

Menarche usually comes at the age of 14 or 15, sometimes earlier. Girls at about puberty used to be tattooed on the brow, shoulders, and forearms with distinctively Badaga patterns. The tattooing was done, without any ceremony, with a thorn from one of two local plants or, more recently, with pins or needles, using soot scraped from the bottom of a pot for color. Traditionally, a girl's initiation into adulthood was essentially her marriage ceremony, which would occur at about menarche. Nowadays, child marriages do not occur. There are no maladies recognized as specific to the period of adolescence, and no bodily mutilations mark any male initiation ceremony.

#### **Adulthood**

Adult women might add further tattoos to the shoulders, forearms, or back of the hands while they were in the menstrual hut. Each village of adequate size would have its own hut, or several small hamlets would share one, until the mid-20th century. There is no theory of why menstruation occurs: it is simply God's will. A woman should be segregated from food preparation activities for six days.

#### **The Aged**

Old people are shown respect, but Badaga proverbs suggest that people are well aware of the infirmities that come with advanced age: "A man above sixty years is said to have half-sense"; "If the lord speaks, the whole village quakes; if an old man speaks there is a sound of babbling"; "The activity of a 20-year-old is pleasure-loving; the activity of an 80-year-old is that of old age." Cynical though all of these may sound, respect is enjoined: "If a person cannot see, hear or walk, as he is such an old man, you must first ask his permission to do anything." It is believed that if a man wears gold his lifetime will lengthen; whereas if he sees two crows in sexual congress then he will die within a year. If he feels he is too young to die, then he can countermand the omen by going up a hill near his home and shouting out to the villagers that he—mentioning his name—is dead. (A woman might also persuade a man to do this for her.) Making sure no one sees him, this act will have the effect of persuading some neighbors to go to his house to pay respects to the corpse; and this process of misleading the mourners is supposed to prolong life.

## **Dying and Death**

When death is thought to be approaching, messages are sent out to other villages inviting relatives and friends of the dying person to come and bless him or her. They bring gifts of grain and milk, offer their blessings, and hope to receive some from the dying person too. Only very close relatives will wait there for death to occur.

Once a person has died, the village headman is called, and a senior member of the family tells him, "This corpse is for you." Accordingly, it is the headman who arranges a communal funeral for the deceased and not his own family, though they will meet much of the expense. Another noteworthy feature of the Badaga funeral is that priests are not involved ceremonially. Most Badagas cremate their dead, but the high-status Lingayat groups and the Christians bury their dead in cemeteries.

The funeral is the most complex of all Badaga ceremonies, and sometimes used to take several days to complete. Now it is always done in one day. It has to symbolically handle the public-health problem of a corpse in the house; the emotional trauma felt by still living members of the bereaved family who must all adjust their lives; and

the social trauma occasioned by the loss of a usually elderly village resident. A full account of the Badaga mortuary rites and their symbolism is included in Hockings (2001).

# **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

Although several hospitals have been in the district since the mid-19th century, Badagas rarely went near them unless a patient was clearly dying and beyond all hope. Until the discovery of antisepsis in the 1870s, such hospitals were themselves a serious threat to health anyway. By the time this Badaga system was studied by the author during 1963–1972, only a handful of elderly practitioners remained alive in the Badaga villages. Once the prime informant, K. Sithamma, died (July 25, 1976), there were scarcely any other active general therapists, as Badagas were generally availing themselves of biomedical procedures in the local clinics and hospitals, or in some cases using Ayurvedic (q.v.) medications and therapists, and their midwives were going through a short program of training. But for the one book published on Badaga medicine, the system would quickly have become forgotten.

# **BIBLIOGRAPHY**

*Note*: There are only one book and one article on the Badaga medical system:

- Blasco, F., & Fauvel, M. T. (1977). Plantes médicinales des Nilgiri. *Journal d'Agriculture tropicale et de botanique appliquée; Travaux d'ethnobotanique et d'ethnozoologie, 24*, 23–39.
- Hockings, P. (1980). *Sex and disease in a mountain community*. New Delhi: Vikas; Columbia, MO: South Asia Books.

*Related texts*:

- Hockings, P. (1988). *Counsel from the ancients, a study of Badaga proverbs, prayers, omens and curses*. Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
- Hockings, P. (1989). The cultural ecology of the Nilgiris District. In P. Hockings (Ed.), *Blue Mountains: The ethnography and biogeography of a South Indian region* (pp. 360–376). New Delhi and New York: Oxford University Press.
- Hockings, P. (1999). *Kindreds of the earth: Badaga household structure and demography*. New Delhi and Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
- Hockings, P. (2001). *Mortuary ritual of the Badagas of Southern India*. (*Fieldiana, Anthropology*, n.s., 32.) Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History.