#### **Background 191**

- Leslie, C. (1974). The modernization of Asian medical systems. In J. J. Poggie, Jr. & R. N. Lynch (Eds.), *Rethinking modernization: Anthropological perspectives* (pp. 69–108). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
- Leslie, C. (Ed.). (1976). *Asian medical systems: A comparative study*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lyons, M. (1988). Sleeping sickness epidemics and public health in the Belgian Congo. In D. Arnold (Ed.), *Imperial medicine and*

*indigenous societies*(pp. 105–124). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

- World Health Organization (1997). Health and environment in sustainable development: Five years after the Earth Summit: Executive Summary. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
- World Health Organization (2000). Gender, health and poverty (Fact Sheet No. 251). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

# **Refugee Health**

#### **Pascale A. Allotey**

#### **INTRODUCTION**

The study of refugees as a population invites a multidisciplinary approach because their very existence often is a result of history, politics, economics, conflict and, more recently, globalization; their protection is a matter of international, refugee, humanitarian, and human rights law; their settlement involves immigration, citizenship, and national sovereignty; and their long-term outcomes involve multi-sectoral collaboration between providers of education, health, and welfare. As a population, refugees are influenced directly by the culture of the countries of origin, the culture of conflict and instability, and the culture of the countries in which they resettle. This entry provides a brief overview of the health of the world's refugees. It covers the cultural issues affecting health and the provision of health care from conflict through to settlement. It also examines a range of cross-cultural approaches to the health of refugees in a number of countries.

#### **BACKGROUND**

The international community, initially through the League of Nations, and subsequently the United Nations (UN), recognized that priority needed to be given to addressing the vulnerability of the many displaced individuals living within a context where governments were unwilling or unable to enforce laws and protect their basic rights. Refugee protection on a large scale first occurred with the setting up of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for almost 1,000,000 Palestinian Refugees in 1950 and culminated in the establishment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the drafting and passage of the Convention on the Status of Refugees in 1951 (hereafter referred to as The Convention). The Convention and the subsequent Protocol in 1967, defined refugees as individuals who (1) face threats of or experience torture, trauma or other forms of persecution by virtue of their race, religion, nationality or membership of a particular social group, or their political opinion; (2) were outside their country of origin; and (3) for these reasons were unable to return (UNHCR, 1951, 1967). Governments that are signatories to The Convention have a number of obligations. These include to support the work of UN agencies that deal with refugee crisis situations, to respond to people who request and are found to be in genuine need of asylum under The Convention, and to protect the human rights of refugees within their borders. A critical component of the obligation is not to return a refugee or asylum seeker to the country from which they fear persecution, a principle known as non-refoulment.

The circumstances that lead to displacement today vary significantly from the circumstances held at the time the definition of a refugee was first drafted. Today, situations that create refugees are more likely to involve mass movements of people. Most of the recent mass displacements have been caused, for instance, by ethnic wars and political insurgency, with a few occurrences of natural and environmental disasters. The mass displacement of populations comes about, in part, because of the changing nature of warfare, where civilians are increasingly becoming the targets for negotiating political agendas. Approximately 75% of deaths and injuries in recent wars were recorded in the civilian population (Benjamin, 2001) compared with less than 5% of civilian casualties in World War I. In addition, women are deliberately targeted for rape, torture and sex slavery, trafficking, forced marriages, and pregnancies (Benjamin, 2001; Goldstein, 2001). The numbers of refugees rose from 2.5 million in 1970 to current figures of over 12 million registered through formal agencies; over three quarters of these are women and children (UNHCR, 2000). The most recent significant flows were from Afghanistan and the Former Yugoslav Republics.

Another population of concern to the UNHCR is the internally displaced. Mass movements of people can occur as a result of the situations described above; however, the populations are unable to flee outside the national borders and are displaced or homeless within their own countries. While internally displaced persons (IDPs) are unable to return to their homes, they are not legally refugees within the definition of The Convention and therefore are not officially the responsibility of the international community. However, like refugees, conditions for IDPs are characterized by insecurity affecting civilians and noncombatants, the destruction of social networks, infrastructure, and ecosystems and human rights abuses. Recent figures indicate that there are 20–25 million IDPs; that is, there are around two IDPs for every refugee (UNHCR, 2000).

Refugees and IDPs typically experience high mortality, especially in the period immediately after their displacement or migration (Toole & Waldman, 1990). Deaths occur from malnutrition, diarrhea, and infectious diseases, especially in children, with recorded increases in communicable diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV infection. Injuries from land mines and direct conflict-related violence typically affect adults. The prior health status of the population, their access to key determinants of health (housing, food, shelter, water and sanitation, health services), the extent to which they are exposed to new diseases, and the level of resource availability, all affect health status (World Health Organization, 2002). A recent session of the General Assembly (June 2001) noted that populations destabilized by armed conflict, natural disasters, and humanitarian emergencies are at increased risk of exposure to HIV infection because of sexual abuse, coercion, forced high-risk sexual behavior, and rape

(United Nations, 2001). Under The Convention, the immediate response of the international community through the UNHCR is primarily to provide refugees with basic necessities such as shelter, food, water, and medicine. Longer term solutions are sought and include settlement in neighboring countries, voluntary return to country of origin once the threat ceases, or resettlement in a new (third) country. Neighboring nations in Africa and Asia host most of the world's refugees because of the importance of geopolitical considerations and family links (UNHCR, 2001a). It is argued that repatriation is easier from neighboring countries and the similar culture and social structure make the settlement process, even if temporary, less traumatic (UNHCR, 2001b). This argument, however, oversimplifies the complexities of social cohesion and political relationships within regions and overlooks the real potential for continuing ethnic conflict where tribal groups and therefore tensions may occur across borders. It also fails to take account of the potential hostility that may result from the need to redistribute the usually scarce resources in order to cater for the refugees. In South Africa, for instance, significant antagonism and prejudice, especially from black South Africans toward black refugees from other parts of Africa, has become a major issue because of high rates of poverty, unemployment, and poor access to health care for the local, disenfranchised black population (Morris, 1998).

The final option is resettlement in countries, usually in the West, through established procedures coordinated by the host countries and the UNHCR. Unfortunately, the increase in refugee numbers has coincided with an increasing reluctance from countries that are signatories to The Convention, particularly in Europe, North America, and Australia, to respond to the resettlement needs of refugees. The major concern has been the mixed nature of migratory movements, the misuse of the asylum processing system by people wanting to migrate to more affluent countries due to economic hardship, the growth in an industry of people smuggling and trafficking, and an inability to garner international support to prevent and resolve refugee situations (United Nations, 2001). In Europe alone annual political asylum applicants increased over a 10-year period from 60,000 to 600,000

#### **Implications of Conflict and Displacement 193**

(Steiner, 2000, p. 2). Furthermore, the response of nations to refugees and asylum seekers is based not only on the magnitude of the crisis and humanitarianism, but also on the internal economic interests and political agenda of the potential host country (Shacknove, 1993). More recently hostility toward refugees has been exacerbated by the perceived need by many countries for stricter border control and immigration policies following the terrorist attacks in the United States on September 11, 2001.

Tighter border control and an asylum review process that is increasingly unable to cope with the numbers of applicants has led to an increase in the numbers of asylum seekers attempting to circumvent the resettlement process by applying for asylum "on-shore." That is, the application for asylum is lodged following arrival in the country with a valid visa and legal documents or through attempting to enter the country without legal documents or visas. The Convention makes provision for this in recognition of the vulnerable positions in which asylum seekers find themselves, and the general lack of choices they have in seeking asylum (UNHCR, 1951).1 The response from several countries, however, has been the mandatory detention of asylum seekers who do not have valid documentation, for the duration of the processing of their applications (McMaster, 2001a). In addition, there has been a tightening of the definition of persecution with a greater onus lying on an asylum seeker to prove a threat to life, torture, or trauma (Lambert, 2001). Rigorous debates have occurred between human rights and refugee advocates on the one hand and immigration authorities and governments on the other about what is perceived by some to be harsh treatment of traumatized and vulnerable populations. Refugee advocates have argued for a broader definition of persecution to include nonpolitical but potentially life-threatening events such as gender-related persecution (Copelon, 2000; Kelley, 2001). The case of Togolese Fauziya Kasinga receiving asylum in the United States in 1996 based on her fear of female genital mutilation provided an opportunity to set precedence in this. "Diminished livelihoods" as a result of conflict has also been proposed as justification for asylum (International Catholic Migration Commission, 2001). Advocates maintain that it is often difficult to unravel human rights abuses from economic marginalization as causes of forced displacement (United Nations, 2001). Arguments based on equity have also been presented to justify an increase in the quota of humanitarian entrants to cope with the numbers of applicants waiting processing for resettlement (Steiner, 2000). The anti-refugee lobby and, increasingly, governments in hosting countries have politicized the asylum issue in response to community perceptions of insecurity (de Bousingen, 2002; Mares, 2001; Steiner, 2000) with the result that the humanitarian spirit that embodied The Convention is often lost. Discussions about the causes of conflict and displacement are more often than not neglected in public discourse in favor of highlighting the importance of border sovereignty and disadvantages of multiculturalism (Mares, 2001; Mateen & Titemore, 1999; McMaster, 2001a). A real danger identified by the United Nations is the potential for acts of racism and xenophobia against asylum seekers (de Bousingen, 2002; United Nations, 2001).

## **IMPLICATIONS OF CONFLICT AND DISPLACEMENT**

In addition to the direct effects on ill health previously highlighted, an important characteristic of current conflicts that indirectly impacts on health is the destruction of social networks and cultural institutions that provide populations with a sense of identity. This is particularly relevant in conflicts against particular ethnic groups such as the Iraqi government's targeting of the Kurdish population (Middle East Watch and Physicians for Human Rights, 1993), the Indonesian government's killing of large numbers of East Timorese, and the Serbs' targeting of ethnic Albanians. There has been documentation of the systematic suppression of cultures through the ban of the use of ethnic languages within oppressed groups. Examples are the violent protests in Soweto as a result of the government's insistence on the exclusive use of Afrikaans during the apartheid period in South Africa and the Iraqi assault against the Shia culture and religion (Makiya, 1993).

The intentional destruction of social, economic, and cultural realities has been described as the primary psychic obstacle that needs to be overcome by survivors (Summerfield, 2000). Communities subjected to frequent harassment, particularly in protracted situations, "forget" concepts of trust and innocence and the ability to predict or explain their sociocultural context. Just as traumatic is the destruction of livelihoods, for instance of subsistence farmers that know no other way of life, and other social structures, community networks, and traditional mechanisms that are relied on in times of crisis. Harrell-Bond and Wilson (1990) describe the effects on Sudanese refugees of the inability to perform traditional burial rituals for relatives who lost their lives during the conflict, a critical part of the grieving process. They reported being haunted constantly by the spirits of the dead family members.

The refugee experience is therefore mediated by a wide range of circumstances. How refugees overcome these to rebuild their lives and regain their health and well-being depends to a large extent on the post-conflict outcomes and the opportunity for a stable environment in which "normal" life can resume. Consequently, the opportunities that present through voluntary repatriation or resettlement are critical to long-term outcomes.

Recent repatriation programs have acknowledged the importance of rebuilding all aspects of the country and communities that have been affected by conflict and instability. Program activities for reintegration and resettlement of conflict areas involve not only the returning refugees, but also the local population in areas to which refugees will be returning in order to create and sustain viable social units. There is an increasing focus on active participation, which is important to short-term success and long-term sustainability. In addition, following a recent UN resolution<sup>1</sup> on the impact of war on women, findings from studies on gender and empowerment have been incorporated into planning, implementation, and evaluation to ensure women's active participation in the peace and repatriation processes. While the voluntary repatriation of refugees may be the ideal solution, systematic evaluation is fairly recent and therefore "best practice models" by which successful reintegration and re-establishment of livelihoods are not clear. A body of literature is gradually building up from lessons of countries such as Albania, Eritrea, and Ethiopia.

### **THIRD COUNTRY RESETTLEMENT**

Experiences of refugees resettled in countries that are culturally different are much better documented. Refugee resettlement is controversial and increasingly emotive, as previously described. For the refugees, the resettlement experience is shaped by the conflict and post-conflict period as well as by the receptiveness of the host community. The receptiveness of the broader community in host countries depends to a large extent on the political climate, the media, and historical experience with engaging with refugee communities. Images of refugees presented in many Western countries are of victims, powerless against rebel forces fighting for or against the incumbent government, of living conditions within refugee camps that harbor diseases long eradicated or unknown in developed societies, and of miserable and malnourished children (Mares, 2001). These refugees are perceived as people who are vulnerable and reliant on the goodwill of the receiving nation (McMaster, 2001c). Also featured in the media are people taking perilous journeys to cross national borders without legal documentation; people taking the initiative to seek out peace and stability instead of waiting on the benevolence of wealthier countries through an established process that is nonetheless protracted and not necessarily equitable.<sup>2</sup> Further images present similar looking people responsible for terrorist attacks on civilian populations. The overall picture drawn from these representations is important to the perception and reception of refugees and asylum seekers. The power of media images in providing and interpreting information and swaying public opinion cannot be over-stated (Kleinman & Kleinman, 1997) and the media has come under a great deal of criticism for fuelling the disquiet in the perception that industrialized countries need to be concerned with the potential of being overwhelmed by asylum seekers (UNHCR, 2001a). It is not uncommon for descriptions of refugees, asylum seekers, and illegal immigrants to be used interchangeably (Steiner, 2000). In reality, however, much of the blame for the disquiet of host communities rests with the political leadership in these countries (de Bousingen, 2002; Mares, 2001; McMaster, 2001a). A recent UN review on international protection stressed the need for the political will to de-dramatize and depoliticize the humanitarian challenge of protecting refugees in order to promote the public's understanding of the right of refugees to seek asylum (United Nations, 2001).

In Australia, asylum seekers who arrive without documentation are subject to indefinite mandatory detention while awaiting determination on the outcomes of their applications. When they are found to have a genuine claim for asylum, they are issued with temporary protection visas, a classification that restricts their rights and access to social and public goods within the community and differentiates them publicly from other citizens and refugees in the community. This policy establishes a hierarchy of the vulnerable who deserve support. Importantly, it institutionalizes their marginalization and creates an attribute for stigmatization. This subsequently

#### **Provision of Health Care 195**

contributes to the barriers to accessing health care (Silove & Steel, 2002; Silove, Steel, & Mollica, 2001; Sinnerbrink et al., 1996).

A recent review of alleged human rights violations in the immigration detention centers by a special envoy of the UNHCR raised serious concerns about the length of and conditions under which asylum seekers were detained in Australia (Bhagwati, 2002). For these asylum seekers, experiences within detention, and subsequently the temporary protection visas (which can be revoked on review), add to the interruptions in their search for stable and peaceful environments in which to rebuild shattered lives (Silove, Franzcp, Steel, & Watters, 2000). In contrast, in Sweden, asylum seekers are housed in geographically isolated hostels with a full provision of services on-site while they wait for their claims to be processed (Summerfield, 1999). Refugees who arrive through the procedures laid out through the Department of Immigration of Australia and the UNHCR are housed in state-funded housing on arrival and their settlement officially coordinated for the first few months following arrival. Refugees in the United Kingdom are largely required to fend for themselves in the community (Dean, 1998).

Specific effects on health of these contextual issues during resettlement have been well documented (Shrestha et al., 1998; Silove & Kinzie, 2001; Silove, McIntosh & Becker, 1993; Silove & Steel, 2002; Sinnerbrink et al., 1996; Sundquist & Johansson, 1996). Most consistent are the mental health problems, which correlate highly with torture and trauma experiences, postmigration stressors such as detention, unemployment, family disharmony, social isolation, and other acculturation difficulties. The inability to trust has an important impact on the establishment of social capital which in turn has negative effects on health. The most common conditions reported include post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, and depression (Shalev et al., 2001; Silove & Kinzie, 2001; Silove et al., 1997; Silove et al., 1998). Debates in cross-cultural mental health, however, have raised questions about the universal application of diagnoses based on psychiatric conditions that may not translate well cross-culturally (Kleinman, Das, & Lock, 1997a; Summerfield, 2001; Szasz, 1991). Summerfield describes the medicalized trauma discourse of Kurdish asylum seekers when reinterpreting their experiences with Turkish authorities when they seek asylum in the West. According to Summerfield (1999), it was unlikely that the asylum seekers would have subscribed to a label of torture or mental health pathology within the country of origin. However, they learn to adopt the expected illness label within the dominant medical discourse of the services they access (Christianson & Safer, 1996; Herlihy, Scragg, & Turner, 2002; Van der Kolk & Fisler, 1995).

There has also been some exploration of alternative explanations for mental ill health in refugees. Kleinman, Vas, and Lock (1997a) describe cultural notions of suffering as a result of political, economic, and institutional power and the influence of this power on social responses and health (pp. ix–xxvii). Grønseth (2001) combines theories of embodiment by Csordas (1994) with social suffering (Kleinman et al., 1997b) to describe the complexity of how the process of suffering manifests as diffuse aches, pains, and fatigue among resettling Tamil refugees in Norway. Others describe the somatization in terms of culture specific syndromes such as *susto*, which indicate a loss of soul, detachment from place, and general disquiet within oneself (Allotey, 1998; Eckersley, 2001; Simpson, 1993).

The perception of unfriendly host communities (Steiner, 2000) and prior experiences that affect trust provide an important context for refugee resettlement. It is not uncommon for resettling refugee groups to embrace and revive traditional cultural practices within the host country as an important part of re-establishing a sense of identity, particularly where they feel unable or, for a range of reasons, are unwilling to integrate within the host community. Women who were nonpracticing Moslems or liberal in their practice have reinvented themselves, taking to traditional forms of dress (*hijab*) as a bold statement of their identity (Brooks, 1995; Manderson & Allotey, 2003b). It is important to highlight the heterogeneity of refugee groups and the diversity in levels of education, professional, and socioeconomic status within groups. However, it would be reasonable to state that there is usually a strong imperative, based on a perception of incongruity of the dominant culture, to foster social networks within their own or other minority groups. There is a tendency, for instance, for information on health and services to be sought from established social groups who share the refugee experience (Manderson & Allotey, 2003a, 2002b).

### **PROVISION OF HEALTH CARE**

Unfamiliarity with mainstream health systems, lack of ability to communicate in the language of the host community, cultural differences, poverty, and marginalization combined with pre-migration and settlement stressors all contribute to social and health disadvantage identified in many refugee groups. These factors are also the main barriers to accessing health services (Jones & Gill, 1998; Palmer & Short, 2000).

The provision of health care to resettling refugees in a third country depends to a large extent on the policy environment towards migrants. Over time and in various contexts, governments have adopted policies broadly based on philosophies of assimilation, integration, or multi-culturalism (Palmer & Short, 2000). Assimilation, which reflects current trends in Europe, is based on an expectation that migrants and refugees will blend in with the dominant culture with no significant change expected from the host community. There is little recognition of or tolerance for diversity under policies of assimilation. Integration recognizes and respects differences in culture and provision is made for language and cultural differences. Integration policies provide assistance to refugees to function within the dominant culture. Multi-culturalism or cultural pluralism is based on total participation of all cultural and ethnic groups in the political process in recognition of their contribution to the development of a dynamic, evolving culture of diversity.

In reality, there is a broad variation in the implementation of these policies into service provision. In broad terms, the policy environment dictates the allocation of resources that enable health services to respond in one way or another. However, services also need to some degree to reflect the needs of their client group. Within health service provision for refugees, service delivery models have ranged from specialized ethno-specific services to mainstream services with no clear agreement of the advantages of either. The debate is ongoing in part because of the differences in outcome indicators, which may be based on efficiency in health service provision or on specific outcomes for the patient. The most desirable would achieve both.

Ethno-specific models provide targeted services to ethnic groups, ensuring that the providers of the service are either from the same ethnic backgrounds or are culturally sensitive to the needs of the specific groups. Other refugee-targeted services include dedicated clinics that recognize the special health needs of this group such as particular parasitic conditions that are not endemic within the host population and, more commonly, specialized trauma counseling services for survivors of torture and trauma (Palmer & Short, 2000). It has been argued, however, that while these services may meet a need, they are not an efficient use of health care resources and they further marginalize refugees from the host community, especially in a policy environment of multi-culturalism (Kelaher & Manderson, 2000). On the other hand, providing refugee care within a mainstream service risks the failure to identify and respond to special needs due to the cultural chasm between service providers and refugees. There has been some attempt to address this failure through a growing body of resources, the aim of which is to increase the cultural awareness and sensitivity of staff to the range of issues that may affect the health, presentation and symptoms, attitudes, response to and compliance with treatment within the health care system (Allotey et al., 1998; Geissler, 1998; Jones & Gill, 1998; Kirkwood, 1993; Levenson & Coker, 1999; Lipson, Dibble, & Minarik, 1996). Under this model, some training is also provided to refugee groups on the available services and negotiation of the health system.

### **CONCLUSION**

It would be unduly optimistic to make projections about the elimination of conflict, particularly under current global circumstances. Anthropologists have an important role to play in the exploration and analysis of situations that create refugees, enable them to survive and maintain resilience in spite of significant trauma, and rebuild their lives post conflict both through repatriation and resettlement. There is a particular dearth of knowledge on the health of refugees within protracted conflict situations where there is long-term uncertainty, a lack of cultural and social infrastructure which we generally understand to be necessary for human societies, and the application of that information to build structures to support and maintain health.

#### **NOTE**

1. Article 31 of the convention states that The Contracting States shall not impose penalties, on account of their illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming directly form a territory where their life or freedom was threatened in the sense of article 1, enter or are present in their territory without authorization, provided they present themselves without delay to the authorities and show good cause for their illegal entry or presence (UNHCR, 1951).

2. The screening process for the resettlement of refugees for many countries gives priority to the well educated, healthy applicants; a further occasion for the disadvantaged to be further marginalized.

#### **REFERENCES**

- Allotey, P. (1998). Travelling with excess baggage: A study of refugee women in Western Australia. *Women and Health, 28*(2), 63–81.
- Allotey, P. Manderson, L., Nikles, J. Reidpath, D. & Sauvarin, J. (1998). *Cultural diversity. A guide for health professionals*. Brisbane: The University of Queensland for Queensland Health.
- Benjamin, J. A. (2001). Conflict, post conflict and HIV AIDS the gender connections. Women, War and HIV/AIDS: West Africa and the Great Lakes, *Paper Presented at the International Women's Day World Bank*, Washington, DC March 8 2001.
- Bhagwati, P. N. (2002). *Detention centres in Australia*. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
- Brooks, G. (1995). *Nine parts of desire: The hidden world of Islamic women*. Sydney, Australia: Anchor Books.
- Christianson, S. A., & Safer, M. A. (1996). Emotional events and emotions in autobiographical memories. In D. Rubin (Ed.), (pp. 218–241). *Remembering our past: Studies in autobiographical memory*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Copelon, R. (2000). Gender crimes as war crimes: Integrating crimes against women into International Criminal Law. *McGill Law Journal, 46*, 217–240.
- Csordas, T. J. (1994). *Embodiment and experience: The existential ground of culture and self*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- de Bousingen, D. D. (2002). Health issues and the rise of Le Pen in France. *The Lancet, 359*, 1673.
- Dean, M. (1998). UK government announces first "health action zones." *The Lancet, 351*, 111.
- Eckersley, R. (2001). Culture, health and well-being. In R. Eckersley, J. Dixon, & R. Douglas (Eds.), *The social origins of health and well-being*. Melbourne, Australia: Cambridge University Press.
- Geissler, E. M. (1998). *Cultural assessment*. St. Louis: Mosby.
- Goldstein, J. A. (2001). Conquests: Sex, rape and exploitation in wartime. In *War and gender* (pp. 332–402). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Grønseth, A. S. (2001). In search of community: A quest for well-being among Tamil refugees in Northern Norway. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 15*(4), 493–514.
- Harrell-Bond, B., & Wilson, K. (1990). Dealing with dying: Some anthropological reflections on the need for assistance by refugee relief programmes for bereavement and burial. *Journal of Refugee Studies, 3*, 228–243.
- Herlihy, J., Scragg, P., & Turner, S. (2002). Discrepancies in autobiographical memories—implications for the assessment of asylum seekers: Repeated interviews study. *British Medical Journal, 324*, 324–327.
- International Catholic Migration Commission (2001). Futures of refugees and refugee resettlement. *International Journal of Refugee Law, 13*(4), 569–583.
- Jones, D., & Gill, P. S. (1998). Refugees and primary care: Tackling the inequalities. *British Medical Journal, 317*, 1444–1446.
- Kelaher, M., & Manderson, L. (2000). Migration and mainstreaming: Matching health services to immigrants' needs in Australia. *Health Policy, 54*, 1–11.
- Kelley, N. (2001). The conventional refugee definition and gender based persecution: A decade's progress. *International Journal of Refugee Law, 13*(4), 559–568.

- Kirkwood, N. A. (1993). *A hospital handbook on multiculturalism and religion*. Newtown, CT: Millennium Books.
- Kleinman, A., Das, V., & Lock, M. (1997a). Introduction. In A. Kleinman, V. Das, & M. Lock (Eds.), *Social suffering* pp. ix–xxvii. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Kleinman, A., Das, V., & Lock, M. (Eds.). (1997b). *Social suffering*. Berkeley: University of Calfornia Press.
- Kleinman, A., & Kleinman, J. (1997). The appeal of experience, the dismay of images: Cultural appropriations of suffering in our times. In A. Kleinman, V. Das, & M. Lock (Eds.), *Social suffering* pp. 1–23. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lambert, H. (2001). The conceptualisation of persecution by the House of Lords: Horvath v. Secretary of State for the Home Department. *International Journal of Refugee Law, 13*(1,2), 16–31.
- Levenson, R., & Coker, N. (1999). *The health of refugees: A guide for GPs*. London: Kings Fund.
- Lipson, J. G., Dibble, S. L., & Minarik, P. A. (1996). *Culture and nursing care: A pocket guide*. San Francisco: UCSF Nursing Press.
- Makiya, K. (1993). *Cruelty and silence: War, tyranny, uprising and the Arab world*. London: Jonathan Cape.
- Manderson, L., & Allotey, P. (2003a). Cultural politics and clinical competence in Australian health services. *Anthropology in Medicine, 10*(1), 70–85.
- Manderson, L., & Allotey, P. (2003b). Story telling, marginality and community in Australia: How immigrants position their differences in health care settings. *Medical Anthropology*, *22*(1), 1–21.
- Mares, P. (2001). *Borderline*. Sydney: UNSW Press.
- Mateen, F., & Titemore, B. (1999). *The right to seek asylum: A dwindling right*? (Brief No. 2(2) ). Centre for Human Rights and Humanitarian Law.: American University. Washington, D.C.
- McMaster, D. (2001a). *Asylum seekers. Australia's response to refugees*. Melbourne, Australia: Melbourne University Press.
- McMaster, D. (2001b). Australian immigration and its 'other'. In D. McMaster (Ed.), *Asylum seekers. Australia's response to refugees* (pp. 38–65). Melbourne, Australia: Melbourne University Press.
- McMaster, D. (2001c). The wretched of the earth. In D. McMaster (Ed.), *Asylum seekers. Australia's response to refugees*. (pp. 9–37). Melbourne, Australia: Melbourne University Press.
- Middle East Watch and Physicians for Human Rights. (1993). *The Anaful Campaign in Iraqi Kurdistan: The destruction of Koreme*. New York: Human Rights Watch.
- Morris, A. (1998). Our fellow Africans make our lives hell—the lives of Congolese and Nigerians living in Johannesburg. *Ethnic and Racial Studies, 21*(6), 1116–1136.
- Palmer, G. R., & Short, S. D. (2000). Health services for disadvantaged groups. In G. R. Palmer & S. D. Short (Eds.). *Health care and public policy. An Australian analysis* (pp. 252–302). Melbourne, Australia: Macmillan.
- Shacknove, A. (1993). From asylum to containment. *International Journal of Refugee Law, 5*(4), 516–533.
- Shalev, A. Y., Cohen, J. Ellis, S. J. Litva, A. Devilly, G. J., Clark, T., Cabrera-Abreu, C., Hargrave, A. & Summerfield, D. (2001). Posttraumatic stress disorder. *BMJ*, *322*(7297): 1301.
- Shrestha, N., et al. (1998). Impact of torture on refugees displaced within the developing world. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 280*, 443–448.
- Silove, D., & Kinzie, J. D. (2001). Survivors of war trauma, mass violence, and civilian terror. In E. Gerrity, T. M. Keane, & F. Tuma