# 11

# **The Union Executive**

*Mahendra Prasad Singh*

# ❑❑ **The Background**

Historically, one can delineate at least two divergent lines associated with the evolution of the executive system in India: (1) the monarchical, and (2) federal-republican. The federal republican *gana-sanghas* appeared in the ancient India, but were soon supplanted by monarchies. Republican parliamentary-federal executive finally came to be established only in independent India under the constitution framed in 1950. The main institutional strand in the Indian history has been monarchical and viceregal executive continuing from the ancient through the medieval to the British period. There were at least six variants of this monarchical executive system: (1) monarchical executive within the framework of centralized bureaucratic state during the Mauryan period; (2) decentralized feudal monarchies in the post-Mauryan period; (3) decentralized segmentary state monarchy in the early medieval South India; (4) a diarchical feudal post-Shivaji Maratha state in the 18th century in which the Maratha ruler with his capital at Satara was reduced to being a nominal monarchy, while the hereditary prime minister, the *Peshwa,* with his *gaddi* at Pune, became the dominant power; (5) the Mughal monarchy within the framework of feudal patrimonial bureaucracy; and (6) the viceregal executive within the framework of centralized bureaucratic state in colonial India. The viceregal system of executive subsequently came to be supplemented by rudimentary parliamentary and cabinet systems based on limited franchise and legislative responsibility introduced by the British.

# **The Union Executive**

Independent India adopted a modified version of the Westminster model of government. The most fundamental modification was, of course, the combination of the parliamentary system with federalism and Fundamental Rights of the citizens and Directive Principles of State Policy. This created the federal imperative that the Westminster model does not know. Another equally important departure is the replacement of monarchy by a republican presidency, although the two are functionally comparable in their limited and strictly nominal role for all practical purposes and their pomp and pageantry. This feature is best described by Walter Bagehot by his celebrated distinction between the 'dignified' and 'efficient' parts of the executive played by the monarch and the Prime Minister and his cabinet. This is similar though not identical with the roles of the President and the Prime Minister/Cabinet in the Indian system. A second feature of the Westminster model adopted in the Indian constitution and convention without any modification is the fusion of powers between the executive and the Parliament which technically means the Presidentin-Parliament, and the Prime Minister and his council of ministers spring from the Parliament itself. The Prime Minister is the fulcrum of the cabinet, which is collectively and individually responsible to the Parliament, specifically to the Lok Sabha. This feature of the cabinet system is buttressed by the party system. The party or coalition of parties enjoying majority in the Lok Sabha forms the government. This lends ideological and programmatic homogeneity to the cabinet. This is further reinforced by Prime Ministerial and Presidential prerogatives with regard to the formation of the government, dismissal of ministers, and the dissolution the Lok Sabha. A third feature of this model is the independence of the judiciary from legislative and executive control. Even though the judges are appointed by the executive and are impeachable by the Parliament, the constitution takes great pains to ensure that they function without fear or favour. Parliament's power of impeachment of the President and judges and President's powers of pardon and reprieve in criminal cases are essentially, or at least partly, judicial functions. But the judicial power is mainly the preserve of the judicial organ of the state, which forms a unified hierarchy of federal, state, and local courts of India. A fourth feature of the Union executive in India is that the ultimate responsibility of the cabinet goes beyond the Parliament to the electorate at large. Over and above, the presidential prerogative tempered by parliamentary majority, the final recourse in the last analysis is the will of the people expressed in electoral mandate and public opinion. The President is elected by an Electoral College consisting of the elected members of both the houses of Parliament and elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the states. He has, thus, a federal constituency that transcends the Parliament. The Prime Minister basically springs from a parliamentary base, but given the nature of electoral politics and the party system, it is evident that more often than not that in case of a particular party coming to power who will form the government. This is also often true of coalitions or fronts of parties. Thus, even though a prospective Prime Minister may be seeking election from a narrow parliamentary constituency, he campaigns as a national leader in the entire country. It is by virtue of this plebiscitary feature of elections that the Prime Minister comes under the real focus of power in the parliamentary as well as federal spheres of the government. With the growing fragmentation and regionalization of the party system, the nature of elections may change such that it may become increasingly obscure as to who may be campaigning as prospective Prime Ministers. To that extent, this situation may demand an institutional substitute for the parliamentary-federal salience of the Prime Minister's role, *e.g.,* election of the party leaders at a national convention of parties as in Canada. Or else, designation of the leaders of the fronts of parties prior to the national electoral campaign. These reforms will find a federally aggregative effect to the electoral campaign.

# **President and Prime Minister**

It is clear from the foregoing discussion that the Indian constitution establishes an executive at the federal level that comprises a constitutional or nominal Presidency with an effective Prime Minister and his cabinet. Article 53 proclaims that 'the executive power of the Union, shall be vested in the President', and Article 74(1) provides that 'there shall be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with such advice'. The President thus, cannot ever rule the country unaided by council of ministers. According to Article 75(1), 'the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President. The other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister'. Although the constitution does not mention political parties here, according to the established conventions of the British, Canadian, Australian, New Zealand, and (now since independence) the Indian political systems, it is evident that the President's choice of a Prime Minister is normally limited to the leader of the party with a majority in the Lok Sabha, or to that of the largest single party or coalition of parties therein. Thus, only when the party system fails to throw up an obvious choice in the leader of the majority party (as, for example, after the fall of the Janata Party government in 1979, and in government formations since the loss of Congress predominance in 1989) can the President have some active role and discretion in this matter. Article 75, (2) and (3) makes the seemingly contradictory provisions that the ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President' (2) and 'The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House of the People' (3). This seeming contradiction, plus the absence of the mention of the Prime Minister in the above clauses, dissolves in view of the convention of the constitution in parliamentary systems the world over that the head of the state is bound by the structure of the majority on the floor of the popularly elected house of the Parliament. The same holds true of the lower chamber. It is shared by the President and the Prime Minister, with the view of the Prime Minister holding majority in the Lok Sabha prevailing. The President can have discretionary power in the matter only when a Prime Minister has evidently lost majority in the house. Now, with the 42nd and 44th constitutional amendments, in fact, the foregoing convention in India has become part of the written constitution in as much as Article 74(1) expressly requires the President to act in accordance with the advice of the Council of Ministers; at most the President may require the Council of Ministers to reconsider such advice once more 'either generally or otherwise' and after such a reconsideration he is constitutionally bound by the advice. This is true of Emergency provisions in the constitution as well as of constitutional amendment Acts. In contrast to Governors (Article 163, Section 1), the constitution does not expressly give any discretionary powers to the President.

The foregoing construction of the powers of the President and the Prime Minister/cabinet is consistent with the expectations of the Constituent Assembly and the major thrust of academic commentaries as well as the behaviour of the incumbents of both the highest offices of the land (*e.g.,*  Chetaker Jha, 1960; K.V. Rao, 1961; and Granville Austin, 1966). This does not mean, however, that this interpretation has gone entirely unchallenged either by commentators or by some incumbents of the Presidency. Alan Gledhill, for example, presents an alarmist view of the President's power to assume dictatorial control of the government. Granville Austin paraphrases Gledhill's apprehensions of the murky prospects thus, only to subsequently dismiss it:

'A President who has been aggrandizing his powers learns that Parliament intends to impeach him. During the stipulated lapse of two weeks between the notice of, and the movement of, the impeachment motion, the President dissolves Parliament. If a new Parliament is elected, writes Professor Gledhill, the President need not to summon it for six months. In the meantime, the President may dismiss his ministers and appoint others of this choice, himself governing the country by Ordinance during this period. This situation could easily justify a proclamation of emergency, and in this manner the President could step by step take over control of the nation'.

He rejects this argument out of hand, and persuasively so:

'The President could not dissolve Parliament without the advice of his Prime Minister, in the first place. Nor could his other hypothetical actions be described as constitutional. That a President or a Prime Minister, perhaps with the backing of the armed forces, could assume power in India is possible, but that would be revolution. And, as Sir Ivor Jennings has written, constitutions do not contemplate revolutions. If the Federal Executive in India becomes autocratic it will be because Parliament and body politic

#### **214** ✽ CHAPTER 11

have defaulted in their responsibility and have acquiesced in their own downfall, because the intent of the constitution has been 'constitutionally' circumvented'.

At least two past Presidents have also questioned the strictly nominal interpretation of the President's role under the constitution. Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the first President, in a note to the first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, on 18th September 1951, conveyed his desire to exercise his own discretion in assenting to Bills, sending messages to Parliament, and returning Bills for Parliament's reconsideration. This view of President's power was firmly opposed by Nehru, Attorney General M.C. Setalvad, and A.K. Ayyar, a member of the Constituent Assembly.<sup>1</sup> Prasad never acted upon his intention, but raised the issue again in the context of non-comparability of President's power to that of the British Crown, arguing that in Britain the monarch can do no wrong (as he/she acts always on the advice of ministers), whereas the President is both elective and impeachable. Besides, he pleaded that 'our conditions and problems are not on a par with the British'. President Prasad went on amplifying:

'The British constitution is a unitary constitution in which the Parliament is supreme, having no other authority sharing its power of legislation except such as may be delegated. Our constitution is a federal constitution in which the powers and functions of the Union Parliament and the State Legislatures are clearly defined and the one has no power or right to encroach upon the rights and powers reserved to the other'.

In view of all this, he wished it to be investigated as a matter of academic debate 'the extent to which and the matters in respect of which, if any, the powers and functions of the President differ from those of the sovereign of Great Britain'.

The Zail Singh-Rajiv Gandhi open confrontation over President's powers occurred during the last months of Singh's presidency (summer and monsoon of 1987). The controversy had been brewing for a long time. It centered initially around the violation of Article 78 of the constitution which provides:

'It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister: (1) to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation; (2) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may call for; and (3) if the President so desires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council'.

In the midst of media reports and speculation that the Prime Minister was neither calling on the President nor did the Home Ministry oblige him by supplying a copy of the Thakkar Commission Report on Indira Gandhi's assassination despite repeated requests. Rajiv Gandhi claimed in the Parliament that he was regularly meeting the President and briefing him on all important affairs of the state. A letter purportedly written by the President contradicting it leaked out to the press. It raised a furore in the Rajya Sabha, but the Vice President R. Venkataraman, acting as the Chairman of the upper chamber, 'ruled out any discussion on the subject, upholding the principle of confidentiality of communication between the President and the Prime Minister'. The problem subsequently became more complicated with the revelations of alleged payment of kickbacks to 'Indian contacts' by the German firm HDW in the supply of SSK submarines and to the Indian ministers and bureaucrats in the supply of Howitzer guns by the Swedish firm Bofors to the Indian army. The opposition mounted a public outcry against the Prime Minister, seeking his resignation. The opposition parties, Congress dissidents, and some prominent luminaries of the legal and journalistic professions began lobbying the President to either dismiss the Prime Minister or to give permission to prosecute him for the alleged involvement of his government in corruption and moral turpitude. They found that Zail Singh not only a President willing to listen and seeking legal advice in and outside the government (mostly outside), but also keen to negotiate politically an alternate Prime Minister to replace Rajiv Gandhi and his own candidature for a second term as President with the support of the opposition and Congress dissidents. Only two days before handing over the presidency to the President-elect R. Venkataraman, Zail Singh finally replied to a letter by journalist Rajinder Puri expressing his inability to grant permission for Rajiv Gandhi's prosecution.<sup>2</sup>

A federal dimension to the mode of indirect election of the President (*e.g.,* association in the process of the elected members of state legislatures) plus frequent appeals to the President for intervention in matters affecting the state governments may convey the impression that he may have some discretionary federal role independent of his nominal parliamentary role as the head of the federal state. But, in a parliamentary-federal state any such independent federal role can be exercised only by the judiciary without jeopardizing the parliamentary component of the government at the Centre.

Two years after the Zail Singh episode, his successor, R. Venkataraman, was also called upon to decide on a similar petition by Shanti Bhushan, a Supreme Court advocate, for Rajiv Gandhi's prosecution on the same charges. In consultation with the Attorney General, the President dismissed the petition, as the charges were based on newspaper reports and surmises, which had been held by Bombay High Court earlier as hearsay rather than evidence. The Attorney General veered to the position that the Supreme Court's ruling in Karunanidhi's case would suggest that the Chief Minister (and, therefore, the Prime Minister) might be deemed to be a public servant under the anti-corruption Act, 1986, and the Governor (and, therefore, the President) could remove a Chief Minister (and, therefore, a Prime Minister) for proven charges of corruption. Besides, he also argued that in terms of the R.S. Naik case, the President or the Governor should decide independently of the Council of Ministers in sanctioning such prosecution. However, both these positions could be assailed in appropriate proceedings'. The President has wondered aloud what an incumbent without legal training would do in such cases:

'If the President had to decide such issues in his sole discretion, he could hardly distinguish between evidence and hearsay, nor could he judge whether the ingredients of an offence had been made out by the applicant. If he relied on his secretary who often times was an administrative officer and not one trained in law, his advice could not be of much value. If the President consulted the law officers of the Government, he could not be sure if the advice was not partisan. Nor could he consult judges since they had to decide the case later if sanction was issued. Consultations with non-official lawyers would hardly be proper since it involved sensitive charges against the head of the administration. I hope the Supreme Court will some day ponder over all these matters'.

A few months later, C. Subramaniam wrote to the President drawing his attention to the Comptroller and Auditor General's observations in his report on the Bofors gun deal and urged him to examine the matter, as the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, outside the purview of Article 74(1) of the constitution and act on his 'own independent conclusions'. President Venkataramen found nothing in the constitution which gave validity to the suggestion. He said:

'It is well known that the President is only a titular head of the Armed Forces and cannot issue any direction to the Forces except through the Ministry of Defence. In my view, the constitution of India did not envisage the President as an appellate authority over the government, but only as a symbol of State with defined powers'.

Despite a federal electoral college for election of the President, the construction of Presidential power in Indian constitutional law and practice has developed within the framework of parliamentary principle of government. In fact, this is in conformity with the functional requirement of unity and cohesion of the Union executive in the parliamentary mode with subsidiary federal roles. The advent of a multiparty system and federal coalition governments have, however, significantly changed this scenario typical of one party dominance or even single-party majority governments in New Delhi. The new development has increased the moral maneuverability of the President and Governors. The coalition partners and supporters in the Parliament and state legislatures/governments have also seriously constrained the authority and power of the Prime Minister. This has also diluted the collective responsibility of the Union Cabinet to the Parliament and added a more effective federal dimension to the whole framework of government of India than ever before.

# **The Prime Minister and the Cabinet**

An important thing about the cabinet system in India is that, except for the procedure of its formation, almost everything else about it has been left to conventions. This is essentially in conformity with the Westminster model of cabinet government. This constitutional vacuum in India, as in Britain, has been left to be plugged by the party system. There has, of course, grown an intricate web of conventional and legal administative procedures and organizations centering around the cabinet (*e.g.,* cabinet committees, Prime Minister's Office, cabinet secretariat, etc.) within the government itself. However, the role of the Prime Minister and the way Council of Ministers works are basically determined by the balance of forces in the ruling party, or parties in case of a coalition government, and in the party system at large. Besides the factional balance of forces in the party and configuration of parties in the system, a Prime Minister is also constrained in government formation to take into account, at least to an extent, ethnic and regional factors. But, these considerations are always mediated by political factors. If the Prime Minister happens to be in a commanding position in the party, there are few fetters on his powers of appointing and dismissing ministers and conducting the working of the Council of Ministers. This was, by and large, true of Nehru after Patel's death in December 1950 and prior to the Chinese aggression in October 1962. The PMs usually enjoy the leeway in bypassing the Council of Ministers/Cabinets as whole bodies, or even the cabinet committees, and get away with deciding informally in consultation with a few senior colleagues, who may constitute a sort of 'inner cabinet' or 'kitchen cabinet'. The foregoing was also characteristic of Indira Gandhi after her massive mandates in the 1971 mid-term elections and 1972 State Assembly elections.

One can, indeed, delineate at least three models of Prime Ministerial leadership in India. The first, typical of the Nehru era, may be called for want of a better term, 'pluralist parliamentary premiership. It coincided with the single-party dominant 'phase under the aegis of the Congress both at the federal and state levels. For this reason, the Prime Minister of India operated within a political framework that, despite the federal division of powers, almost resembled the parliamentary system. The second model of Prime Ministerial power may be called 'neo-patrimonial parliamentary premiership'. This was exemplified by Indira Gandhi at the height of her power, mainly 1971 to the end of internal Emergency in 1977. The Congress party enjoyed predominance during this phase in New Delhi and also in most of the states, but with a difference. Unlike the pluralist power structure and internal democracy in the party in the Nehru era, Indira Gandhi's Congress dispensed with organizational elections following the great split of 1969; state Chief Ministers and *Pradesh* party presidents came to be nominated by the Prime Minister herself. With this centralization of power in the Prime Minister's hands, she also gave the call for 'committed' bureaucracy and judiciary. The Prime Minister's Secretariat (later renamed by Morarji Desai as PMO) was greatly expanded to buttress her enormous powers. The third model of Prime Ministerial style may be designated as the 'federal' parliamentary one. It was presaged by the Janata government (1977-79) and the Rajiv Gandhi government (1984-89), which, despite the persistence of oligarchical tendencies in the two respective parties, were more amenable to federal pressures than any other preceding governments. The four (later five) major parties that merged to form the Janata Party—Bharatiya Jana Sangh, BharatiyaLok Dal, Congress (Organization), Socialist Congress for Democracy-functioned as four oligarchical factions at the Centre, but state-level groups had better chances of being heard and considered in New Delhi than, say, in the highly-centralized and oligarchic power structure of the Congress Party led by Indira Gandhi. The Congress (Indira) under Rajiv Gandhi continued to be oligarchical and undemocratic, but his relations with non-Hindi state units of the party and non-Congress state governments were generally more informed by the federal principle than those with Congress units and governments in the Hindi-speaking regions. The federal premiership style came to have a fuller denouement in the post-1989 period.

With the range of variation sketched above, the Prime Minister must act as to use a cliché, the keystone of the cabinet arch. Observers, who have worked in the Prime Minister's, Secretariat, tell us that his role as the executive head of the government mainly clusters around initiation, coordination, and monitoring of policies. An effective Prime Minister is the one who keeps himself as free and available as possible for consultation and policy initiation and coordination. In Chetakar Jha's opinion, 'a Prime Minister without any specific portfolio is more desirable than the present practice. The British Prime Minister does not hold any'. L.N. Sharma, too, regards coordination as his 'most important responsibility'. This is particularly true of governments and countries with greater departmental autonomy, such as Britain and the older Commonwealth than India, especially under powerful Prime Ministers, like Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi, who like the grand Mughals tried to implement almost everything important by themselves. With what we have called 'federal' Prime Ministers above, coordination and arbitration between and within ministries, and between the Centre and the States, assumes greater importance, without, however, relegating their role in major policy initiatives to the background. With the growing complexity of the government, policies in increasingly larger number of areas are now formalized in national policy statements and approved by the Parliament for longer term implementation by ministries. Ministers, especially in finance and technological areas, now seem to enjoy a quantum of autonomy which was previously unknown.

# **Parliament, Party, and Mass Public**

Beyond the Presidency and the cabinet, Prime Minister's role may well be conceptualized as a series of concentric circles of power and influence spanning the parliament and the civil society. The classical role of the Parliament in the convention mode as the independent maker and unmaker of the constitution and government and the seat of legislative initiative has been arrogated by the party whip and the government and the administration. The Indian Parliament is no exception to this universal trend of the decline of Parliament. Even the committee system in a parliamentary system cannot compete with the committee system in the American Congress. For the separation of the U.S. President and his cabinet from the Congress allows vigorous committee work in the legislative process. On the contrary, committees in a parliamentary system are overshadowed by the cabinet, which is, in fact, the most important committee of the house, so to say. The Indian Parliament has introduced a new full-fledged system of departmentally-related standing committees since the spring of 1993. It will strengthen the committee system, but hardly reverse the role of the Parliament beyond being: (1) the instrument of legitimization of the government shaped by political processes and forces, and (2) the forum for focusing on important public issues and mitigation of public grievances.

The institutional imperatives of India's parliamentary-federal system significantly determine the Prime Minister's relations and role in the party and the mass public. In the periods of transition from the anti-colonial nationalist movement to national governance (1947-50), from the 'Nehru-Patel duumvirate',<sup>3</sup>to the former's supremacy in the dominant Congress party (1950-52), and from one durable premiership to another (1964-1970, when Shastri and Indira Gandhi in quick succession, succeeded Nehru), the organizational wing of the Congress tended to acquire some salience and even tried to assert its supremacy vis-a-vis the parliamentary wing. However, forcing the issue into direct confrontations, both Nehru and Indira Gandhi in their respective periods of ascendancy were soon successful in establishing the supremacy of the parliamentary wing over the organizational wing and of the Prime Minister over the party as a whole. The organizational wing again displayed a flurry of sponsored activity under the benevolent authoritarian shadow of Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi, to facilitate the political induction of her sons, Sanjay's and, after his death, Rajiv's, in the first half of the 1980s. After Rajiv's tragic assassination in 1991, when the veteran P.V. Narasimha Rao was called upon to abandon his plans of political retirement and head the party, he departed from the practice of *ad hoc* nomination of organizational units under Indira and Rajiv Gandhi and held organizational elections in the party in 1992 after a lapse of twenty years. However, he implemented the principle of 'one man one post' only in the state units of the party, and continued to hold the office of the national Congress President. Moreover, organizational elections were again postponed in subsequent years. The organizational wing did not, therefore, emerge as a locus of any autonomous power. Feeble challenges to Rao's position and policies, if at all, surfaced either from a few of his own cabinet colleagues (*i.e.,* Arjun Singh, Sharad Pawar, and R. Kumaramangalam) or from some state Congress presidents (*i.e.,* Narain Datt Tewary in U.P. and Vazhapadi Ramamurthy in Tamil Nadu). All had to go. These challenges to the Prime Minister's position in the party and the government are attributable to the federal tensions.<sup>4</sup>They coincide with the transition from singleparty dominant system to multi-party system of polarized pluralism since the 1989 Lok Sabha elections, since the early-1980s in the states component of the party system.

The federal tensions found fuller expressions in the Janata Party government (1977-79) and National Front government led by Janata Dal (1989-90). Prime Ministers Moraji Desai and V.P. Singh were forced to contend with extra-parliamentary party leaders and powerful cabinet colleagues on much more liberal terms than any previous Congress Prime Minister. However, when it came to the crunch, both Desai and Singh, despite the fact that they represented smaller factions in their parties than some of their cabinet colleagues, were able to easily dismiss and dispense with Charan Singh and Devi Lal, respectively, in swift actions. These more powerful cabinet colleagues in the party had to cool their heels out in the cold when they crossed swords with the Prime Ministers, inherently more powerful in the government. The Prime Ministers, had, however, to eventually pay a heavy price. The Desai government fell victim to factional feuds. While the Singh government survived the factional conflict, it fell shortly thereafter due to other reasons (*i.e.,* withdrawal of support by BJP, which had been supporting it from the parliamentary floor without joining it). Janata Party President Chandra Shekhar and National Front chairman N.T. Rama Rao played only a second fiddle to Prime Ministers, Desai and V.P. Singh (the latter himself was the convener of the National Front).

As effective head of the government, the Prime Minister, especially in an one-party government easily dominates the electoral process and the party's political process. Elections are virtually plebiscites between prospective premiers. In the period intervening between elections Prime Ministers and his rivals in the ruling and opposition parties often organize mass rallies to demonstrate their strength in intra-party bargains and competitive inter-party mass mobilizations with an eye on the coming elections. Left parties and BJP often demonstrate their hold over trade unions and trading centres and white-collar employees, respectively, by calling for *bandhs* in a particular state or the nation at large. Mass movements occasionally spread out like Prairie fires spilling out the confines of the party and electoral processes, leading to major shifts in the political realignment of the mass electorate and changes in the party system (*e.g.,* around the 1967 general elections in the major North Indian states and Tamil Nadu; in 1977 when Congress lost power to Janata Party in New Delhi and major states in North India; in 1989 and 1991 when Congress predominance suffered another major breach at the national-level to National Front, with BJP and Janata Dal emerging as two other major parties alongside Congress, opening up a wide space for coalitional politics and minority governments between these three 'pivot' parties and leftist and regional parties). By 1998-99 these three pivot parties were reduced to two Indian National Congress and Bharatiya [Janata Party on account fragmentation of Janata Dal into several regional splinters in Bihar, Orissa, U.P., and Karnataka, and its decimation in Gujarat. As a result, the national party system configuration has tended to become dualistic-BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) and Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA). The two fronts have been led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Sonia Gandhi respectively. The two UPA governments were headed by Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Sonia Gandhi's nominee by virtue of her positions as the Congress party president and the UPA convener. The Prime Ministers are always the major protagonists in these confrontations in party politics and mass movements. The role of the mass media and the use of professional advertising agencies in electoral campaigns and mass mobilizations have also becoming increasingly important since the 1970s. These trends have specially intensified since the 1980s.<sup>5</sup>

In sum, the Indian federal executive has functioned predominantly in the Prime Ministerial mode so far, with the parliamentary component of the government providing the major active component than the federal one. But, with the growing regionalization of the party system, especially since 1989, the Prime Ministers have been required to operate within a political framework with increasingly active federal component. Besides, over the years, the salience of the politics of mass rallies, and occasionally of mass movements, has become more evident in the party system and lent a plebiscitary favour to the electoral politics. This strand of mass politics is more typical of the unorganized sectors of the economy and polity according to Lloyd and Susanne Rudolph, and is marked by what they call 'demand groups', distinct from pressure groups inasmuch as the former are more likely to use anomic and noninstitutional channels. The test of statesmanship lies in institutionalizing the party system and restoring the efficacy and esteem of the organs of the government within a more federalized parliamentary system. With much greater salience of regional parties in the 2014 general elections, the statesmanship of the Indian political leadership would be much in demand in the times ahead.

# **Notes and References**

- 1. See also Reba Som (1994) for a more recent discussion of the episode with some additional documentation.
- 2. See Prabhu Chawla (1988).
- 3. The term 'Nehru-Patel duumvirate' is Michael Brecher's (1966).
- 4. Sharad Pawar was shifted from the Union Defence Ministry to the Chief Ministership of Maharashtra. Tewary and Ramamurthy were highly critical of the soft stance of Prime Minister Narasimha Rao towards Mulayam Singh Yadav government in U.P., and the Jayalalitha government in Tamil Nadu, and the alleged neglect of Congress party's interest in the two states. Kumramangalam was dismissed for open criticism of Prime Minister's policies. The Prime Minister was constantly needled by Arjun Singh on the Babri Masjid demolition and on the violation of 'one man one post' principle by Narasimha Rao himself by combining Prime Minister's office with party presidentship. Following Congress debacle in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka in Assembly elections in 1994. Arjun Singh resigned from the cabinet presenting a litany of his oft-repeated charges against the top party leadership. On crossing this *Lakshmanrekha* (Rao's favourite metaphor in the context of party discipline), Rao suspended Singh from primary membership of the party. Expressions of support for Singh mainly came from Ramamurthy, Tewary, Digvijay Singh (Madhya Pradesh CM), A.K. Anthony (Kerala), and Kalpnath Rai (Eastern U.P). Singh has since rejoined Congress and was the HRD Minister in the Manmohan Singh government.
- 5. On the post-1989 party system, see M.P. Singh (1992a and b).

# **Bibliography**

- Austin, Granville, *The Indian constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation,* Bombay, Oxford University Press, 1966.
- Brecher, Michael, *Nehru's Mantle: The Politics of Succession in India,* New York, Praeger, 1966.
- Chawla, Prabhu, 'The Conspiracy that shook Rajiv Gandhi', *India Today* (New Delhi), 15th April 1988.
- Gledhill, Alan, *The Republic of India,* London, Stevens and Sons, 1951.
- Jha, Chetakar, *Indian Government and Politics: A Political Commentary,* Patna, Novelty & Co, 1960.
- Prasad, Rajendra, *President's Speech While Laying the Foundation Stone of the Building of the Indian Law Institute.* New Delhi, 28th November 1960. Indian Law Institute, typescript.
- Rudolph, Lloyd & Susanne H., *In Pursuit of Lakshmi*: *The Political Economy of the Indian State,* New Delhi: Orient Longman, 1987.
- Rao, K.V., *Parliamentary Democracy of India*: *A Critical Commentary,* Calcutta, The World Press, 1961.
- Singh, Mahendra Prasad (ed.), *Lok Sabha Elections* 1989: *Indian Politics in 1990s,* Delhi, Kalinga Publications, 1992a. 'From Centrist Predominance to Polarized Pluralism: The Post-1989 Party System in India'. *Punjab Journal of Politics,* Vol. XVI., Vos. 1-2 (1992b).
- Singh, M.P. and Rekha Saxena, *India at the Polls: Parliamentary Elections in the Federal Phase,* New Delhi, Orient Longman, 2003.

- Sharma, L.N., *The Indian Prime Minister,* Delhi, Macmillan Company of India Ltd., 1976.
- Som, Reba, 'Jawaharlal Nehru and the Hindu Code: 'A Victory of Symbol Over Substance?' in J.S. Grewal and Hugh Johnston (eds.), *The India-Canada Relationship: Exploring the Political, Economic and Cultural Dimensions,* New Delhi, Sage Publications, 1994.
- Venkataraman, R., *My Presidential Years.* New Delhi, Indus, An imprint of Harper Collins Publishers India, 1994.