# 20 The poverty of Western political theory

Concluding remarks on concepts like 'community' East and West<sup>1</sup>

Partha Chatterjee

### Community in the West

I must confess that when the debate raged in Anglo-American academic circles some 15 years ago between liberal individualists and communitarians, I found little in it to sustain my interest. It seemed to me an utterly provincial debate, repetitious and largely predictable in its arguments, playing out all over again a set of confrontations that students of Western political philosophy in the rest of the world had become familiar with for at least a hundred years. Today, I think I was perhaps a little too impatient. Had I not been so dismissive of the significance of the debate for the future advance of political theory, I might have noticed then, as I do now, that in rehearsing once more the fundamental antinomies of political theory in the West, the debate was in fact pointing to some of the ways in which practices of modern politics in non-Western countries might be theorized and perhaps even institutionalized.

I will not spend any time here going over the various arguments and counterarguments of this debate on which much has been written (Sandel 1984; Avineri and de-Shalit 1992). Let me come straight to the point that is most relevant for my discussion. The communitarian attack on liberal individualism had two prongs – one, methodological, and the other, normative. From the methodological angle, the communitarians argued that the image of the individual self as constructed by liberal theorists was false. Individuals were not, as liberals would have it, sovereign subjects, unencumbered by involuntary obligations, freely choosing between available options on the basis of their individual preferences. On the contrary, those preferences were shaped by a network of social attachments into which people were born; not all attachments were freely chosen. The very constitution of the individual self became a false abstraction if it was removed from the actual social circumstances that provided the cultural and moral resources with which individual wills were formed. Arguing from the normative angle, communitarians charged that by constructing the individual self as one unencumbered by any prior social attachments, the liberal theorist had emptied the idea of political obligation of all genuine moral content. If one's ties with the community in which one was born had no intrinsic moral value, how would the liberal individualist explain why people were so often prepared to make sacrifices for their family or kin or ethnic group or country? More generally, communitarians argued, individuals needed the community to give moral meaning to their lives; even personal autonomy was more satisfactorily achieved within the community than outside it. Above all, communitarians were unprepared to accept the liberal premise that the protection of individual freedom required that considerations of right must have priority over questions of the common good. The latter, they insisted, were at the very heart of modern participatory politics and liberal attempts to constrain and devalue them as something potentially divisive and dangerous had only laid the ground for widespread apathy among citizens and manipulative politics by powerful organized interests in most liberal democracies in the West.

The reply of the liberal individualists to the methodological criticism of the communitarians was that the latter's image of the self as one shaped by the experience of life in a community could well be true, but this was only a particular theoretical position designed to make a particular case about the common good. There were several other contending positions on the common good and so deep were the divisions between them that there could not be any general consensus in society on these questions. The liberal argument was that the only situation in which all these contending views could get an equal and fair chance to represent themselves was one in which the procedures were neutral between individuals. This was the basis for the methodological claims of liberal individualism.

On the moral plane too, the liberal individualists did not altogether reject the importance of community for individual lives. Some agreed that community was a need; others argued that the goals of community could be realized even in a liberal society. Their main concern was that by undermining the liberal system of rights and the liberal policy of neutrality on questions of the common good, communitarians were opening the door to majoritarian intolerance, the perpetuation of conservative beliefs and practices and a potentially tyrannical insistence on conformism.

One feature of this debate that particularly struck me was the narrow and impoverished concept of community that was being employed on both sides. Some communitarian theorists – Alasdair Maclntyre (1984) and Michael Sandel (1982), in particular – talked about family and neighbourhood as primary attachments that served to locate individual selves within the community. But others, both liberals and communitarians, strongly objected to placing so much value on small group attachments that flaunt the banner of 'tradition'; these solidarities, they said, were more often than not the means through which socially conservative, patriarchal and illiberal practices were maintained and transmitted. There have also been movements, in political writing as well as in activism, for community-based participatory politics in local neighbourhoods, both urban and rural, in different countries of Europe and North America. These movements have been inspired by populist or anarchist ideologies of both left and right wing varieties. One of their principal characteristics, however, has been their marginality, often a preferred marginality, to the main institutions and practices of political life in those countries.

Looking back on the liberal-communitarian debate, the only form of the community that seems to have found a large measure of approval was the political community of the nation. Michael Walzer (1983) argued that the nation-state was the one community which could give every person within a certain territory the same status as citizen and also satisfy every person's need to participate in the social distribution of goods. This gave rise to charges that by emphasizing uniform citizenship, Walzer was implicitly arguing against immigration and cultural diversity within the nation. David Miller (1989), who has recently attempted to construct a theory of socialist politics in industrially advanced Western democracies, also argued that the aspirations of community were most feasibly satisfied in the citizens' membership of a nation.

It would appear then that Western political theory does not deny the empirical fact that most individuals, even in industrially advanced liberal democracies, lead their lives within an inherited network of social attachments that could be described as community. It also recognizes to a large extent that the community fulfils a certain moral condition for an effective and satisfying sense of participation by people in a social collective. Nevertheless, there is a strong feeling that not all communities are worthy of approval in modern political life. In particular, attachments that seem to emphasize the inherited, the primordial, the parochial or the traditional are regarded by most theorists as smacking of conservative and intolerant practices and hence as inimical to the values of modern citizenship. The political community that seems to find the largest measure of approval is the modern nation that grants equality and freedom to all citizens irrespective of biological or cultural difference. But in this respect too, there is a recent spate of criticism that attacks the idea of the nation as inherently intolerant, patriarchal and suspicious of diversity and argues that the time has come to develop post-national forms of political solidarity. This is an interesting development, but I will not have the opportunity to consider it in this chapter.

#### **Community in the East**

Turning to the Idea of community in the non-Western parts of the world, one notices a similar opposition in most of the theoretical literature between community as the relic of pre-modern tradition and large, universalist and impersonal political identities as the hallmark of modernity. Guided by this modernizing propensity, much of the recent history of non-Western societies has been written as a progressivist narrative of the evolution from small, local and primordial community attachments to large secular solidarities such as that of the nation. In the era of colonial rule, colonial writings usually described these societies as a collection of backward *gemeinschaften* lacking the internal dynamic to transform themselves into modern industrial nations. Nationalist thinkers challenged the assumption of historical incapacity but agreed that their own project was to overcome the numerous community attachments and build up the nation as the most powerful and legitimate claimant for political loyalty.

There is, however, an interesting twist to the way in which this nationalist project of modernity was formulated as one that was different from Western modernity. While non-Western nationalists agreed that many of the traditional institutions and practices in their societies needed to be thoroughly changed for them to become modern, they also insisted that there were several elements in their tradition that were distinctively national, different from the Western, but nevertheless entirely consistent with the modern. Borrowing the categories of orientalist or colonial thought, they frequently posed this difference as one between Western materialism, individualism and disregard for traditional values and Eastern spiritualism, community solidarity and respect for tradition. In doing this, nationalist writers picked out the liberal individualist strand in modern social theory as the one that was most characteristic of the West and often exaggerated its features to the point of caricature. But in posing the contrast between individualism in the West and communitarian values in the East and insisting that the latter represented a better, or at least more appropriate, version of modernity for non-Western countries, nationalist thinking in effect played out the same arguments that we encountered in the liberal-communitarian debate. Indeed, one still hears these arguments as part of the official ideologies of many Asian and African states – arguments that are sometimes used with complete cynicism to defend authoritarian regimes and policies. It should be obvious, therefore, that having been born in an intellectual climate

in which these arguments were the staple of everyday conversation, I found little in the debate of the 1980s that could hold my attention.

The nationalist posing of the question as one between Western individualism and Eastern communitarianism did not provide any new theoretical answers regarding the place of community in modern political life. On the contrary, just as there were, among non-Western nationalists, advocates of community attachments as the repository of social solidarity, moral value and national tradition, so were there critics who condemned those attachments as signs of parochial backwardness, feudal and patriarchal bondage and the failure of the nation to attain the true heights of modern political association. The theoretical terms had been set by the categories of Western social theory; apparently, all that non-Western thinkers could do was fill up those categories with a different cultural content and then play out the same arguments in a different national arena.

I could give many examples from the history of modern political thinking in India, a field with which I have some familiarity. The setting up of the contrast between individualism in the West and community in the East is as old as modern Indian nationalism. When Indian travelers visited England in the late nineteenth century, they marveled at the achievements of Western science and technology and fervently wished to emulate them in their own countries. But they were also appalled by the conditions in which the poor lived in the industrial cities and were convinced that this could never happen in India where community ties would ensure that not even the poorest were reduced to such a degraded state. The contrast was present in the more basic dichotomy between Western materialism and Eastern spiritualism which was central to the construction of non-Western nationalist ideology. Western materialism was easily connected to an individualist way of life and criticized for its lack of regard for social obligations, mutual dependence and the solidarity of the social whole. This limitation of Western modernity was sought to be rectified by what was claimed to be the spiritual aspect of culture in which the Eastern traditions of community life were said to hold out many lessons for the modern world.

In the history of Indian politics, Gandhi's intervention in the 1920s produced one of the most remarkable trends in both political thinking and activism that extended the possibilities of this argument to its limits. In recent years, Ashis Nandy has reworked the Gandhian position with much ingenuity. His principal argument is that for more than a hundred years, with the advance of nationalism and the institutions of the modern state, there has occurred in countries such as India a tussle between the forces of modern individualism and those of traditional primordialities. What is highlighted in liberal economic and political theory is the bright side of modern individualism with its emphasis on the rapid creation of wealth and general prosperity and the free flowering of the individual personality. What is ignored is the underside of modern individualism – the callous impersonality and massification of market-driven societies that destroy age-old institutions of sociability and community living without putting anything in their place. Contrary to the beliefs of the modernizers, traditional community structures are not simple and inflexible; primordialities are multilayered, the self is open-ended, adjustment and compromise are ethical norms. Left to themselves, Nandy argues, these traditional community structures have more effective civilizational resources than the institutions of the modern state to resolve disputes, tolerate difference and allow for the development of a better adjusted and more accommodative personality. The crucial institutions here are those that belong to the 'little traditions'

of local community life which are the products of many centuries of coping with social change. The difficulty is that the ruling elites in non-Western countries have increasingly surrendered to the intellectual and procedural sway of the modern state and have used its capacity for the efficient deployment of force to break down the supposedly retrograde and parochial institutions of traditional community life. At this time, Nandy thinks, the odds are overwhelmingly stacked against the little traditions as the modem nation continues to be built 'on the ruins of one's civilizational selfhood' (Nandy et al. 1995: xi); the community, if not defeated, 'is certainly in decline' (ibid., 203).

The defence of community institutions in Gandhian thinking has had a fair degree of influence on movements of resistance by weak and marginalized sections of the people threatened by the onward march of modernization. In particular, its emphasis on indigenous cultural modes of collective action has encouraged the development of many innovative forms of campaign and mobilization even in the arena of modern political organizations. The mass movements of the Indian National Congress under the leadership of Gandhi in the last three decades of British colonial rule are well known examples (Rudolph and Rudolph 1967). But similar examples of political mobilization shaped by indigenous cultural forms that are quite different from those made familiar by the history of modern politics in the West can be found in many countries of Asia and Africa in both colonial and post-colonial periods. These examples constitute essential materials for a history of the domestication of the modern state in non-Western societies.

In theoretical terms, however, I am not persuaded that arguments of the Gandhian type, including their recent modified versions such as those proposed by Ashis Nandy (Nandy 1983, 1987, 1989, 1995), can make any contribution that could take the debate between individualism and communitarianism beyond the apparent impasse in which it has found itself in Western political theory. The identification of all modern institutions of state and politics with the ideology of Western individualism and their conflict with the traditional communities of the East collapses the opposition once more into the familiar terms of modernity versus traditionalism, with the exception that this time it is tradition and primordiality which are privileged over modernity. True, the Gandhian position has been able to gain considerable tactical leverage in its struggles against the depredations of the modernizing state by placing itself outside the intellectual and institutional arena of modernity. But since it refuses to acknowledge its own role as a constituent part of the politics engendered and ordered by the presence of the modern state in non-Western societies, it chooses to end every argument with a stubborn gesture of rejecting the modern state altogether. By doing this, it also refuses to make the unique experiences of modem politics in the non-Western world a constituent part of the task of rethinking modern political theory itself.

#### **Capital and community**

That is the task which, I think, faces the non-Western political theorist: to find an adequate conceptual language to describe the non-Western career of the modern state not as a distortion or lack, which is what inevitably happens in a modernization narrative, but as the history of different modernities shaped by practices and institutions that the universalist claims of Western political theory have failed to encompass. But before I come to the implications of this task. I need to dwell a little on that other lack – the incomplete universalism of modern political theory.

## 292 Partha Chatterjee

In an earlier work, I have attempted to state what I think is the main reason for the poor theorization of the concept of community in modern social thought (Chatterjee 1990, 1993: Chapter 11). Western political theory since the Enlightenment has been organised around the idea of the free and equal individual as the locus of productive energy, subjective rights and cultural creativity in modern society. The power of this abstract idea has been accompanied by the equally powerful historical process of the dismantling of feudal as well as absolutist institutions in Western Europe and the release of productive capital and productive labour on an unprecedented scale. The conceptual device of abstract liberty and equality which gave shape to the universal rights of the citizen was crucial not only for undermining precapitalist practices that restricted individual mobility and choice to traditional confines defined by birth and status but also, as the young Karl Marx noted 150 years ago, for separating the abstract domain of right from the actual domain of life in civil society (see especially Marx 1975). In legal-political theory, the rights of the citizen were unrestricted by race, religion, ethnicity or class (by the early twentieth century, the same rights would also be made available to women), but this did not mean the abolition of actual distinctions between men (and women) in civil society. Rather, the universalism of the theory of rights both presuppposed and enabled a new ordering of power relations in society based precisely on those distinctions of class, race, religion, gender, etc. At the same time, the emancipatory promise held out by the idea of universal equal rights has acted as a constant source of theoretical critique of actual civil society in the last two centuries and has propelled numerous struggles to change unequal and unjust social differences of race, religion, ethnicity, class or gender.

In these transactions between theory and actuality, community attachments have been seen as belonging to the mundane lives of actual civil societies – obdurate remnants of their precapitalist pasts or practical instruments for managing social differences on the ground. They have been regarded as objects of inquiry by empirical sociologists, not of philosophical speculation by political theorists. In the mirror of theory, community attachments have always appeared as restrictions on universal citizenship as well as on the universality of capital. To the extent that the universality of the state has been limited by the existence of nations (that is to say, the universality of the state and of capital has had to reveal itself in the existence of many nation-states and many national economies), the nation is the only form of community that has sometimes found a place, and that too a fairly marginal one, in the high theory of political obligation.

As a matter of fact, the emergence of mass democracies in the advanced industrial countries of the West in the twentieth century has produced a new distinction between the domain of theory built around the idea of the citizen and the domain of policy inhabited not by citizens but by populations. Unlike the concept of the citizen, the concept of population is wholly descriptive and empirical: it does not carry a normative burden. Populations are identifiable, classifiable and describable by empirical or behavioural criteria and are amenable to statistical techniques such as censuses and sample surveys. Unlike the concept of citizen which carries the ethical connotation of participation in the sovereignty of the state, the concept of population makes available to government functionaries a set of rationally manipulable instruments for reaching large sections of the inhabitants of a country as the targets of their 'policies' – economic policy, administrative policy, law and even political mobilization. Indeed, as Michel Foucault has pointed out, a major characteristic of the contemporary regime of power is a certain 'governmentalization of the state' (see, in particular, Foucault 1991). This regime secures legitimacy not by the participation of citizens in matters of state but by claiming to provide for the well-being of the population. Its mode of reasoning is not deliberative openness but rather an instrumental notion of costs and benefits. Its apparatus is not the republican assembly but an elaborate network of surveillance through which information is collected on every aspect of the life of the population that is to be looked after. It is not surprising that in the course of the present century, ideas of participatory citizenship that were so much a part of the Enlightenment notion of politics have fast retreated before the triumphant advance of governmental technologies that have promised to deliver more well-being to more people at less cost. Indeed, one might say that the actual political history of capital has long spilled over the normative confines of liberal political theory to go out and conquer the world through its governmental technologies.

In countries of Asia and Africa, where the career of the modem state has been foreshortened, ideas of republican citizenship have sometimes accompanied the politics of national liberation. But without exception, they have been overtaken by the developmental state which has promised to end poverty and backwardness by adopting appropriate policies of economic growth and social reform. With varying degrees of success, and in some cases with disastrous failure, the post-colonial states have deployed the latest governmental technologies to promote the well-being of their populations, often prompted and aided by international and non-governmental organizations. In adopting these technical strategies of modernization and development, communities have often entered the field of knowledge about populations – as convenient descriptive categories for classifying groups of people into suitable targets for administrative, legal, economic or electoral policy. In many cases, classificatory criteria used by colonial governmental regimes have continued into the post-colonial era, shaping the forms of both political demands and developmental policy. Thus, caste and religion in India, ethnic groups in South-east Asia and tribes in Africa have remained the dominant criteria for identifying communities among the population as objects of policy. So much so that a huge ethnographic survey recently undertaken by a government agency in India has actually identified and described a total of exactly 4,635 communities that are supposed to comprise the population of that country (Singh 1995).

I am convinced that the attempt by modern governmental technologies to classify populations into determinate and enumerable communities is a telling sign of the poverty of modern social theory. It is a commonplace in the descriptive ethnography of the non-Western world to find that the community is contextually defined, that its boundaries are fuzzy, that a particular community identification does not exhaust the various layers of selfhood of a person, that it makes little sense to ask a community member how many of them there are in the world (Kaviraj 1992). And yet, it is this contextuality and fuzziness that legal-administrative classifications and statistical techniques of enumeration must erase in order to make populations amenable to governmental policy. What is lost in the process is the richness of meaning and the strategic flexibility afforded by the cultural repertoire of a people to handle social differences. This is the loss that writers such as Ashis Nandy bemoan. As I have said before, contemporary technologies of government regard communities as so much demographic material, to be manipulated instrumentally. They are not objects of philosophical or moral inquiry. In theory – to put it, if I may, in a nutshell – capital and community are antithetical.

### 294 Partha Chatterjee

The contradiction has been highlighted in an interesting way in the recent discussions over the work of Robert Putnam and his associates on governmental performance in northern and southern Italy (Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti 1993). Two concepts have been proposed by Putnam to explain why governments seem to work better in certain regions of northern Italy. These concepts are civic community and social capital. In a civic community, according to Putnam, citizens have equal rights and obligations, participate actively in public affairs as well as in a dense network of civic associations and bear feelings of respect, trust and tolerance towards their fellow citizens. Where civic community is strongly rooted, democratic government tends to perform better. Why? Because civic community fosters the creation of social capital. Social capital, says Putnam following a suggestion by James Coleman, consists of organizational features such as trust, norms of reciprocity and networks of civic engagement that facilitate co-ordinated social action (Coleman 1990). Unlike conventional capital which is ordinarily a private good, social capital is a public good. It is not the personal property of those who benefit from it. Indeed, social capital, unlike other forms of capital, is mainly produced as a by-product of other social activities. Thus, the more intensive the network of civic associations engaged in various collective activities and the stronger the norms of reciprocity between the members of these associations, the greater the stock of social capital. Indeed, social capital is inculcated above all through socialization and civic education as well as by collective sanctions.

The examples Putnam cites of the working of social capital are, however, drawn from studies of rotating credit arrangements among peasants or urban workers in Indonesia, Nigeria and Mexico. The chief characteristic of these institutions is that they are able to create credit mechanisms in situations where conventional credit markets based on capitalist calculations cannot work. This is done, Putnam says, by pledging social capital, i.e., the stock of mutual trust built up through other social interactions and networks. Thus, Javanese peasants operate local mechanisms of mutual help based on traditional but concrete practices of interdependence in the exchange of labour, capital and goods in a variety of social activities. The urban poor in Mexico City have developed a whole array of credit associations based on reciprocity and mutual trust. These institutions are much more than merely economic; they are mechanisms that strengthen the solidarity of the community.

It seems to me that the concept of community is being invoked here to supply what does not properly belong to the concept of capital. The examples of credit associations are particularly telling. Anyone familiar with the ethnographic literature on non-Western agrarian or nomadic-pastoral societies will immediately recognize how deeply these exchange practices are implicated in the entire structure of material interaction and symbolic meaning that characterizes those societies. Such practices would be integral elements of the 'traditional' lives of those communities and, more often than not, they are likely to be destroyed by the advance of 'modern' institutions of capitalist production and exchange. When they survive, they do so on the margins of the modernized sectors, among populations and in activities that have still not been fully absorbed into the network of capital. Why are these examples that belong to the older communitarian histories of non-Western societies being mobilized here in the cause of political institutions in modern Western democracies?

My answer is that by adding 'social' to capital and making that the motive force of 'civic' community, capital is being made to do what it has always failed to do, namely, ground the social institutions of a modern capitalist economy in community. The description of the civic community as presented by Putnam is a restatement of the manifold virtues of participatory citizenship to which the communitarian theorists still sing their praises. Putnam's attempt is to show that a culture of active citizenship of this kind is empirically associated with well-functioning democratic systems. But in trying to establish this connection in theoretical terms, he is led into the same impasse where the liberal-communitarian debate has been stuck. To explain why the civic community only exists in some regions of northern Italy and not in others, Putnam has to move into a historical investigation going back to the thirteenth century. He must then say that the civic community can only function where it already exists as a part of historical tradition. On the other hand, the examples he cites of the working of social capital come from traditions that belong to places – Indonesia, Nigeria or Mexico – which not even the most starry-eved modernization theorist would name as havens of good democratic governance. In other words, while modern Western political institutions appear to need a grounding in community in order to be successful, the only contemporary examples through which community can be made sense of, have to be borrowed from non-modern and non-Western cultural traditions. It is not surprising, therefore, that Putnam's work has come under fire from critics who have found it unduly pessimistic, because it suggests that good democratic government cannot be established by institutional modernization unless civic community already exists as part of the historical tradition. He has also been criticized for being unduly romantic in his portraval of the associational life of the community. And finally, it has been pointed out that, contrary to Putnam's rosy picture, community life is usually conservative and resistant to change (Margaret Levi 1996). Traditionalism, romanticism, conservatism: all of these, you will remember, were familiar epithets used by liberal individualists against the communitarians. Evidently, we have not moved one step ahead of that debate.

#### Community and new institutions of the state

To give a sense of what political theory must cope with in countries where the history of the modern state is short, let me present some findings of a study of communityformation among poor migrants in an Indian city (Sen 1992). These migrants form a group of about 1,500 people living in a row of shanties perilously close to a railway track on the south-eastern fringes of Calcutta, not far from where I live and work. The land on which they have built their shacks belongs to the state-owned railways. They are, therefore, illegal squatters on public land. The settlement has grown here since the early 1950s. The migrants have come from different rural areas of southern Bengal and some from Bangladesh. Since they migrated from different places at different times, the settlers had no prior network of attachments given to them as a collective. The community, such as it exists here, was built from scratch.

The overwhelming reason why they have acted as a collective is the very survival of their habitation. Ever since the emergence of the settlement some 40 years ago, there have been periodic attempts by the railway authorities to evict them. These attempts have been resisted, as the settlers will proudly tell a visitor, by the concerted efforts of the community as a whole. The most common metaphor by which the settlers speak about their community is that of a family. They do not talk of the shared interests of the members of an association, but of the more compelling bonds of a shared kinship. Nevertheless, there are concrete associational forms through which the collective

functions. The most important of these is a welfare association which has its own office where it runs a small library and a medical clinic and which acts as the centre of community activity. It organizes sports and recreation activities and community festivals (including religious ones) and resolves disputes (even family disputes). It is also the body through which the community negotiates with the outside world – with government agencies such as the railways, the police or the municipal authorities, with voluntary agencies offering welfare and developmental services, with political parties and leaders.

But apart from this formal body, there are other networks of community support that are vital in securing work or financial help. Many men here work as unskilled labourers in the construction business and depend on mutual contacts to find work. Most women in the settlement work as domestic help in middle-class houses in the neighbourhood for which again mutual references are important. Caste and village networks are sometimes activated for negotiating marriages, but everyone agrees that these obligations are much less stringent here than in the village. Although all members of the settlement see themselves as poor labourers, some are less poor than others, and in fact some live as tenants in rooms let out by those who originally built the shacks. Most are unhappy with the conditions in which they live in the settlement and would love to move out. A few who have had the chance have indeed moved to other places in the city. But most stay on, struggling collectively 'as a single family' with their uncertain status as illegal squatters.

There are several conceptual problems raised by these findings. First, it is difficult to think of the collective form evolved by the settlers as a civic association. The association itself springs from a collective violation of property laws and civic regulations. The state cannot recognize the rationale for the association's existence as having the same validity as that of other economic and cultural associations of citizens pursuing more legitimate objectives. On the other hand, given the fact that this is only one of numerous other groups of population in Indian cities whose very livelihood or habitation is premised on violations of state law and civic regulations, the state cannot altogether ignore the collective claims of the association in making its own policies. Thus, state agencies such as the police or the railways and non-governmental development agencies deal with the collective body of squatters not as a body of citizens but as convenient instruments for the administration or welfare to marginal and underprivileged population groups.

Second, although the squatters accept that their occupation of public land is both illegal and contrary to the requirements of good civic life, they make a claim to a habitation and a livelihood as a matter of right. State agencies, on the other hand, are prepared to concede that this claim has a moral force that should be borne in mind when carrying out welfare policies but are strongly opposed to recognizing it as a justiciable right since, given the paucity of resources at the disposal of the state, it cannot be effectively delivered to the whole population of the country. Since places of residence and sources of livelihood are likely to remain in short supply in the foreseeable future, a general and principled recognition of the claim, as opposed to a contextual and instrumental one, say state officials, would only act as an invitation to further violations of public property and civic regulations.

Third, when the squatters demand the right to livelihood and habitation, they demand it as a collective right which they claim belongs to them as a community. This impinges upon a question that has vexed the modern state in post-colonial countries,

especially those that have been modeled on Anglo-American constitutional procedures: can citizens have rights that belong to them by virtue of their membership of particular communities, defined by ethnic, religious, linguistic or other criteria? Many states have recognized such rights for specific purposes, creating numerous legal anomalies and a theoretical defence of the practice that is hesitant and shamefaced. That equal homogeneous citizenship ought to be the norm seems to be conceded; current practices that do not conform to this norm are seen as deviations produced by colonial legacy or social backwardness or cultural exceptionalism.

Finally, the site on which our community of squatters have managed to conduct their struggle for survival is not that of a civil society of citizens dealing with a state in whose sovereignty they participate but rather that of a political society where claims and benefits can be negotiated between governmental agencies responsible for administering welfare and groups of population that count according to calculations of political efficacy. The settlers, therefore, have to pick their way through a terrain where they have no standing as citizens; rather, their strategies must exploit, on the one hand, the political obligations that governments have of looking after poor and underprivileged sections of the population and, on the other, the moral rhetoric of a community striving to build a decent social life under extremely harsh conditions. These strategies, far from being inward-looking and isolationist, actually involve making a large array of connections outside the community – with other groups in similar situations, with more privileged and influential groups with whom the community has social or economic exchanges (such as employers or middle-class neighbours), with government functionaries, with political leaders and parties, and so on. These are the means through which the community has found a place in urban political society. It is by no means a secure place, for it is entirely dependent on the community's ability to operate within a field of strategic politics. Many of the connections it has established with other forces in political society seem to resemble the supposedly traditional forms of patronage and clientilism but – and this is my claim regarding the ineluctable mod- $\text{ernity of this political experience} - \text{they are enmeshed in an entirely new set of gov-}$ ernmental practices that are the functions only of the modern state in the late twentieth century. The most significant feature of the survival strategies adopted in the last few decades by thousands of marginal groups such as the one I have talked about is the way in which the imaginative power of a traditional structure of community, including its fuzziness and capacity to invent relations of kinship, has been wedded to the modern emancipatory rhetoric of autonomy and equal rights. These strategies, I am suggesting, are not available within the liberal space of the associations of civil society transacting business with a constitutional state. For the majority of people in postcolonial societies, the normative status of the virtuous citizen will remain infinitely deferred until such time as they can be provided with the basic material and cultural prerequisites of membership of civil society. Until the arrival of that liberal millennium, however, they can only deal with a governmental system with the resources they can muster in political society. As we have seen before, community has a very tenuous place in the Western liberal theory of civil society and state; in the new political societies of the East, communities are some of the most active agents of political practice.

Undoubtedly, the possibilities of strategic politics by numerous groups representing perhaps a majority of the population in India are greatly facilitated by the existence in that country of an electoral democracy and a liberal constitutional system. However,

I have little doubt that other groups of population in other Asian and African countries also adopt strategies of a similar sort to deal with governmental systems which, in this globalized age, tend to function largely through similar procedures and with similar technologies. The most significant feature of this strategic politics of the communities is the increasingly overriding importance of notions such as autonomy and representation for which reason, I think, it is entirely valid to see in this politics a desire for democratization. The important differences of this politics with the classical history of democracy in the West are, first, that autonomy and representation are being claimed on behalf not only of individuals but of communities and, second, that these democratic claims are being made in relation to a state whose governmental functions already encompass the bulk of the population well before the latter have been socialized into the institutions of civil society. The politics of democratization must therefore be carried out not in the classical transactions between state and civil society but in the much less well-defined, legally ambiguous, contextually and strategically demarcated terrain of political society.

# Conclusion: the task for twenty-first century Indian political thought

This, I am suggesting, is one of the principal tasks of Indian political theory today: to provide a conceptual map of the emerging practices of the new political societies of the East. The normative models of Western political theory have, more often than not, only served to show the non-Western practices as backward or deviant. What we need is a different conceptualization of the subject of political practice – neither as abstract and un-encumbered individual selves nor as manipulable objects of governmental policy, but rather as concrete selves necessarily acting within multiple networks of collective obligations and solidarities to work out strategies of coping with, resisting or using to their advantage the vast array of technologies of power deployed by the modern state. In the received history of Western political theory, as I have said before, capital and community have been antithetical. When the new history of Eastern modernity gets written in the twenty-first century, perhaps capital will at last find a resting place in community. In the course of that journey, political theory as we have known it for so long will also get rewritten.

## Note

1 This is an abridged and revised version of the article that appeared as 'Community in the East', Economic and Political Weekly, 33(6), 1998.

# References

Avineri, Shlomo and de-Shalit, Avner (eds) (1992) Communitarianism and Individualism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

- Chatterjee, Partha (1990) 'A response to Taylor's Modes of civil society', Public Culture, 3(1):  $119 - 32.$ 
  - (1993) The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Coleman, James S. (1990) Foundations of Social Theory, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.