**4**

## **When the War was Over**

The war was hardly over before the blame game began and heads started to roll. No one was surprised when Vengalil Krishnan Krishna Menon was sacked even as fierce fighting raged in the heights of the Himalayas. His left-leaning views were not a problem—many Indian politicians at the time leaned more to the left than to the right—but he was also the defence minister and was therefore criticized more than anybody else in the establishment for having underestimated the Chinese threat. According to Lieutenant General Brij Mohan Kaul, Chief of General Staff of the Indian Army during the 1962 War, India's intelligence gathering system 'compared unfavourably with that of the Chinese. They had systematically introduced agents into India in general and NEFA in particular (whereas we had lagged in this respect). Their agents built up a network for reporting back to the Chinese.'<sup>1</sup>

Even so, for several years before the attack in October 1962, intelligence reports had been pouring into the headquarters of the army—and Menon's ministry—about the Chinese military build-up across the northeastern border. Menon had at least three years' notice of the impending Chinese aggression.<sup>2</sup> Or, as the Indian journalist and political commentator D.R. Mankekar wrote in his book *The Guilty Men of 1962*, 'From 1959 onwards, Chinese belligerence was mounting up, until it burst out in a crescendo in October 1962'.<sup>3</sup>

Also according to Mankekar,

Between the two schools of thought prevailing in the country at the time, Menon headed the one which played up the threat from Pakistan and underplayed the Chinese menace to India. Apart from his ideological bias in favour of China and other Communist countries, Menon had for long adopted

Pakistan as his pet enemy, having for so many years monopolised the foot-lights in the glamorous role as a valiant gladiator over the emotionally-combustible Kashmir question.4

On 10 January 1962, Menon had issued a statement at Tezpur in Assam —a frontline position during the war that broke out nine months later saying that 'the India-China border dispute was not of such a magnitude as could precipitate a war.'<sup>5</sup> In a sense, he was right. China would not go to war over the actual border dispute, but he failed to grasp the broader geopolitical and ideological context in which China decided to 'settle accounts with the Indians'.<sup>6</sup>

Menon was one of the most controversial, some would argue, divisive, figures in Nehru's cabinet. He was one of Nehru's oldest friends and closest political confidantes whose interests and actions were not always appreciated by the army. In 1959, the legendary General Kodendera Subayya Thimayya even resigned his post as the Chief of Army Staff over disagreements with Menon. Nehru, however, refused to accept Thimayya's resignation and persuaded him to stay on, which he did until his retirement in 1961.

A British observer even went as far as saying that Menon 'is felt to be one of the Nehru family (in a way no other Minister is or has been) … indeed Nehru behaved towards Menon in a manner so paternal to suggest that he saw in Menon the son he had always so much wanted to have'.<sup>7</sup> Other Westerners portrayed Menon as 'India's Rasputin', 'the Hindu Vishinsky', and 'India's Communist-cuddling roving ambassador'.<sup>8</sup>

Menon's anti-Western stance became an issue when India, during the height of the fighting in the Himalayas, saw it had no alternative but to turn to the United States for support. On 23 October, three days before Nehru made the official request for American support, the US ambassador in New Delhi, John K. Galbraith, informed India's Foreign Secretary M.J. Desai that Menon's retention of the post as defence minister represented one of the 'more serious problems' standing in the way of American military aid to India.<sup>9</sup> Hence, he had to go. After a brief interlude with Nehru in charge of the defence ministry, Yashwantrao Balwantrao Chavan, who had played a prominent role during India's freedom struggle, became the new minister.

Despite the close friendship between Nehru and Menon, it is also clear that there were serious disagreements between the two. Nehru was perhaps more sceptical of the Chinese than he was prepared to show. As early as

## 1958, he is reported to have said in a private conversation with the Indian ambassador-designate to Beijing, G. Parthasarathi,

I don't trust the Chinese one bit. They are a deceitful, opinionated, arrogant and hegemonistic lot. Eternal vigilance should be our watchword. You should send all your telegrams only to me, not to the Foreign Office. Also, do not mention a word of this instruction of mine to Krishna [Menon]. He, you and I all share a common worldview and ideological approach. However, Krishna believes, erroneously, that no Communist country can have bad relations with any Non-Aligned country like ours.10

That was Menon's most serious misjudgement. But as Kaul wrote in his book about the 1962 War and its aftermath, 'When Menon fell from grace, his many past services to India were forgotten and only his errors remembered'.<sup>11</sup> Menon was in fact one of the most brilliant minds and dynamic personalities ever to have held a ministerial post in the Indian government. He was a vegetarian, did not drink alcohol or smoke tobacco, and, as a minister, he lived in a small room in a modest bungalow full of books.

As a young man in the 1920s and 1930s, Menon had studied at University College, London, and the London School of Economics, where his professor of political science, Harold Laski, later described him as 'the best student I have ever had'.<sup>12</sup> After independence, Menon became India's first High Commissioner to the United Kingdom and, later, the Indian ambassador to the UN. He was also one of the brains behind the 1955 Bandung Conference and the creation of the Non-Aligned Movement. In fact, the very term 'non-aligned' was coined by Menon in a speech at the UN in New York in 1953 to describe countries which were allied with neither the West nor the Soviet Union. But it was hardly any secret that Menon was more sympathetic to Moscow than to Washington and London.

When he took over the Defence Ministry in 1957, he was 'like a fresh breath of air, which blew away the cobwebs and layers of dust accumulated on the portfolio over the years'.<sup>13</sup> He was arrogant and not especially liked by his co-workers, whether subordinate or senior to him in the hierarchy, but, according to Kaul, 'He was a well-read man and an encyclopaedia on practically every subject under the sun such as science, philosophy, medicine, engineering, history, politics, economics, agriculture and animals. He had an intricate knowledge of the intricacies of aircraft

engines, armoured vehicles, submarines and wireless sets. No expert felt safe in his presence.'<sup>14</sup>

Most importantly, however, he laid the foundations for India's own defence industries to make the country less dependent on imports and he restructured much of India's military command system, which under his tutelage came to be based on merit rather than seniority within the ranks. Menon was also the mastermind behind the annexation of the former Portuguese colony of Goa in 1961. In 1957, he set the record for the longest speech before the UN Security Council in New York. For eight hours, he defended India's right to sovereignty over Kashmir against Pakistan's claims to the same. Five years after he was forced out of the government, he left the ruling Congress Party and stood for several elections as an independent candidate. When he died at the age of 78 in 1974, the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi stated that 'a volcano is extinct'.<sup>15</sup>

The next head to roll was that of General Pran Nath Thapar, Chief of Army Staff. On 18 November 1962, he flew back from Tezpur to Delhi, and went straight to Nehru's residence. Thapar told the prime minister that he was willing to resign. He said it was not his fault that the Indian Army had been routed in the Himalayas, but, as a professional soldier, he assumed responsibility for the disaster. Nehru said that he would consider it and, the following day, accepted Thapar's offer. Thapar then submitted a formal request for early retirement, which was granted.

Thapar was born in the western part of Punjab, which now belongs to Pakistan, and went to school in Lahore. Like so many other army officers of his generation, he was educated at Britain's Royal Military College at Sandhurst. He saw action in Myanmar, the Middle East, and Italy during World War II and later became Director of Military Operations and Intelligence. Thapar had a distinguished military career, and became army chief in May 1961. After his resignation from the military, he served for five years as India's ambassador to Afghanistan.

Thapar's successor as the Chief of Army Staff, General Jayanto Nath Chaudhury, a Bengali, was also a Sandhurst graduate who had taken part in the 'Burma Campaign', the British counteroffensive in Myanmar to recover the colony from the Japanese. Chaudhury had served as army chief for only two days when the Chinese declared a unilateral ceasefire. It fell to him to pick up the pieces and rebuild the shattered defences along the border.

Then, the turn came for General Kaul to go. He had also had a distinguished military career and served as Chief of General Staff and General Officer Commanding in the northeast during the war. Sandhursttrained and, like all the others, brought up in the British Army tradition, he had seen combat in Myanmar during World War II and in Kashmir in 1948. In the early 1950s, he had served with General Thimayya for the United Nations Neutral Repatriation Commission. He was closer to Nehru, though, and was seen as one of very few Indian Army officers who may have had political ambitions. But the war in the northeast was his downfall.

Kaul was at the frontline when the first skirmishes occurred along the border in mid-October, but fell ill from altitude sickness up in the mountains and had to be evacuated from the area and flown to Delhi for medical treatment. He was not able to return to the northeast until 29 October and his absence from the theatre of war was seen by his detractors as a sign of cowardice. He had developed 'cold feet', they said, and was 'malingering'.<sup>16</sup> This was a highly unfair accusation, but given the political climate in India after the humiliating defeat that the Chinese had inflicted upon the Indian Army, he had no other choice but to bite the bullet and ask for an early retirement, which was duly accepted by the government on 11 December. 17

Kaul was then only 50 years old. He eventually left the service, a bitter man, on 14 May 1963 and went on a year-long, personal tour of Europe, Japan, and the US. Had it not been for the blame he shouldered for the 1962 debacle, he would most probably have been looking forward to a future not only in the military but perhaps also in politics. The legendary American broadcaster Welles Hangen even saw him as a likely candidate to succeed Nehru as prime minister. 18

There were also some unsung and largely anonymous victims of the war: India's ethnic Chinese community. The authorities suspected that they were a 'fifth column' that had provided the Chinese military with information prior to the 1962 War and they were treated as traitors to the nation. It is beyond doubt that China's Communist government had sent intelligence agents to India years before the 1962 War, but they were hardly to be found among India's own ethnic Chinese communities. India's Chinese had come during the British colonial era and most of them lived in Kolkata, where they worked as tanners, shoemakers, and carpenters, and owned restaurants, beauty parlours, shops, and other small businesses. If

they had any political sympathies, it would be with the Nationalist Chinese government in Taiwan rather than the Communists in Beijing. The Overseas Chinese Association in Kolkata openly expressed support for the Indian government throughout the conflict and even urged it not to accept Beijing's 'dirty offer' of a ceasefire in November. 19

Nevertheless, the Foreigners (Restriction of Chinese Nationals) Order, which was issued on 25 October, prohibited any person of Chinese descent from leaving his or her village for longer than 24 hours without written permission from local officials. Five days later, another order was issued making it possible to detain 'any person not of Indian origin who was at birth a citizen or subject of any country at war with, or committing external aggression against, India'.<sup>20</sup>

Then came the promulgation of the Foreigners (Internment) Order of 3 November under which the authorities in Assam and certain districts of northern West Bengal arrested all residents of Chinese descent and transported them over 1,500 kilometres away to an internment camp at Deoli in Rajasthan. By February 1963, according to the government's account, there were 2,165 ethnic Chinese at Deoli and an additional 143 detained in local jails.<sup>21</sup> Almost all of them had come from the northeastern border regions.

One of those interned was Yin Marsh, who was born in Kolkata and raised in Darjeeling, where her family ran a popular Chinese restaurant. She, her father, grandmother, and eight-year-old brother were all sent to Deoli, a harrowing experience which she has related in her book *Doing Time with Nehru: The Story of an Indian-Chinese Family*. The title alludes to the ironic coincidence that Nehru, who had authorized the mass arrests, had once been detained in Deoli by the British during India's struggle for independence.<sup>22</sup>

In the end, none of the detainees in Deoli, or any other Indian person of Chinese descent, was brought to trial for espionage or other charges.<sup>23</sup> But in 1963, 2,395 ethnic Chinese, of whom 1,665 were internees and 730 their dependents, were repatriated to China. For those who remained, the situation became untenable, and between 1962 and 1967 another 7,500 left India for Hong Kong, Taiwan, Canada, and other places, even Pakistan.<sup>24</sup> It was not until 1998 that ethnic Chinese were allowed to become naturalized Indian citizens.

The treatment of the ethnic Chinese hurt India's international image as a strong democracy and today no more than 2,000 persons remain of the once-thriving community in Kolkata, and even fewer in towns like Kalimpong and Darjeeling, and some districts of Assam where their ancestors were brought as indentured labourers by the British tea planters in the nineteenth century. In 2010, survivors of the Deoli camp went public saying that they wanted a monument to be raised at the site as 'an acknowledgement of the persecution of the ethnic Chinese' in 1962 and as a reminder of 'our loss of freedom'.<sup>25</sup>

But the main political casualty of the 1962 War was perhaps Nehru himself and his ideology of non-alignment. His health began to deteriorate after the war and, in 1963, he spent months recuperating in the highlands of Kashmir, from where his forefathers came. On 7 January 1964, Nehru suffered a stroke while attending a Congress Party meeting in Bhubaneshwar, the capital of Odisha, in the eastern part of India. He collapsed while on stage and was rushed back to New Delhi for medical treatment. The Congress Party and the government began making arrangements to relieve him of some of his duties. He was not that old, only 75. But it was clear that his stamina was now disappearing fast.

There were two issues that Nehru had wanted to settle during his lifetime: his painful conflict with his old comrade Sheikh Abdullah over the status of Jammu and Kashmir and the ongoing tribal insurgency in the Naga Hills in the northeast, 'India's Little Vietnam', as it became known. But it was the defeat in the war with China that hurt him the most. Some historians believe that what he saw as a complete betrayal of trust on the part of the Chinese contributed to his declining health and hastened his death.<sup>26</sup> As the Indian writer Ramachandra Guha has pointed out, 'The China war had weakened Nehru's position not just in India or the world but within the Congress Party itself'.<sup>27</sup>

On 27 May, Nehru suffered another heart attack and died at his home, Teen Murti House in New Delhi. His daughter Indira Gandhi was by his side as heart specialists fought, in vain, to save him. At 2 p.m. that afternoon, cabinet minister C. Subramaniam told the lower house of the parliament, the Lok Sabha, 'The prime minister is no more. The light is out.' Subramaniam was paraphrasing Nehru's own statement after the

assassination of Mahatma Gandhi on 30 January 1948: 'The light has gone out of our lives and there is darkness everywhere.'<sup>28</sup>

Although India had received some assistance from the West during the war, American and British offers of military aid came with strings attached. As the Indian historian Gyanesh Kudaisya points out in his account of Nehru's last days,

Nehru was upset…India was now forced to accept outside mediation and to open a dialogue with Pakistan over the highly contentious issue of Kashmir. Both the US and UK governments had used the Himalayan crisis to put pressure on India to make concessions to Pakistan and to settle the Kashmir issue. Nehru's carefully nurtured policy of non-alignment suffered a setback and India's stature on the global stage, which he had worked so hard to build, diminished.29

Gulzarilal Nanda, an economist and a politician from the Congress Party, took over as interim prime minister until Lal Bahadur Shastri could be sworn in on 9 June. A former freedom fighter of some renown, Shastri was far from an unknown figure in Indian politics, but he was mildmannered, soft-spoken, and lacked Nehru's charisma and stature on the world stage.

Nevertheless, he led India during the 1965 war with Pakistan, which the Indian Army won, and thus managed to restore some of the pride that had been lost in 1962. On 10 January 1966, a peace deal was signed in Tashkent in Uzbekistan, then a part of the Soviet Union. The Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin moderated the meeting between Shastri and Pakistan's President Muhammed Ayub Khan. A day later, Shastri died from a sudden heart attack, which has led to all kinds of conspiracy theories. Was he poisoned and, if so, by whom? But there was never any evidence to confirm those speculations and Shastri's body was flown back to India to be cremated there.

Gulzarilal Nanda had to step in again and served as the acting head of the government until 24 January, when India got another new prime minister who would raise the country's profile in the region and across the world: Nehru's then 48-year-old daughter Indira Gandhi. Relations with Washington would become strained because of her criticism of the American bombing of Vietnam. She also steered India into a close friendship with the Soviet Union, which, from India's point of view, would be a more trustworthy ally than Western nations.

During the 1962 War, Ayub Khan had protested vehemently against American and British military aid to India, arguing that it would 'enlarge and prolong the conflict', and that the weapons would be used against Pakistan over the Kashmir dispute.<sup>30</sup> And the West could not afford to antagonize Pakistan, a member of the pro-Western Southeast Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO) as well as the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO).<sup>31</sup>

Pakistan was in the curious position of being a member of two Westernorganized defence pacts while remaining a close ally of China. And India's alliance with the Soviet Union would inevitably accelerate the country's progression along the serious collision course it was already on with China. It is clear that India's decision makers felt the country needed a strong and decisive prime minister who could lead them through the extremely tangled situation in which the region was embroiled during these turbulent years. Furthermore, the choice of Indira Gandhi would ensure continuity. She was Nehru's daughter and, although not a relative, she had the same surname as the Mahatma.

In China, meanwhile, Mao Zedong was rapidly consolidating his grip on power. The 1959 Lushan Conference that had led to the purge of some of Mao's most prominent rivals and enemies was followed by intrigues and manoeuvrings which lasted well into 1962. If Mao was depressed in the beginning of 1962, as his physician Li Zhisui wrote in his book about the Chairman, it was not until a conference at the seaside resort town of Beidaihe in August of that year that 'the banner of militant Marxism-Leninism', in the words of Roderick MacFarquhar, could once again be 'unfurled over Beijing'.<sup>32</sup> Mao blamed the disastrous consequences of his Great Leap Forward on Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai, Deng Xiaoping, Chen Yun, and other so-called 'moderates' within the party. 'We (meaning himself) had been talking about making agriculture the foundation, but this had not actually been practised by his [Mao's] colleagues…in the four years from 1959 to 1962.'<sup>33</sup>

MacFarquhar points out that the last time a dispute over economic policy had been transmuted into political struggle was at the 1959 Lushan Conference, 'as Mao reminded them, and then it had resulted in the purge of four senior officials'.<sup>34</sup> The same pattern was repeated at the 1962 Beidaihe meeting. The Canadian professor Lorenz M. Lüthi argues that

Mao then 'staged a brilliant comeback in daily policy making. He used this momentum to stamp his mark on Chinese foreign relations.'<sup>35</sup> This meant virulent condemnation of his new enemies, the 'Soviet revisionists', and getting ready for a war against India, although contingency plans for military action would have been discussed only among Mao's inner circle of trusted followers and behind closed doors and not during the actual conference. In other words, part of the plan was to sideline and marginalize what was left of the opposition to Mao within the Party and the state apparatus.<sup>36</sup> A major build-up of war materiel and an increase in the number of Chinese troops along the border could be noticed only a few days after the Beidaihe conference was concluded on 27 August.<sup>37</sup>

In November, as war was raging in the Himalayas, an article in the *Zhōngguó Qīngnián Bào* (*China Youth Daily*, the official newspaper of the Communist Youth League of China), stated that, 'the past ten years of practice in socialist construction … have proven the unqualified correctness of Mao Tse-tung [Zedong]'.<sup>38</sup> Even more striking was an article in the 8 January 1963 issue of the newspaper. Mao was 'at all times standing higher and seeing farther than anyone else…the way Chairman Mao Zedong looks at problems must be like standing on top of a skyscraper looking down on the streets and roads below. Each path, turn and curve comes into his views. How can it be possible for him to lose direction?'<sup>39</sup>

At the same time, the anti-Soviet rhetoric reached a crescendo. According to a declassified CIA document,

In late September and early October [1962] Chinese Communist spokesmen were asserting that the CPSU [the Communist Party of the Soviet Union] had "given up" leadership of the world revolution … [and] that this leadership had passed by default from Moscow and Khrushchev to Peiping [Beijing] and Mao Tse-tung [Zedong], and that although seemingly isolated, Communist China was now supported by a majority of people in the socialist camp and would pursue thereafter "uncompromising" struggle with the USSR.40

The CIA document goes on to refer to an editorial in the *People's Daily* of 15 November, which stated that Beijing claimed 'supreme doctrinal authority within the international Communist movement'<sup>41</sup> . The editorial concluded with a call for 'all Marxist-Leninists to resolutely carry on the struggle against modern revisionism to the end'.42 The victory over India in the 1962 War had shown that China possessed enough military muscle to

inflict a crushing defeat on another major Asian power. It had also, as intended, deprived India of its role as a major voice for the newly independent countries in Asia and Africa.

It was time for Mao and his trusted lieutenants, among them his wife Jiang Qing, Defence Minister Lin Biao, and the spymaster Kang Sheng to begin to purge the Party—and to assert China's role as the leader of not only the international Communist movement but also the entire Third World. But first, China needed a nuclear bomb.

China's interest in nuclear weapons began during the Korean War, when they learned that the United States was contemplating the use of atomic bombs to halt the advance of Chinese so-called volunteers, who came streaming down the peninsula in human waves. China had already in the early 1950s developed its own production of small arms, rockets, and artillery with technology imported from the Soviet Union and with the help of Soviet technicians. Then, in January 1955, Mao called a meeting of the Central Committee of the CCP to discuss starting a nuclear weapons programme. The following year, PLA Marshal Nie Rongzhen worked with the Chinese Academy of Sciences to establish a Nuclear Research Institute at an undisclosed location and the programme began to acquire content and direction.<sup>43</sup> Between 1955 and 1958, the Soviet Union and China signed six accords related to the development of nuclear science, industry, and weapons.<sup>44</sup>

In 1957, Marshal Nie Rongzhen travelled to Moscow to sign one of those treaties by which the Soviet Union pledged to provide aid in nuclear research, missile development, and aviation technology. That pledge included a prototype atomic bomb and related missile technology. <sup>45</sup> But a split between the Soviet Union and China was already developing, although it would not become public until 1961. Nie, however, was convinced that China would be able to progress with its nuclear programme even without Soviet assistance.

In 1958–60, when millions of people were starving to death throughout China, another high-ranking PLA officer, Chen Shiqu, moved 40,000 special engineering troops to Lop Nur, a former salt lake in the deserts of Xinjiang, to commence the construction of a nuclear testing site. Then, on 16 July 1960, the Soviet government scrapped 600 contracts it had signed with China and informed the government in Beijing of its decision to

withdraw all its 1,390 experts in China between 28 July and 1 September. 46 But that did not deter the leadership in Beijing from going ahead with their nuclear programme, now entirely staffed with Chinese technicians and paid for with allocations from the state's military budget. On 16 October 1964, China conducted its first nuclear test. A second test was carried out on 14 May 1965, followed by a third on 9 May 1966. China had now established itself as a nuclear power.

Regarding Mao's own attitude to nuclear weapons, it was long speculated whether he had really said in his famous 'US imperialism is a paper tiger' speech before a meeting with the world's Communist parties in Moscow in November 1957 that, 'I'm not afraid of nuclear war. There are 2.7 billion people in the world; it doesn't matter if some are killed. China has a population of 600 million; even if half of them are killed, there are still 300 million people left. I'm not afraid of anyone.'<sup>47</sup> But in March 2013, the Chinese government's documentary TV channel, CCTV-9, ran an 18-part series on declassified Sino-Russian foreign affairs files dating back to the time Mao was in power. One episode showed him saying exactly that.<sup>48</sup>

Until then, many people—especially Chinese—had refused to believe that the leader of China could have been that callous. But the Chairman himself had actually refused to deny it when Edgar Snow, the American author of the famous book *Red Star Over China*, asked him about it in an 1965 interview. 'Mao would not deny anything he had said, nor did he wish me to deny for him the so-called rumour' (about China's millions' power of survival in a nuclear war).<sup>49</sup>

In the same month as the third nuclear test was conducted, May 1966, Mao decided the time was ripe to launch his Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution to purge the Party and the State of all 'counterrevolutionaries, revisionists and capitalist roaders'.<sup>50</sup> Already in December 1965, General Luo Ruiqing, a PLA veteran and its joint chief of staff, had been dismissed from his post for his reluctance to follow Mao's idea of emphasizing ideological training within the army, a line ardently followed by Mao and Defence Minister Lin Biao. Luo was lumped together with the CCP chief of Beijing, Peng Zhen, Propaganda Department Director Lu Dingyi, and senior CCP Central Committee member Yang Shangkun as part of an 'anti-Party clique'.

The country was thrown into turmoil as purges, mass meetings, and even killings of real and imaginary opponents to Mao became daily occurrences. Youthful and militant Red Guards roamed the countryside, terrorizing the population and destroying temples and anything else that could remind the people of pre-revolutionary days. Among those in a higher position to be humiliated in public and purged was Liu Shaoqi, once the second-most powerful man in the country after Mao. Deng Xiaoping was also targeted, purged, and sent to work as a regular worker at a tractor factory in Jiangxi province. His son, Deng Pufang, was tortured and thrown out of a window of a four-storey building. He became a paraplegic, bound for life to a wheelchair.

One of the masterminds behind the purges was Kang Sheng, the psychopathic opium addict who had played an important role in the CCP's intelligence network since the 1930s. Sidney Rittenberg, an American who was close to Mao and the entire leadership, described him as 'dark, devious and sinister'.<sup>51</sup> Calling India's Menon a 'Rasputin' was a clear exaggeration, but Kang Sheng certainly did live up to that epithet. According to Rittenberg, Kang Sheng was 'always holding something back, besides bragging about his ability to spot foreign agents…[he] carried himself as if he was wearing an invisible monocle surveying others with a superior and suspicious gaze.'<sup>52</sup>

Even the supposed 'moderate' Zhou Enlai, who Nehru once had trusted, was part of the leadership that unleashed a reign of terror in China. He made sure that the state machinery was functioning reasonably well during the years of upheaval. But he kept on the defensive, guarding his political backside, being challenged by Mao's vicious wife Jiang Qing. To make sure he was on the winning side during the Cultural Revolution, Zhou signed off on the documents used to expel Liu Shaoqi from the CCP in October 1968.<sup>53</sup> Rather than being an astute statesman, Zhou was the ultimate manipulator and opportunist.

Despite the few years of uncertainty after the death of Nehru, Indian politics remained, by comparison, a lot calmer than China's, though the 1962 War led India to also expand, modernize, and rearm all branches of its armed forces. For the defence of the north, new mountain divisions were formed and, according to Eric S. Margolis, 'Accurate surveys were begun of the hitherto unchartered Himalayan and Ladakh border regions. Disputed Kashmir suddenly assumed heightened strategic importance as

Delhi worried that China had designs on the mountain state, or that it might join Pakistan in a coordinated assault on northern India.'<sup>54</sup>

The 1962 Sino-Indian War and the 1965 war with Pakistan, prompted India to improve its intelligence-gathering capabilities. The solution came in September 1968, when Indira Gandhi's government set up a new external spy agency, the Research and Analysis Wing, R&AW, better known to its operatives as simply 'RAW'. Its first head was Rameshwar Nath Kao, who had served under Bhola Nath Mullik in the Intelligence Bureau. His official designation was Secretary (Research) in the prime minister's cabinet secretariat, of which RAW was a 'wing'. He became India's first true spymaster and the organization he headed grew over the years to become one of the world's largest and most active intelligence agencies.

India's regular military forces were also strengthened. After the 1962 War, India ordered 400 T-54 medium tanks from the Soviet Union, which would be of no use in the mountains, but could be deployed against Pakistan. India's request to buy F-104 interceptor aircraft from the USA fell through because Washington did not want to antagonize its ally, Pakistan. But a factory to produce the Soviet's MiG-21 was already being planned. Now, in 1963, the first squadron of MiG-21Fs entered service in the Indian Air Force.<sup>55</sup> While Pakistan was still seen as the immediate threat, 'India's leaders were becoming convinced that China represented a long-term territorial rival. In 1963, India began secret development of a nuclear weapons program.'<sup>56</sup>

India's own defence industries, which had been established at the initiative of Menon when he was India's defence minister in the 1950s, were upgraded with the help of technical expertise mainly from the Soviet Union. The old garrison town of Bangalore, now Bengaluru, in the south, far away from India's troubled borders, was chosen as the site for the development of an indigenous electronics industry in the 1950s. Large research laboratories such as the National Aeronautical Laboratory and the Electronic Research and Development Establishment were established in Bangalore. Bharat Electronics Limited was established in the city in 1954 and became India's premier defence electronics company and it grew to be so in the 1960s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited was formed on 1 October 1964, having grown out of Hindustan Aircraft, a company established in

1940. What has today become 'India's Silicon Valley' began as a centre for the development of advanced defence material.

While the mainstream Indian economy was growing at an almost painfully slow rate in the 1960s and 1970s, the new friendship with the Soviet Union enabled the country to maintain a fairly advanced defence establishment. In August 1971, India and the Soviet Union concluded a Treaty for Peace, Friendship, and Cooperation, signed by India's minister of External Affairs, Swaran Singh, and his Soviet counterpart Andrei Gromyko. The Communist Soviet Union succeeded where imperial Russia had failed: to expand its sphere of influence down to the Indian subcontinent.

But there was a problem. In line with other socialist and some developing countries, India received from the Soviet Union preferential payment terms and could exchange Indian-made goods for military equipment and components. At the same time, defence analysts argue that 'the oversupply of Soviet equipment reduced India's incentive to develop its own weapons or seek other sources, alienating Western suppliers. India was prevented from selling its Soviet-originating but Indian-made arms on the international market, thus depriving India of a valuable source of military revenue.'<sup>57</sup>

It was not hard for India to come to the conclusion that the Soviet Union was an unreliable ally, thus strengthening the country's determination to develop its own armaments, including weapons of mass destruction. India's nuclear industry was actually not new. Research into using nuclear power for peaceful purposes began at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research as early as 1944 under the renowned scientists Homi Jehangir Bhabha and Raja Ramanna. But it was not until after the 1962 War that the research was turned to the development of India's military arsenal. With plutonium produced in a reactor supplied by Canada, India managed to produce a nuclear device, which was tested on 18 May 1974 at the Pokhran Test Range in Rajasthan. It was supposed to be a 'peaceful nuclear explosion', but there was now no doubt that India too, 10 years after China's first test, possessed a nuclear weapons capability.

Ramanna, who is considered the father of India's nuclear programme, had been instrumental in setting up the facility at Pokhran, and in February of that year he is reported to have said, 'We are ready to tickle the dragon's tail'.<sup>58</sup> There could be no doubt as to who the 'dragon' was. After the

successful explosion, a scientist at the site rang Prime Minister Indira Gandhi conveying a brief message, 'Madam, the Buddha has finally smiled'.<sup>59</sup> The test was set to coincide with the birthday of the Lord Buddha, and, thus, the operation had been codenamed the Smiling Buddha.<sup>60</sup>

India no longer had any reason to fear another Chinese attack and China's strategy after 1962 was, anyway, not to confront India directly. It would instead be a proxy war. The first anti-government force in India to receive support from China was the Naga rebel movement on the eastern border with Myanmar. Mowu Gwizan, a staunch Christian like most other Nagas, may have been surprised when, in June 1962, his Pakistani hosts in Karachi introduced him to a representative of Communist China promising support. There was a limit to how much aid and assistance Pakistan could provide to the Naga rebels without provoking a backlash from India. China had no such fears or qualms and even if the Nagas were Christians, they could prove to be a useful force in the efforts to destabilize India.

Back in the Naga Hills, Mowu discussed the offer with the other leaders of the Naga rebel army, and decided to take it up. Two men were selected to lead the first Naga trek to China, Thinoselie Medom Keyho, a veteran of the Naga struggle who had joined the Naga National Council (NNC) and its rebel army in the 1950s, and the much younger Thuingaleng Muivah, a Naga from Manipur who, despite his belief in Christianity, was inspired by Marxist ideology. In January 1967, after a four-month trek through northern Myanmar, they were well received at the Chinese border and, after some clarifications about their identity had been made, they were taken to the Chinese city of Tengchong in Yunnan. Thinoselie and Muivah were then flown to Beijing where they were lodged in the Beijing Hotel, while the 130 men who had followed them to China were stationed in a newly built training camp near Tengchong. In November 1967, Thinoselie and all the soldiers trekked back to India with new automatic rifles, machine guns, and rocket launchers. Muivah stayed behind in Beijing.<sup>61</sup>

A second contingent of Naga rebels reached China in March 1968, led by Isak Chishi Swu from the political leadership of the NNC and Mowu from the army. Four more groups also made it to China, bringing the total number of Naga rebels who underwent training in Yunnan to more than 700. Fierce battles were fought in the Naga Hills between the Indian Army and the Naga rebels. It was obvious that the Chinese had been much more

generous than the Pakistanis, who had given them only old rifles and a limited number of machine guns.

Chinese support for the NNC is remarkable because of the Nagas' almost fanatical belief in Christianity. They were converted by Western missionaries in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and, although they arrived in China during the height of the Cultural Revolution, they were allowed to pray and sing hymns in their training camps in Yunnan. China wanted them to fight and destabilize India, and that was more important than their religious beliefs.

After the Nagas came other northeastern rebels. Mizo tribesmen, from another predominantly Christian tribe who fought for a separate state, trekked through northern Myanmar to China in the 1970s. The first group of 38 men arrived in China in 1973 and received military training at Kotong military post opposite Panwa Pass on the Yunnan frontier with Myanmar's Kachin State. A second batch of 109 Mizo rebels reached China in August 1975 and was trained at Meng Hai in southern Yunnan. The leader of the Mizo rebels, Laldenga, his foreign secretary Lalmingthanga, and a few others also visited China, including Beijing. But, they went by air from East Pakistan and did not trek through the Myanmar jungle.<sup>62</sup> But it was clear that China and Pakistan were colluding in their support for India's tribal revolutionaries. Laldenga's first visit to China in June 1968 was organized through the Chinese Consulate in Dhaka, and the Chinese had already then promised him military support. In September 1970, Laldenga was back in China where he met Premier Zhou Enlai and the promise of support was repeated.<sup>63</sup>

In April 1976, a smaller group of Manipuri revolutionaries made it via Nepal to Tibet, where they were trained by commanders of China's security forces. Like the Nagas, the Mizo rebels were also provided with arms by the Chinese, while the Manipuris received ideological training and some military instruction at a PLA camp near Lhasa.<sup>64</sup> After their return to Manipur, the militants unleashed a reign of terror in the Imphal Valley, killing Indian security personnel as well as suspected 'traitors' to its cause. Banks were looted and weapons snatched from police stations and other outposts. Evidently inspired by the regular Chinese military, the name of the new rebel group was the People's Liberation Army. In 1979, it formed a political wing called the Revolutionary People's Front, led by

Nameirakpam Bisheswar Singh, one of the militants who underwent training in Lhasa in 1976.

According to a classified Chinese document entitled 'China Should Become the Arsenal for World Revolution' and dated 7 July 1967, Mao declaimed, 'The present situation is excellent. Nagaland in India is fighting against the Congress Party with armed struggle.'<sup>65</sup> Mao went on to stress the importance of the Communist Party of Burma (CPB). 'The geographic conditions in Burma are better than those of Vietnam, with more room to manoeuvre … it is all better if the Burmese government chooses to oppose us; I hope it will sever normal relations with us. In that case, we can more openly support the Burmese Communist Party.'<sup>66</sup>

In the same speech, Mao went on to say, 'China is not only the centre of world revolution, it must also be the centre of world revolution militarily and technically. When we give weapons, they will be Chinese weapons engraved with Chinese characters (except those to certain specific areas). We will support them openly; and China must become the arsenal for world revolution.'<sup>67</sup> India, naturally, was not pleased. India protested and pictures of weapons bearing Chinese markings that had been seized from Naga rebels were shown at the United Nations in New York. But China did not care, it was the centre of world revolution and India had become the enemy.

In 1960, Zhou Enlai had said in a speech before China's legislature, the National People's Congress, that, 'we place ardent hopes in friendly relations between China and India…we deeply believe that the traditional friendship between the people's of China and India will shine forth brilliantly to the end'.<sup>68</sup> However, in an internal party report from December 1971, he was more explicit and perhaps more honest and forthcoming when it came to defining his views on China's relations with India.

While the Soviet revisionists back India, we support Pakistan. When we say support Pakistan, we mean support her in resisting the aggression of India. But there are mistakes in the domestic policy of Pakistan, the massacres in Eastern Pakistan and the lack of national policy. India is the head of the reactionaries among the imperialists, revisionists and reactionaries. For all this, we still want to restore normal diplomatic relations with her at an opportune moment, for the purpose of furthering the people's revolution in India.69

That 'people's revolution', the Chinese believed, was going to be led by a political movement which at that time was sweeping across parts of the Indian countryside: the Naxalites, or, as they were officially called, the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) (CPI(ML)). At least, that was the intention until the situation got out of hand and the 'Indian comrades' were unable to live up to the expectations of the Chinese leadership.

The Communist Party of India (CPI), one of the biggest and best organized communist parties in Asia, had split after the 1962 War. The CPI's official line was to condemn the Chinese attack, as most of its leaders were pro-Moscow at a time when the international communist movement was split between those who supported the Soviet Union and a minority that sided with China. In 1964, the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI (M)]) was formed. Without being entirely in favour of China's ideological line, it saw the 1962 War as a conflict between a socialist and a capitalist state.

But there was a group of Indian Communists who were openly pro-China and inspired by Mao's revolutionary ideology. They were led by Charu Mazumdar and Kanu Sanyal, both active in the plains below Darjeeling in northern West Bengal, where a peasant uprising broke out in May 1967. Mazumdar and Sanyal had for some time been preparing the tea garden workers and poor peasants in the area for armed revolution. The spark came when a sharecropper in a village called Naxalbari was evicted by a landlord without any legal basis. When he protested, he was beaten by the landlord's thugs and, in response, thousands of villagers armed with bows, arrows, and spears took over land holdings and granaries, basically running their and the neighbouring villages as a 'liberated' commune.

Between 15,000 and 20,000 peasants and workers participated in the movement which, by the end of May, reached the level of an armed uprising. The police were sent in and clashed with the peasants, who fought back with firearms and ammunition they had snatched from the landowners. The Chinese were quick to express their full support for the revolt. On 5 July 1967, the official newspaper, *People's Daily* ran an editorial titled 'Spring Thunder Over India',

A peal of spring thunder has crashed over the land of India. Revolutionary peasants in the Darjeeling area have risen in rebellion. Under the leadership of a revolutionary group of the Indian Communist Party, a red area of revolutionary armed struggle has been established in India…no matter how well the imperialists, Indian reactionaries and the modern revisionists cooperate in their sabotage and

suppression, the torch of armed struggle lighted by the revolutionaries of the Indian Communist Party will not be put out. 'A single spark can start a prairie fire.' The spark in Darjeeling will certainly set the vast expanses of India ablaze.70

That same month, paramilitary forces were deployed in the Naxalbari area. Activists were beaten or arrested, or both. Some, like Mazumdar, escaped and went underground. The revolt lasted only a few months, but it had a far-reaching impact on the political scene in many of India's rural areas, as Sumanta Banerjee wrote in his classic *In the Wake of Naxalbari*. 'It helped expose the political failure of the parliamentary Leftists in power and unrolled a process of rethinking among the Communist ranks.'<sup>71</sup>

While the CPI(M), which was part of the United Front government that ruled West Bengal at the time, condemned the uprising, radicals led by Sanyal, who stayed behind in the area, met to discuss their future course of action. In September, probably encouraged by the editorial in the *People's Daily*, they decided to contact the Chinese through their diplomatic mission in Dhaka, East Pakistan. Sanyal crossed the border to East Pakistan, but did not make it to Dhaka.<sup>72</sup>

Back in northern West Bengal, they met again and assembled a fourman team headed by Sanyal which was to reach China via Nepal. The Nepalese border was only a few kilometres away from Naxalbari and the team had no problem going to Kathmandu by public bus. The Chinese Embassy in Kathmandu, the capital of Nepal, were at first hesitant to promise them anything, but after the staff contacted their superiors in Beijing, the ambassador himself informed them that they were welcome to China. They were even allowed to stay at the embassy until arrangements could be made.

Sanyal and his team were transported to the Chinese border by an embassy official, but had to walk the final stretch of the journey over the hills to avoid the immigration checkpoints. On the other side, PLA soldiers helped them get to a military camp near Lhasa. On 30 September, they went by a civilian flight to Beijing. Lodged at the Beijing Hotel, where the Nagas had also been staying, they were taken to see a PLA officer. According to Sanyal, 'Some 16 or 17 PLA commanders participated in the marathon meeting that lasted for well over two hours. They learnt about the happenings in Naxalbari at length; they wanted to know how it all began, how many weapons we had and what we planned to do next.'<sup>73</sup>

Over the next few weeks, the four Indian Maoists were introduced to Mao himself and they were then sent for military training. They learnt how use automatic rifles, machine guns, and hand grenades, and to plant mines and make explosive devices. Chinese-Hindi interpreters were at hand and they were also taught 'Mao Zedong thought' and how to apply it to Indian conditions. They were also told not to approach the Chinese Embassy in Kathmandu again but to establish a route through other parts of Nepal and Bhutan for what was described as 'future cooperation', which would include arms supplies.<sup>74</sup> The Chinese assured them that they would cover all the costs of setting up secret camps along the suggested route.

In mid-December, after spending three months in China, Sanyal and his team were driven back to Kathmandu in a Chinese army vehicle. They then returned to India by bus and, once on the other side of the border, caught a train for New Jalpaiguri near Siliguri in northern West Bengal.

It seemed like a promising beginning for a people's revolution in India and, throughout 1968, smaller, Naxalbari-type struggles erupted in different parts of India, especially in Srikalulam in Andhra Pradesh, an old revolutionary stronghold. On 22 April 1969, the 100th anniversary of the birth of Vladimir Lenin, the CPI (ML) was formed. The party's formation was announced nine days later by Sanyal at a massive May Day rally in the Kolkata Maidan. Mazumdar became its first general secretary. India now had its own pro-Chinese Communist party, different from both the CPI and the CPI(M) and much more radical and militant. Radio Beijing beamed more revolutionary bulletins from India and extracts from articles written by Mazumdar.

During the height of its struggle in 1969–70, CPI(ML) attracted a motley crew of supporters ranging from Bengali intellectuals to rural activists, and outright goons drawn from Kolkata's lumpenproletariat. Hundreds of 'class enemies' were 'annihilated' by the Naxalites, which meant that they were shot or bludgeoned to death. The victims of 'the Red Terror' included landlords, money lenders, policemen, and corrupt local officials, or just anyone who was opposed to the CPI(ML). Mazumdar, who was in hiding in Kolkata, was the driving force behind the 'left adventurist' line, whereas Sanyal remained faithful to his followers in the rural areas of northern West Bengal and stayed there.

On 9 April 1970, Radio Beijing announced, 'at present, the flames of peasants' armed struggle have spread to West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,

Punjab, Himachal, Orissa, Assam and Tripura, and particularly Andhra Pradesh'.<sup>75</sup> Later that year, the CPI (ML) sent Sourin Bose, a senior cadre, to Beijing where he held talks with Zhou Enlai and Kang Sheng. By that time, Chinese enthusiasm for the Indian revolutionaries was beginning to wane. Kang Sheng reportedly told Bose that the CCP could not understand the meaning of the 'Naxalite' concept of 'annihilation', which he likened to the methods used in China by 'left adventurists' after the defeat of the Communists there in 1927. Mazumdar had also coined a phrase which Zhou criticized: *Chiner Chairman Aamader Chairman* (China's Chairman is Our Chairman).<sup>76</sup>

The Naxalites, as the Indian Maoists came to be known after the village where the 1967 rebellion occurred, were too radical even for the rabid ideologue and diehard Mao-supporter, Kang. Zhou told Bose that, 'we don't deny that Chairman [Mao] is [an] international authority…[but] to regard a leader of one country as the leader of another party is against the sentiment of the nation; it is difficult for the working class to accept it.'<sup>77</sup>

Bose flew back to Kolkata via London, bringing with him the depressing news from Beijing. At a meeting in Kolkata on 8 December 1970, the leaders of the CPI(ML) agreed not to disclose to their followers that the Chinese were critical of their polices, and that the party would get no support, moral, material, or otherwise, from China.<sup>78</sup>

It is quite possible that the Naxalites could have developed their movement into a more powerful force if Sanyal had managed to control it, and then Chinese aid would also most probably have been forthcoming. But before long, factionalism tore their tiny groups apart and the Chinese decided to disregard them when it became clear that they were not going to become a viable force in Indian politics.

On 16 July 1972, Mazumdar was betrayed by one of his comrades and captured at his hideout in Kolkata. Twelve days later, he died in police custody. No Chinese aid ever reached the CPI (ML). Instead, the Chinese continued to support Naga and Mizo rebels in the northeast. They seemed to be more trustworthy than the unruly Indian Maoists.

While the Chinese were determined to find and support proxies who could fight the war for them in India, the Indians had changed their attitude towards the Tibetan refugees—and the Tibetan resistance—after the 1962 War. Although relations between India and the Soviet Union became close

and cordial in the 1960s, this did not prevent India's security services from cooperating with the CIA, which had provided clandestine support for the Tibetan resistance since the 1950s. After the 1962 War, the Tibetan guerrillas who had been trained at Camp Hale in Colorado were transferred to India where, according to the Tibetan historian Tsering Shakya, 'the Indians had established a secret Tibetan Army base near Dehra Dun at Chakrata, more commonly known to the Tibetans as Unit Twenty-Two'.<sup>79</sup> More than 12,000 Tibetans were brought to Chakrata, where many of them underwent military training. The Dalai Lama's government in exile at McLeodganj in the hills above Dharamsala provided leadership for the struggle, which, however, in the end amounted to more of an intelligence gathering expedition than an outright armed struggle against the Chinese occupation of Tibet.

The actual forward base for the resistance was not at the relatively shortlived camp in India but in Mustang, in a remote corner of Tibet, adjacent to the frontier. Mustang, ruled by a local feudal lord and sometimes described as a 'semi-independent Tibetan kingdom' inside Nepal, was surrounded on three sides by Chinese-occupied Tibet. It was sufficiently difficult to access by land, making it easy for the CIA to keep their operations secret. Soldiers from the regular Royal Nepalese Army also guarded all the mountain trails and passes leading into the area. Weapons and other supplies were airdropped from C-130 transport planes that had flown from Okinawa and through the Indian air space, and had been refuelled at Takhli airbase in Thailand. Before the 1962 War, the American planes dropping supplies and getting guerrillas in and out of Tibet had used obscure airfields in East Pakistan and then flown only across the narrow corridor of Indian territory between Nepal and Bhutan.

From a military point of view, though, Mustang was a bad choice for a rebel base. There were almost no villages on the barren and desolate Tibetan side of the border where the rebels could get food and other supplies, or organize an uprising against the Chinese. Then, in January 1972, Nepal got a new king, Birendra Bir Bikram Shah, who wanted to improve relations with China. In December 1973, he visited Beijing where the Chinese expressed their displeasure over the Tibetan bases in his country. In order to maintain a more independent stance towards India, Nepal's powerful southern neighbour, Birendra was willing to listen. The Chinese reciprocated by giving generous aid to Nepal.

In May 1974, a trade agreement was signed in Kathmandu between the Nepalese and the Chinese governments and, in July, the Nepalese military moved against the Tibetan camps in Mustang. They were disarmed without much resistance and their morale vanished almost completely after listening to a taped message from the Dalai Lama. He urged them, probably on instructions from the Americans, to lay down their arms and leave.

American support for the Tibetan resistance had come to an end after two historic visits to China by American dignitaries, that of the Secretary of State Henry Kissinger in July 1971 and of President Richard Nixon in February 1972. Despite their ideological differences, Washington and Beijing shared a common interest in countering the Soviet Union. National security policies were apparently more important than ideology, and the Tibetan resistance had to be sacrificed. China had agreed to normalize relations with the USA provided that it, among other things, stop all assistance to the Tibetans.

In India, China continued its support for ethnic rebel movements in the northeast until the death of Mao in September 1976 and the rise of the less ideologically rigid Deng Xiaoping. Deng had been branded a 'capitalist roader' during the Cultural Revolution—and that turned out to be correct. He introduced a number of free-market reforms, and China's economy began to grow at a breathtaking pace.

In Mizoram, a peace accord between the rebels and the Government of India was agreed upon in June 1986, paving the way for the union territory to become a full-fledged state within the Indian Union. Nagaland had achieved the same status in 1963, but disturbances continued there as well as in Manipur. In the late 1970s, serious disagreements over the validity of the armed struggle erupted within the old NNC, which led to the formation of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN) in January 1980. Its main theoretician was Muivah, who had returned from China with a curious ideological blend of evangelical Christianity and revolutionary Maoism. But, since Muivah came from Manipur and not Nagaland, the official chairman was Isak Chishi Swu, a Sema Naga from Chishilimi village in Nagaland.

Its quaintly jumbled 'Manifesto', issued on 31 January 1980 and which was written by Muivah, quoted Mao emphasizing that a revolutionary organization must have 'correct policies', and went on to praise 'the Christian God, the Eternal God of the Universe'. The manifesto stated that

'to us the sovereign existence of our country, the salvation of our people is Socialism with their spiritual salvation in Christ are eternal and unquestionable' and went on to reject the idea of a multiparty system, paraphrasing Maoist jargon, 'To achieve socialism, the dictatorship of the people through a revolutionary organisation is absolutely indispensable.' That organization was, of course, the NSCN which promised to liberate the Nagas from 'the exploiting class…of reactionary traitors, the bureaucrats, a handful of rich men and the Indian vermin'.<sup>80</sup> Such mumbo-jumbo probably did not impress the Chinese, who had stopped providing the Naga rebels with military training in China after 1976. But links between them and the Chinese were never completely severed.

The only territory, and later state, in India's northeastern region that has never had any armed insurrection is Arunachal Pradesh, the erstwhile NEFA. One reason could be the ethnic diversity of the rugged and extremely mountainous area, where dozens of different tribes have for centuries lived more or less isolated from each other. Another possible explanation is that Western missionaries never went there. The missionaries had not preached separatism, but the introduction of written languages, a literature, and a firm belief in something other than a host of spirits had created a sense of nationhood among, for instance, the Nagas and the Mizos. This in turn led to local nationalist movements, which eventually became armed, anti-government forces.

Two entirely different personalities are closely associated with the emergence of the NEFA, Verrier Elwin and Nari Rostomji. Elwin, a British missionary who had married a tribal woman from central India, converted to Hinduism in 1935 and became an Indian citizen after independence. Rustomji was an Indian Parsi and a product of the Indian Civil Service, a meticulous bureaucrat with strong feelings for India's northern frontiers. Elwin was a close confidante of Nehru, who wrote the foreword to his book *A Philosophy for NEFA*, which was published in 1957.<sup>81</sup> The emphasis should be on education and economic development, Elwin stated, and not to isolate the tribal population despite the fact that the areas where they live lie behind the Inner Line.

Both Elwin and Rustomji travelled all over the NEFA and, after the Chinese established themselves in Tibet, the presence of a bureaucracy and organs of power such as courts and police stations became imperative. Local government offices, schools, libraries, dispensaries, and hospitals

were constructed at major population centres, along with the establishment of crafts training institutes and cottage industries. Roads were built into the territory from Assam, to which the NEFA belonged until 1972. By 1955–6, NEFA counted 113 primary schools, 13 middle schools, and 3 high schools.<sup>82</sup> Knowing full well that it was a sensitive frontier area, India's intelligence networks were also strengthened in 1954 by the recruitment of candidates from 14 of the NEFA's many tribes. The main qualification when they were sent for training was that they should have had some basic education.<sup>83</sup>

With the help of Elwin and Rustomji, the NEFA began to take shape as a functioning administrative entity, but it was the 1962 War that laid the foundations for what was eventually to become Arunachal Pradesh. A crucial role in fostering a sense of belonging to India was also played by the Ramakrishna Mission, a volunteer organization founded by the Indian sage Ramakrishna's chief disciple Swami Vivekananda as early as 1897. It subscribes to the ancient Hindu Vedanta philosophy and promotes social work, education, tribal welfare, and health. Although a private charity, its move into the NEFA in the 1960s was no doubt encouraged and even supported by Indian authorities, especially the security services. It opened community centres and schools all over the NEFA, where Hindi language was taught along with basic education and the mission's firm roots in Hinduism were no doubt preferable to the central government than the introduction of Christianity into the hill country north of the Brahmaputra. The Inner Line regulation also prevented not only foreigners but also other Indians from entering the area without special permits.

The spread of Hindi into the hills was not entirely welcomed by everybody in India's northeast. As a by-product of the Ramakrishna Mission's activities, Hindi became the new lingua franca among the tribals instead of Assamese (the language spoken by those from the hills who had had interactions with officials, merchants, and others from the Brahmaputra Valley), and, more commonly, Nefamese (a pidgin kind of Assamese spoken by many tribals when they communicated with each other and with the people of the plains). As early as 1957, tribal leaders from the Lohit Frontier Division in the NEFA had submitted a memorandum to the Governor of Assam, saying that, 'Hindi may be taught to the students in the same school…[where the medium of instruction is] Assamese. It is known to your honour that in this Division seven classes of tribals are living such

as Abor, Khamti, Edu, Miju, Digaru, Miri, Singpho and Tibetans. Assamese is the main language to exchange thoughts amongst ourselves.'<sup>84</sup> Whatever sympathy there might have been for their point of view in New Delhi in the late 1950s, there was much less of an incentive to promote Assamese language at the expense of Hindi in the NEFA after 1962.

The NEFA, previously a hill region of Assam, was converted into the Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh in 1972 and proclaimed a state in 1987, thus becoming somewhat estranged from the plains with which the local people had had trade and other contacts for centuries. But the integration of the NEFA was more important than such local sensitivities for India's security planners. The new administrative entity was given a name in Sanskrit, meaning 'The Land of Dawn', and a new capital was established at Itanagar at the foothills of the Himalayas, close to the ruins of a fifteenth century fort built by Hindu kings from the plains.

Arunachal and the six other Indian states in the traditionally volatile northeastern region are connected with the rest of the country through a strategically sensitive corridor between Nepal, Bhutan, and Bangladesh called the Siliguri Neck, or more popularly, the Chicken's Neck, which at its narrowest point is only about 27 kilometres wide. The need to secure that area and the northeast became even more of a priority after the 1962 War. On 24 October of that year, the American ambassador John K. Galbraith had met the prime minister of Bhutan, who had told him that Chinese troops were massed on the borders of his kingdom. According to the former CIA analyst Bruce Reidel's account of the 1962 crisis, 'The miniscule army of Bhutan could not hope to stop a Chinese attack. If the Chinese broadened their offensive to include Bhutan and its even smaller neighbour Sikkim, they could easily drive south to cut off India's entire northeastern section—made up of NEFA and Assam—and link up with East Pakistan.'<sup>85</sup>

At the time of the 1962 War, China had no such intentions, the possibility of a move from the Chinese down to the corridor side was always in the minds of the security planners in New Delhi—and that made them more convinced than ever before that the tiny and isolated Himalayan kingdoms of Bhutan and Sikkim were of utmost strategic importance for the defence of India.