# **3 War Communism**

## The First Months of Power

This chapter covers the period from the Bolshevik seizure of power until the promulgation of 'NEP', i.e. the period from November 1917 until the middle of 1921. Politically and militarily these were stirring, dramatic years. In January 1918 the Constituent Assembly, with its SR majority, sat for one day and was dispersed. Tortuous negotiations with the Germans eventually ended with the onerous peace of Brest-Litovsk (April 1918), followed by a revolt by the left SRs, terror and counter-terror, and a vast civil war. Allied intervention contributed to a series of disasters, which for a time left the Bolsheviks in control of only Central Russia. Victory was eventually won, with immense effort and sacrifice, but in 1920 came war with Poland and a last attack by the White armies from the Crimea. By the end of 1920 victory was complete, the enemies now being hunger, cold, anarchy and ruin, as well as some bands of rebels of various hues to mop up.

'War communism' is the name commonly given to the period of extreme communization which began in the middle of 1918, i.e. eight months after the revolution had triumphed. It is therefore necessary to trace the events of the intervening period. Did fully fledged war communism arise out of a series of improvisations, due to the exigencies of war and collapse, or was it consciously introduced as a deliberate leap into socialism, and ascribed to the war emergency when its failure was found to be discreditable to the regime? Both schools of thought exist. Which is right? Or are they perhaps both right?

In interpreting the events of 1917-21, it is important to bear in mind the following. Firstly, there was a good deal of anarchy, of **sheer elemental** chaos, in the situation of Russia in those years. **Orders** by the centre might be obeyed, but quite probably the local authorities, even if communist-controlled, pleased themselves. Orders were in any case all too often confused and contradictory, through sheer inexperience or because the civil service machine was all too effectively smashed. Lenin himself wrote: 'Such is the sad state of our decrees; they are signed and then we ourselves forget about them and fail to carry them out.'<sup>1</sup> Therefore much that happened was not due to central orders at all, and many of these orders were due to desperate efforts to cope with confusion and anarchy.

Secondly, all the events of 1917-21 were, naturally, dominated by the war and civil war, by destruction and fighting, by depleted supplies and paralysed transport, by the needs of the front and the priorities of battle, and last but not least by the loss of vital industrial and agricultural areas to various enemies. The policies of the Soviet government in these years cannot, of course, be considered in isolation from these conditions.

Thirdly, while we have already noted some Utopian and unrealistic passages in Lenin's ideas even before the revolution, and while his comrades were even more prone than he to illusions of all kinds, we must allow for the interaction of Bolshevik ideas with the desperate situation in which they found themselves. To take one example among many: rationing and the banning of private trade in foodstuffs were essential features of the period, and came to be regarded as good in themselves. Yet both these measures were common enough among belligerent nations, and in fact both the Tsarist and the Provisional government had endeavoured somewhat ineffectively to do just these things. It is interesting to note that H. G. Wells, who visited Russia in 1920, laid great stress on just these points, in explaining Bolshevik policy. It is not only the Bolsheviks who made a virtue out of necessity; anyone old enough to recall 1948 will remember how Labour politicians in Britain extolled rationing (so much fairer to ration by coupon than by the purse). This 'ideology' delayed the abolition of rationing in Britain. Yet its cause was, obviously, the war. One could hardly imagine that Labour in power in peacetime would be 'ideologically' committed to introduce rationing. Or, to

put it another way: actions taken in abnormal circumstances for practical reasons are often clothed in ideological garb and are justified by reference to high principles. It is all too easy then to conclude, with documentary evidence to prove it, that the action was due to a principle.

This is not to say that principles ('ideology') had nothing to do with it. Indeed, it is quite clear that Lenin and his friends approached practical issues with a whole number of *idees fixes,*  and that these influenced their behaviour. The consequences of actions inspired by ideas could influence events by further worsening the objective situation and therefore rendering further action necessary on empirical grounds. And so on. There was a process *of interaction* between circumstances and ideas.

## **Early Measures**

The legislation of the first months of Soviet rule sought to implement the short-term programme outlined by the Bolsheviks before the seizure of power.

The land decree of 8 November 1917, adopted by the Congress of Soviets and embodied in a law promulgated in February 1918, followed the lines of the programme, in this instance 'borrowed' from the radical wing of the SRs. Local committees and Soviets were to supervise land distribution. Land was nationalized,<sup>2</sup> the right to use it belonged to the peasants. None should have more than he alone could cultivate, since the hiring of labour was to be forbidden. Some attempt was made to define the size of holdings. But in fact neither the Bolsheviks nor the SRs, nor any political force, could tell the peasants what to do. Each village made its own arrangements, which varied widely between and within regions. Some of the better-off peasants grabbed more land. Others, including many who had consolidated their holdings under Stolypin, had their land taken away and put back into the common pool. The average size of holdings diminished, and the number of peasant households with land increased, as some very poor or landless peasants gained from the redistribution. We shall see in the next chapter what effect this great convulsion had upon

the shape of Russian agriculture. It is sufficient at this stage to emphasize that it was not in fact a reform undertaken by the authorities, it was a more or less elemental act by peasants, with government organs accepting and by implication legitimizing what was happening. Army deserters, often with weapons, joined in the process of land allocation. The forces of peasant traditionalism, egalitarianism, commercialism, the interests of richer and poorer peasants, clashed in varying degrees and in different ways in thousands of villages where authority had broken down. Despite efforts to prevent it, the land seizures were accompanied by many acts of senseless violence: the landlords' cattle were sometimes slaughtered, the landlords' houses, barns or stables destroyed.

The land law of February 1918 did refer to productive efficiency, better technique, land reallocation and even to the development of a collective system of agriculture. But all this remained on paper. The Bolsheviks could not even attempt to impose a settlement. They had no administrative apparatus, they had practically no party members in the villages. They had come to power on the flood-tide of peasant revolt. All they could do in the first years was to try to keep themselves from being swept away. Their actions, as we shall see, were directed in the main to obtaining the food without which the towns and the army would starve, indeed did starve.

On 27 November 1917 came a decree on 'workers' control'. Factory committees, which existed already under the Provisional government, were given stronger powers. They could 'actively interfere .. . in all aspects of production and distribution of products. The organs of workers' control were granted the right to supervise production, to lay down minimum output indicators for the enterprise, to obtain data on costs .. . The owners of enterprises had to make available to the organs of workers' control all accounts and documents. Commercial secrecy was abolished. The decisions of workers' control organs were binding on owners of enterprises': in these words a Soviet textbook summarizes the decree.<sup>3</sup> This appeared to put the seal of legality on growing syndicalist, not to say anarchic, tendencies which had been increasingly manifesting themselves for months before the

Bolshevik seizure of power. The trade unions were at least nationally organized, and so one could conceive of 'workers' control' exercised by them becoming, or emerging into, some sort of national plan for resource allocation. The trade unions, however, were in these first months not under Bolshevik control, whereas many of the factory committees were. Yet the latter, despite this control, were bound to reflect only the sectional interest of the factory workers. The local leaders had neither the training nor the sense of responsibility to 'supervise' and 'control' production and distribution. They could and did sell off materials, pilfer, disobey instructions. Of course, discipline had to be reimposed. Carr comments that 'as a weapon of destruction workers' control rendered indisputable service to the revolutionary cause'. It could only add to the already fast-spreading chaos. This was the more certain because the decree also insisted that the management's operational instructions were to be binding. This was, therefore, still kontrol', not full control. But the degree of control was sufficient to inhibit the management from effective action, and divided responsibility meant irresponsibility; indiscipline, and even violence ^towards technical staff, made work virtually impossible. The railways were operated for the first months by the railway trade union, independently of the Soviet government; the union was not Bolshevik-controlled, and decided to run the railways as the railwaymen thought fit. It was only after some delicate negotiations, plus some outright chicanery and finally the threat of direct violence (March 1918), that the railways were finally placed under the Soviet regime's authority, with workers' control ended. Amid all the multifarious causes of breakdown and confusion, 'the onset of industrial chaos, radiating from the capitals throughout Soviet territory, defies any precise record', as Carr says.<sup>4</sup> Of course, workers' control was only one of many causes of this. But no remedy was possible which did not involve the stern subordination of the committees to some authority and discipline.

On 20 November 1917 the State Bank was seized by armed detachments, because its employees had refused to issue money to what was, in their view, an illegal band of interlopers calling themselves the Council of People's Commissars. On 27 December

### **44 War Communism**

all private banks were nationalized, and, along with the State Bank, amalgamated into the People's Bank of the Russian Republic. In February 1918, all shareholders in banks were expropriated, and all foreign debts repudiated.

## VSNKH

On 15 December 1917 the Supreme Council of National Economy was set up. This was known by its initial letters, VSNK H (or *Vesenkha)* (and by these letters it shall be called in this book). In examining its powers at the time of its creation, we shall find some evidence of the view held at this time of the role of central planning and the intentions with regard to the nationalization of industry and trade.

VSNKH' S task was defined as follows:

The organization of the national economy and state finance. With this object VSNK H elaborates general norms and the plan for regulating the economic life of the country, reconciles and unites the activities of central and local regulating agencies [the council on fuel, metal, transport, central food supply committee, and others of the appropriate peoples' commissariats: of trade and industry, food supplies, agriculture, finance, army and navy, etc.], the all-Russian council of workers' control, and also the related activities of factory and trade-union working-class organizations.

VSNK H was to have 'the right of confiscation, requisition, sequestration, compulsory syndication of the various branches of industry, trade and other measures in the area of production, distribution and state finance'.

VSNK H was attached to *(pri)* the Council of People's Commissars, as a species of economic cabinet, and the members were to be representatives of the relevant commissariats plus the workers' councils, plus some others. The full Council seldom met, and a bureau, initially of fifteen members, was responsible for day-today work. It had the power to issue orders on economic affairs, which were (in theory) binding on everyone, including the people's commissariats whose functions it partially duplicated.

Regional councils (SNK H or *sovnarkhozy,* yet another abbreviation) administered and controlled the economy locally, under the guidance of VSNK H and in close association with local Soviets and workers' councils. By May 1918 there were 7 zonal, 38 provincial and 69 district sovnarkhozy.<sup>s</sup> Very soon VSNK H 'sprouted' departments *(glavki),* for controlling particular activities and sectors, bearing such names as *Tsentromylo, TsentrotextiP, Glavneft', Glavspichki, Glavles,* concerned respectively with soap, textiles, oil, matches, timber, etc. Duplication with the people's commissariats for trade and industry was ended in January 1918 by their liquidation. With the progress of nationalization the various departments of VSNK H took command of the nationalized sectors of the economy. Its structure was repeatedly changed in the years that followed, but there seems little point in boring the reader with reorganizational catalogues. Much more important and interesting is what its functions were and how they changed.

# Nationalization

As the wording of the original decree showed, VSNK H was supposed to guide and coordinate, but it was certainly not clear how closely it would plan and control industry or trade, or how much of these activities would be nationalized. It is true that there were declarations of intent which suggested that all-round nationalization was the policy. Thus in the 'Declaration of Rights of the Working and Exploited People', published on 17 January 1918 and modelled on the Declaration of the Rights of Man of the French Revolution, some of the laws on workers' control and VSNK H were seen as 'guaranteeing the power of the working people over the exploiters and as a first step towards the complete conversion of the factories, mines, railways and other means of production and transport into the property of the workers' and peasants' state'. However, this declaration proposed no timetable, and would have been consistent with a prolonged existence of a mixed economy. Certainly in its first few months of existence the organs of VSNK H included some managers and even owners. Thus the rules for *TsentrotextiP,* adopted on 1 April 1918,

included in the departmental council fifteen representatives of the (private) employers. The Soviet history textbook from which the above data were derived comments: 'Lenin took a positive view of attempts to make agreements with capitalists on definite conditions favourable to the working class. He repeatedly said and wrote this'.<sup>6</sup> Serious negotiations for collaboration were undertaken with a leading 'capitalist' magnate, Meshchersky. And in any case the various glavki (TsentrotextiP, Glavspichki, and the rest) corresponded closely with the analogous syndicates set up by private business before the war, and used for purposes of control by previous governments during the war. The offices and much of their staff were the same.

Nationalization did indeed begin. The railways (already, in the main, in the hands of the state under the Tsars) and the merchant fleet were nationalized by January 1918, but, with these exceptions, individual plants were nationalized, not industries - at first. Such nationalization was due to a number of factors. At this period, it would certainly be wrong to assume that local Soviets, even communist-controlled, acted because the centre told them to. The large majority (over two-thirds) of nationalizations were local, until June 1918, and may have been due to genuinely local decisions. These in turn could have been due to over-enthusiasm, or to real or imagined sabotage, or to the refusal of employers to accept orders from workers' councils. In view of the prevailing chaos, it is only too likely that many employers found conditions intolerable and tried to get out.

The central authorities were alarmed by the extent of unauthorized nationalization and on 19 January 1918 it was decreed that no expropriation should take place without the specific authority of VSNKH . Clearly, no one took very much notice of this, since on 27 April 1918 the same prohibition was repeated, this time with financial teeth: there would be no money issued to any enterprises which were nationalized without the authorization of VSNKH. <sup>7</sup> It is not clear, on the evidence, that all-round nationalization was already seen as an immediate aim when VSNK H was set up. In fact it would seem that Lenin and his colleagues were playing it by ear. The first leaders of VSNKH , men like Obolensky, Kritsman, Larin, Milyutin, were young intellectual enthusiasts, with little grip on the realities of administration. And in any case much of Russia was outside the authority of the government.

Kritsman in his remarkable article on 'The Heroic Period of the Great Russian Revolution',<sup>8</sup> refers to the pre-June period as one of 'elemental-chaotic proletarian nationalization from below'. He added: 'Were it not for external factors, the expropriation of capital would not have taken place in June 1918.' It was hoped that 'capital (i.e. capitalists) would be in some sense in the service of the proletarian state'.

It may be added that the whole question of the intentions of the government at the beginning of 1918 is a matter in dispute among Soviet scholars of the period. Thus Venediktov and several others claim that the party did have a basic plan of nationalization for all the major branches of industry. There was a resolution to this effect passed by the sixth party congress, and it is true also that Lenin in December 1917 spoke of'declaring all limited companies to be state property'.<sup>9</sup> None the less the evidence, though mixed, is still consistent with the intention to maintain a mixed economy for a considerable period. It may not be out of place to recall that, at about the same time, the Labour Party in Britain was also passing resolutions advocating the nationalization of the means of production.

By June 1918 there were still only 487 nationalized enterprises.<sup>10</sup> The great leap into war communism must be dated from the end of June 1918 with the promulgation of the nationalization decree, affecting in principle all factories, as distinct from small workshops.

To find an explanation of this apparent switch in (or very rapid speed-up of) policy, it is necessary to examine three relevant matters: agriculture, trade and the military situation.

### The Slide into War Communism

It has already been explained that the peasants had seized the land and redivided it according to their own lights. The splitting up of farms had a disorganizing effect on production, as also did a struggle among the peasants themselves about who was to get

what. This struggle was given every encouragement by the Soviet government. Already on 15 February 1918 Lenin was speaking of 'ruthless war against the kulaks'" (i.e. the better-off peasants). All this was taking place under conditions of growing hunger, and ever-wilder inflation. The peasants, understandably, sought to obtain a better price for their food. Rationing had been introduced in towns in 1916, but the prices paid to peasants fell far behind the general rise in prices of consumers' goods, and a very great shortage of such goods further discouraged sales through official channels. The peasants tended naturally to evade the state monopoly of grain purchase, thus encouraging the development of a flourishing black market. The Provisional government sought to combat this, in vain. The Bolsheviks at first did no better. Lenin's writings show the inability to cope with the (to him) destructive 'petty-bourgeois flood', which threatened to sweep away effective control. For Lenin, trade at free prices was equivalent to 'monstrous speculation', hoarding was considered sabotage. He informed the Petrograd Soviet on 27 January 1918 that there should be mass searches of stores and houses: 'We can't expect to get anywhere unless we resort to terrorism: speculators must be shot on the spot.' Yet the very next paragraph reads: 'The rich sections of the population must be left without bread for several days because they [have stocks and] ... can afford to pay speculators the higher price."<sup>2</sup> The winter of 1917-18 was a terrible one. In Petrograd the bread ration fell early in 1918 to a mere 50 grams (2 oz) a day even for workers.<sup>13</sup> Manv had to leave the city, and factories closed for lack of labour. Hunger became a matter of the utmost gravity.

The collapse of production and transport and the disruption of existing market relations were accompanied by an effort to ration through the state (and retail cooperative) organs and by a resolute attempt to suppress free trade in essentials. Private trade in a wide range of consumers' goods was forbidden. However, lack of goods to sell and of an effective distribution mechanism made confusion worse than ever. The cooperative movement was called upon to help, but in 1918 it was still controlled by men hostile to the Bolsheviks, and it was not an effective part of the official system.

All this had a logic of its **own, the more** so as **conditions**  worsened sharply. *Shortages grew ever more acute, as the civil*  war spread over Russia in the summer of 1918, and as the effect of the Brest-Litovsk treaty was felt: the temporary secession of the Ukraine in particular struck a heavy blow at the already disorganized economy. Between July 1918 and the end of 1919, much of Russia was directly affected by civil war. Railways were disrupted, bridges blown up, stores destroyed. The Soviet-held territory was cut off from essential sources of materials and food. There were typhus epidemics. Stern control over the prevailing anarchy was seen to be vital, and control has a logic of its own.

Referring, or purporting to refer, to another revolution, a Soviet commentator wrote:

While strictly regulating maximum consumption and at the same time preserving private bourgeois property and the money economy, the Jacobin state could not help but introduce further coercive and plainly terrorist measures. It was not possible, by any means, to compel the factory owner and the individual peasant to produce, while simultaneously ruining him by requisitions and restricting his links with the market. To put into effect laws contrary to all private interests .. . it was necessary to strengthen the dictatorship of the central authority, to systematize it, to cover all France with police and military, to abolish all freedoms, to control through a central supply commission all agricultural and industrial production, endlessly to resort to requisitions, to seize hold of transport and trade, to create everywhere a new bureaucracy in order to operate an immense supply apparatus, to limit consumption by ration cards, to resort to house-searches, fill prisons with suspects, cause the guillotine to be constantly at work. Political terror merged wim economic terror, and went in step with it.<sup>14</sup>

This picture shows a common logic in operation in France in 1793 and Russia in 1918. Given the conditions under which privately owned industry was to operate, given also the rationing not only of consumer necessities but also (as supplies ran down) of many vital materials and fuels, there was a fatally logical escalation in the degree of state control, state operation and finally also state ownership. No doubt there was also pressure from those party zealots who believed that the revolution had to

**go much further** much more quickly. No doubt too that Lenin's **repeated and** eloquent words about bourgeois exploiters, and his **use** of 'workers' control' as a deliberate disorganizing device for weakening the bourgeoisie, contributed to the nationalization drive when it came, as it also contributed to making the work of private management utterly impossible, even with the best will in the world. (However, there is no reason why they should have shown good-will to a regime which had usurped power and publicly announced that their ruin was a good and desirable objective.)

Discipline Versus Syndicalism

A conflict with the left communists broke out in the very first months, over the question of discipline and control. For Lenin, workers' control was a tactical device, just as in the army a revolt against officers and propaganda in favour of an elective command was an effective means of disrupting the old military structure. But once power was achieved, Lenin quickly became a firm supporter of discipline and order. We find him speaking of

the establishment of strictest responsibility for executive functions and absolutely businesslike disciplined voluntary fulfilment of the assignments and decrees necessary for the economic mechanism to function like clockwork. It was impossible to pass to this at once; some months ago it would have been pedantry or even malicious provocation to demand it [written on 28 March 1918].

Here he found himself in opposition to the left communists, who also opposed him because of his willingness to sign a particularly unfavourable treaty with the Germans.

Undoubtedly the opinion is very widely held that there can be no question of compatibility [of one-man managerial authority with democratic organization]. Nothing can be more mistaken than this opinion . . . Neither railways nor transport, nor large-scale machinery and enterprises in general can function correctly without a single will linking the entire working personnel into an economic organ operating with the

precision of clockwork. Socialism owes its origin to large-scale machine industry. If the masses of the working people in introducing socialism prove incapable of adapting their institutions in the way that large-scale machine industry should work, then there can be no question of introducing socialism .. . The slogan of practical ability and businesslike methods has enjoyed little popularity among revolutionaries. One can even say that no slogan has been less popular among them. It is quite understandable that as long as the revolutionaries' task consisted of destroying the old capitalist order they were bound to reject and ridicule such a slogan. For at that time the slogan in practice concealed the endeavour in one form or another to come to terms with capitalism or to weaken the proletariat's attack on the foundations of capitalism, to weaken the revolutionary struggle against capitalism. Quite clearly things were bound to undergo a radical change after the proletariat had conquered and consolidated its power and work had begun on a wide scale for laying the foundations of a new, i.e. socialist society.<sup>15</sup>

It is in line with this policy that a decision was taken in March 1918 to take the railways away from 'workers' control' and place them under semi-military command.

Such policies and measures were opposed by Bukharin, Radek, Obolensky and others. They resented Lenin's emphasis not only on discipline but also on the need for material incentives, piecework and specially favourable conditions for the employment of bourgeois specialists. They accused Lenin of moving towards state capitalism. Lenin replied with eloquence in an article entitled 'Left-wing Childishness'. He refused to regard the accusation of state capitalism as an accusation at all. If state capitalism were established this would represent an advance on the existing situation. The real conflict, he asserted, was not between state capitalism and socialism, but between both state capitalism and socialism on the one hand and the menacing alliance of the petty bourgeoisie with private capitalism on the other. The left opposition continued throughout this period to criticize measures designed to strengthen discipline through centralization and one-man management, and we shall find basically the same issues being debated again in 1920-21.

Needless to say, his left opponents quoted many of Lenin's

**words against** him. Had he not written in 'State and Revolution' **that** specialists should not be paid more than workers? Had he **not** extolled workers' control? Was his present policy not plainly inconsistent with doctrine? The workers would not understand.

Lenin succeeded in curbing some of the excesses of the workers' councils by having them merged with the trade unions, which were gradually being brought under firm party control. But the experience of workers' councils was defended by him as a necessary, if materially destructive, stage of the revolution. He found it more difficult to curb the excesses of his own colleagues, and, though (as he later admitted) also being over-sanguine himself on occasion, he repeatedly was having to combat what he called the 'infantile disorder' of leftism.

Dobb argued<sup>16</sup> that Lenin had no intention at first to launch into the extremes of war communism, that he was driven by emergencies of war, hunger and chaos into an attempt to control everything from the centre. It is true that his more extreme statements, to be cited on p. 60 below, were made subsequent to the first six months of Bolshevik power; though we can say that his own policies contributed to the chaos, of course. He boasted that these had 'destroyed the discipline of capitalist society'. In doing so, he had for a time helped to destroy all order. It is also the case that a proposal, seriously mooted in the spring of 1918, to have mixed state-and-capitalist enterprises, was rejected. And it was presumably with Lenin's approval that the chief of VSNK H in May 1918, Milyutin, spoke of'completing the nationalization of industry'. But we will return to this point later.

## 'Prodrazverstka' and State Monopoly of Trade

The slide into war communism was stimulated by the food shortages and the failure of efforts to procure food, especially grain, from the peasants at official prices. Attempts were made to organize sales of goods to peasants, but this had little effect. In May 1918 the Supply Commissariat *(Narkomprod)* acquired more powers to obtain and distribute food. In the end it proved necessary to use force. Lenin spoke on 24 May 1918 of a 'crusade

for bread', and there developed a so-called 'food dictatorship', with the local organs of Narkomprod, with the help of workers' detachments and of the *Cheka* (secret police), seizing stocks held by alleged hoarders. This was merged into the campaign against the so-called rich peasants, kulaks, which Lenin had been advocating as the means of spreading Soviet power into the villages. The poor peasants, whom Lenin regarded as natural allies against the rural bourgeoisie, were urged to help in the task. On 11 June 1918 the decree on 'committees of the poor' *(kombedy)* in the villages was issued. One of their principal tasks was 'the removal of surplus grain from the kulaks'. The class war was to be bitterly fought in the villages, and many real or alleged kulaks had some land, equipment and livestock, as well as 'surplus' grain, confiscated. This step, said Lenin, 'was a tremendously important turning point in the entire development and structure of our revolution'. By stages, the compulsory deliveries of food were systematized and given the name of *prodrazverstka.* This untranslatable term is derived from the noun *prodovoPstvie,* meaning foodstuffs, and the verb, *razverstat\* which literally means to distribute or sub-allocate (tasks or obligations, for instance). It came to mean a policy in which each peasant household was ordered to deliver its surplus to the state. In some cases this was outright confiscation, in others it was virtual confiscation, since the nominal prices paid were very low and there was practically nothing that could be bought with the money. The state demanded all that the peasant had, over and above an ill-defined minimum requirement for himself and his family. The peasants naturally resisted, and either hid their grain or sought to dispose of it through a black market or through illegal barter deals which continued throughout the period. To combat this the government sent workers' detachments to find and seize grain and to punish the hoarders, and it also sought to utilize the committees of the poor peasants, to set them upon their richer neighbours and so to try and discover grain hoards. Thus the process of grain confiscation went hand in hand with the effort to fan class warfare in the villages. A bitter struggle was waged between the government and the peasants and among the peasants themselves. Armed detachments sought to prevent the illegal movement of food to

urban markets, although in many cases this was the only way in which food could in fact reach the towns, owing to the inefficiency and inadequacy of the official collection and distribution network.

Peasants resented prodrazverstka deeply, and numerous riots broke out. Some parts of the country were in the hands of socalled 'greens', who were against both 'reds' and 'whites' in the civil war and stood for peasant rights. Some of them were of semi-anarchist complexion, notably a powerful peasant anarchist movement in the Ukraine led by Nestor Makhno, who was a major force in 1919. Others were little better than bandits. In his novel *Julio Jurenito,* Ilya Ehrenburg painted a sarcastic picture of the peasant attitudes of the time. Peasants, he wrote, were all for liquidating communists, officers, Jews.

The main thing, however, was to burn all the towns, for that's where trouble and dissension began. But before burning them it would be necessary to salvage any property that might come in useful, roofing for instance .. . men's coats, pianos. That was their programme. As for tactics, the most important thing was to have a small cannon in the village and about a dozen machine-guns. Don't allow strangers to come near, and replace exchange of goods by raids on trains and requisitioning of passengers' baggage, which was far more sensible.<sup>17</sup>

Yet in the end fear of a return of the landlords kept enough peasants loyal to the Bolshevik cause to ensure their ultimate victory in the civil war. For in most 'white' areas the landlords did come back, and peasants who had seized their land were often punished.

However, the peasants could see little sense in producing farm surpluses which would be taken from them by requisition squads. Sowings were reduced. Production fell. It became ever more difficult to find surpluses, though the government's procurement organizations became more efficient and the requisitioning detachments more ruthless as time went on. Actual state procurements of grain, according to official sources, did increase. Thus in the agricultural year 1917-18 total procurements amounted to 30 million poods and in 1918-19 to no million poods.<sup>18</sup> Lenin declared that 'this success clearly speaks of a slow but definite improvement in our affairs in the sense of the victory of com-

munism over capitalism'. It did not mean that conditions in the towns in fact improved. Throughout this period it was in fact quite impossible to live on the official rations, and the majority of the supplies even of bread came through the black market. The government was never able to prevent this market from functioning, but did sufficiently disrupt it to make food shortages worse. There arose a class of people known as *meshochniki,* or men with sacks, who moved foodstuffs and dodged the guards who tried to stop illegal trade. Many townsmen abandoned their work and moved to the country where at least there was some food. Many of the workers, being of recent peasant origin, were able to rejoin their relatives in the villages. There was a spectacular decline in the population of big cities, especially those which, like Petrograd, were far from sources of food. The townsmen who remained shivered hungrily in their unheated dwellings. The so-called bourgeoisie were often deprived even of such small rations as workers had, and had to sell off their belongings in order to buy black market food. A famous Soviet humorist described a barter deal in which a peasant acquired a grand piano in exchange for a sack of grain. The piano was too large for the peasant's hut and so it was cut into two and part of it stored in an outhouse.

Kritsman described the existence of two economies, one legal and the other illegal. Despite all the efforts to requisition bread grain, in 1918-19, 60 per cent of its consumption in cities passed through illegal channels. He estimated that in January 1919 in the provincial *igubernskie)* capitals — i.e. most large towns — only 19 per cent of all food came through official channels; the figure rose to 31 per cent in April 1919, and fluctuated thereafter; it was only 29 per cent in April 1920. This illustrates most clearly the limitations of the government's 'political' grip, the extent to which it was struggling with forces it could not control, for all its ruthlessness. Lenin could cajole and threaten, the detachments of the Cheka could confiscate and shoot. Yet at certain moments even the government itself was compelled to 'legalize' illegal trade. For example, in September 1918 the wicked speculators and meshochniki were authorized to take sacks weighing up to i| poods (54 lbs) to Petrograd and Moscow, and in this month, according to Kritsman, they supplied four times more than did the official supply organization.

The government tried to encourage various forms of rural cooperation, varying from the loosest associations for the joint cultivation of the soil to fully fledged communes and state farms. More will be said about these various types in the next chapter. It is sufficient here to note that even at the height of war communism all these varieties of collective or cooperative farming covered only a tiny minority of households. In other words, they had little immediate significance for the agricultural situation. They were, however, regarded as politically important. Thus a decree published in February 1919 spoke of a transition to collective farming. No such transition occurred in 1919. But all this helped to set a precedent for subsequent events.

Lenin did see in these still ineffective moves towards collectivism the path to the future. As already pointed out, he was aware of the limitations of small-holder agriculture and conscious of the political difficulties which would arise from the dominance of a private peasant economy. It is interesting in this connection to quote the evidence of H. G. Wells, who saw Lenin in 1920. The following is his report:

'Even now,' said Lenin, 'not all the agricultural production of Russia is peasant production. We have in places large-scale agriculture. The government is already running big estates with workers instead of peasants where conditions are favourable. That can spread. It can be extended first to one province, then another. The peasants of the other provinces, selfish and illiterate, will not know what is happening until their turn comes!' It may be difficult to defeat the Russian peasant en masse; but in detail there is no difficulty at all. At the mention of the peasant, Lenin's head came nearer mine; his manner became confidential. As if after all the peasant *might* overhear."

One sees here a hint of Stalin's later deviousness, not to say plain dishonesty, in respect of his peasant policy. However, this should not lead us to conclude, as Stalin later wished us to conclude, that the collectivization drive of 1930 represented Leninist policies. It is true that Lenin and his more far-sighted colleagues already in 1918 saw not only the acute problem of persuading peasants to part with food in the critical days of the civil war, but also a long-term contradiction between peasant

#### **The Money Illusion and Economic Collapse 57**

individualism and the socialist transformation of society. However, as we shall see, Lenin drew lessons from the bitter experience of the war-communism period, and in his last years counselled care and moderation.

## The Money Illusion and Economic Collapse

In nightmare conditions of civil war, mismanagement, chaos, hunger and breakdown, the rouble collapsed. The bulk of state expenditure was met through the printing press. Free market prices rose month by month. I myself recall as a small child giving a banknote of considerable face value to a beggar, who returned it to me saying that it was valueless. From March 1919 state enterprises were wholly financed from the budget, i.e. they obtained from the budget all the money they needed, and paid their receipts into the budget. Most transactions between state enterprises were of a book-keeping nature only and not for cash. All this was a gradual process. It began with cash advances by VSNK H to meet wages payments and other expenses for those enterprises which happened to have run out of liquid resources. This practice spread. At first, many of the advances were supposed to be credits and not grants. However, in the general conditions of chaos and collapse, the practice of meeting the running expenses of the economy out of the budget became almost universal and cash payments gradually lost their significance. Typical of the views held at this time was a resolution of the second all-Russian congress of SNK H (economic councils) to the effect that

state industrial enterprises should deliver their products to other state enterprises and institutions on the instructions of the appropriate organs of VSNK H without payment, and in the same way should obtain all the supplies they require, and that the railways and the state merchant fleet should transport gratis the goods of all state enterprises. In making this proposal, the congress expressed the desire to see the final elimination of any influence of money upon the relations of economic units.<sup>20</sup>

This policy was gradually brought into full effect during 1919.

#### **58 War Communism**

This **led to what** was called the 'naturalization' of economic relations. To cite Venediktov again:

Enterprises in fact made no payment for materials and services obtained from other state institutions, since all expenditures took place by bookkeeping and took the form simply of the transfer of working capital allocations from one account to another. The next step was the gradual abolition of monetary charges levied on state institutions for communal services, first in Moscow and later throughout the country. At the same time workers and employees and their families and also some other strata of the population were no longer charged for foodstuffs and consumer goods, for postal and transport services, for housing and communal services, etc. This extended not only to the state sector but also to the working elements of the town and some groups of rural residents, families of soldiers and invalids, etc.<sup>21</sup>

This entire process reached its apogee at the end of 1920 and was undoubtedly deeply influenced by the ideology which was so widespread among the party during the period of war communism. Indeed Venediktov himself noted in his book that some of the most extreme measures in this direction were taken after final victory had been achieved in the civil war.

In other words money lost its effective function within the state sector of the economy, and had precious little function at all. In 1919-20 workers' wages were largely paid in kind, the meagre ration being free. Overcrowded tramcars and trains, insofar as there were any, were free also, as were municipal services. By 1920 there was even an attempt at a moneyless budget. This has been well described by R. W. Davies. As he put it:

When it proved impossible to stabilize the currency and a centralized war communism economy began to be established, the earlier cautions about the dangers of the rapid transition to a moneyless system were heard less often. News spread that the civil war system of complete state ownership and the abolition of the market was the full socialism of Marx and Engels, and that money was therefore an anachronism. And this view was strengthened by the inflation which seemed in any case to make the abolition of money inevitable. By the middle of 1920 the view

uiat the time was ripe for the complete establishment of a moneyless system was almost universally accepted and attention was turned to the problems of operating an economy in kind. In the sphere of the budget the central problem became die replacement of the money by a budget or balance of state income and expenditure in kind (a material budget), a unified plan for utilizing the material resources of the economy.

Since the various goods had to be expressed in some common denominator, there were discussions about finding such a denominator in labour units. War communism ended before some of these ideas could find any practical expression.<sup>22</sup>

Lenin himself, in writing or approving the draft programme of the Communist Party in 1919, included the following phrases:

To continue undeviatingly to replace trade by planned, governmentally organized distribution of products. The aim is to organize the whole population into producers' and consumers' communes .. . [The party] will strive for the most rapid carrying out of the most radical measures preparing the abolition of money.

Russian commentators have noted the contrast between these words and Lenin's own insistence on a very different policy two years later, emphasizing that experience taught him that this was the wrong road.<sup>23</sup>

As money lost all value, private trade was declared illegal and the nationalization of practically all industrial enterprises was undertaken, voices came to be raised among the communists that they were even now in the process of establishing a true socialist economy. The most intelligent ideologist of left communists, Bukharin, devised a theory to the effect that in revolutions there is an inevitable mass destruction of means of production, and that by thereby destroying the structure and social habits of the past it would be possible to build from scratch the true socialist Russia. Markets, money, buying and selling, these characteristics of capitalism would swiftly vanish. So would economics, a science related to commodity exchange and to private property in the means of production.<sup>24</sup> Of course Bukharin and his friends were well aware of the appalling shortage of goods of every kind, and did emphasize the necessity of increasing production. However, they retained at this period a Utopian and optimistic set of ideas concerning a leap into socialism, which would seem to have had little to do with the reality of hunger and cold. Chaos increased. Industrial production fell rapidly. The destructive civil war disrupted communications and made life more difficult still, while calling upon the remnants of industry to supply virtually everything for the needs of the front.

Shortage of food was perhaps the key problem. The government's policy towards the peasants gave no hope of any improvement, since it provided no incentives to produce. Early in 1919 the government wound up the committees of the poor which had wrought such havoc. But the policy of requisitions and armed detachments was maintained unchanged through 1919 and 1920. Measures that made sense, if at all, only in terms of the emergency and disruption came to be regarded as good in themselves. Yet the vast majority of the people obviously yearned for greater freedom of trade, and the authorities knew it very well. They obstinately refused to contemplate such a surrender, as they saw it, to the petty-bourgeois instincts of the masses. Lenin's own views at this period were both harsh and extreme. Thus he is on record as having opposed proposals by both Trotsky and Larin (see p. 69-70 below) to relax prodrazverstka at the beginning of 1920. In August 1919 his notes read as follows: 'Free trade in bread grains is a return to the total power *[vsevlastiye]* of the rich, the landlords, the capitalists. It is the beating up *[izbiyeniye]*  of millions to make profits for capitalists. It is *Kolchakovshchina,*  it is a state crime.'<sup>25</sup> Similar statements abound through to the end of 1920. Other Bolsheviks, with few exceptions, were just as emphatic as he was in opposing anything that implied the legalization of private trade. However, their position became more vulnerable with the sharp and continuous decline in the numbers of townspeople, the halving within two years of the working-class population itself, the proletariat in whose name the communist party exercised its dictatorship. There were 2.6 million workers in 1917, 1.2 million in I920.<sup>26</sup> Chaos and misery were unbearable, or rather would become unbearable as soon as the civil war which gave them some conceivable *raison d'etre* was over.

It is hard for a prosaic writer without literary gifts to picture

**the** state **of** Russia **at** this **period. It is true that many remote and**  isolated villages lived their lives as usual, **but** over most of **the**  country normal life had become impossible. H. G. Wells, in his book quoted above, spoke of

harsh and terrible realities .. . Our dominant impression of things Russian is an impression of a vast irreparable breakdown. The great monarchy which was here in 1914, the administrative, social, financial and commercial systems connected with it have, under the strains of six years of incessant war, fallen down and been smashed utterly. Never in all history has there been so great a debacle before. The fact of the revolution is to our minds altogether dwarfed by the fact of this downfall . . . The Russian part of the old civilized world that existed before 1914 fell and is now gone .. . Amid this vast disorganization an emergency government supported by a disciplined party of perhaps 150,000 adherents - the Communist Party - has taken control. It has at the price of much shooting - suppressed brigandage, established a sort of order and security in the exhausted towns and set up a crude rationing system.

Wells gives a frightening picture of Petrograd, in which all wooden houses were pulled down for fuel and even the wooden pavings had been used for the same purpose. All this accords with the picture of the period which one obtains from reading such a novel as *Dr Zhivago.* Another Russian novel, Gladkov's *Cement,* described the effect of the chaos of the time on the operations of a factory. Amid desperate shortages of materials and fuel, the remaining workers made cigarette lighters out of pilfered metal in order to have something to barter for food. The tremendous shake-up and disruption of these years left a scar on the memories and consciences of millions of people, and it is not surprising that the experiences of the period with their grandeur and miseries played such an important part in subsequent literature. The table on p. 62 shows the collapse statistically.

The collapse of foreign trade was due not only to the prevailing chaos, but also to the blockade maintained during the civil war by the Western powers. There was a sizeable British naval force in 1919-20 in the Gulf of Finland, for example, blockading Leningrad.

## 62 War Communism

VSNKH endeavoured to cope with an impossible job. By **September** 1919, according to Bukharin, there were under its **control** 3,300 enterprises, employing about 1.3 million persons, or so the statistical records purported to show, while Bukharin himself thought the number of nationalized enterprises was about

|                                      | 1913  | 1921  |
|--------------------------------------|-------|-------|
| Gross output of all industry (index) | 100   | 31    |
| Large-scale industry (index)         | 100   | 21    |
| Coal (million tons)                  | 29    | 9     |
| Oil (million tons)                   | 9.2   | $3-8$ |
| Electricity (million kWhs)           | 2,039 | 520   |
| Pig iron (million tons)              | 4.2   | O.I   |
| Steel (million tons)                 | 4-3   | 0.2   |
| Bricks (millions)                    | 2.1   | 0.01  |
| Sugar (million tons)                 | $i-3$ | 0.05  |
| Railway tonnage carried (millions)   | 1324  | 39-4  |
| Agricultural production (index)      | 100   | 60    |
| Imports ('1913' roubles)             | i,374 | 208   |
| Exports ( $'1913'$ roubles)          | 1,520 | 20    |
|                                      |       |       |

(Sources: Promyshlennost' SSSR (Moscow, 1964), p. 32. Vneshnyaya torgovlya SSSR za 1918-40 gg. (Moscow, i960), p. 13. Narodnoe khozyaistvo SSSR, 1932, p. XXXIV. Sotsialisticheskoe stroiteFstvo (Moscow, 1934), pp. 2,4. Etapy ekonomkheskoi politiki SSSR, P. Vaisberg (Moscow, 1934) p. 55.) *Note:* Some of the above figures do not refer to strictly comparable territory.

4,000, but presumably the figures here given only relate to those within the purview of  $V \text{SNKH}$ . Of the above-mentioned enterprises, 1,375 were functioning in September 1919. Amid the general breakdown of transport and communications, the unpredictable movements of the war fronts, the demands of the military for all available supplies and its own clumsy and inexperienced mishandling of materials allocations, VSNKH could only struggle to mitigate where possible the general collapse of economic life. Chaos was increased by arbitrary arrests of real or alleged 'bourgeois', including specialists, deprivation of rations, and so on.

Successive reorganizations considerably expanded its administrative apparatus. In Bukharin's conception VSNKH was in  $\mathbf{a}$  very real sense acting as a single state firm. In 1919-20, through its various glavki, it distributed such materials as were available, issued orders as to what to produce, which of the desperate needs to satisfy, and in what order. This was indeed, as Bukharin noted, an attempt at total and moneyless planning, though in a disintegrating economy under conditions of civil war, with little effective coordination between VSNKH' S own glavki, let alone other controlling bodies. He noted that in September 1919 about 80-90 per cent of large-scale industry had been nationalized, and he correctly foresaw that this figure would reach 100 per cent. However, in view of the fact that he was a leader of the left extremists at this period, it is interesting to note that he, and also Preobrazhensky, his co-author, added the following words:

We must remember that we do not expropriate petty property. Its nationalization is absolutely out of the question, firstly because we would be unable ourselves to organize the scattered small-scale production, and secondly because the Communist Party does not wish to, and must not, offend the many millions of petty proprietors. Their conversion to socialism must take place voluntarily, by their own decision, and not by means of compulsory expropriation. It is particularly important to remember this in areas where small-scale production is predominant.<sup>27</sup>

In line with the above conceptions, the decree of 26 April 1919 specified that there should be no nationalization of any enterprise employing five persons or less (ten persons in the absence of a power-driven machine).

Despite the above, many thousands of small workshops were in fact nationalized, even though the state was quite unable to make them function. The statistics of the period were muddled, to say the least. The invaluable Kritsman gave a number of contradictory figures. Thus VSNK H claimed that on 1 November 1920 there were 4,420 nationalized enterprises, while another source made it 4,547. Yet in August 1920 an industrial census counted over 37,000 nationalized enterprises. Of these, however, over 5,000 employed one worker only. Many of these 'enterprises' were, apparently, windmills! This illustrates the fantastic extremes to which nationalization was pushed in 1919-20, despite the clear impracticability of such action.

**Kritsman called** the resultant confusion 'the most complete **form of** proletarian natural-anarchistic economy'. Anarchistic because of conflicts between different administrative instances, and because of lack of any coherent plan. Anarchistic too because of the 'shock' *(undarnyi)* campaigning methods, by which the authorities rushed from bottleneck to bottleneck, creating new shortages while seeking feverishly to deal with others. He claimed that it was 'heroic'. He knew and said that it was chaotic.

The war emergencies and the transport breakdown were everpresent reasons for tighter control. Already in November 1918 the Council of Workers' and Peasants' Defence was set up to collect and utilize resources for war. This council sprouted a number of committees with strangely abbreviated names such as *Chrezkomsnab* and *Chusosnabarm,* with special powers over defence industries, including those administered by VSNKH .

In March 1920 it became the Council of Labour and Defence *(Sovet truda i oborony,* STO). Lenin was its chairman, and its authority conflicted with, and became superior to, that of VSNKH . The STO became the effective economic cabinet and issued binding decrees on all kinds of things, from nationalization to boots. VSNKH , the STO and the government in 1920 were prone to set up committees to make plans for the expansion of production in future years. For this purpose a number of socalled bourgeois specialists were drawn in. They used the work of such men as Grinevetsky, though this able engineer-planner was an anti-Bolshevik. Some of these plans represent interesting pioneering efforts at thinking out means of developing Russian natural resources on a large scale, even though in the short run nothing whatever could have been done to make a reality of them. The best known of these plans was the so-called GOELRO, the plan for electrification of Russia to which Lenin paid so much attention and which Wells in his book described as senseless dreams amid the universal ruin. This was 'the first long-term development plan in human history'.<sup>28</sup> The plan was presented to a Congress of the Party in Moscow in 1920 by the old Bolshevik engineer Krzhizhanovsky. He illustrated the plan with a vast map of Russia in which electric light bulbs showed the electrification of the future. Such was the state of Moscow's

electricity supply at the time that it was necessary to cut off almost all the city in order to ensure that these lights on the map would not cause overstrain at the power station. The organization responsible for GOELRO was eventually merged with the nascent planning organs, as will be mentioned later on.

By the end of 1918, another body was undertaking the coordination of resource allocation: this was the Commission of Utilization *(Kommisiya ispol'zovaniya),* which, as its title suggests, was concerned with distribution, not production. It was interdepartmental, and tried to reconcile conflicting interests of the various glavki and commissariats. In doing so, it began, however haltingly, the practice of drawing up material balances, later to become an essential feature of Soviet planning.<sup>29</sup>

One gets the impression of utter administrative confusion, described by Vaisberg as 'administrative partisan war'. Central organs, in and out of VSNKH , while enforcing stern centralization, were often at odds with one another. No unified plan existed. There was priority for war, and numerous improvisations as the economy staggered from critical shortage to outright breakdown. But, to cite Vaisberg again, 'one must not forget and this is most important - that under these conditions the party coordinated the multitude of plans and operational decisions of the glavki, replacing the non-existent unified national-economic plan and ensuring military victory'.<sup>30</sup> And within the party the effective body, supreme oyer all, was the politbureau.

During the war-communism period the party fervently debated the linked issues of industrial administration and the role of the trade unions. We have seen that the original principles of workers' control involved a species of undefined supervision over the function of management, which gave rise to much indiscipline and strengthened syndicalist tendencies. The merging of the workers' councils with the trade unions could only improve the situation on condition that the trade unions were not behaving as sectional interest organizations and that they would do something effective to impose discipline. This concept of the trade unions was at variance with their representative character. It is true that the unions were increasingly under the control of members of the Bolshevik party. However, these members were not yet behaving

like obedient cogs in a machine, and themselves embodied tendencies which could only be described as syndicalist in nature. Many also had, as we have seen, illusions concerning the innate virtue of working-class initiative. Opposition to Lenin crystallized around the issues of one-man management and the role of the unions. Gradually, through 1919 and 1920, Lenin succeeded in having the principle of one-man management in industry introduced, but even as late as March 1920 he admitted his failure to persuade the Bolshevik faction in the trade unions to accept his ideas on this subject. In this respect, as in others, there were no clear rules of conduct. Thus management took the following forms in various places:

(1) A worker in charge, with a specialist assistant and adviser.

(2) A specialist in charge, with a worker-commissar attached to him.

(3) A specialist in charge, and a commissar who had the right to query but not to countermand his orders.

(4) A collegium, with a responsible chairman.<sup>31</sup>

Lenin's principle of 'iron discipline', to which he returned again and again, eventually overcame the concept of a management collegium which included representatives of the workers. The so-called Workers' Opposition, led by Shlyapnikov and Kollontai, thought in terms of trade-union control over the economy. This was not at all Lenin's view. He saw in the party the embodiment of the true interests of the entire working class, and would not allow any counterposing of trade unionist or sectionalist interests to the supreme authority of the party. It is interesting to note, in view of later Chinese policies, that the Workers' Opposition, in its speeches to the tenth party congress in 1921, advocated that every member of the party, whatever his position, should be an ordinary worker for several months in the year.

At the other extreme Trotsky advocated the militarization of labour. His views arose out of the desperate situation of 1920. A 'military' attack on the chaos in rail transport did have some success. He took the view that the urgency of the need for reconstruction was such that it justified the creation of a kind of labour army which would work under military discipline. Lenin

opposed this view. The trade unions in his opinion still had protective functions, given the bureaucratic deformations from which the Soviet state still suffered. Furthermore Trotsky, in making virtue out of necessity, went so far as to envisage labour militarization as lasting through the whole transitional period, until the time that socialist consciousness would make everyone desire to work for the common weal. Until then, the workers would have to be compelled to do what was needed - and it was the leadership who knew what it was. Bukharin at that time took a similar line. (Both quickly changed their tune once war communism was over.) Thus Bukharin feared that groups of workers 'will fail to understand all-proletarian tasks', and so one needed labour conscription and direction of labour, the 'concentrated coercion of the proletarian dictatorship, the militarization of economic command functions'. He saw no point in so-called 'freedom of labour'.<sup>32</sup>

These debates may seem to be of fundamental importance. It might appear that they were concerned with the 'conscience of the revolution' and the very essence of the nature of the Soviet state. Those who take this view may therefore deplore that so little space has been devoted here to the arguments of the protagonists. The arguments were of course deeply felt. Yet one must ask oneself whether the debates really made much difference to reality. It was natural that some communists would advocate direct working-class control over the factories, and that this would conflict with the need for discipline and order. It was natural, too, that the advocates of discipline and order would triumph, especially in the chaotic conditions of the period. The issue of whether or not the apparatus of economic control should be under the trade unions, which seems so fundamental, was surely in a very real sense a pseudo-issue. If the trade-union apparatus had taken over the tasks of running industry, it would have become transformed into another version of VSNKH , the economic department of government. It was quite impossible for the unions to retain their characteristics in this new role. As for the militarization of the economy, Trotsky's mistake was surely to ignore the longings of the demobilized soldiers and overwrought citizens for the status of free workers. The unions were

of **course** incorporated into the system and used as a 'transmission **belt',** between party and masses.

**Nor** was Lenin opposed to *ad hoc* militarization. Here, for instance, is one of his draft decrees: 'In a belt stretching 30-50 versts on both sides of the railway lines, introduce martial law for labour mobilization to clear the tracks.<sup>33</sup> He repeatedly urged the mobilization of the bourgeoisie for compulsory labour. A resolution approved by him during the height of the argument with Trotsky favoured 'sound [zdorovye] forms of the militarization of labour'.<sup>34</sup> Yet the fact remains that acres of scarce paper and tons of scarcer ink were devoted at this time to this particular discussion, by Lenin and many others.

The Essence and Ending of War Communism

So we can identify the following characteristics of war communism:

(1) An attempt to ban private manufacture, the nationalization of nearly all industry, the allocation of nearly all material stocks, and of what little output there was, by the state, especially for war purposes.

(2) A ban on private trade, never quite effective anywhere, but spasmodically enforced.

(3) Seizure of peasant surpluses (prodrazverstka).

(4) The partial elimination of money from the state's dealings with its own organizations and the citizens. Free rations, when there was anything to ration.

(5) All these factors combined with terror and arbitrariness, expropriations, requisitions. Efforts to establish discipline, with party control over trade unions. A siege economy with a communist ideology. A partly organized chaos. Sleepless, leatherjacketed commissars working round the clock in a vain effort to replace the free market.

By the beginning of 1920, the White armies were fleeing on all fronts, and the Bolsheviks were in control of an exhausted country. The time had come to consider the basis on which reconstruction could be achieved. No longer was it possible (or necessary) to subordinate all considerations to the struggle for survival. The means of recovery were now to hand. At the end of 1918 and for much of 1919 the Soviet-held territory of Russia was cut off from most of its customary sources of textile materials (Turkestan and the Baltic states), from oil, from the Donets coal basin, from the wheatlands of the North Caucasus and of the Ukraine, from most of its iron and steel plants. All these had returned to Soviet hands. True, they were in a deplorably rundown or decrepit state. But the resources were available, and needed to be activated. The task of reconstruction had to be tackled and the attention of the party leaders was increasingly devoted to this. The Polish invasion (May 1920), the subsequent Russian advance on Warsaw, and the painful retreat, interrupted for a time the process of re-thinking, by providing yet another reason for emergency measures. But fighting with Poland ended in October 1920.

However, the key problem was the relationship with the peasants, and also the related problems of freedom of trade and of private small-scale industry. It was becoming increasingly clear that the state organs were quite unable to cope with running all sections of industry and with the processes of material allocation, rationing and trade. Requisitioning (prodrazverstka) was bitterly resented by the bulk of the peasants, and agricultural recovery was impossible unless they could be given some incentives and a sense of security. State farms were not an acceptable solution and the peasants were strongly opposed to the transfer to them of any usable land which they themselves wanted. Trotsky may have appeared to be an extreme supporter of discipline, in that he favoured militarization of labour in 1920. Yet the same Trotsky was the first prominent Bolshevik to accept the need to abandon prodrazverstka, to substitute a tax in kind and to allow greater freedom for trade, or at least to barter. He said as much in February 1920. We have now learnt that a similar proposal had been made by Yu. Larin to the third congress of the *sovnarkhozy*  (economic councils) at the end of January 1920, and received some support, for example from Rykov, whereupon Lenin and Krestinsky insisted not only on rejection of the proposal but also forbade its publication, which is why it has surfaced only very

**recently.<sup>35</sup> The** Mensheviks, for example F. **Dan,** also argued for abandoning prodrazverstka. But Lenin was implacable. Yet he was on record as saying that requisitions were a necessary and temporary phase, arising from the emergency situation and the general destitution of the country. He could surely not have imagined that peasants would or could be persuaded (for long) to hand over their surpluses for what he himself described as 'coloured pieces of worthless paper'. He seems to have hoped for some sort of organized product exchange, which would still cut out private traders and keep the peasants wholly dependent on state sources of supply. Certainly the speeches of the time, and also such novels as *Cement* by Gladkov, show that a great many party members were devoted to the proposition that free trade and private manufacturing were sinful, that to allow such things was to surrender to the enemy, and that the widespread black market was an evil to be firmly suppressed. Later on, Lenin admitted that he too was affected by the prevailing atmosphere. On 29 April 1920 he said: 'We say that the peasants must give their surplus grain to the workers because under present-day conditions the sale of these surpluses would be a crime .. . As soon as we restore our industry, we will make every effort to satisfy the peasants' needs of urban manufactures.'<sup>36</sup> Yet two days earlier he had said: 'We will not feed those who do not work in Soviet enterprises and institutions',<sup>37</sup> which meant it was a crime for them-to eat.

In fact, he seems to have gone right off the rails. Far from modifying the extremes of war communism, the decrees adopted towards the end of 1920 were more extreme than ever. Prodrazverstka was strongly reasserted. Aware of the 'accursed vicious circle' — no industrial production meant no food in towns, no food in towns meant no industrial production - he tried to break out by more ruthless requisitioning. The peasants, he knew, 'needed [industrial] products, not paper money'. He was willing to say that 'we admit ourselves to be despots to the peasants'. But he insisted on their duty to deliver up their surpluses. Even as late as 27 December 1920, speaking to a conference in Moscow, he urged still more attacks on alleged kulaks, a category he refused to define: men on the spot would know; a man who bought a horse for five poods of grain was a kulak, for instance. When a delegate implied that delivery obligations of his area (Stavropol, North Caucasus) might be reduced, so as to avoid 'confiscations .. . and so as not to destroy the economy', Lenin told him: 'Act as you acted before. With strict conformity to the decree of the Soviet regime and your communist conscience,' which clearly meant — confiscate.<sup>38</sup> To be fair, on the very same day he found himself in a minority when he proposed the issuing of bonuses in kind to peasant households who produced more. His colleagues thought that bonuses should go only to agricultural associations of various kinds. Lenin replied: 'We have twenty million separate households, which are individually run and cannot be run otherwise. Not to reward them for increasing their productivity would be basically wrong.'<sup>39</sup> On 8 February 1921 Obolensky proposed to the central committee that prodrazverstka should be abolished and Lenin apparently approved.<sup>40</sup> He started making drafts of resolutions on the subject.

Yet as late as 24 February 1921, faced with what he described as kulak risings and a catastrophic situation, he blamed the peasant risings on an SR conspiracy fomented from abroad. Why? 'The connection may be seen because the rebellions occur in those regions from which we take bread grains.'<sup>41</sup> Such an absurd statement suggests he was overwrought, or just not thinking. But by then he was about to make up his mind that change was necessary.

In December 1920, too, an attempt was made to control by decree the sowing and harvesting on the twenty million peasant holdings. Of course, this could not be made effective. But the declaration of intent was made, and organizations to carry it out were set up *(posevkomy,* sowing committees), which is a significant index to the party's mentality at the time. The same extremism showed itself in industrial policy. Here too, as on the food front, Lenin in the same year thought in terms of organized action, priorities, suppression of the market. Industry must be started again, food must be provided. 'We must concentrate all our efforts on this task .. . It has to be solved by military methods, with absolute ruthlessness, and by the absolute suppression of all other interests'; so he said to the executive of the Soviets on

2 February 1920.<sup>42</sup> Perhaps it is in the last few words of this quotation that one finds the clue to the policy pursued in that year. Collapse was total. Priority of reconstruction must also be total. But the great illegal underground market economy, defying all efforts to control it, was sucking resources away, corrupting the apparatus and the proletariat alike. Very well, suppress it totally. So they must have argued. Only a year previously Bukharin and Preobrazhensky, both at this time known for their 'leftism', had quite explicitly stated (in their 'ABC of Communism') that nationalization of small-scale industry would be 'absolutely out of the question' (see page 63). So Lenin would hardly have been acting under pressure from them. This whole leap into extremism in the last months of 1920 plainly perplexed Kritsman, who made no attempt to explain it. He quoted the decree nationalizing all small-scale industry, which was dated as late as 29 November 1920, though by then most of it had already been either nationalized or paralysed. Of course, the administrative organs were quite unable to cope with thousands of tiny productive units. Chaos increased. Thus in that year efforts were made to retain, for the reconstruction period at least, the characteristic methods of war communism. But this proved impossible.

Events forced their hand. Peasant riots grew in intensity as the menace of a White victory in the civil war receded. Bandits roamed wide areas. In some provinces it proved necessary to despatch large armies to suppress rebellion, particularly the Antonov rising in Tambov. Food supplies were gravely endangered. The final straw was the Kronstadt rising, when the sailors rebelled against the miserable conditions of life, and in their slogans reflected the peasants' hostility to the party's policy. This rising began on 28 February 1921. But probably on 8 February, at latest on 24 February 1921, there were clear indications that Lenin had seen that a drastic change of line had become necessary. He expressed willingness to consider the end of prodrazverstka.<sup>43</sup> The rising may, however, have helped to convince even the more extreme of the Bolshevik leadership that a sharp about-turn was a matter of life or death for the regime - and therefore also for them. The New Economic Policy was born.

## Why War Communism?

We must now return to the theme with which we started this chapter. Was war communism a response to the war emergency and to collapse, or did it represent an all-out attempt to leap into socialism? I have already suggested that it could be both these things at once. Perhaps it should also be said that it meant different things to different Bolsheviks, and this is an important element in our understanding their view of the about-turn of 1921. Some felt that the days of 1918-20 were not only heroic and glorious days of struggle, leading to victory against heavy odds, but were also stages towards socialism or even the gateway to full communism. Some of these men were deeply shocked by the retreat, which seemed to them a betrayal of the revolution. Others saw the necessity of the retreat, but were above all concerned with limiting its consequences and resuming the advance at the earliest date. Still others - some of the future right wing among them - looked forward to a prolonged pause, and saw in war communism at best an unavoidable series of excesses. For them a large private sector in small-scale industry and trade, linked with an overwhelmingly private agriculture, was the condition of political security and economic reconstruction, and this would go on for a long time. These attitudes were by no means clear-cut. Lenin himself admitted that he had been over-sanguine about the war-communism period. More strikingly still, Bukharin swung from the extreme left to become in the end the ideologist of caution and compromise, as we shall see in the next chapter.

Evidence as to how the Bolsheviks saw the events of 1918-21 may be found in some fascinating debates held in the years 1922— 4 at the Socialist (later Communist) Academy. The men who spoke were still able to express frank views, to disagree with one another, speaking of events which they all remembered vividly. This was no official post mortem, or the smooth cleaned-up version of later party histories. It is therefore worth quoting what the various views were, even though all too briefly.

E. A. PREOBRAZHENSKY: YOU know mat in 1918 we introduced

**nationalization** only on a very modest scale, and only the civil war compelled us to go over to nationalization all along the line.<sup>44</sup>

V. P. MILYUTIN (one-time head of VSNKH) : In [early] 1918 we had **no** war communism, no all-round nationalization, and it is wrong to say **that** there were slogans advocating all-round nationalization. On the contrary, we moved cautiously towards taking over a few trustified sectors of industry.<sup>45</sup>

A. A. BOGDANOV: Two elements determined war communism. The element of *catastrophe,* this is what made war communism necessary in Russia .. . The second was a formal element: communism had to be achieved. But who could do it? He who knows how. I will remind you of the Paris Commune. There, in a besieged city, it was necessary to carry out at least some communist measures .. . I remember in 1918 how Lenin tried to prepare the ground for the thought that for the present we needed only state capitalism. Yes, we were cautious. I recall how the Bolsheviks felt when power fell into their hands. The first feeling was one of disarray *[rasteryannosf].* These were men given by history a gigantic burden to carry. They tried to act cautiously, but militaryrevolutionary necessity developed and compelled them, life compelled them, to act as they did.<sup>46</sup>

B. GOREV (ex-Menshevik): The most terrible enemy of the proletariat is the petty-bourgeois peasantry, and this enemy must be neutralized. In this -sense the experience of the Russian revolution shows that the nationalization of petty trade should be the last phase of the revolution, and not the first... The difficulty was not in the logic of civil war, as comrade Preobrazhensky thinks, but in the fact that the rebellious proletariat demand equality, that is consumer communism [i.e. he gives weight to pressure from below].<sup>47</sup>

v. FIRSOV (minor communist): NEP was arising already in 1918 .. . Then came the period of civil war; 'war communism' appeared. Our movement towards communism thereby slowed down, since socialist construction is impossible when all production potential is utilized unproductively. The war ended .. . The inevitable NEP<sup>48</sup> appeared, the first stage of our move towards socialism. NEP may be detestable and disagreeable for us, but it is inevitable. Is it a concession, a step back from our ideals? Yes. A move back as against our past? No, since we have nothing to retreat from. We are just beginning to advance. NEP is the advance line of socialist construction.<sup>49</sup>

L. N. KRITSMAN: War communism was a natural-anarchistic economy. Not a socialist form, but 'transitional to socialism'.<sup>50</sup>

YU. LARIN: We had to run the economy in the almost complete absence of normal economic conditions, and so inevitably the planned economy turned simply into the allocation of whatever was available.... That is the principal reason why the planned economy under war communism took the form of administrative measures, not of economic regulation but of administrative allocations.<sup>51</sup>

Trotsky, writing in 1920, had this to say:

Once having taken power, it is impossible to accept one set of consequences at will and refuse to accept others. If the capitalist bourgeoisie consciously and malignantly transforms the disorganization of production into a method of political struggle, with the object of restoring power to itself, the proletariat is *obliged* to resort to socialization, independently of whether this is beneficial or otherwise *at the given moment.* And, once having taken over production, the proletariat is obliged, under the pressure of iron necessity, to learn by its own experience a most difficult art - that of organizing a socialist economy. Having mounted the saddle, the rider is obliged to guide the horse - in peril of breaking his neck.<sup>52</sup>

Of course, the above quotations may have an element of *ex post*  justification about them. But it would still be over-simple to conclude, with Wiles,<sup>53</sup> that war communism represented a model of fully fledged quantitative planning, or, with Paul Craig Roberts and Laszlo Szamuely<sup>54</sup> that it was due almost solely to ideology, to trying to follow Marx, though similar arguments can now be encountered in Russia too since 1989. It could be argued, on the contrary, that Dobb, and the Soviet scholar Gimpelson, give too much weight to circumstances, too little to ideology. My own view, already stated, is that both factors played a major role and reinforced each other, and this differs little from the conclusions of Silvana Malle, in her full-scale survey of the period.<sup>55</sup> The elements which could be explained by this being a siegeeconomy were overlaid and sometimes overwhelmed by ideological-Marxist enthusiasm. But it is not inappropriate to remind oneself that men who considered themselves orthodox Marxists, such as Plekhanov, Kautsky, Martov, strongly opposed the theory and practice of war communism.

**What did Lenin** think? In 1920 he could still talk of reconstruction by enthusiasms — such as voluntary extra work, the so-called *subbotniki* - and by continuing strict centralization of economic life. We have already seen how he seems to have become 'overenthusiastic' in 1920. Evidence can be multiplied. Thus on 16 October 1920 he telegraphed the Soviet authorities in the Ukraine and urged them to develop collective cultivation, confiscate the money reserves of so-called kulaks (over and above the 'workers' norm', whatever that was), to collect 'fully' all bread-grain surpluses, to confiscate the farm implements of kulaks.<sup>56</sup> True, every now and again he told his comrades that they were going too far, as when, commenting on a draft decree on confiscation of property, he objected to the confiscation of all money held by anyone which exceeded the annual income of a worker, and also the confiscation of all books owned by anyone in excess of 3,000 volumes.<sup>57</sup> But it is clear that by 1920 Lenin was himself going too far, too fast.

He became finally convinced of the necessity of retreat and, true to his nature, he made of the necessity a set of basic principles, of which much more will be said in the next chapter. The new policy was to be carried through 'seriously and for a long time'. In his notes he has left us some interesting insights into his thought-processes. One such note reads: '1794 versus 1921.'<sup>58</sup> The Jacobins, in the French Revolution, had found that the terror and economic centralization had lost their *raison d'etre*  with the victory of 1794. The beneficiaries of the revolution, especially the more prosperous peasants, had pressed for relaxation and freedom to make money. This had swept away Robespierre, and the whole revolution moved to the right after 'Thermidor' (the month of Robespierre's downfall). All Russian revolutionaries had the example of France vividly before them. Lenin's notes show that he intended to carry out the *economic*  retreat to avoid a head-on clash with the forces that broke Robespierre. Robespierre, in his view, failed to take into account the class nature of his enemies, had struck out against individuals and had been swept away in the end. He, Lenin, would avoid such political consequences by keeping the levers of political power firmly in the hands of a disciplined party. So it was not a coincidence that the beginnings of NEP were accompanied not only by the final ban on all political parties other than the Bolsheviks, but also - at the tenth party congress in March 1921 - by a ban on factional organization within the Bolshevik party itself.