22

# Women's Movement in India: Issues and Perspectives

Pushpa Bali

he end of the Second World War and the retreat of imperialism in the twentieth century led to the increased demand and awareness of the human rights all over the world. The changes that followed the two world wars created atmosphere and built structures which emphasized the end of inequalities in the social order so that liberty, equality, and democracy could flourish. The quest for genuine equality has also laid greater emphasis on the collective rights of the vast majority of disadvantaged groups, such as women who constitute roughly 50 per cent of the total population. The twentieth century promoted the cause of gender justice by internationalizing struggles for equality by women all over the world. The new world order and the institutions, which emerged, promoted the debates on women's rights and genuine gender equality so that it become meaningful. The International Women's Decade initiated women's struggle against subordination, freedom, self-determination, equality and justice. The debate found expression in the form of various movements in the developed as well as developing countries. In fact, in developing countries, like India, women's movement was apart of the national movement against imperialism which emerged after the independence.

Women's Movement in India (WMI) emerged as a part of social reform movement in the early nineteenth century. This was the period when rights and wrongs to women became major issues. Early attempts to reform the conditions of women were led by men who came under Western influence, and tried to reform the society, started campaign against caste, polygamy, theism, adulatory, *purda*, child-marriage, and *sati*. They considered those outdated. They also took up fight against the issues which affected women,

particularly widows, who were so ill-treated, that the only viable option for them was either to become *sati* or be driven to accept prostitution. They initiated campaign for education of women which was non-existent at that time. The initial efforts for the upliftment of women was led by men. There were no independent movements of women for women and by women. It is a debatable issue "whether their main rationale for the upliftment of women was the production of companionable wives and enlightened mothers, the strengthening of the family structure or simply humanitarian feelings for inhuman and unjust atrocities". Be it what may, but one cannot deny the fact that for the first time it was realized that it is not the destiny of women to be illiterate and suffer. Society has a key role in their education and enlightenment. Social reform movement set in process, and as a result of it, many educated women, who were either wives, sisters or daughters and others who were beneficiaries of education, initiated by them, and joined the movement. By the early twentieth century, women's own autonomous organizations began to emerge. However, by the 1930s, after the mass participation of women in non-cooperation and civil disobedience movements led by Gandhi, WMI entered into the second phase.

During the second phase, there was a serious debate in the WMI regarding the rights of women. The supporters of pragmatic reforms demanded reservations for women, keeping in mind the real status of women in society, particularly in rural backward areas. But the women who were active in the national movement opposed any kind of reservations and demanded adult franchise, gender equality as the constitutional rights, and the like. There were occasional clashes between the two, but both agreed to work for social reforms and welfare of women. It was because of the active participation of women in the anti-imperialist struggle that the fundamental rights resolution of the Indian National Congress in 1931 in Karachi emphasized freedom, equality and justice for women which was later on incorporated in the constitution of India and hailed as a landmark, so far as rights of women are considered.

During the early years in the WMI, it was more or less taken for granted that the difference between the two sexes are such that they affect their roles, desires, and aims, so they should be treated differently and reared differently. Early nineteenth century reformers argued that these differences from men made them socially useful (as mothers), hence, proper care for their well-being was also socially necessary. Later on, when more and more women joined their own organizations though the difference between the two sexes was again stressed, emphasis was also laid on women's right to speech, education, equality, and emancipation.

# ❑❑ **Constitutional and Legal Rights**

The constitution of India is one of the most progressive documents so far as the legal rights of the women are concerned. The constitution makes no discrimination on the basis of sex and provides equal rights to all citizens irrespective of sex. It not only prohibits the state from discrimination against any citizen on the ground of sex, but also empowers the state to make special provisions for the well-being of the women.

Article 15 specially prohibits gender discrimination and provides "prohibition of discrimination on grounds of sex or place of birth". At the same time, Article 15(3) gives positive power to the state to make special provisions for women and children. Article 16(2)(1) provides equal opportunities to all citizens in matters of public employment and Article 16(2) categorically prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in respect of any employment or office under the state.

Besides the fundamental rights, the constitution of India has made special provisions for women under the Directive Principles of State Policy, particularly in Articles 38, 39, 42 and 44. Article 38(2) states that "the state shall, in particular, strive to minimize the inequalities and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status facilities and opportunities." Article 39(a) specifically provides "that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to adequate means to livelihood." Article 39(d), again, categorically states "that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women." Article 39(d) further lays down "that the health and strength of workers, men and women and the tender age of children are not abused and the citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter a vocation unsuited to their age or strength." The constitution under Article 42 made specific provisions "for just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief." Article 44 provides for "uniform civil code for citizens throughout the territory of India."

The constitution of India and the various provisions can be considered as a landmark as far as legal rights of women and gender equality is concerned, but it has raised a pertinent question: Can law bring social change? Can there be genuine equality among unequals? The ruling elite and the society overlooked the socio-economic backwardness of the women in the process of constitution making. It had adverse impact on the women which constituted one of the major segments of the disadvantaged group. Gender equality through constitutionally guaranteed remained a pious legal dream of the constitution-makers for quite some time.

Women activism in the post-independence era gave way to the building up of the institutions and structures. Though the government started *Mahila Mandals* and various reform programmes, many women were disillusioned by the half-hearted measures adopted by the government in the post-independence era, particularly on the issue of Hindu Code Bill. Even the plans for enacting a uniform civil code for all communities was shelved. It remains a distant dream even today. The WMI was more fragmented during that era than before, because of the elimination of the common enemy, the British Raj, which had great unifying impact on all segments of the WMI. Political divisions among the movement became more important than before because the WMI had never "identified their enemy on gender basis, partly due to the exigencies of colonialism and partly due to the complexities of the Indian culture in which gender relations has not been clearly distinguished as in the west." Moreover, many women Congress activists of the pre-independence era were now part of the government, so they could not take active part in the movement against their own party. Hence, there was a lull in the WMI, with the exception of one or two movements which were parts of their larger movements of that time but also raised women issues.

The first political movement which took place immediately after independence was the Telengana peasant movement in Andhra Pradesh (1948-50). It was a movement led by CPI in which about 2500 villages were liberated. It was basically an agrarian movement in which thousands of women participated along with the men but, besides the agrarian issues, it also paid attention to women's issues, such as "wife-beating, making it known that they would chastise the offenders," though "the attitude towards women remained one of benevolent paternalism."

In the early sixties, another movement, named, *Chipko Andolan* took place in Uttarakhand under the leadership of Sarvodaya leader Vinoba Bhave against degradation of forests. Women in large number participated in this movement. The movement also took up the issue of increasing consumption of alcohol, which the women considered the major cause of their suffering. Meera Behan and Sarla Behan, the two disciples of Mahatma Gandhi, were active in this movement. The movement focussed attention on action against the manufacturers and sellers of alcohol, but not the consumers who are the main cause of the problem.

## ❑❑ **Contemporary Women's Movement**

Contemporary WMI, which started in the seventies and eighties, was very different from the earlier movements and is influenced by two factors. First, the WMI which emerged in the seventies was greatly influenced by powerful women movement in the USA which ignited a world-wide debate and protest by women for their emancipation and rights. This influenced the women in India, particularly the urban educated elite classes. There was abundant feminist literature available in the universities, colleges and shops. At the same time, there was huge growth of Indian literature on socio-economic and socio-cultural issues focussing on women. But this was limited to the urban areas. Though the international events influenced WMI, the Indian movement had basically emerged due to the widespread disillusionment of women at the grass roots level with the process and model of development, which failed to eliminate poverty, discrimination, and injustice to the women. By the 1970s, there was widespread disillusionment among women groups with the process of development, and the attitude has gradually started shifting to confrontation. In fact, contemporary WMI has emerged out of radical confrontationist movements of the time. Four movements played a crucial role in the consolidation of the WMI at the grassroots level.

#### **Shahada Movement**

Shahada is a Bhil *adivasi* settlement in Dhulloia district of Maharashtra. Many young Sarvodaya workers started the Shramik Sangathan to help the *adivasis* suffering due to drought and famine. These organizations took a more militant approach, initiated land-grab, demanded minimum wages, and held women *shivirs* (camps). Women played active role in mobilizing the masses. As militancy developed in the movement, women issues also began to be raised along with the wider issues. Women applied their consciousness to the question of their oppression on the basis of gender. The movement shortly led to the anti-alcohol agitation, because many men after consuming alcohol beat their wives. Women *shivirs* were organized to discuss and help each other to eradicate this evil which is one of the main causes of their oppression. The Shahada movement started as a protest movement against landlords turned into a movement against the sale and consumption of alcohol and attack on wife-beaters. It was an indirect protest against violence in the family, which had so far been held as a private matter of the family. Shahada movement, in a way, challenged some aspects of patriarchy.

## **SEWA**

The first attempt to organize a women's trade union was made in Ahmedabad by a Gandhian socialist leader, Ella Bhatt, attached to the women wing of Textile Labour Association (TLA). She formed the Self-employed Women Association in 1972 to organize the women working in various trades in the informal sector. They all suffered due to extremely low wages, poor working conditions, and lack of training, harassment by the authorities or middlemen and police. The aim of the SEWA was to improve their working conditions, provide technical and economic assistance, help them to sell their products at better prices by collective bargaining and improve their economic status. The SEWA helped the women to become economically self-sufficient to give them freedom from exploitation by assurance of regular work arid access to opportunities for development. Thus, the SEWA helped the poor working women to improve their economic status and become self-sufficient, because economic dependence is one of the major reasons of their exploitation by men.

### **Anti-Price-Rise Front**

The conditions of famine and drought affected the urban areas in Maharashtra, which led to the rising prices and black-marketing. Mrinal Gore of the Socialist Party and Ahilya Rangekar of CPI(M) formed the United Front, Anti-Price-Rise Front, to mobilize the women in the cities against inflation. It became a mass movement demanding price-control and proper distribution of essential commodities at fair prices. The women groups also raided the premises of the black-marketers. It was a mass movement of urban housewives against economic hardships affecting their daily life.

#### **Nav Nirman Samiti**

After Maharashtra, the movement soon spread to Gujarat. Known as Nav Nirman Samiti, it was initially a student protest against rising prices of the essential commodities and political disorder. Later, it turned into a massive movement when middle-class women joined it. Women participated in these movements because rise in the price of essential commodities had adversely affected their daily life. Hoarding and black-marketing activities had caused added more hardship to the plight of the common people. The Anti-Price-Rise Front and Nav Nirman Samiti indirectly helped in crystallizing women's identity as a group.

In the same year, in Andhra Pradesh, the first feminist group formed the Progressive Organization of Women (POW). This group stressed on the existence of gender-based oppression and motivated women against it. The manifesto of this group emphasized on the concept of equality between men and women in every walk of life. According to them, the two primary structures of exploitation are gender-based division of labour on the biological basis and the culture which provides justification to such division.

The year 1975 witnessed a sudden development in the feminist movements. It was also declared as the International Women's Year by the United Nations. The declaration also focussed on the various activities. Influenced by the POW, the progressive women in Pune formed the *Purogami Stree Sangathan,* and in Bombay they founded *Stree Mukti Sangathan*. Lal Nishan Party, a splinter group of the CPI, brought out a special issue on women. Socialists organized a conference on *devdasis* and Muslim women. Several government and semi-government organizations celebrated the I.W.Y. in their own ways. In Hyderabad, radical women students of the POW organized campaign against sexual harassment, dowry, bride-burning. Social issues,such as dowry, bride-burning, violence, and sexual harassment of the women were debated all over India.

The proclamation of Emergency in 1975, and the suspension of civil liberties led to the suspension of the WMI. But, with the ascending of Janata Party to power in 1977, the movement was revived. In the later seventies and early eighties, the WMI was mainly dominated by urban groups though similar movements were going on in certain rural areas, such as Telengana in Hyderabad, where an incident of kidnapping of a woman and murder of her husband by a local landlord led to a chain of events ended with development and demand for independent women's organizations in the area because women felt that "Women organization affiliated to political parties (even in socialist countries) have become mere appendages of those parties Women's organizations should guard against such a danger, but without isolating themselves from the masses and from the revolutionary movement."

By the 1980s, women groups were active all over India. They organized poster-exhibitions, meetings, study circles and activists' meetings to debate on issues related to women and started campaigns against them. A forum against rape was formed against the Supreme Court's judgement in the Mathura rape case. The third phase of the WMI is also concerned with woman's control over her body. It debated issues including women's health, violence, rape, wife-battering, divorce, right to maintenance, child custody, etc. They are also concerned not only with the enactment of legislation in favour of women, but also with amendments to the existing anti-women laws. The WMI is equally concerned about the proper implementation of the existing laws concerning women and their rights. WMI in its current phase is not only concerned with education of the women, but equally concerned about standard education, textbooks having women-oriented content in the proper perspective. Many universities have opened women studies and development centres, introduced women-oriented education programmes. Women Development Centres are conducting academic researches on women-related issues. The WMI, in this decade, is concerned with equality which is genuine. They not want reservations alone, but proper share in all material resources, means of production, education, and in decision-making process. The progressive WMI is the outcome of changing social, economic, and political reality.

The WMI is an ongoing process. It started as a protest against negative outlook towards women and their problems. It moved on to the second phase where they denied biological explanation of existing disparities between the two sexes, then to the third phase where men and women are equal. In the early nineteenth century, it started with humanitarian concerns for the suffering of women, and the need for reform. By the twentieth century, the emphasis has shifted to stressing women's right to be treated as useful members of society. By the late twentieth century, it has moved to women's right to self-determination.

The WMI demonstrated a variety of ideologies in it. Each group has its own perception and theories. According to the Left groups [Left is a wide term including so many groups such as CPI, CPI(M), Maoist groups], the primary reason for women's subordination is their economic dependence on men and exploitation in the capitalist system of production and the feudal structure, and the culture of the society. The classless, stateless society will eventually liberate the women from such subjugation.

The socialist groups (*e.g.,* Samajwadi Mahila Samaj) and Congressoriented AIWC explain women's exploitation and her unequal status in terms of social traditions, religious practices, materialistic, and consumerist attitude of society. Following the Gandhi an ideology they urge women to develop their own inner strength, use rational persuasion for strength.

The newly-formed radical youth and feminist groups perceive the women problems, such as violence as the manifestation of unequal relationship of men and women because of patriarchy. According to them, the domination and exploitation of women's labour, fertility, and sexuality are caused by men's exploitation of women. So, the man-woman relationship has to be changed. Unless there is genuine equality between the two sexes, women cannot be liberated.

Women in India have been deprived of their rights, for long. They were forced to suffer deprivation by the society in silence. The women's movement in India is the reassertion of their rights as equal in the political economic process. It is the manifestation of their desire to live with dignity in society, but this has directly challenged the old feudal, conservative values and structures based on patriarchy.

Women's movement has mounted a great pressure on the government. Responding to this pressure is a formidable task for the government. A democratically elected government cannot overlook these issues. So, how to maintain a balance between conservative feudal forces and radical forces in a democratic society is a challenge for the government. Women's movement has played a dual role in this process, confronting/demanding and petitioning the state on one hand and advocating, collaborating with and briefing it on the other. Quite often, the women's groups have succeeded in seeking positive legislation's in their favour. In 1991, the government set up National and State Commissions for women to monitor the women-oriented programmes of the government. Various political parties, too, are quick to realize the importance of women as voters and have set up their women's wings. Within the women's movement, there are so many diversities, dissensions, ideological differences which affect their perception of the women and issues related with them. It is natural for a plural, multi-culture, multilingual, multi-religious democratic society, and this is the strength of the movement. Any social movement in such a diverse society, is bound to have different views. Moreover, the problems of the rural women are different from those of the urban women. Similarly, the problems of dalit, tribal, poor, illiterate, working-women are bound to be different from the urban, literate, working women or urban elite women. Even the culture and religion have their own cultural and religious biases which may adversely affect the women's belonging to them. Certain issues may be crucial for a particular women group, but may not be of the same importance for others. Hence, the women's movement in India, is bound to have cleavages. Despite these differences, there are certain issues which are of equal importance for the women in general. *Towards Equality,* the report of the Committee on Status of Woman appointed by the Government of India in 1974, highlighted certain key issues which are crucial for gender equality in India. The Committee expressed serious doubts about the process of modernization which had ignored the real difference and exaggerated the influence of culture, religion, and social values on gender roles. It is clearly reflected by study of the role of women in economic life where they are shown as consumers and reproductive beings and not as producers. There is accelerated decline in the sex-ratio, increasing gap in life expectancy, mortality, and economic participation. Even demographic trends have supported these facts. The government failed to fulfil the constitutional-legal mandate. Women's organizations demand real equality.

## ❑❑ **Issues before the Women's Movement**

There are so many issues before the women's movement and their organizations in a culturally and economically diverse society like ours. Some issues are local, some are issues before a particular community or section of society. There are certain issues which can be identified as the key issues affecting women all over India, and are the main causes of the marginalization of women and key to gender equality. Each one of them is so crucial that it requires thorough in-depth study to understand its true impact. These issues are:

#### **Violence**

Violence is one of the major issues before the movement since the time of its inception. In general, it is a coercive mechanism to inflict one's will over another, to assert one's own power. A hierarchical social structure,like ours, has violence in-built in it. The intensity of violence exercised by the dominant group to subjugate the subordinate group differs from place-to-place and time-to-time. Violence is often perpetuated through the institutions of state, community, family, and the society at large. Any demand or efforts to change it, is interpreted as a revolt against the institutions of the society. Quite often, the women's movements have protested against such violence and demanded legislation against it. The women's movements have taken up issues, like domestic violence, dowry-deaths, rape, female infanticide, amniocentesis tests for sex determination, burning of widows, lynching women on suspicion of witchcraft and forcing them into prostitution. A new kind of violence is inflicted upon women's body by conducting different types of medical tests (particularly for family planning), without realizing the side effect on their health. For medical research, female body is used as guinea pigs.

Despite laws and women's movements, there is a sharp increase in the number of cases of violence against women. In recent years, there have been many cases of stripping, individual and gangrape, humiliation inflicted on *Dalits* as well as other women. Often this is attributed to the media and its activism to project such cases, but the fact is that in so many cases, it is due to the backlash of the feudal conservative structures of society which want to reinforce their subjugation through coercion, humiliation, and violence. On one side, the movement for women's rights is strengthened, on the other side, there is an increase in social acceptance of violence and its use for personal and political benefit. Although the government has enacted legislations, but these laws are full of lacunae or they have been implemented half-heartedly due to the patriarchal and feudal values of the law-enforcement agencies.

#### **Fundamentalism and Communalism**

Fundamentalism and communalism is another major issue before the women's movements in India. The wave of fundamentalist upsurge sweeping across the world has adverse impact on women's movements abroad and in India in particular. The complex structure of the Indian society, economic constraints before the state and political opportunism have provided enough breathing space to communalism. Religion plays a dominant role in the life of individuals in our society. Though the constitution proclaims India as a secular state, political opportunism has led to the revival of religious fundamentalism in the last few years. Often, the political parties play religion as a trump card to gain the support of the particular community. Religious, ethnic or cultural fundamentalism is opposed to gender equalityand dignity. The year 1985 marked a shift in the Indian politics. For lack of effective leadership and the need for the support of the various groups, the government and various political parties adopted policies and played the communal card for their own benefits. In May 1986, the government totally surrendered to the Muslim fundamentalists on the issue of Muslim women's right to maintenance in case of divorce, under Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code, a secular law open to all communities. It was a total surrender by the government to the Islamic fundamentalism and was opposed by the women's organizations, irrespective of religion. Even the progressive and educated section of the Muslim community was opposed to it.

In 1992, the demolition of the 500-year-old Babri Masjid in Ayodhaya by Hindu fundamentalists sparked off violence and riots in several parts of the country. Women were the most vulnerable targets of the communal frenzy. Because of the patriarchal ideology of the family and community honour, women were subjected to rape and humiliation in order to demoralize them. There have been many riots in India, but the riots after the mosque-demolition witnessed the worst kind of sexual perversities inflicted upon the women, particularly women from the minority community.

Since women are deeply attached to religion, the various fundamentalist groups are floating new kind of religious women's organizations, like Durga Vahini, Matri Shakti, which focus on the role of the mother, defender of the faith, protector of the social and cultural values of society and, thus, maintain the status quo. Quite often, the religious platform is used for propagating fundamentalism. The illiterate and religious women in the rural and urban areas are the main target of communal fundamentalism. There is a greater need for the reinterpretation of religion as a progressive social force because the power of the fundamentalist resulted from all-male religious hierarchies which excluded women from interpretation of scriptures. Moreover, the women's movements also have to start a dialogue with other women's organizations, cutting across the barriers of religion, education, and space, bring them to the mainstream of women's movement, and save them from the clutches of fundamentalists.

## ❑❑ **Women and Economic Issues**

Impoverishment of the majority of women in the economy is one of the vital issues of concern for the movement as well as academics. The committee on Status of Women in India, for the first time, raised the issue to examine the relationship between macro-economic changes and the women's status. The focus on the economic themes by the women's studies in the National Conference helped the academics to conduct serious research on this issue. Moreover, some organizations of poor women in the informal sector (*e.g.,* Self-employed Women's Association, Annapurna) were doing excellent work at the grassroots level for the upliftment of women through economic development and empowerment. In fact, their record is much better than the government. In 1977, the new government decided to review various development policies, and started search for alternative strategies for the development to check the marginalization of women, particularly poor women in the development process. It was during that time, because of the combined efforts of women members of Parliament belonging to various political parties and pressure of the active women's groups, that Planning Commission included a chapter on "Women and Development in the Sixth Five-Year Plan." Henceforth, all government programmes will focus on women, as a separate category, acknowledging government's inability to achieve gender equality, the plan clearly stated that without economic independence, equal access to education, skill-training and family planning services, constitutional guarantees of equality remain a myth. Henceforth, all anti-poverty programmes were directed to include women as target. In case of distribution of assets by government, it will provide joint ownership to husband and wife, will also give priority to families headed by women. Women's groups have consistently demanded for genuine land reforms. The late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, in the last years of his prime ministership hosted the second NAM conference on "Women and Development" and also initiated debate on the new Panchayati Raj Bill which proposed to give greater power to women. It was implemented after 73rd constitutional Amendment Act in 1991 and reserved 33 per cent seats for women in local bodies. In 1991, the government also set up the National Commission and State Commissions for women to serve as watchdog bodies, monitoring the implementation of pro-women policies.

Today, the Indian women feel that the Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAP) have adverse impact on the women and children. First, it has removed the regulatory aspects of the state in the mixed economy and replaced it with globalization and open market. The opening up of the market has allowed the multinational corporations to enter the Indian market, leaving women and deprived groups at their mercy. At present, 94 per cent of the women are part of the informal sector. When the future of informal sector itself is in question one can imagine the plight of women employed in it. Second, steep rise in prices due to SAP has badly hit the women and children. The per capita intake of cereals have dropped in the past two years causing serious health concerns. Third, as a result of SAP, traditional industries, like coir, cashew, tobacco, khadi, fishing, which generally employ women are severely affected and, thus, cause further impoverishment of women in the rural areas.

Contemporary women's movement in India covers a large canvas. It includes many organizations in its fold and many ideologies and viewpoints on the various issues. They may differ in their understanding of class gender and the origin of women's oppression, but they all share a common belief that women are an oppressed section of the society. Even at the time of the Beijing conference, held in September 1995, besides the official delegation and the paper, seven Indian leading women's organizations which had the support of over a hundred welfare organizations, released their alternative paper titled, "Towards Beijing: Perspective from the Indian Women's Movement", which criticized the governmental paper and some of the policies directed towards women, which they placed in the conference along with the official paper. Almost an equal number of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) also participated and presented their papers, criticizing the governmental policies concerning women, their health and family planning.

Due to the pressure from the women's groups, the government has enacted several new legislations; amended many of the existing laws. But, it raised one very important question to ponder, whether law can bring social change. Despite the government enacting or amending legislations in favour of women, these legislations and efforts are half-baked, full of lacunae, could not be implemented effectively due to over bureaucratization at the government level, patriarchal values and hierarchies, and vested interests of law-enforcement agencies. Even serious crimes, like rape or dowry-deaths at times are difficult to register, leave aside the question of punishing the guilty. Even their interpretations and judgement are at times much influenced by the prevailing social and cultural prejudices. The case of Bhanwari Devi, a social worker in Rajasthan and the judgement of District and Sessions Court, Jaipur, is an eye-opener.

Gender equality remains a utopia unless the values of those who interpret and implement the laws are changed. We have to bring a social change in the outlook of the society. It is essential that women have more access and participation in the decision-making at all levels. This can only be possible by literacy, social awareness, and economic empowerment of the women. Gender equality and social justice have yet to tread a long way. "Today, the WMI has created an ethos and environment, it has put forward a hope and a future which every woman can claim and gain strength from so she may work out in her own way, her struggle for a better life and society."

#### **Notes and References**

- All India Women's Conference, *Indian Women in the 1980s: Development Perspectives,* All India Women Conference, 1980.
- Government of India, *Towards Equality:* Report *of the Committee on Status of Women in India,* Government of India, 1974.
- Bibekanand Das and LN. Dash, The *Feminine Gender,* New Delhi, Manak Publications Pvt. Ltd., 1995.
- Hem Lata Swaroop and Sarojani Bisaria (ed.), *Women. Politics and Religion,* A.C. Brothers. Etawah, 1991.
- Jean Grimshaw, *Feminist Philosophers: Women's Perspective on Philosophical Traditions,*  Sussex, Harvester Press, 1986.
- K. Murali Manohar (ed.), *Women Status and Development in India, Society for Women's Studies and Development,* Warangal, 1983.
- Nandita Gandhi and Nandita Shah, *The Issues at Stake:* Theory *and Practice in the Contemporary Women's Movement in India,* New Delhi, Kali for Women, 1992.
- Radha Kumar, *The History of Doing: An Illustrated Account of Movements for Women's*  Rights and Feminism in India 1800-1990, New Delhi, Kali for Women, 1993.
- Kum Kum Sangari and Sudesh Vaid (ed.), *Recasting Women. Essays in Colonial History of India,* New Delhi, Kali for Women, 1989.
- Subrata Mukherjee and Susheela Ramaswamy (eds.), *Women in the Past, Present and Future,* New Delhi, Deep and Deep Publications, 1996.
- Susheela Kaushik (ed.), "History Politics and Theory", *Teaching Politics,* Delhi, 1988.
- Tanika Sarkar and Urvashi Butalia, *Women and the Hindu Rights: A Collection of Essays,*  New Delhi, Kali for Women, 1995.
- Flavia Agnes, "Women's Movement within a Secular Framework", *Economic and Political Weekly,* Vol. XXIX, No. 19, 7th May 1994.
- Indu Agnihotri and Veena Mazumdar, "Women Movement in India. 1970-90: Changing Political Discourse", *Economic and Political Weekly,* Vol. XXX, No. 29, 22nd July 1995.
- Supriya Akerkar, "Theory and Practice of Women's Movement in India", *Economic and Political Weekly,* Vol. XXX, No. 17, 29th April 1995. *The Hindustan Times,* Year Page, Delhi edition, 31st August 1995, p. 14.