# **Cognitive Medical Anthropology**

### **Linda C. Garro**

### **INTRODUCTION**

The term cognitive medical anthropology does not refer to a recognized and clearly demarcated field of study but rather to a body of work that addresses topics of relevance to medical anthropologists while also reflecting cognitive anthropological interest in "the relation between human society and human thought" (D'Andrade, 1995, p. 1, italics removed).

Initially labeled as the "new ethnography," "ethnoscience," "ethnosemantics," or "ethnographic semantics" (Casson, 1994), the emergence of cognitive anthropology dates to the beginning of what has been called the "cognitive revolution" in the late 1950s (D'Andrade, 1995). After a "long cold winter of objectivism" and the domination of behavioristic theories, the cognitive revolution "was intended to bring 'mind' back into the human sciences" (Bruner, 1990, p. 1). A recurring commitment expressed in much of the cognitive anthropological literature is to describe and represent cultural knowledge in a manner compatible with what is known about human cognition. For many, another longstanding orientation is to

the insider's view: the society member's perspective on what things mean and what is going on in his or her social world. The principal aim of cognitive anthropology is to understand and describe people in other societies in their own terms, as they conceive and experience it. A further aim is to avoid the biases induced by ethnocentrism, distortions that result when an investigator imposes an outsider's view on life in another society and describes it from this external perspective. (Casson, 1994, p. 61)

An early and influential conceptualization of culture formulated by Ward Goodenough motivated much subsequent work within cognitive anthropology. Goodenough (1957, p. 167) defined culture as "whatever it is one must know or believe in order to operate in a manner acceptable to its members, and do so in any role that they accept for any one of themselves. Culture . . . must consist of the end product of learning: knowledge, in a most general, if relative, sense of the term." While a focus on describing shared and internalized cultural content (e.g., shared understandings about illness or widely known cultural

models) has been and continues to be a productive venue of inquiry, some cognitively oriented work within medical anthropology points to the limitations of focusing on the "end product" without also attending to process. Such work has underscored the socially situated nature of cognition, embedded in and unfolding in interactions and activities to meet the needs of everyday life.

Although the specific studies examined here concern topics of interest to medical anthropologists, not all the literature reviewed here is authored by individuals who self-identify as medical anthropologists. Links to broader trends and themes in cognitive anthropology are provided to situate the research discussed. The first section introduces some methodologies proposed for discovering the underlying conceptual organization of the illness domain. Other topics explored here include: measuring variability in cultural knowledge and the development of cultural consensus theory; comparing cultural knowledge across cultural settings; cognitive– ethnographic studies of illness treatment decisions; and cultural models of illness and illness narratives.

# **METHODS AND THE CONCEPTUAL ORGANIZATION OF THE ILLNESS DOMAIN**

Under Goodenough's broad mandate, considerable attention became directed to developing "a kind of ethnography in which the methods of description are public and replicable" (Tyler, 1969, p. 20) as integral to the process of discovering "how cultural knowledge is organized in the mind" (D'Andrade, 1995, p. 248). In this section, three such methodologically oriented approaches used in studying the conceptual organization of the illness domain are described.

An early article by Frake entitled "The Diagnosis of Disease Among the Subanun of Mindanao" showcases elicitation and analytic methods applicable to "a more rigorous search for meanings" (Frake, 1961, p. 113) as

### **Methods and the Conceptual Organization of the Illness Domain 13**

a step "toward the formulation of an operationallyexplicit methodology for discerning how people construe their world of experience from the way they talk about it" (Frake, 1969, pp. 28–29). During his fieldwork, Frake found that: "Their continual exposure to discussions of sickness facilitates the learning of disease concepts by all Subanun." Characterizing the meaning of a disease concept as the "information necessary to arrive at a specific answer" or diagnosis (Frake, 1961, p. 114), Frake limited the terms elicited to the perceptual realm of skin diseases and the culturally specific (emic) diagnostic criteria which serve to define and differentiate them. Noting the "conceptual exhaustiveness of Subanun classification of natural phenomena" (Frake, 1961, p. 131), Frake portrayed the underlying conceptual organization as taking taxonomic form with different diagnostic criteria operative at different levels of contrast and with increasing specificity at lower levels of the hierarchy. While "informants rarely disagree in their verbal descriptions of what makes one disease different from another," the "'real world' of disease presents a continuum of symptomatic variation which does not fit neatly into conceptual pigeonholes" (Frake, 1961, p. 130). As a "social activity" that involves negotiating the relevance of culturally shared categories to specific instances, the diagnosis of a particular disease may "evoke considerable debate" (Frake, 1961, pp. 129 & 130–131). Thus, while the "analysis of a culture's terminological systems will not, of course, exhaustively reveal the cognitive world of its members . . . it will certainly tap a central portion of it" (Frake, 1969, p. 30).

Aiming for a more comprehensive understanding of the conceptual domain of illness, subsequent researchers (D'Andrade, Quinn, Nerlove, & Romney, 1972; Young, 1978; Young & Garro, 1994) report unsatisfactory results from efforts to elicit taxonomies or "to carry out standard feature analysis" (D'Andrade, 1995, p. 70). Researchers turned to methods, such as the term–frame substitution task, which allowed for directly comparable responses across informants. Constructing a term–frame interview requires a list of illness terms as well as a set of statements about illness. Each illness term is systematically inserted into each question frame and informants are asked whether the resulting sentence is correct or not (see Weller & Romney, 1988, for further details on this and other systematic data collection techniques). From "Categories of Disease in American-English and Mexican-Spanish" (D'Andrade et al., 1972), an

American-English question frame is "You can catch

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ from other people." The number of responses analyzed for each individual can be quite large as this is determined by the product of the number of terms and the number of frames. Analytic techniques for such similarity judgments used in a number of studies include multidimensional scaling (MDS) and cluster analysis (see also D'Andrade, 1976; Garro, 1983). MDS provides a visual representation in which items responded to in similar ways are placed closer together in the scaling plot. Cluster analysis groups items together at increasing degrees of similarity in responses.

In work carried out by Young and Garro in Pichátaro, a Tarascan town in the Mexican state of Michoacán, the set of 34 illness terms and 43 frames used in a term–frame interview came primarily from wide-ranging informal interviews about different kinds of illnesses and specific illness episodes, with selected statements recast as yes/no questions (Garro, 1983; Young, 1978; Young & Garro, 1994). Although not intended to be exhaustive, representativeness was a goal, both with regard to the range of illnesses covered and in terms of what matters to community members when they talk about and deal with illness. Rather than being a "shortcut," considerable ethnographic grounding is required to construct a suitable term–frame interview. While the responses can be analyzed in a number of ways, including MDS, that converge on similar patterning (see Garro, 1983), organizing the relatively large number of terms and frames according to the results of a hierarchical cluster analyses facilitated the discovery of similarities and contrasts across this rather large number of terms and frames (Young, 1978; Young & Garro, 1994). Further, a formal analysis of the distribution of frames relative to illness clusters served to differentiate the characteristics linked with particular clusters from those that are more general. Through this procedure the findings are tied to patterns in the data and thus are less dependent on what the researcher sees than when the MDS plot is interpreted. At the broadest level, which clustered illnesses into two main groups, there was an overall distinction between external versus internal locus of cause—illnesses resulting from contact with hazardous environmental agents versus those resulting from internally initiated conditions (related to diet and emotion). Other key distinctions were made on the basis of illness gravity and the life stage of the characteristic victim. All the aforementioned were also among the most important considerations involved in actions aimed at preventing and alleviating illness. Conspicuously absent from this discussion, however, is the "hot–cold" etiological distinction, even though this was the subject of a number of the question frames. This distinction does not play an important role in the conceptual structuring of the illness categories present in the cluster analysis (see also Weller, 1984b). This was perhaps because, in Pichátaro, distinctions based primarily on these etiological principles did not necessarily reflect the types of knowledge most significant for purposive action in relation to illness. In contrast with Frake's efforts to discover the defining features relevant to diagnosis (the distinctive features that define illness terms), the use of the term–frame substitution task in Pichátaro as well as in D'Andrade et al. (1972) was oriented around discovering the underlying conceptual distinctions that matter most to people in avoiding and dealing with illness in the context of everyday life.

Using different methods, Weller (1984a) tested the cultural salience of concepts reported in the D'Andrade et al. (1972) study with "samples of urban literate women with children living in the United States and Guatemala." In the earlier research, the concepts of degree of contagion and severity were highlighted for English speakers. For Spanish speakers, important concepts included the relative frequency of occurrence in children versus adults and the appropriateness of hot or cold remedies. Weller (1984a, p. 341) measured "agreement among informants to assess the relative cultural salience" of these illness concepts, starting from the assumption that concepts with the "highest agreement are culturally more salient than those with lower agreement." An initial pile-sort task with well-known illnesses provided similarity judgments used to construct a " 'conceptual model' of disease" using MDS. A comparison between the Americans and the Guatemalans carried out by restricting the analysis to the subset of illness terms common to both groups found a high degree of correspondence between the two conceptual models. The data used to assess the saliency of the four concepts mentioned above were separate ranking orderings of the illness on each concept obtained from each of the participants (the Americans did not rank illness on hot–cold). Both agreement among individuals and the fit between the conceptual model and the individual rank-order data for each concept were assessed. For the Americans, the results indicated that all three ranked concepts were important in the cognitive organization of illness. For the Guatemalans, the "conceptual structure" is "best characterized by the concepts of contagion and severity." More variation among informants and a poorer fit between the rankings and the model were reported for the age-related and hot–cold concepts. Indeed, the "variation on the hot–cold dimension is so extreme that it seems to indicate that there may not be a culturally shared definition of that concept" (Weller, 1984a, p. 345; see also Weller, 1983).

# **MEASURING VARIABILITY IN A CULTURAL SETTING AND CULTURAL CONSENSUS THEORY**

Variability in cultural knowledge about illness within an identified setting was first systematically addressed by Fabrega in the Mayan community of Zinacantan, Mexico (Fabrega, 1970; Fabrega & Silver, chapter 7, 1973). A form of term–frame interview was used where a set of 18 illness terms were paired with 24 possible bodily disturbances (symptoms). Two groups—one composed of 30 practicing *h'iloletik* (shamans) and the other 30 laymen—were compared. A chi-square analysis found no significant differences between the groups (see Garro, 1986, p. 352).

As noted above, Weller (1983, 1984a) relied upon the extent of intracultural variability as a way for assessing what is culturally shared. Along with Boster's (1980) finding that consensus indicates shared knowledge, Weller's work exploring the implications of intraindividual and interindividual agreement for identifying individuals with cultural expertise foreshadows the formal development of cultural consensus theory (Weller, 1984b). Cultural consensus (Romney, Weller, & Batchelder, 1986) refers to both a theory and a mathematical model for "estimating how much of a given domain of culture each individual informant 'knows' (called cultural competence in the theory) as well as estimating the 'correct' cultural response to each question that can be asked about the particular domain of culture under consideration" (Romney, 1994, pp. 268–269). Prompted by the "need to find more objective ways to investigate culture" (Romney et al., 1986, p. 314) and given the existence of intracultural variability, cultural consensus theory "helps describe and measure the extent to which cultural beliefs are shared . . . If the beliefs represented by the data are not shared, the analysis will show

this" (Romney, 1999, p. S103). A reanalysis of the contagion and hot–cold rankings from the urban Guatemalan women (Weller, 1984a) was presented in the article introducing the cultural consensus model (Romney et al., 1986, pp. 327–329) and reinforced the earlier findings cultural consensus characterized the contagion rankings but not the hot–cold rankings—leading the authors to conclude that "informants do not share a coherent set of cultural beliefs concerning what diseases require hot or cold medicines" (Romney et al., 1986, p. 328).

Another study exploring variation in cultural knowledge about illness and its treatment compared curers and non-curers (all women) in Pichátaro using responses from a term–frame interview (Garro, 1986). The Quadratic Assignment Program (Hubert & Schultz, 1976) was used to test three alternative hypotheses of interinformant agreement. Although not originally analyzed using the cultural consensus approach, a reanalysis illustrated both sharing and variability within cultural consensus theory (Garro, 2000a, pp. 281–283). The cultural consensus findings were consistent with a high level of sharing in cultural knowledge across both the curers and non-curers. Yet, there was variability in the extent to which individuals could be said to represent this shared knowledge. A specific prediction was that curers, by virtue of their greater experience in dealing with illness and differential opportunities to learn about it, would better represent shared cultural knowledge as evidenced by higher overall levels of agreement (consensus) within this group. This hypothesis was supported but it was also discovered that there was a confounding with age such that older individuals, irrespective of curer status (and curers tended to be older), also agreed more among each other. Like curers, older individuals were socially positioned to have learned more, and hence share more knowledge about illness. Both of these findings were consistent with cultural consensus theory's conceptualization of variation across informants as indicating measurable differences in the amount of knowledge about a cultural domain, with some knowing more than others.

# **COMPARING CULTURAL KNOWLEDGE ACROSS DIFFERENT SETTINGS**

In addition to the general comparisons across cultural settings discussed above, a number of studies have taken

a closer look at what can be learned through a comparative approach. Three different approaches are examined here. The most ambitious of these is a "collaborative, multisite study using a shared methodology" to study "intra- and inter-cultural variation in beliefs" (Weller, Pachter, Trotter, & Baer, 1993, p. 109) for four geographically separated and distinctive Latin American samples. The illnesses are considered to be either biomedical or folk conditions. Weller and Baer (2001) present findings for five of the eight illnesses studied (AIDS, diabetes, the common cold, empacho, and mal de ojo; with asthma, nervios, and susto also included in the larger design) and some detailed studies, comparing beliefs for individual illness conditions have been published (Weller et al., 1993, 1999). Noting that it "is usually impossible to know if reported differences between cultures are due to cultural differences or due to a difference in methods used to study the cultures," the researchers constructed a series of 100–150 yes/no questions for each of the illnesses which allowed them to collect comparable data at each site. The questions asked about "potential causes, susceptibility, signs and symptoms, treatments, healers, and sequelae" and were constructed on the basis of informal interviews at each of four sites and some additional sources (Weller & Baer, 2001). With cultural consensus analysis supporting high agreement within samples (Weller et al., 1993), the results of a binomial test indicating a "strong majority response (-66%) in each sample for each illness was used to estimate group beliefs about the presence/absence of features that best described each illness" (Weller & Baer, 2001, p. 201). Features determined to be of high concordance within each setting were then directly compared as a way of assessing what was distinctive or unique across the four groups. The finding of a high degree of sharing with little unique variation across the groups led Weller and Baer (2001, p. 222) to reflect on the underlying cognitive representation and suggest that "the illnesses and features that define them may compose a systemic culture pattern or high concordance code in the sense that they may form a structured set of related items with high agreement and stability across culture members." These comments about "feature sets" brought to mind D'Andrade's (1976) somewhat different assessment, based on work involving the term–frame substitution interview, that it was cognitively plausible to expect that knowledge about illness or any other cultural domain is stored in terms of propositions, or in other ways of representing conceptual relationships,

### **Comparing Cultural Knowledge Across Different Settings 15**

which have the generative or productive capacity to answer novel questions and make inferences.

Garro (1996) explored the generalizability of causal accounts of diabetes through an analysis of 88 dual-format interviews carried out across three Canadian Anishinaabe (Ojibway) communities. In all three communities type-II diabetes was viewed as a relatively "new" illness, with the first cases diagnosed within living memory, but also as a disease which affected so many people that it was seen to be a major health problem. The three communities were chosen to vary in significant ways from each other, including the relative degree of geographic isolation and language use. The first interview format was an open-ended and wide-ranging discussion where individuals talked about their experiences with diabetes. The second was a structured interview consisting of a series of yes/no questions about diabetes based on comments and reflections made by community members in earlier informal interviews about diabetes and other illnesses. Agreement and variation in the structured interview responses were analyzed through a variety of means (including cultural consensus analysis, the binomial test, and the Quadratic Assignment Program). While the direct comparisons using the yes/no responses converged upon a set of explanations which could be found in all three communities, comments made in the openended interviews allowed for an exploration of differences in how explanations were framed and emphasized across the three communities. Particularly in areas where agreement was less strong, the dual interview format allowed for a deeper and more finely nuanced representation of understandings about the causes of diabetes across the three communities.

Based on her work in Pichátaro and a Canadian Anishinaabe community, Garro (2000b, 2002) explored potential connections between a cognitive anthropological focus on illness understandings and efforts concerned with cross-cultural comparisons at the level of meaning across culturally divergent sites. Mindful of Hallowell's admonition (1955, p. 88) that the categories used for making comparisons need to be grounded in an examination of how experience is endowed with meaning within the context of culturally constituted behavioral environments, Garro drew on information from multiple sources using diverse methods to explore the range of explanatory frameworks that were culturally available for conferring meaning on illness at both of her research sites. With reference to existing comparative frameworks, Garro discussed the challenges in working toward the construction of a comparative framework that captures the range of known variability across cultural settings while still remaining open to ethnographic possibilities.

## **COGNITIVE–ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF ILLNESS TREATMENT DECISIONS**

Studies of decision-making in real-world settings provide an arena for addressing the question: Why do people do what they do? For cognitively oriented ethnographic studies, a frequent starting assumption is that in recurring decision situations where alternative courses of possible action exist, members of a group come to have shared understandings, a common set of standards concerning how such choices are made (Goodenough, 1963, pp. 265–270; Quinn, 1978; Young & Garro, 1994). Cognitive–ethnographic studies of medical decisionmaking seek to understand what people do when faced with illness and typically attempt to account for actions taken to deal with illness. To gain insight into the relationship between cultural knowledge and specific treatment actions, careful consideration is given to how people talk about treatment decisions. Such studies are concerned with the nature of cultural knowledge brought to the occurrence of illness, how this knowledge is applied in evaluating illness, and the process whereby decisions about treatment are made. Some, although by no means all decision-making studies are overtly concerned with developing and testing decision models. When attempted, a common strategy is to build a decision model using interview data and other information obtained primarily from one sample, and then to validate the model using decisions made by a second, independent sample. Here, reference to a decision-making approach or perspective serves an inclusive higher-level category, with a "decision model"—the more formal representation of the decision-making process that can be evaluated using actual choices—as a subcategory. Garro (1998a) presented a review and counter-perspective to several broadly based critiques leveled at anthropological studies of care-seeking and decision-making.

Rather than attempt a comprehensive discussion of similarities and differences among relevant studies (e.g., Bauer & Wright, 1996; Hill, 1998; Kayser-Jones, 1995; Mathews, 1982; Mathews & Hill, 1990; Nardi, 1983; Ryan & Martinez, 1996; Sargent, 1982, 1989; Stoner, 1985; Weller, Ruebush, & Klein, 1997), discussion is limited to two studies—one carried out in the Mexican town of Pichátaro (Garro, 1998a, Young & Garro, 1994) and the other in an Anishinaabe (Ojibway) community in Manitoba, Canada (Garro, 1998b). While the two settings differed radically in terms of the political–economic context of health care, both studies were concerned with how families make treatment decisions among different alternatives.

In both studies an objective was to discover if there were generally shared considerations and cultural understandings that helped to explain variability in each community. At each site there was variability in patterns of resort to different treatment alternatives at different times, both within and between households. The comparability of the two studies was facilitated by adopting the same overall research design in both, despite the methodological challenges and substantive issues involved in adapting the general data-collection strategy to such quite different research settings. In addition to participant observation, informal talks, and interviews, there were two main phases. First, a group of individuals within each community participated in a series of structured interviews organized to learn about local medical understandings and how medical treatment decisions were made when a family member was ill. These interviews served to elucidate the shared understandings and constraints on preferred actions relevant to treatment decisions. The term–frame interview in Pichátaro discussed in the preceding section was part of this process. In Pichátaro, interviews designed to learn about patterns of careseeking included systematic contrastive questioning about the use of treatment alternatives, presenting hypothetical illness situations designed around contrasts mentioned in earlier interviews and asking individuals what should be done, and recording family-based histories of past illness. In addition, ranking tasks were used to explore assessments of "faith" in different treatment alternatives for a set of illnesses. Pile sorts and ranking tasks obtained judgments of severity for separate sets of illnesses and symptoms. This phase of the research design took a somewhat different form in the two settings, to be expected as the format and content of structured interview methods depend upon prior ethnographic research. In the Anishinaabe community, for example, considerably more attention was given to etiological concerns. However, some approaches, such as the term–frame interview that worked well in Pichátaro, did not transfer to the Anishinaabe community (see Garro, 2000b, for details).

For both communities, Garro (1998a) maintained that a decision-making perspective was compatible with how individuals talked about actions taken in response to illness and proved to be a useful means for learning about the process of seeking care. Still, as commented on again below, Garro concluded that the stages of developing and testing a formal decision model were better suited to the Pichátaro context than to the Anishinaabe community. For Pichátaro, two basic strategies or general principles underpinned the decision model which specified how assessments of a given illness and judgments about appropriate sources of treatment resulted in expected patterns of treatment choice. But the model also detailed the constraints, such as lack of money or transportation, that at times led to less preferred treatment alternatives being selected.

The second major phase involved collecting actual illness case histories and treatment decisions from a separate, randomly selected group of families in each community through regular household visits over an approximately half-year period. These case studies provided a basis for assessing the relationship between what people say they do and what they actually do. For both sites, the case studies provide independent confirmation for the depiction of the decision-making process from the first phase of the project. This correspondence can be more clearly seen in the Pichátaro study where the decision model successfully predicted a high proportion of both initial and subsequent treatment choices, approximately 90% of all treatment actions (80% if initial home treatments, which can be seen as a "largely routine initial response," are excluded from the calculations). Further, what the data indicated was that it was not the case that community members generally felt that biomedical treatment was incompatible with their own understandings about illness—such instances do exist but they are relatively uncommon—nor did they believe (for the vast majority of cases) that biomedical treatment was less likely to result in a cure than the other alternatives. Instead, the observed patterning in treatment actions can be accounted for by the relative inaccessibility of physician services, including the high costs of obtaining such care and transportation difficulties. A subsequent comparative study examining use of physician services in Pichátaro as well as another nearby, culturally similar community with much better access to physician services tested the prediction that better access would result in much higher rates of physician utilization (Young & Garro, 1982). And this is what was found. The study was also designed to examine a plausible alternative explanation for the observed differences in patterns of resort, namely that the second village had a much stronger biomedical orientation with regard to illness understandings. Support for this hypothesis was not found, however, as no significant differences in illness understandings for the two communities were discovered through an analysis comparing responses to two different structured interview methods (a term–frame interview and a triads comparison task). It was not a difference in cultural knowledge, including the adoption of biomedical understandings, that accounted for the increased rates of physician utilization in the second community, but rather a reduction in the financial and structural constraints impeding care-seeking from physicians.

Still, even for studies like the one in Pichátaro where a decision model is seen to provide a reasonably good guide to an understanding of treatment actions and the culturally based rationality that underlies them, insufficient consideration has been given to the jointly cultural, social, and cognitive constructive processes through which meaning is conferred upon perceived afflictions (Garro, 1998a). To move in this direction would involve attending to how signs of trouble come to be "framed" in the context of everyday life—by individuals and in social interactions—as certain types of illness amenable to certain kinds of treatment. This framing of a problem is integral to the decision-making process but is often treated as given in decision modeling studies (cf. Mathews, 1987). Multiple possibilities may be entertained as the framing process unfolds in time, drawing upon cultural and personal knowledge, while often taking shape within social interactions and in relation to ongoing "social activity" (cf. Frake, 1961).

The import of this framing process in studies of illness treatment decision-making relates to the claim that developing and testing a decision model is better suited to accounting for treatment actions taken in the Mexican community than in the Anishinaabe community (Garro, 1998b). It is the framed situation, not the process of speculating or converging on a particular framing, that decision models are set up to handle. This precondition of a framed illness was met in the Pichátaro study, where diagnoses and other efforts characterizing illness provide

a guide to the presumed cause and suitable forms of care for an illness at a given point in time. In contrast, a greater degree of interpretive openness and ambiguity often accompany illness in the Anishinaabe community. There was an openness to framing the "same" condition in quite variable ways—an individual may juggle alternative possible framings with divergent implications for care-seeking, and family members may have different interpretations of what is going on. In addition, there was a variable potentiality for illness and its treatment to be understood within a cultural framework of Anishinaabe sickness a framework in which the underlying assumptions are distinctive from those implicit in studies of decision modeling (but which do not extend to studies of decision- making more generally). Decision models entail tacit assumptions: the problem prompting careseeking is localized to an individual; illness episodes are discrete and bounded in time; there is a decision-making entity (person or group of persons) whose decisions are to be modeled. But these tacit cultural assumptions underlying the decision modeling approach cannot accommodate all aspects of the version of reality that often guides decisions in the Anishinaabe community. These tacit assumptions will be met in many settings; the Pichátaro study is one example. In the Anishinaabe community, however, these assumptions did not apply to an appre-ciable proportion of cases involving consultations with Anishinaabe healers. While research in both sites affirmed the broad applicability of a cognitive– ethnographic decision-making perspective to the understanding of actions taken in response to illness, the possibility remains that a decision-making approach may not be as productive in other cultural settings or that it may not even be applicable.

## **CULTURAL MODELS AND ILLNESS NARRATIVES**

In the 1980s, considerable attention within cognitive anthropology became directed to cultural models: "presupposed, taken-for-granted models of the world that are widely shared . . . by members of a society and that play an enormous role in their understanding of that world and their behavior in it" (Quinn & Holland, 1987, p. 4). Good (1994, p. 50) points to transitional writings in medical anthropology (e.g., Clement, 1982; White, 1982a) in

#### **Cultural Models and Illness Narratives 19**

which "anthropologists sought ways to represent the 'ethnotheories' that organize cultural worlds rather than lexical items that demarcate objects in that world." Although not reviewed here, the increased interest in ethnopsychological approaches (e.g., Lutz, 1985; White, 1982b; White & Kirkpatrick, 1985) for exploring talk about persons, feelings, motivations, and related matters, is relevant to considerable work in medical anthropology.

Garro (1988) suggested that complementing a cultural model type approach with a cultural consensus approach could help illuminate underlying culturally shared understandings, in this instance cultural knowledge relating to high blood pressure, while providing the basis for exploring variability within a cultural setting, in this case an Anishinaabe community in Manitoba, Canada. The research design included both open-ended interviews and a series of yes/no questions about the illness asked of individuals previously diagnosed with high blood pressure. Responses to the yes/no questions were analyzed using cultural consensus analysis (with the actual questions used based on informants' statements from an earlier series of wide-ranging informal interviews about illness and high blood pressure). The cultural consensus analysis supported the assumption of shared cultural knowledge about high blood pressure and statements with higher levels of agreement across informants were seen as more culturally salient. Responses across both sets of interviews were used to infer a prototypical cultural model for "blood that rises." This interactive analytic process drew on the patterning among informants across both types of interview formats. The four key propositions of the prototypical model proposed revolved around the episodic and embodied nature of high blood pressure and were seen to provide a framework for interpreting and making causal attributions for perceived symptoms (the model is prototypical in terms of serving as the "best example" of cultural understandings about high blood pressure across informants). While some of the observed variation in both sets of interviews was considered to be outside the cultural model, much of the variation expressed by informants was shown to be neither idiosyncratic nor systematically patterned, but as originating in and accommodated by the key concepts of the prototypical model. Thus, personal experiences with high blood pressure and causal attributions were typically cast within the bounds of the cultural model.

Within medical anthropology, though not within cognitive anthropology more generally, a considerable body of work pertaining to cultural models also involves narratives relating to illness. While the literature on illness narratives is wide ranging (Garro & Mattingly, 2000), here the focus is on writings that open onto viewing narrative as a mode of thinking "for ordering experience, of constructing reality" (Bruner, 1986, p. 11). Narrative is an active and constructive form of cognitive engagement that reflects participation in specific social and moral worlds and depends upon personal experience and cultural resources, including culturally available models. Along with studies of decision-making, narrative provides a way of linking together cognitive anthropology's focus on shared cultural content with greater attention to process. Some of the ways that this has been explored are sketched out in the closing paragraphs.

Motivated by what narrators judge to be worth talking about, illness stories often convey the emotional, the moral, and the social, providing a "powerful means of socializing values and world views to children and other intimates" (Capps & Ochs, 1995, p. 13). Through both what was said and what was left unsaid, the illness stories recorded by Price (1987) in urban Ecuador contained implicit moral and affect-laden messages drawing on "situation knowledge about social roles in illness" (p. 334). Caretakers, such as the mothers of ill children, often implicitly but emphatically disclosed "I did the right thing." Narrative recountings where individuals act counter to cultural expectations are often elaborated, judged morally commendable or reprehensible, and so emotionally charged "that it can be said that if cultural models of social roles drive the narratives, emotional propositions are the fuel that empower them" (p. 319). As Price (pp. 328–329) points out, the "situated social purposes" of narrative tellings likely opens onto different forms of cultural knowledge than what may be obtained through formal elicitation procedures.

At a pragmatic level, hearing narrative accounts is a principal means through which cultural understandings about illness—including possible causes, appropriate social responses, healing strategies, and characteristics of therapeutic alternatives—are acquired, confirmed, refined, or modified. Hearing a story augments the listener's "fund of cultural knowledge" with which to meet the future (Price, 1987, p. 315). Studies depict how personal narratives of illness experience are shaped by social context and informed by cultural models. Cain (1991), for example, examines how the well-established model associated with Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) guides individuals in reframing their lives as expressed in personal stories. She provides insight into the learning process and its consequences through an analysis of individual narratives at different points in this process. Through participation in AA meetings and hearing the conventionalized stories of established AA members, a culturally specific narrative form or genre is learned, a form that provides the schematic basis for the reflexive construction and communication of an individual's past: "the AA member learns the AA story model, and learns to place the events and experiences of his own life into the model, he learns to tell and to understand his own life as an AA life, and himself as an AA alcoholic" (Cain, 1991, p. 215). Through this process, an individual's life story comes to more closely resemble the prototypic AA story. The stories of those who fit the AA model of what it means to be an alcoholic come to be resources which may help guide how others come to reconstruct their past.

Even when no well-established story model exists, as in the case of a chronic and often difficult to treat illness attributed to the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), autobiographical accounts told by members of a TMJ support group living in the United States drew on broadly shared models of illness, mind, and body (Garro, 1994) that underlie and give coherence to the diversity of individual accounts. Narrative provided a vehicle for confronting contradictions between the individual's experience and expectations based on shared cultural models relating to illness and its care, divergences between what was expected and what transpired. In addition, individual narratives were structured in line with a broad model for TMJ that was shared by members of the group. This model reflected interactions with others, including treatment providers and other support group members. Past events were often reinterpreted or reconstructed as supporting the TMJ model.

In a processual ethnography that traced the emergence of a cultural model for AIDS in a village in rural Haiti, Farmer maintains that stories told about known individuals with the then unfamiliar illness, "provide the matrix within which nascent representations were anchored" (Farmer, 1994, p. 801). Consensus in cultural models associated with AIDS emerged and became established through the generation and discussion of illness stories. The model encompassed two disparate explanatory frameworks, either "naturally" (e.g., sexual contact with someone who "carries the germ") or "unnaturally" (with AIDS being willfully and maliciously "sent" by another person).

The process of relating culturally available knowledge to a particular life context does not happen in a straightforward, deterministic manner (cf. Price, 1987). In addition to Farmer's work, other studies point to multiple, even conflicting cultural models that can potentially be applied to individual illness cases. With regard to diverse explanatory frameworks for diabetes in a Canadian Anishinaabe community, Garro (2000c) examined "how cultural knowledge serves as a resource in guiding remembering about the past." Case examples are presented to illustrate how individuals variably draw upon culturally shared knowledge in constructing a narrative account: "Through remembering, culturally available knowledge becomes situated knowledge, connected to a particular person, context and illness history." These reconstructions of past personal and collective experience played a powerful role in guiding action, influencing and justifying decisions about how to combat the illness (including decisions to reject the doctor's advice), and shaping expectations about what the future would hold. The constructive nature of remembering complicates any neat division between cognitive content and cognitive process while also providing an avenue for exploring the interdependency of social, cultural, and cognitive processes (see Garro, 2001). In a separate analysis (Garro, 2000a), a close look at the responses given in the open-ended interviews as well as the yes–no questions showed that variation in reliance on different cultural models for diabetes was also patterned along social lines that reflected different life experiences. Rather than characterizing the observed variation in a manner consistent with cultural consensus theory where differences are explained by some people knowing more and others knowing less about diabetes, the differences appeared to be more a matter of knowing differently; reflecting historically divergent experiences for which age is a convenient marker associated with differential reliance on culturally available models. Rather than focusing on depicting shared cultural content, the focus is on knowing as situated in individual life experiences, but life experiences that are socially situated and historically grounded, resulting in patterned variability with regard to what is shared.

In an article by Mathews, Lannin, and Mitchell (1994), the narrative accounts told by southern African American women with advanced breast cancer draw on

### **References 21**

multiple sources of knowledge in "coming to terms" with a diagnosis of breast cancer and making some sense, at least provisionally, of what is happening. The multiple sources included an "indigenous model of health emphasizing balance in the blood," popular American notions about cancer, and biomedical understandings. How women understood their own experiences with reference to these conflicting models was highly variable. Looking at instances where women worked out some form of accommodation, Mathews et al. related these narratives to ways in which different interpretive schemas can be learned and mentally stored. They maintain that narrative provides a window on the processes involved in aligning an individual's experiences with one or more of these preexisting cultural models and how these alignments change in light of continuing experiences and new information.

A closer look at how social processes impact on illness understandings is provided by Mathews' (2000) work on the negotiation of cultural agreement in a spontaneously organized breast cancer self-help group in North Carolina. Having attended the group meetings since its inception, Mathews' analysis "of a group information helps to illuminate ways in which participants actively negotiate a new set of cultural meanings, which they then use to make sense of their own personal experiences of breast cancer" (Mathews, 2000, p. 400). The shared model that emerged through ongoing discussion and negotiation was a synthesis based on the three different knowledge sources mentioned above as well as a view that God was the ultimate source of healing, but also contained a critique of certain aspects of the biomedical view of cancer and its treatment. Over time, the "initial stories of all four original members were modified, some more dramatically than others, to fit the contours of the agreed-upon model" (Mathews, 2000, p. 407).

Many of the studies reviewed in this final section open onto an understanding of how culturally based knowledge and the social world form and inform each other. With reference to narrative accounts of troubling experiences that come to be understood as illness, Garro (2003) presents a process-oriented perspective for construing illness through available cultural resources. Rather than regarding culture as content, a processoriented perspective draws attention to how culturally available interpretive frameworks—some widely shared and others not—serve as resources which may be variably drawn upon to navigate the ambiguity surrounding illness; resources which both enable and constrain interpretive possibilities. In the narrative accounts examined, social interactions guide the interpretation of experience with regard to pre-existing shared models but the diversity of cultural resources for making narrative sense of troubling experience leaves open alternate framings with divergent implications. Garro's formulation of a process-oriented perspective revolves around the interplay between the range of historically contingent cultural resources available for endowing experience with meaning and the socially and structurally grounded processes through which individuals learn about, orient toward, and traffic in interpretive plausibilities.

### **REFERENCES**

- Bauer, M. C., & Wright, A. L. (1996). Integrating qualitative and quantitative methods to model infant feeding behavior among Navajo mothers. *Human Organization*, *55*, 183–192.
- Boster, J. S. (1980). How the exceptions prove the rule: Aguaruna plant classification (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1980).
- Bruner, J. (1986). *Actual minds, possible worlds*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Bruner, J. (1990). *Acts of meaning*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Cain, C. (1991). Personal stories: Identity acquisition and selfunderstanding in Alcoholics Anonymous. *Ethos, 19*, 210–253.
- Capps, L., & Ochs, E. (1995). *Constructing panic: The discourse of agoraphobia*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Casson, R. W. (1994). Cognitive anthropology. In P. K. Bock (Ed.), *Psychological anthropology* (pp. 61–96). Westport, CT: Praeger.
- Clement, D. C. (1982). Samoan folk knowledge of mental disorders. In A. J. Marsella & G. M. White (Eds.), *Cultural conceptions of mental health and therapy* (pp. 193–213). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Reidel.
- D'Andrade, R. (1976). A propositional analysis of U.S. American beliefs about illness. In K. H. Basso & H. A. Selby (Eds.), *Meaning in anthropology* (pp. 155–180). Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- D'Andrade, R. (1995). *The development of cognitive anthropology*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- D'Andrade, R. G., Quinn, N. R., Nerlove, S. B., & Romney, A. K. (1972). Categories of disease in American-English and Mexican-Spanish. In A. K. Romney, R. N. Shepard, & S. B. Nerlove (Eds.), *Multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications in the behavioral sciences,* Vol. II (pp. 9–54). New York: Seminar Press.
- Fabrega, H., Jr. (1970). On the specificity of folk illnesses. *Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 26*, 305–314.
- Fabrega, H., Jr., & Silver, D. B. (1973). *Illness and shamanistic curing in Zinacantan: An ethnomedical analysis*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

- Farmer, P. (1994). AIDS-talk and the constitution of cultural models. *Social Science & Medicine, 38*, 801–810.
- Frake, C. O. (1961). The diagnosis of disease among the Subanun of Mindanao. *American Anthropologist, 63*, 113–132.
- Frake, C. O. (1969 [1962]). The ethnographic study of cognitive systems. In S. A. Tyler (Ed.), *Cognitive anthropology* (pp. 28–41). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
- Garro, L. C. (1983). Variation and consistency in a Mexican folk illness belief system (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Irvine, 1983).
- Garro, L. C. (1986). Intracultural variation in folk medical knowledge: A comparison between curers and non-curers. *American Anthropologist, 88*, 351–370.
- Garro, L. C. (1988). Explaining high blood pressure: Variation in knowledge about illness. *American Ethnologist, 15*, 98–119.
- Garro, L. C. (1994). Narrative representations of chronic illness experience: Cultural models of illness, mind and body in stories concerning the temporomandibular joint (TMJ). *Social Science and Medicine, 38*, 775–788.
- Garro, L. C. (1996). Intracultural variation in causal accounts of diabetes: A comparison of three Canadian Anishinaabe (Ojibway) communities. *Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 20*, 381–420.
- Garro, L. C. (1998a). On the rationality of decision making studies: Part 1: Decision models of treatment choice. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 12*, 319–340.
- Garro, L. C. (1998b). On the rationality of decision making studies: Part 2: Divergent rationalities. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 12*, 341–355.
- Garro, L. C. (2000a). Remembering what one knows and the construction of the past: A comparison of cultural consensus theory and cultural schema theory. *Ethos, 28*, 275–319.
- Garro, L. C. (2000b). Cultural meaning, explanations of illness, and the development of comparative frameworks. *Ethnology, 39*, 305–334.
- Garro, L. C. (2000c). Cultural knowledge as resource in illness narratives: Remembering through accounts of illness. In C. Mattingly & L. Garro (Eds.), *Narrative and the cultural construction of illness and healing* (pp. 70–87). Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Garro, L. C. (2001). The remembered past in a culturally meaningful life: Remembering as cultural, social and cognitive process. In H. Mathews & C. Moore (Eds.), *The psychology of cultural experience* (pp. 105–147). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Garro, L. C. (2002). Hallowell's challenge: Explanations of illness and cross-cultural research. *Anthropological Theory, 2*, 77–97.
- Garro, L. C. (2003). Narrating troubling experiences. *Transcultural Psychiatry*, *40*, 5–43.
- Garro, L. C., & Mattingly, C. (2000). Narrative as construct and construction. In C. Mattingly & L. C. Garro (Eds.), *Narrative and the cultural construction of illness and healing* (pp. 1–49). Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Good, B. (1994). *Medicine, rationality, and experience: An anthropological perspective*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Goodenough, W. H. (1957). Cultural anthropology and linguistics. In P. Garvin (Ed.), *Report of the seventh annual round table meeting in linguistics and language study* (Monograph Series on Language and Linguistics, No. 9 (pp. 167–173)). Washington, DC: Georgetown University.

- Goodenough, W. H. (1963). *Cooperation in change*. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Hallowell, A. I. (1955). *Culture and experience*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Hill, C. E. (1998). Decision modeling: Its use in medical anthropology. In V. C. de Munck & E. J. Sobo (Eds.), *Using methods in the field* (pp. 139–164). Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira.
- Hubert, L., & Schultz, J. V. (1976). Quadratic assignment as a general data analysis strategy. *British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 29*, 190–241.
- Kayser-Jones, J. (1995). Decision making in the treatment of acute illness in nursing homes: Framing the decision problem, treatment plan and outcome. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 9*, 236–256.
- Lutz, C. (1985). Depression and the translation of emotional worlds. In A. Kleinman & B. Good (Eds.), *Culture and depression* (pp. 63–100). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Mathews, H. F. (1982). Illness classification and treatment choice: Decision making in the medical domain. *Reviews in Anthropology, 9*, 171–186.
- Mathews, H. F. (1987). Predicting decision outcomes: Have we put the cart before the horse in anthropological studies of decision making? *Human Organization, 46*, 54–61.
- Mathews, H. F. (2000). Negotiating cultural consensus in a breast cancer self-help group. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 14*, 394–413.
- Mathews, H. F., & Hill, C. E. (1990). Applying cognitive decision theory to the study of regional patterns of illness treatment choice. *American Anthropologist, 92*, 155–170.
- Mathews, H., Lannin, D. R., & Mitchell, J. P. (1994). Coming to terms with advanced breast cancer: Black women's narratives from Eastern North Carolina. *Social Science and Medicine, 38*, 789–800.
- Nardi, B. A. (1983). Goals in reproductive decision making. *American Ethnologist, 10*, 697–714.
- Price, L. (1987). Ecuadorian illness stories: Cultural knowledge in natural discourse. In D. Holland & N. Quinn (Eds.), *Cultural models in language and thought* (pp. 313–342). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Quinn, N. (1978). Do Mfantse fish sellers estimate probabilities in their heads? *American Ethnologist, 5*, 206–226.
- Quinn, N., & Holland, D. (1987). Culture and cognition. In D. Holland and N. Quinn (Eds.), *Cultural models in language and thought* (pp. 3–40). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Romney, A. K. (1994). Cultural knowledge and cognitive structure. In M. Suárez-Orozco, G. Spindler, & L. Spindler (Eds.), *The making of psychological anthropology II* (pp. 254–283). Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.
- Romney, A. K. (1999). Culture consensus as a statistical model. *Current Anthropology, 40*, S103–S115.
- Romney, A. K., Weller, S. C., & Batchelder, W. H. (1986). Culture as consensus: A theory of culture and informant accuracy. *American Anthropologist, 88*, 313–338.
- Ryan, G., & Martínez, H. (1996). Can we predict what mothers do? Modeling childhood diarrhea in rural Mexico. *Human Organization, 55*, 47–57.
- Sargent, C. (1982). *The cultural context of therapeutic choice: Obstetrical care decisions among the Bariba of Benin*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.