# 7

# Women's studies

## Abha Chauhan

## **Introduction**

Women's studies in India emerged in the mid-1970s in response to multiple pressures at the local, national, and international levels. These could be seen in the second wave of feminism that engulfed the West in the late 1960s questioning gender inequality and discrimination in society, when mainstream disciplines were criticized for marginalizing women's representation and their concerns. This was also the time when the United Nations declared the Women's Decade (1975–85) during which several conventions for the elimination of discrimination against women were passed in the international forums, and a series of regional and international conferences were convened under its auspices to bring people together on one platform to discuss women's issues.

In India, a similar upsurge in the women's movement was witnessed in different regions of the country around the same time. The setting up of the Committee on the Status of Women in India (CSWI) in 1971 and the publication of its report, *Towards Equality* (1974), the initiatives taken by the Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) to sponsor research on women in 1977, the formulation of the National Policy on Education (1986, revised in 1992), and the launch of 'Women Studies Centres' in the universities with support from the University Grants Commission (UGC 1986) provided further impetus to the growth of women's studies in India. Other developments also contributed to the growth of women's studies: (i) the passing of the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution (1992) providing for the reservation of one-third of the seats in the rural and urban local governing bodies for women (ii) the formation of the National Commission for Women (1992); (iii) the declaration of Women's Empowerment Year (2001); and finally (iv) the National Policy for Empowerment of Women.

The 'studies on women' in academia undertaken prior to 1975 (Altekar 1962; Cormack 1961; Hate 1969; Ross 1961) were seen as different from 'women's studies' undertaken thereafter. Some of the important works in sociology where women were visible included those dealing with female sexuality (Ghurye 1953) or ethics of feminism (Wadia 1923). Wadia's work dealt with the effects of feminist thought on marriage, motherhood, home life, education, and professions. C. Hate's thesis on Hindu women (1946) and S.C. Dube's review of the role of men and women in India (1963) were written during this period. Karve's comparative study of kinship in India focussed on women's everyday lives. Her paper on 'The Indian Woman in 1975' (Karve 1966) was a projection of the future patterns for Indian women based on the analysis of census data. Thus in the pre-1975 phase women were not totally absent in sociological writings, but the experiences and perceptions of women remained unresearched.

The second wave of feminism in the West, however, saw criticism of the content and methods of several disciplines including sociology and anthropology (Oakley 1972; Smith 1987). At this time, a feminist critique of various disciplines began to question the invisibility of women and the gap between women's perceptions and sociological knowledge. Of particular relevance to the social sciences has been the development of the 'anthropology of women' of the 1970s, and later the development of feminist anthropology with emphasis on gender relationships rather than women alone (Patricia Caplan 1985; Moore 1988). Their growth was instigated to undo biases and prejudices which were mainly due to lack of access on the part of social anthropologists to women of the society being studied and because of their preconceived notions about women of their own societies (Moore 1988). It has been pointed out in several writings that where male investigators described women as economically unimportant and ritually polluted and debarred from sacred practices, women ethnographers described them as being just the opposite (Rohrlich-Leavitt et al. 1975). The 'community's point of view' was actually the 'male's point of view' wherein women remained largely invisible (Srivastava 2001).

Similar developments are noticed in the discipline of sociology with emphasis placed on the 'sociology of women' (Ollenburger and Moore 1992), and the 'sociology of gender' (Kramer 2001) that developed later. In India too the issues of concern for women's studies brought about an academic shift in the mid-1980s in the focus from 'women's studies' to 'gender studies', or from 'sociology of women' to 'sociology of gender'. According to Sharmila Rege (2003b:10), 'for those of us concerned with engendering sociology, it means moving from sociology of women to a more inclusive sociology of gender'.

The conceptual and theoretical understanding of the two concepts—'women' and 'gender'—differed in a meaningful way, though both of them found expression in many writings. The usefulness of 'gender' as an important category of analysis for 'Women's Studies' was seen in understanding how women are situated in society, how they experience structures of oppression and how they respond to these, i.e. in the context of women's subjectivity and agency of the patriarchal system that controls not only gender relations but also economic and class power, political and religious authority, or a combination of these (Geetha 2002). 'Gender' is regarded as an inclusive category and does not necessarily divert the focus away from women (Chanana 2001: 25); 'women' focussed studies, on the other hand, incorporate the gender dimension by focussing on the diversity of women's experiences of structured inequality. Those who privilege the category women over gender argue that the shift to the latter is a replacement of the study of sexual inequality with the study of the differences between the sexes. The category 'gender' is seen as diverting the focus from specific issues concerning women in different spheres. However, those feminists, especially of the Third World (Black and Dalit feminists), argue that the category 'women' subsumes their specific issues under the larger homogeneous and universal ones and the use of 'gender', on the other hand, allows for the analysis of differences of race, class, caste, ethnicity, and nation (Rege 2003b: 9–10).

However, the two can and must be seen as complementary and supplementary categories in more meaningful ways. The definitions of women's studies and its subject matter would reveal that gender is an important dimension of 'Women's Studies' as much as women constitute a significant component of studies related to gender. This became all the more relevant as 'Women's Studies' got closer to being a discipline encompassing various dimensions including gender as well as other forms of stratification like caste, class, race, ethnicity, or nation which helped in understanding the specific issues pertaining to women belonging to these forms. In the course of time, 'Women's Studies' began to be seen as an academic discipline (still contentious though) concerned with gender and having a feminist component which encompassed 'an entire generation of scholarship on women, gender and feminism' (John 2001: 238). By now it is understood to have built its own perspectives, theories, and methodologies. In an interdisciplinary perspective it addresses gender concerns, possesses a political commitment to change, challenges the boundaries of individual disciplines, and promotes interaction between them. It is with this perspective of 'women's studies' that the present survey attempts to understand the works in sociology and social anthropology. It certainly does incorporate studies related to sociology of gender.

The International Sociological Association (ISA) established in the 1970s the Research Committee (RC 32) on Women in Society. In 1998, on the eve of the 14th World Congress of Sociology at Montreal, Canada, ISA published a series of volumes on the heritage, challenges, and perspectives of social knowledge. The volumes were an attempt to 'introduce feminist sociological knowledge more widely' with the objective to illustrate and analyse 'ways in which scholarly biases are being redressed and new knowledge created with feminist insight' (Christiansen-Ruffman 1998: 11).

It was in the late 1990s that the concept of research committees (RCs) was introduced in the Indian Sociological Society (ISS). Since then in every All India Sociological Conference, sessions are held in different RCs, one of them being 'Gender and Society' (RC 10). The ISS celebrated its golden jubilee in 2001 and decided to publish a series of volumes called *Themes in Indian Sociology*, based on the articles published in the ISS journal *Sociological Bulletin* during the last five decades. The first in the series (2003b) includes fourteen articles covering a broad range of issues relating to the lifespan of women in different social institutions—the family, the school, and the workplace 'by feminist scholars towards engendering mainstream sociological discourse in India'.

Of late the publication of series has become a trend. The series consists of anthologies of earlier published articles, or of articles on any contemporary issue. One finds this happening both in sociology as well as in women and gender studies. The *Social Structure and Social Change s*eries, brought out in honour of M.N. Srinivas, with five volumes, had one volume on women in India society (Shah et al. 1996). The book focussed on the social and human dimension of the process of development and the need to incorporate gender issues in policies and programmes. *The Oxford India Companion to Sociology and Social Anthropology* published recently (Das 2003: vols 1–2) does not include women or gender studies, or issues concerning them, although some topics touch upon them (family, domestic violence, social movements, etc.). Thus, it can be said that the feminist perspective has been largely missing in the studies carried out in the sociology and social anthropology of India.

Interestingly, women and feminist series have articles of sociological relevance. The first volume of *Issues in Contemporary Feminism* (Sunder Rajan 1999) is on gender and caste (Rao 2003). It regards caste as an important issue, which was missing in the feminist debates and movement so far until then. Another series, *Theorizing Feminism* (Krishanraj), which intends to introduce key concepts in feminist theory, examines in its very second volume gendering caste (Chakravarti 2003a).

Keeping in mind the nature of the two fields, the task of undertaking a survey of women and gender studies in sociology and social anthropology is indeed daunting and difficult. The dilemma of drawing boundary lines of the two disciplines, when it has been so easy to trespass, especially in the case of 'women's studies'—which cherishes its interdisciplinary nature—always persisted throughout this work. The effort to cull out the issues and studies at the 'borders of sociology and women's studies' (John 2001: 253) and those that are located at the 'academic borderlands' (the territories that lie between the academy and activism (Rege 2003b: 29) has been a challenging one. The series of edited books covering diverse issues made the task even tougher. The effect was to limit the survey to topics more closely associated with the discipline of sociology and social anthropology, such as caste, community, religion, family, marriage, and kinship. Those dealing with broader issues like economic and political forces of change impacting society—such as violence, politics, globalization, conflicts and wars—which have become important issues in recent years impacting women's lives, have also been dealt with. Though works of scholars from diverse backgrounds are included, those of sociologists have been particularly incorporated.

# **Growth of Women's Studies and the Women's Movement: Theory and Praxis**

This section traces the growth of women's studies and its linkages with the women's movement. It brings out the interface between theory and praxis by showing how issues of the women's movement led to theoretical understanding in women's studies and to the sociological writings and research.

Women's studies in India is said to have made its appearance around the same time as the publication of the *Towards Equality Report* (1975), which sent shock waves and 'an acute sense of unrest about the roles we ourselves as teachers, researchers and political activists had played' (Neera Desai et al. 2003: 53). It is usually agreed that women's studies 'involve action, intervention and conscious-raising' (Karlekar 2000a: 118). 'Encoded in the heart of women's studies is a political commitment to social change and growth' (Poonacha 2004). Often referred to as the 'academic arm of the women's movement' and 'a critical instrument in the educational process' (Sharma 2002: 209), women's studies provided theoretical and critical insights into women's activism, which in turn was 'informed by the dynamism of the women's movement and the questions it posed' (Pappu 2002: 225). Women's studies had a two-fold challenge: (1) to deal with the activism of the women's movement and to translate it into the academic context; and (2) to develop as a 'multi-disciplinary knowledge system capable of understanding, explicating and theorizing the experiences of women in different locations and in changing times' (ibid.). According to Neera Desai (2002: 32), an analysis of women's studies in India can be attempted from three vantage points—initially as an area of research, action, and policy on issues concerning women, then as a discipline in the higher education system where teaching becomes crucial along with research and documentation, and finally, women's studies as established by the apex educational centres for promoting research, teaching, and action.

As said earlier, women's studies calls for a demarcation between 'women's studies' and the 'studies on women' that are undertaken as an academic exercise without political commitment to social change (Altekar 1962; Cormack 1961; Hate 1969) and proposes to remove the boundaries between the 'academic' and 'action' (Neera Desai 1998: 69). The ICSSR Advisory Committee on Women's Studies specifically used the term 'women's studies' instead of research on the 'status of women' (ICSSR 1977). Even now many of those who have been engaged in research on women and gender have not explicitly done so under the 'rubric' of 'women's studies' (John 2001: 238) as, according to them, women are neither an oppressed category nor do they have political rigour. They are also not rooted in the historical background of the women's movement and in the critique of mainstream disciplines. But whether the studies undertaken prior to 1975, or those that do not really fall in the criteria of 'women's studies', should be considered as women's studies or not still remains a contentious issue.

The 1970s was not only a period of enthusiasm and the emergence of women's studies informed by new theoretical insights and political activism, it was also the time when women's studies attempted to understand the roots of women's subordination. The reasons were sought in such aspects as biology, socialization, division of labour, property, production and reproduction, and in the corresponding theoretical perspectives focussing on liberal, socialist, Marxist, existentialist, and radical feminist ideologies. Each of these, while in agreement with the subordinate position of women in society, had different explanations for such a state of affairs. They tried to find the causation in biology, class, patriarchy, and culture. It was felt that the space occupied by Marxism about the idea of unity between theory and practice now seemed to have been taken over by feminism with its emphasis on gender justice and equality rather than class struggle.

Women's studies contributed to inter alia, the revival of the women's movement in this country in the post-1975 period as much as the women's movement provided dynamism to it. Most studies on the women's movement in independent India can be divided into two main phases: women's struggle up to 1975, and the 'new' social movement from 1975 onwards (Kumar, 1993; Omvedt 1990 1993; Singh 2001). Women's movements prior to 1975 can be traced back to the social reform movements of the early nineteenth century. These movements campaigned *against* child marriage and Sati, and *for* widow remarriage, women's education, suffrage and equality in civil rights, and openings for women in professions like medicine, teaching, and law (Chaudhuri 1993). Women supported Mahatma Gandhi and his non-cooperation and civil disobedience movement as well as the nationalist movement in large numbers (Kumar 1993). The years following India's independence saw a weakening of women's organizations and the marginalization of gender issues.

The mid-1970s saw the emergence of a 'new women's movement' with several groups emerging and building networks and forging alliances for the issues that were for the first time becoming central to the women's movement (Fuchs and Linkenbach 2003: 1548–49). The studies on women's movement identified several problems (Gandhi and Shah 1992; Kumar 1993; Sharma 1989) as the movement gained momentum with events like the imposition of the National Emergency (1975–77), the issue of 'violence' (Forbes 1996) instigated by events like the Mathura rape case, and cases of dowry harassment and dowry deaths in the late 1970s and early 1980s that led to mass mobilization, demonstrations and media coverage. These incidents prompted researchers to write on such issues which finally led to the amendments in these laws. During this period, movements like the *Chipko* movement in the Himalayan foothills and the Self-Employed Women's Association (SEWA) in Gujarat brought critical issues of civil and democratic rights to public notice.

The decades of the 1970s and the 1980s were also the decades of women/gender development and of large number of studies on women's work, a few of which were supported by international aid agencies. These events shaped some of the policy responses. The Sixth Five Year Plan (1980–85) included for the first time a chapter on women and development. Several working groups were set up between 1977 and 1979 by the planning commission, the ministry of rural development, and the department of education to look into the issues of women's employment, literacy, and village level organizations among rural women. The 1970s were dominated by empirical researches on developmental concerns, policy reviews, legislative and administrative measures, women's work in the informal sector, and demographic trends (Kumud Sharma 2002: 210–11).

The rise in communalism and religious fundamentalism in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and incidents like the Shah Bano case (1985) and the destruction of the Babri Masjid (1992) vitiated the political climate of the country. These issues brought out the diverse ideological underpinnings of those in the women's movement who had become weary of the secular and objective credentials of women's studies (Poonacha 2003: 2656–57). The 1990s opened the door to liberal economy. With growing globalization, the State became less responsive to women's causes and concerns. The failure of the women's movement to effectively address this issue fragmented the movement. The availability of funds determined the nature of women's studies. Funding agencies set their own agenda and priorities while co-opting gender concerns.

In the 1980s, feminist theorizing increasingly questioned the androgynous model of human nature and critiqued masculine ideology by pointing to the interconnections between women's subordination and the destruction of the environment, the conflict situation, or nuclearization. Consequently, these fused the various environmental, peace and anti-nuke movements across the world. The multiple voices began to resonate in different aspects like art, culture, religion, literature, and sports. Women of colour and from developing countries pointed to the ways in which race, class, and gender intersected in complex ways to modify their lives. These ideas breached the private/public, nature/culture divide in Western theorizing (Rosaldo and Lamphere 1974) and also critiqued this dualism in the Indian context (Abha Chauhan 2001). Scholarship in women's studies reached new heights as it problematized the concepts of sex, gender, identity, and agency (Poonacha 2003: 2656).

At this time, one can clearly discern the shift from generalizing and ambitious models of grand theories in feminist analysis to the post modernist and post-structuralist positions focussing on the local, particular, and culturally specific differences. These studies questioned the distinctiveness of gender identity and emphasized on its deconstruction (Walby 1990). The notion of 'difference' between the white women and women of colour was seen in the way in which they perceived institutions. The family, for instance, seen by white feminists as a major site of women's oppression by men, was visualized as a site of resistance and solidarity against racism by women of colour (Kaul 2001: 158).

However, many feminists feel the limitations of the postmodernist trend, which, within the women's studies, proposes to dismantle the category of women itself. They contest the claims of postmodernists to have a monopoly on theorizing diversity and complexity. In neglecting the social context of power relations, and in viewing power as diffuse and dispersed, postmodernism fails to recognize that systematic oppression of gender, class, and race persists (Jackson 1998: 24). In India, some feminists apprehend that given the theoretical developments of postmodernism to accommodate the differences and the political environment in the country, all kinds of conservative worldviews and ideological dispositions will be given space which would harm the basic tenets of women's studies like secularism and human rights (Poonacha 2004). This was the time when 'gender' as an analytical category for studying structural inequalities in society and programmes of development became important (Nagla 2001).

By the mid-1980s it was clear that the women in development/women and development (WID/WAD) approaches of the late 1970s and early 1980s, which focussed on bringing women into development programmes, did not address some of the root causes of women's marginalization and exclusion. They treated women as beneficiaries and recipients of programmes and not as participants and decision makers. The *Human Development in South Asia* report (Mahabub-ul-Haq 2000) dealing with the gender question showed that a disproportionate share of the burden of human deprivation was borne by South Asian women in different fields like economy, law, education and health. Equally true in the context of India was that despite the efforts made by the government and other organizations for women's development, the condition of women, especially of the girl child, remained dismal in the areas of education, health, employment, and crimes against women (Seth 2001). Thus, the gender and development (GAD) approach that emerged in the 1980s and extended into the 1990s addressed the inequities in the relations between women and men, which were seen as the fundamental problem in the process of development. The GAD approach encompassed the equity and empowerment approach (Mohanty and Mahjan 2003: 5).

The period of the 1990s was also the time when the concept of 'empowerment' started gaining currency. As different from the welfare, development and equity approaches, the empowerment approach became more acceptable as it gave due consideration to the practical needs of women while focussing on their strategic needs which emphasized the transformation of the social structure to give space to women. The Eighth Five Year Plan (1992–97) document gave primacy to the empowerment of women with due emphasis on the sectors of employment, education, and health. Subsequently, the National Commission for Women was establishment in 1992. The year 1992 also saw the passing of the Panchayati Raj Act, a landmark Act which made provisions for reserving one-third of the seats for women in panchayats and urban local governing bodies, thus enabling close to one million women to occupy decision-making positions. Several works on Panchayati Raj with women as the focus followed (Kaushik 1993, 1995). Subsequently, the Ninth Five year Plan (1997–2002) document devoted, for the first time, a full chapter to women's empowerment. As a consequence, the 2001 was declared as the 'Women's Empowerment Year' (WEP); as part of the WEP, the 'National Policy for Empowerment of Women' was adopted. The UGC had introduced 'Women Studies Centres' in different universities and colleges since 1986 in order to promote the component of the empowerment of women by implementing the scheme 'Development of Women's Studies' in Indian universities and colleges (UGC 2004a: 3).

# **Teaching of Women's Studies in Indian Universities**

It is important to examine the process of the entry of women's studies in Indian universities which can be traced in the women's movement—indeed in the 'women's studies movement'—as well as in the political commitment to bring about a change towards gender justice and equality. Besides this, women's studies within the realm of higher education has an extremely important role to play in providing direction to research work and in making available the analytical and methodological tools that feminist critiques of disciplines have developed.

 Women's studies entered the university system with the establishment of the Research Centre for Women's Studies (RCWS) at the Shreemati Nathibai Damodar Thackersey (SNDT) Women's University, Mumbai, in 1974. It received UGC recognition in 1985, incorporating women's studies into teaching and research programmes in university and colleges. This centre was unique for not only being the first of its kind in the country but also because its birth took place in a women's university through the initiative of the university itself which then saw women's studies as an adjunct to women's education (Krishanraj 2003). SNDT Women's University probably pioneered the use of the term 'women's studies' for academic and action-oriented studies on women's issues (Desai et al. 2003).

The concern of RCWS for women's situation in India received a further impetus with the release of the report of the Committee on the Status of Women in India which exposed the dismal condition of women's lives followed by a series of research undertaken at the initiation of the ICSSR (Karlekar, 1982; Mazumdar, 1983; 1990). In 1981, the First National Conference on Women's Studies (NCWS) was organized at SNDT Women's University in Bombay with the twin purposes to stimulate and debate the concern for women's issues by promoting women's studies within higher education and to find for alternative approaches for its development in India (Sharma 2002: 212). Women's studies was defined as the 'pursuit of a more comprehensive critical and balanced understanding of social reality' and a 'critical instrument for social and academic development' (NCWS 1981:10). The discussions about launching a movement for women's studies saw several initiatives being taken by individual women or groups of women. The efforts of individuals like Madhuri Ben Shah—the then Chairperson of the UGC—Vina Mazumdar, and Neera Desai paved the way for the birth of the Indian Association of Women's Studies (IAWS). A review of the curricula in different disciplines was undertaken by the NCWS and its findings showed the virtual absence of women in them (Desai 1988). It was during this conference that delegates from over 30 universities and representatives from NCERT resolved to change syllabi to accommodate women's studies in the mainstream disciplines (Patel 2004).

In April 1985, the IAWS, the University of Delhi, and the UGC co-sponsored a seminar to discuss the organization and perspectives of women's studies in Indian universities. This formed the basis of the directives later formulated by the UGC in its guidelines. It may be noted that around this time, UNESCO's Regional Office for Social and Human Sciences in Asia and the Pacific, based in Bangkok, convened a regional meeting in Delhi in collaboration with the ICSSR to promote women's studies. This important seminar was opened by Dr Madhuri Shah, the then chairperson of the University Grants Commission. The meeting's recommendations to the various governments in the region were to introduce courses on women and set up cells for research. It also asked UNESCO to take initiative in preparing teaching materials for women's studies. Following that meeting, in 1985 itself, Dr Madhuri Shah took the decision to create 'Women's Studies Centres' (WSCs) and wrote to the universities to initiate action and seek UGC support (see Chandrakala Padia 2004 for details). The UNESCO Regional Office for Social Sciences, then headed by Professor Yogesh Atal, commissioned scholars in several countries of the region to prepare teaching materials. Neera Desai and her team well involved in preparing a volume for India under UNESCO's auspices.

 Most of the women's studies centres focused on the introduction of courses, curriculum development, training of teachers, role of extension activities, methodologies adopted, and researches undertaken. By the end of the Eighth Plan (1992–97), 22 centres had been established in different universities and 11 cells in colleges (Desai et al. 2003). The national seminar, 'Education for Women's Equality', held in New Delhi in 1985 was particularly relevant for the UGC. It was convened by the ministry of education to receive input for the formulation of the National Policy on Education (NPE). The policy included a section on 'Education for Women's Equality' recognizing women's studies as an instrument for the empowerment of women. It laid down that 'education will be used as an agent of basic change in the status of women' and 'Women's Studies will be promoted as a part of various courses and educational institutions encouraged to take up active programmes to further women's development' (ibid.). One of the major outcomes of this was the entry of the University Grants Commission into this field, it laid the guidelines for the promotion of women's studies and finally set up women's studies centres in different universities with a thrust on teaching, research, and extension.

At the same time the dynamics of women's studies attracted people who were concerned with revitalizing university education by bringing it closer to social issues. There was an increase in the number of 'academic activists' in the universities who felt concerned about issues such as the growing poverty, inequality, and violence in society. They began to participate in and write about such things in conjunction with those engaged in the women's movement. The first demonstration of the emergence of a social and academic conscience was the widespread agitation against the Supreme Court verdict in the Mathura rape case (1978) acquitting the two accused policemen. It was spearheaded by four law teachers from Maharashtra and spread virtually across the country forcing the government to undertake a review of rape laws. Similarly, the issue of dowry harassment and dowry deaths captured the minds of the people in the 1980s and this was expressed in the form of several studies and publications (Kumar 1993; Kumari 1989).

#### 312 Abha Chauhan

The support provided by the UGC for the establishment of centres/cells for women studies (WSC) led to the visibility of the discipline in the university system; doubts, however, remained about 'whether women's studies possessed clear objectives and whether it would ghettoize scholarship within the universities', and about the fact that 'it became a vast and heterogeneous field of study, continuously fed by feminist politics and movement agendas, giving rise to [a] different set of problems' (Sharma 2002: 213). In the foreword to the book, *Narratives from the Women's Studies Family: Recreating Knowledge* (2003), the then UGC Chairperson, Nigavekar, mentioned that 'Women's Studies as a significant discipline—with ramifications that flow not only into all the disciplines within a university but also into the policy, action and implementation of the Constitution of India—has come of an age in India'. In 1996, after Dr Armaity Desai took over as the Chairperson of the UGC, the Standing Committee on Development of Women's Studies revised the guidelines for the UGC Ninth Plan (1992–2002). During the Ninth Plan (1997–2002), 13 new women's studies centres were established, bringing their total to 34. In the guidelines for the Tenth Plan, the UGC decided to continue the scheme with financial support for various activities and programmes covered in the Tenth Plan. The number of women's studies centres has now increased to 67.

Even after several decades of constant efforts, women's studies as a subject still remains at the periphery of academic interest (Padia, 2004: 3). At the University of Pune, the centre was set up within the Department of Sociology, but there was considerable resistance to it and it got somewhat marginalized when it was separated from the Department and made autonomous (Bhagwat 2002: 40), as happened with many other centres (John 2002a; Kumud Sharma 2002; Pappu 2002; Bhagwat 2002; Chaudhuri 2002). Besides these problems, it was noticed that there is a lack of discussion on women's studies pedagogy. However, women's studies centres have gained recognition in the universities of Pune, Mumbai, Gauhati and the Avinashlingam Deemed University, among others.

The Women's Studies Unit at TISS, Mumbai, has ventured into research and action projects and diverse areas of interest (Datar 2003) while the WSDC, Delhi University, has taken on the role of advocacy by organizing an policy debates and lobbying for science and technology, education for women, particularly the girl child, and the rights of child labourers and children of sex workers (Kaushik 2003). The WSC at Alagappa University has carried out many research-oriented projects and runs a Free Legal Aid and Counselling Centre. The UGC supports programmes for refresher course for teachers which are held every year and are quite popular.

However, there is still a long way to go for women's studies centres in the universities and colleges; to establish themselves considering the magnitude of the problems mentioned earlier. Women's studies also face other problems today related to pedagogy, crises in higher education itself, reduced state funding and privatization within higher education, and dependence on foreign funding (John 2002a: 206). Women's studies centres are burdened with different kinds of activities as they have the responsibility of teaching, training, and research with extension added as yet another dimension. At the same time, the WSCs are expected to respond to the demands of both the women's movement and academy (Pappu 2002: 225). 'These problems, especially the paucity of funds and donor driven agendas of various organizations and the manner in which NGOs have stormed the gender vagabond without commitment to any feminist ideology, have resulted in WSCs' agenda being co-opted and left without any political activism' (Menon-Sen 2001: 15). Works and publications on women face a similar situation as 'the approach, the analysis, the arguments, the rigour, the policies don't seem to matter' (Pappu 2002: 232). Women's studies has to play an extremely important role in the areas of research work, methodology, and theory. With the spread of globalization and the newer areas of study such as cultural studies and Dalit studies the task is difficult, but equally important and challenging (232–33).

# **Research Trends in Women's Studies**

Various books and journals were consulted for the present review covering period from 1988 to 2003. In particular, the *ICSSR Research Abstracts in Sociology and Social Anthropology* and journals such as *Contributions to Indian Sociology*, *Sociological Bulletin*, *Economic and Political Weekly, Seminar,* and *Indian Journal of Gender Studies* were taken into consideration. Table 7.1 gives the yearwise distribution of the numbers of books and articles on women/gender studies that were published in the review period, and were closely related to sociological themes.

In these publications, 20 different issues related to women have been discussed. The frequency of the themes in 272 publications in this period (excluding 41 edited books1 ) is shown in Table 7.2.

Some of the themes mentioned in Table 7.1 overlap. It is therefore difficult to pinpoint the themes and relate them to a time period. However, it can be said that as women's studies and women's movement studies began to gain strength in the 1970s, the issue of violence, particularly dowry-and rape-related violence, became important in the decade of the 1980s; simultaneously, the question of development and empowerment acquired significance and Panchayati Raj and globalization/structural adjustment were the themes of study in the 1990s. At the same time, the issues of family and kinship and those of caste and Dalit women became pertinent as much as the questions related to theory and methodology that took women's issues centre stage in all the vital concerns for academia, actionoriented programmes, and policy-making. Thirty-eight out of the 272 publications consulted, i.e. 14 per cent, have been written by men. Therefore, most researches related to the themes in women studies are undertaken by women.

#### 314 Abha Chauhan

| Year  | Total | Books | Edited Books | Articles | Reports/<br>Papers |
|-------|-------|-------|--------------|----------|--------------------|
| 1988  | 16    | 7     | 3            | 3        | 3                  |
| 1989  | 10    | 4     | 1            | 5        | -                  |
| 1990  | 9     | 5     | 1            | 2        | 1                  |
| 1991  | 7     | 3     | 1            | 2        | 1                  |
| 1992  | 15    | 7     | 3            | 4        | 1                  |
| 1993  | 19    | 10    | 1            | 8        | -                  |
| 1994  | 9     | 6     | 1            | 2        | -                  |
| 1995  | 18    | 8     | 2            | 8        | -                  |
| 1996  | 24    | 12    | 3            | 9        | -                  |
| 1997  | 8     | 4     | 1            | 3        | -                  |
| 1998  | 38    | 14    | 6            | 17       | 1                  |
| 1999  | 26    | 14    | 7            | 5        | -                  |
| 2000  | 16    | 7     | 2            | 7        | -                  |
| 2001  | 26    | 13    | 2            | 11       | -                  |
| 2002  | 27    | 8     | 5            | 14       | -                  |
| 2003  | 45    | 8     | 2            | 34       | 1                  |
| Total | 313   | 130   | 41           | 134      | 8                  |

**Table 7.1** Year-wise Publication of Books and Research Articles on Women 1988–2003

*Source:* Author's own.

## *Family, Marriage, and Kinship*

The studies on family, marriage, and kinship have formed an important subject matter for sociological research in India. Though dealing with women in some context or the other, 'women' remained peripheral in such analyses. According to Neera Desai, 'it is shocking that women have been so invisible in research in these areas, which are associated ideologically with women and women's lives' (1998: 59). The main themes in sociological studies like marriage, kinship, family, caste, stratification, and community, regarded as being intrinsically linked to

|     | Issues/Themes                                        | Number |
|-----|------------------------------------------------------|--------|
| 1.  | Theory/Methodology                                   | 25     |
| 2.  | Women's Studies                                      | 42     |
| 3.  | Women's Movement                                     | 15     |
| 4.  | Status/Culture                                       | 13     |
| 5.  | Socialization/ Seclusion/ Education                  | 15     |
| 6.  | Fertility/Health/ Sexuality/ Sex-Ratio/              | 11     |
| 7.  | Family/Marriage/ Kinship                             | 24     |
| 8.  | Economy/Technology/Informal Sector/Wk.               | 9      |
| 9.  | Develop/ Empowt/ Panchayati Raj/ State               | 10     |
| 10. | Ecology/Environment/Globalization/ Struct Adjustment | 9      |
| 11. | Property/ Land Rights                                | 8      |
| 12. | Dowry                                                | 12     |
| 13. | Widows                                               | 5      |
| 14. | Religion/ Personal Laws                              | 10     |
| 15. | Caste                                                | 16     |
| 16. | Dalit Women                                          | 9      |
| 17. | Village/ Rural / Tribal Women/ Commu.                | 10     |
| 18. | Conflict/ War/ Peace                                 | 13     |
| 19. | Violence Against Women                               | 9      |
| 20. | Domestic Violence                                    | 7      |
|     | Total                                                | 272    |

**Table 7.2** issues themes studied during the survey Period

women and having a wide coverage, should have resulted in the fruitful development of both sociology and women's studies. But this has not happened 'despite the discipline's unusual reflexivity, and despite the repeated emergence of gender and feminism as subjects of dispute' (John 2001: 239).

An earlier review, 'Sociology of Kinship', for the ICSSR, done in 1970–72 (Dube 1974), based on an extensive survey of methodological and sociological literature, 'brought in women only contextually and no special focus on women's issues and problems was suggested for further research' (Dube 2001: 51). The centrality of studies on family, marriage, and kinship in sociology meant that women had not only been invisible but "their experiences had been ignored' (Rege 2003b: 13). In the review of the articles published in the *Sociological Bulletin*, Rege notes that during 1952–70, there was a predominance of articles on marriage, family, caste, social problems, and rural and urban sociology, and the presence of women. But as articles on these themes decreased in the following decade, it marked a greater invisibility of women. In the post-1975 period, there were a few studies related to sex roles, socialization, and processes of decision making in the family (ibid.: 23–24). The decade of the 1970s however, 'is significant in terms of the increased sensitivity to the history of the discipline, its teaching and research programmes' (ibid.: 24), which paved the way for the studies that gave more visibility to women and provided paradigmatic challenges in the decade to follow (ibid).

**Family.** Most of the earlier studies on family in India have remained dominated by Indology, or 'Book-view' (Ghurye 1955; Kapadia, 1956), or law (Maine 1972), or confined to studying the forms, structures, and functions of family and concentrating on the debate between nuclear and joint family as well as on the distinction between 'household' and 'family' (A.R. Desai 1980; I.P. Desai 1964; Gore 1968; Kolenda 1987; Shah 1973, 1998a). These latter studies, as different from the earlier ones based on Indological and legal perspectives, followed a proper 'sociological' approach and were embedded in the fieldwork tradition. Shah's work, in particular, focused on the 'household dimension' of the family, the commensal and the co-residential group, and on the question of the disintegration of the joint household rather than of the 'joint family' (1973, 1998a).

Regarding the nature and direction of change in the joint family, those influenced by Western scholars believed that family is inconsistent with industrialization and associated economic and social patterns, and would, therefore, disintegrate in the process (Morrison 1959; Ross 1961). Others were of the opinion that the joint family will not disintegrate but will adapt itself to the modern industrial setting by adopting a reconciliatory path (Kapadia 1956, 1959, 1966; Madan 1989). This argument was supported by various empirical studies conducted simultaneously both in towns and cities as well as in villages (I.P. Desai, 1964; Gore, 1968; Rao, 1968; Ross, 1961; Singer and Cohn, 1968).

The concepts and arguments, such as 'family as a process of partition going through many stages' (Madan 1989), 'break up in the joint family in rural India' (Kolenda 1987, 1996), 'developmental process' (Shah 1998a), 'developmental cycle of the domestic group' (Gould 1968; Vatuk 1975), and the 'nuclear family is merely a stage in the joint family cycle' (Desai 1964: 44–47), indeed became important tools for understanding the change in the form of the family and household, albeit without the centrality of gender concerns. Even in the studies where the family was held responsible for reproducing inequalities within the society, gender-based inequality—an inequality embedded in the oppressive structures of family ideology based on age and gender hierarchy—was overlooked (Béteille 1999). However, some of these studies on family, though not gendered analyses of the institution, focused on examining the changes in roles and relationships within the family and somewhere touched upon the subject of women—particularly the kind of support the family provided to women in child-rearing and caring (Karlekar 1987); the emotional and physical burdens that woman, especially the daughters-in-law, bear and the adjustments they make (Gore 1968); the changing status and role of women in the nuclear family (Ross 1961); and on caste endogamy and spouse selection (Shah 1998a: Chapter 8). S. C. Dube (1955), in his study of an Indian village near Hyderabad, mentioned family ties, the conflictual situation between mother-in-law and daughter-in-law as well as several cases of wife beating.

The developments in family, marriage, and kinship studies in India have followed and reflected the changing paradigm and concerns of anthropology and sociology in the West—changes in perspectives from evolutionist, diffusionist, functionalist, and structuralist to the most recent ones in post modernist and deconstructionist trends with important inputs from Marxist and feminist theory (Uberoi 1999: 5). In India, the perspectives of British social anthropologists have heavily influenced the studies on society and kinship, like Srinivas' (2003) work dealing with the relationship between religion and society amongst the Coorgs of south india and his description of the Coorg localized lineage or *okka* linked to the community's ritual practices. Most of the papers in J.S. Bhandari's two volumes on kinship and family in the north-east (1996) can be classified as structural analyses of kinship done in the style of the classical British anthropologists; of course, some authors analysed kinship in terms of its cultural context as well.

As different from Srinivas' work and his emphasis on the descent theory is the work of Louis Dumont (1983) drawn from the arguments of the French structuralist Levi-Strauss. Dumont's focus has been on alliance theory, which he applied in his understanding of the south Indian kinship and Dravidian kinship terminology. In a recent study, Raymond Jamous (2003), in his account of kinship and rituals in a Meo community in north India, following Dumont, engages with the kinship terminology, the relation of kinship and territory, marriage alliance, and marriage rituals and prestations. Recognizing the critical importance of kinship in the social organization of many societies, one finds a lack of gender perspective in these studies.

As feminist critics pointed out the gap between women's experiences in their everyday lives and the sociological knowledge, the studies on family went beyond analysing women's status, roles, and relationships within the household to viewing the family and household also as a site of exploitation and violence (Uberoi 1999: 36) and how it actually functioned 'as a unit of production, reproduction and consumption in the wider society' (ibid.: 6–7) impacting women's lives. It is argued that the household cannot be treated as a private entity separated from the context in which it is embedded (Saradamoni 1992). In recent years, a need has been felt to study the interface between family and gender as different from the traditional understanding of family which is not a space of harmony but also of power relations, its interrelatedness with society and the state and those forms of living that refuse to correspond to the traditional notion of the family (Pernau et al. 2003).

**Socialization.** Considerable attention has been given to the socialization of the girl child and the internalization of gender identity through different mechanisms like pre-puberty marriages or life-cycle rituals by sociologists and anthropologists (Das 1988; L. Dube 1998, 2001). The socialization of the girl child embedded in the patrilineal kinship and caste ideology is associated with the belief that the ultimate destiny for girls is marriage and relocation to the husband's house (Dube 2001). The rituals and ceremonies are important in making girls aware of their fragile purity and play a crucial role in the very process of growing as women (ibid.). The studies have shown that both caste and class dimensions affect gender socialization. A study in a multi-caste village in Gujarat provides insights into gendered socialization and entitlements defined by caste through families wherein girls of higher and middle castes are placed much better than those of the lower castes (Desai 1998: 66). Some works have also focussed on the need to develop appropriate programmes and policies for child and human development which are culturally specific (Saraswathi and Kaur 1993).

The studies by feminist scholars show that family is both a unit of support as well as a place of restrictions for girls and the unequal gender division of labour. There has been a constant neglect of and discrimination against girls as reflected in the expectations and entitlements to resources like health care, food, nutrition, education, and material assets (A.M. Basu 1989; Minocha 1984; Palriwala 1996; Papanek 1990). An important work on interrogating women's education focusses 'on the interaction between socialization and education as processes, between the family, home, and the school which provide the ideological bases for inequality between women and men' (Chanana 2001: 20). The girl child is a victim of substantial abuse of a physical, psychological, and emotional nature (Multiple Action Research Group 1996), much of which is carried out within the home. Not surprisingly, there has been a constant decline in the female child sex-ratio over the decades (Agnihotri 2000). Also, child labour has shown an increase with a substantial expansion in both rural and urban areas (Chaudhuri 1996).

**Kinship.** Certain recent studies have shown the relationship between gender and kinship by analysing how the differences in kinship systems and family strategies account for critical differences among societies and the ways in which gender operates. Leela Dube's (1997) study on women and kinship, a product of discussion on the United Nations University Project 'A comparative study of women's work and family strategies in South and Southeast Asia', deals with the interplay between kinship and gender. Dube endeavours to uncover, through a study of kinship practices, both the material and ideological underpinnings of women's lives. Observing that gender studies often bypass kinship systems assuming that these are immutable structures, she argues that to the contrary kinship and its rules are highly relevant to the conduct of our everyday lives, providing the key organizing principles of resource allocation, division of labour, recruitment of individuals to groups, placement, inheritance as well as access to food and nutrition, health care, education, and authority and decision making (ibid.: 5). In this study, Dube focuses on three kinship systems—patrilineal, matrilineal, and bilateral—and convincingly argues that the patrilineal kinship system of South Asia, as different from the bilateral kinship system of South-East Asia, is more hierarchical.

This argument is not new in Dube's work and can be traced to her earlier writings. The theory of the unequal contribution of sexes to reproduction, particularly in patrilineal communities, where a man provides 'seed' and woman the 'field' for the birth and growth of the child (Dube 1986, 2001) provides the justification for alienating woman from power, decision making, control over labour and property, and her sexuality. This is different from matrilineal (Dube 1986; Saradamoni 1999) and bilateral communities, especially of South-East Asia (Leela Dube 1997) and of many of the lower castes (Kapadia 1995) that have their own theories of procreation and understandings of women's entitlement. Other feminists have extended this argument further correlating the type of descent system and other features like marriage, residence, and succession with women's position in society and their 'bargaining power' (Agarwal 1994, 1997). A few others have focussed on the different types and ways of restrictions like seclusion and *purdah* (Papanek and Minault 1982; Sharma 1978; Vatuk 1982) and their access to the public domain on equal terms with men (Agarwal 1994; Sharma 1980). In the rural areas of Rajasthan, where women live under a triple authority structure (head of the household, their husbands, and a senior woman), food consumption and control comprises a metaphor for intra-household distribution and authority (Palriwala 1996).

In fact, since the 1980s, there have been a considerable number of studies which demonstrate the consistency between demographic variables like sex ratio, household size, fertility rates, and mortality rates and the regional patterns of kinship organization (Agarwal 1994; Basu 1992; Bhat 1996; Kolenda 1987; Patel 1994) especially while contrasting the northern and southern regions of India. Phenomena like the low sex ratio and the adoption of practices like amniocentesis are seen as linked to the kinship system and family relations in the most economically prosperous states of north India—Haryana and Punjab (Das Gupta 1987)2 .

However, Dube's argument (1997), relevant in many of these situations, generalizes the condition of women in the South Asian (mainly patrilineal) and South-East Asian (largely bilateral) kinship systems as hierarchical/asymmetrical and relatively egalitarian respectively. Yuko Nishimura (1998) in her study provides a fascinating gendered account of the kinship, property rights, and marriage practices of the Nagarattar—a mercantile community of Tamilnadu. She emphasizes the strong position of married Nagaratter woman (the *Acchhi*), which is strengthened by the practice of high dowry, though there is hardly any support for divorce and remarriage in the community, thus constraining women's ability to make choices to a large extent.

In north Indian kinship systems in particular, women's kinship relations and the ways they construct them in their conjugal homes present a complex picture (Raheja and Gold 1996; Vatuk 1975). There are also ways in which natal families of women in patrilineal societies of the north extend social and physical proximity and support to women on many issues, an important one being access to reproductive health care (Unnithan-Kumar 1999). A married daughter depends heavily for emotional and physical support in times of widowhood and desertion on her siblings and kin (Desai 1990; Sharma 1980). In many instances, as projected by Helen Lambert (1996) in her study of Chawandiya village of Rajasthan, men also utilize the ties established through married women's natal villages for political and economic reasons. Besides this, it is also visualized that there are other variables like caste, class, age, and ethnicity that mediate kinship principles as well as wider forces which affect women's position in society. For instance, the emphasis on the bilateral kinship system of South-East Asia does not explain why religious fundamentalism has lowered the status of women or in what way the process of industrialization has resulted in the phenomenon of the commercialization of sex in such societies.

Similarly, how does one explain the increase in the incidence of female infanticide in the more egalitarian southern kinship region of Tamil Nadu? One finds here a close association between kinship and caste as among Brahmins in the south, who practice patrilateral cross-cousin marriage compared to other non-Brahmanical castes amongst whom matrilateral cross-cousin is a preferential form of marriage, the notion of female sexuality and chastity are of prime importance (Kapadia 1995). This is closer to Leela Dube's position as she considers the material basis of caste and unequal distribution of resources as being interlinked with kinship (Dube 2001; Rao 2003b; Srinivas 1996b). There is a need to go beyond kinship and caste ideologies as the prevalence of asymmetry is noticed in the southern kinship systems as well. How do we understand the nature of patriarchy among the lower caste groups or do we just believe that it is because of the percolation of Brahmanical ideology and indeed the result of the process of Sanskritization? The increase in female infanticide is seen as being due to the process of Sanskritization where communities 'claim comparability with upper caste culture' (Mazumdar 1992) and feminist sociologists argue that it is Brahmanical ideology that has percolated to even Dalit men rendering caste as a critical category of analysis, something ignored by both Marxists (with emphasis on class) and feminists (focussing on patriarchy) (Rege 2003a)

**Dowry.** The other area where the deterioration in women's status is considered to be due to the Sanskritization process is the all-pervading menace of dowry and the concomitant negative attitude towards girl children and the legitimization of infanticide in communities where the poor fear dowry (Karlekar 2003: 1134–35). Sociological studies have shown how dowry has spread to several lower-caste groups (Epstein 1973: 179; Srinivas 1984: 14–15) and other religious communities like Christians (Caplan 1999: 357–79), and also how it has grown in content and dimension due to the rise in prosperity and the large-scale injection of cash in different regions (Benei 1995) including the remote and hilly areas (Sharma 1984: 72). The decade of the 1980s in particular saw a large number of cases of dowry harassment and dowry deaths (Kumari 1989). Though there was nationwide condemnation of these incidents and subsequent legislative measures were taken to amend the Dowry Act (1983), which made cruelty to a wife a cognizable and nonbailable offence, the situation only worsened. It is a matter of concern as well as of sociological enquiry to find out the factors that perpetuate the system of dowry and indeed are considered desirable and necessary by girls and women themselves for their own self and for their natal families.

Dowry in the traditional understanding refers to the gifts that are given voluntarily to the bride to be taken to her conjugal household. Thus, it is the fulfilment of a material obligation on the part of bride's family towards the bride, which also serves as a moral basis for the establishment of a relationship between the two families (Sheel 1999: 17). It has been regarded as a woman's *streedhan*, property to be devolved to her on her marriage (Goody 1973), which is different from, and must not be connected with, the more recent 'modern monstrosity' (Oldenburg 2002; Srinivas 1984: 13). In many communities of south India, dowry is regarded as pre-mortem inheritance, including also immovable property like land and its produce (Dube 1997: 39–40).

In some communities (such as the Nagarattar of Tamil Nadu) dowry belongs entirely to women (Nishimura 1998), while in some others women have little control over it (Sharma 1984). The debate regarding dowry as a form of women's property gained importance with some arguing in its favour in the given context, at least as an interim (Kishwar 1988, 1989), and others opposing it (Agarwal 1994: 483). A situation where dowry brings monetary gains and status to the girl and her family, where a large number of women continue to support giving and taking of dowry (Teja 1993), and correspondingly, where they do not come forward to ask for their share in parental property (Sharma 1984), thereby bargaining their positions, especially in the conjugal household, needs probing. One way to improve women's economic status is to establish and work for women's rights in land, especially in the case of rural women (Agarwal 1994), but gender equality in land will remain a far-fetched dream till the issue of landlessness is addressed in its entirety (Jassal 2001). Women's access to property and economic resources is considered to be extremely important, especially their right to property in different family and civil laws, and it is felt that reforms within personal laws are necessary for gender justice end equality (Agnes 1999).

#### 322 Abha Chauhan

Feminist scholars, particularly those operating within a Marxist framework, have seen women's confinement to the domestic, reproductive spheres, and their mobility to access the public domain on equal terms with men as an impediment to their position. They suggest active participation by women in productive work as well as control over resources and property. In the context of the Indian family, Amartya Sen (1993) points to gender as a major basis of disadvantage affecting notions of entitlement and access to land, food, education, and medical attention (Das Gupta 1987; Papanek 1989–90; Sen 1999). Some authors have stressed the point that it is women's restricted access to land as the major production resource in South Asia that has placed the greatest limits on women's bargaining position in the family (Agarwal 1994: 53–71; Jain 1996; Sharma 1980).

**Matrilineal Societies.** An important aspect in the studies of kinship in India has been the focus on matrilineal societies (Dube 1974). Leela Dube's works (1996, 2001) show the inter-linkages between matriliny and Islam where both have coexisted in a manner which did not disadvantage women. The continuation of her argument would be that South-East Asian Muslim communities rooted in matrilineal or bilateral kinship enjoy much greater freedom of movement and participation in economic production than patrilineal Muslims in the northern part of the subcontinent. Her recent book, *Anthropological Explorations in Gender: Intersecting Fields* (2001), represents over 50 years of her work consisting of articles previously published in different journals and edited volumes, most of which have been already referred to in the present volume (Dube 2001). A common thread running through the essays is the complex and diverse relationship between gender and other areas of stratification like caste, class, and religion and the significant role of kinship organization in determining the structures of power that keep women subordinated in the family and community. The opening piece by K. Ganesh (2001) situates Leela Dube's work against the backdrop of historical and contemporary development in gender studies in India. Ganesh highlights the vacuum that existed in the field of women's studies and anthropological studies of kinship after Karve, and maintains that Leela Dube 'has been a catalyst in the development of gender and kinship studies in India' (ibid., 15).

*Matriliny Transformed*, authored by K. Saradamoni (1999), is an important work on matriliny from the gender perspective. It covers the period from 1729, when the state of Travancore was formed, to the mid-1920s when matriliny was altered comprehensively through legislation. In another article, Saradamoni (1996) focusses on the changing marriage and kinship relations during colonial rule among the Nayars in south India as a consequence of the series of legislations, especially between 1920 and 1930, dealing with rules of inheritance, succession, marriage, and joint family. The author believes that matriliny supported features which strengthened the social and economic position of women and offered a sense of security as well as autonomy to women, linked in the last instance to their right of permanent residence in their natal homes which is no longer the position.

Studies on matrilineal kinship systems in the north-east have shown that complete equality does not exist even among the matrilineal communities like the Khasis of Meghalaya. It is seen that among them the 'ideas and norms regarding kinship and gender roles, which are apparently weighted in favour of women, are not so in fact' (Nongbri 1999: 178, 2003: 184). However, the process of change, first through the introduction of Christianity, then through modernization, and more recently by the Meghalaya Succession Act (1986) that gives every member of the Khasi and Jaintia tribes the right to 'dispose his property at will', led to the weakening of women's position (ibid.: 185). The process of change in the matrilineal communities of the north-east brings its own contradiction and highlights the trauma of a community caught in the midst of transition and the way in which gender is constituted in the face of modernization and change (Chako 1998).

## *Family, Kinship, and External Forces*

In recent years, the focus of family and kinship studies has shifted to examining the impact of a wider arena like the state and the market, or forces such as migration and globalization (Sethi 1999). Much of the gender inequality in India persists because the State has failed to reduce gender disparities in education, economic opportunities, inheritance laws, property rights, and political power (Dreze and Sen 1995). The dialectical relationship between the macroeconomic and political processes and the structural relations of gender, family, and kinship and the mutual implications of kinship and gender are the themes explored in Rajni Palriwala and Carla Risseeuw (1996). Control over, and support for women are both shifting as a result of historical processes 'intensifying vulnerabilities and resuscitating oppressions' (ibid: 21). At the same time, women are trying to moderate these processes in their own interests as actors. Palriwala and Risseeuw believe that what is recognized is a knowledgeable assessment of changing structures and relations of kin support. The contributors to the volume, on their part, provide feminist insights into the way people's commitments are lived out within, and mediated by, the family.

Another book in the series about changing kin and security networks in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (Risseeuw and Ganesh 1998) challenges the stereotypical notion that family and kinship are unchanging and stable and raises a host of questions on the concept of 'agency' as women appear to be not only coping with changes but also initiating some. The book is a gendered analysis of kin and security networks that women make use of in different situations across the two regions, especially in crises situations as in the case of India's partition in 1947 when education was used as a part of family strategy to equip girls to earn if a contingency arose where they needed to (Chanana 1998, 2001: Chapter 3).

#### 324 Abha Chauhan

Naila Kabeer and Ramya Subramanium (1999) criticize the gender-blind trajectories of state, market, and community actions in India. Karin Kapadia's article in the same volume on landless labourers—*Pallar* women from Tamil Nadu—shows how capitalist organizational techniques reinforce and enhance the marginalization of female wage-earning contributions, increasing their day-today struggles.3 The most basic struggle of women revolves around procuring the basic necessities of life such as food, water, fuel, fodder, and shelter. This struggle is grimmer as women have little control over the conditions and products of their labour (Gothoskar 1992). Struggles for them differ in various organized and unorganized sectors, each having its own implications (Jhabvala 1992; Vijayan 1992).

The question of ecology, environment, and globalization acquired importance in the 1990s. Questions have been raised as to how development affects the local environment and women (Shiva 1988). Similarly, it is argued that though the new reproductive technology gives women freedom to have better control over their bodies, it creates new forms of dependence upon the state and the technology itself, extracting a heavy price in terms of financial costs and adverse effects on women's health (Jyotsna Gupta 2000). The introduction of new technology, even in rural areas, has strengthened the base of patriarchy through caste ideology which helped perpetuate gender subordination and gender stereotyping (Roy and Singha 1995). Thus, the studies have brought out the adverse effects of the structural impact and globalization on women in the 1990s (Rajput and Swarup 1994).

 An edited volume of the CWDS4 relates women's lives with globalization and tries to understand the gender impact of economic changes, particularly of structural adjustment but less of globalization as the latter involves many more things beyond economy. The papers in the book focus on the impact of structural adjustment and globalization on health-care services (Karlekar 2000b), the social sector (Prabhu 1995), environment (Kumud Sharma 2002), natural resources and poverty (Sumi Krishna 2002), and how these in turn impact women's lives. Of sociological interest is the paper by Deshmukh-Ranadive which deals with the interface between the household and the macro-environment and the individual and the household. In another significant book, Deshmukh-Ranadive (2002) develops a model to understand the household function of production, consumption, and the distribution of economic goods and services.

#### *Gender, Caste, and Communities*

The work on caste and communities—tribal, ethnic, or religious—from the gender perspective has remained more or less an uncharter field of enquiry, even though the disciplines of sociology and social anthropology abound with such works, most of which have been ethnographic accounts (S.C. Dube 1951, 1955; Elwin 1939, 1947; Furer-Haimendorf 1939, 1943, 1979; Grigson 1938; Hutton 1921; Majumdar 1962; Rivers 1906). The trend of such comprehensive studies and intensive fieldwork seems to have declined, and in the case of gender studies the terrain is even less explored. Some of these studies show the dilemma, fostered to a great extent by the British legacy of census identification of communities, of classification which renders, for instance, the same group as a 'caste' or 'tribe' and even within the caste—a scheduled caste or a scheduled tribe, or even the other backward class (OBC). The sociological understanding of these communities, thus, shows a great variation from such identifications.5 For example, the Kol and the Korwa (Hindus) are scheduled castes in Uttar Pradesh (UP) but in neighbouring Madhya Pradesh they are scheduled tribes. The Meos (Muslims) could only be classified as OBC in Haryana, UP, and Rajasthan at different intervals of time, though the area they inhabit is a contiguous tract around the Aravali range called Mewat, and the people living in three differenrt states behave as a single endogamous group (Chauhan 2003). However, the gender implications of such artificial, basically administrative, distinctions have still not been properly investigated.

The study on the Girasia of Rajasthan by Maya Unnithan-Kumar (1997) reveals this dilemma. She focuses on how individuals and groups construct boundaries within communities in hierarchical and non-hierarchical terms. The Girasias do this by drawing similarities and differences in identity formation with groups like the Rajputs (Parmar clan) and the Bhils, even though the Girasia are classified as scheduled tribe today in Rajasthan while in neighouring Gujarat they fall under the category of OBC because of their somewhat better economic condition. The Girasia women are marginalized, regardless of whether the practice of brideprice or dowry is observed, owing to a shared ideological devaluation of women's labour and weak control over resources. It is indeed a difficult exercise, especially regarding those communities who live in close approximation to the caste village and become more or less a part of the regional caste hierarchy occupying a lower position. Such placements are tantamount to a double discrimination of caste and patriarchy for women, as analysed for the Saharia tribe of Madhay Pradesh, who are classified as a Primitive Tribal Group (Chauhan 1999).

The studies on matrilineal communities like the Khasis of Meghalaya (Chako 1998; Nongbri (1999, 2003), the Nayars (Saradamoni 1999), and the Kurichiyas of Kerala (Aiyappan and Mahadevan 1990) depict how forces of modernization and change installed patriarchal values and undermined women's position. Even for patrilineal communities, there are significant accounts that show how contact with the wider society led to the loss of women's economic and political roles (Chaki-Sircar 1984) or to their customary rights on land (Kishwar 1999). The studies of these twin processes of Sanskritization and modernization among both tribes and castes suggest that the two processes do not oppose but mutually reinforce each other and are detrimental to women's position in society. Hence the focus on gender, caste, and class becomes crucial in sociological analyses, including those that focus on processes of change.

In India, the emphasis on caste remained central in most of the sociological and anthropological research from the 1950s until the 1970s—generally described as a 'village studies era'. All aspects of village life—be it the economy and division of labour, or local politics, or organization of the kinship and marriage systems—were shown to be functionally interconnected with the caste system (Atal 1968; B.R. Chauhan 1999; S.C. Dube 1955; Mandelbaum 1988; Mayer 1960). Louis Dumont (1970) emphasized in his treatise that the caste system is based on the principle of hierarchy—the binary opposition of pure and impure became the most important element that provided unity and consensus to Indian society. There were criticisms of Dumont's textual conceptualization of caste, particularly by those who argued that the lower castes have their own alternative ideologies (Berreman 1991; Mencher 1991) and that castes need not be placed along a continuous hierarchy but could be discrete categories (Gupta 1991, 2003: 515–17). Common to all these criticisms of Dumont's theory is the argument of the Brahmanical ideology of caste and, more generally, of the hierarchy of social inequality (Fuller 2003: 484–85) whether of oppressed untouchables (Mencher 1974), ascetic renouncers (Madan 1982), or women (Dube 1996: Kapadia 1995: Raheja and Gold 1996) and indeed of women belonging to the Dalit catgory (Guru 1995; Jogdand 1995; Rege 1998) .

Karin Kapadia (1995) shows that gender identities are tied with caste and class as the *Pallar* women—the Dalits in Aruloor village in Tamil Nadu—continue to be landless and treated as untouchables. The book consists of the lower-caste contestations of the Brahmanical construction of the Tamil cultural universe by drawing a clear line between non-Brahmin and Brahmin values, symbols, and discourses like the control of women's fertility as being more central amongst the lower castes, whereas female sexuality and chastity being of primary importance to the upper castes—a norm which is emulated by upwardly mobile lower castes groups.

However, even though Kapadia's critique of Dumont's views on caste provides an alternative view of caste hierarchy, there seems to be a tendency to romanticize Pallar women's greater freedom, resourcefulness, and equality, ignoring the patriarchal constraints of the community from which women have little escape. Maya Unnithan-Kumar's study (1997) did provide a corrective to this perspective by trying to understand the identity construction of Girasia women through the similarities and differences with other communities like the Rajputs and the Bhils rather than associating tribal features with the community officially identified as a 'scheduled tribe'.

Leela Dube (1996, 2001, 2003) has examined the gendered structures that caste practices rely on. Her article explores the relationship between caste and gender and examines the way in which caste impinges on women's lives and the role of women in maintaining and, to an extent, changing it. The discussion focusses on three interrelated and overlapping themes—occupational continuity and the reproduction of caste, food and rituals, and marriage and sexuality. In these aspects, caste continues to be dominant even though the changes are witnessed in (i) the the loosening of rules governing commensality, (ii) the nature and magnitude of social interactions, and (iii) the negotiated arranged marriages within the defined limits.

Therefore, it is not just reservations, or caste-based electoral politics, which is keeping caste alive as it is generally understood, but also factors like unequal control over property, unequal division and performance of labour, the endogamous marriage system, and the larger family matrix within which everyday rituals of caste, like worship, marriage rites, and food, are enacted. Women who uphold the family traditions and, more specifically, maintain the purity rules in the kitchen are honoured and respected. But at the same time they perpetuate caste and its restrictions in their everyday lives (Dube 1996: 6–9).

The point that the subordination of women and the control of female sexuality are crucial to the maintenance of the caste system, strengthened by endogamous marriages, is evident in Uma Chakravarti's (2003a) work. This book is a systematic attempt to work out the interface between caste and gender. Drawing from the historical sources, religious texts, anthropological and sociological literature, Chakravarti shows how gender is critical to the formation of caste. The book unmasks the mystique of consensus in the working of the caste system to reveal the underlying violence and coercion that perpetuate a severely hierarchical and unequal society.

## *Dalit Women*

The early 1990s saw the assertion of autonomous Dalit women's organizations both at the national as well as the regional levels, throwing up crucial theoretical and political challenges (Rege 1998). The demands by Dalit and other lower-caste women are not merely for inclusion but for an analysis of the gender relations that are inflicted by the multiple and overlapping patriarchies of caste communities which produce various forms of vulnerabilities. A significant shift in the feminist thought of the 1980s and 1990s at the international level was the increasing visibility of Black and Third World feminist work. The essays in Anupama Rao (2003) provide a good introduction to current debates in Indian feminism. These were stimulated by the renewed national debate about the politics of caste following the contentious 'Mandal decision' in 1989. They trace the emergence of *Dalit Bahujan* women as a recognizable political collectivity and note lower-caste women's vulnerability to sexual violence and harassment. For them, patriarchy is no less inflicting than caste.

Dalit women have been the target of upper-caste violence, and were treated as 'property' by Dalit men (Dietrich 1992a, 2003: 57–79). The caste basis of violence against women suggests that both party-based organizations and autonomous women's groups left Brahmanism unchallenged, the former by collapsing caste and class categories, and the latter by collapsing caste into sisterhood (Rege 2003a: 90–101). Ignoring caste-based identity politics led to the bypassing of several forms of violence and the backlash that Dalit women face. However, there is a need to be cautious of the postmodernist notion of plurality and difference as in the name of 'difference' the unequal power structure and relations are ignored. Sharmila Rege suggests that 'a shift of focus from "naming difference" or "different voice" to social relation that converts difference into oppression is imperative for feminist politics' (1998: 40).

The focus on caste acquired a new meaning in gender studies in the 1980s and 1990s with the realization that within the broader patriarchal male domination, caste-based mechanisms of oppression needed to be addressed in a more systematic and meaningful way and through women's own accounts of their experiences, especially of Dalit women. This concern can be visualized in the contemporary democratic upsurge and the awakening of the self-consciousness of oppressed women backed by the growing critical feminist theoretical and ideological paradigms of protest and resistance (Fuchs and Linkenbach 2003: 1546). Caste and its role in social transformation became the focus of debate as the centrality of caste was recognized in feminist scholarship and the women's movement.

## *Sexuality/Widowhood*

Leela Dube (2001) tried to build a framework which puts *sexuality* at the centre of the debate on caste and gender. Ritualization of virginity and glorification of marriage and motherhood are mechanisms to control and contain female sexuality. She holds the view that violence against women is underwritten in these forms of articulation by gender (162–63). Even access to education for girls, as well as the type, quality, and duration of education, and the way girls make use of it, is largely determined by the way in which female sexuality is controlled (Chanana 2001). The studies on sexuality in feminist researches since the early 1990s have come a long way from an 'Indological' model of conjugal relations where sexuality was deemed legitimate only for the production of male offspring to ensure the continuance of ritual offerings to ancestors and not primarily for the production of pleasure (K.M. Kapadia 1966). Reference to sexuality now is also found in the anthropological literature on Hindu life-cycle rituals, marriage, childbirth, and female puberty (Dube 1998, 1997; Good 1991).

Thus, feminist researchers now address male and female sexuality as a major topic of both theoretical and practical concern which had remained dormant for a long time (John and Nair 1998; Uberoi 1996). This approach gives centrality to sexuality in the constitution of notions of tradition, modernity, and nationhood. Of importance, from a sociological perspective, are the essays in John and Nair (1998) that focus on the control of female sexuality at the centre of the acts of violence that come as a punishment or infringement of permitted marriage alliances in north India (Chowdhry 1998a), and the notions of shame, honour, and chastity as being central to organizing women's own understanding of their bodies at the different stages of life in a fishing village in Tamil Nadu (Ram 1998). This is even more poignant in the case of Viramma*,* a Dalit woman from Tamil Nadu, whose story is narrated in her own words (Racine and Racine 2000), which reveals shows the relationship between sexuality, caste, and acute poverty. It shows that though Viramma internalized her oppression she never surrendered even in adverse circumstances.

Widowhood is perhaps the ultimate patriarchal institution reflecting a structure of total control over all aspects of a woman's life, her sexuality, her children, and her material possessions (Chen 2000). The vulnerability of all widows remains where the patriarchal ideology mediates through kinship and caste (Chen 1998). Culture is expressed in differential forms among the widows like those at Vrindavan or Varanasi leading ascetic life, or those who are required to enter into levirate unions due to the deep-rooted mistrust of them even in old age (Chowdhry 1997, 1998a). There are widows like the aged whom no one wants, those with children to look after, and those who are struggling alone for their livelihood (Chen 2000).

## *Conflict, War, Peace, Politics, and Violence*

With the escalation of conflicts and the growing concerns of feminists around these issues, since late 1990s research on conflict, war, peace, politics, and violence is gaining ground in women and gender studies. Conflict situations impact women's lives considerably, especially of those living in the underdeveloped postcolonial states and under oppressive patriarchal structures. Despite the sharing of this common milieu, women are also separated by caste, culture, ideology, religion, ethnicity, and nationality, each of which on its own, or in association with other dimensions, impinges upon women in situations of conflict. It is these aspects that make the studies on conflict and war sociologically important.

Women have been victims of violence due to war and war like situations as well as conflict situations of physical and sexual abuse and rape. They become victims of displacement and forced migration. However, they also play an active role in combating violence and war through peace and conciliations. In a recent work, Anuradha Chenoy (2002) traces the course of militarism in South Asian countries, which, combined with fundamentalism and national chauvinism, reinforces patriarchal practice. The book gives detailed accounts of women's experiences of militarism and, for the first time perhaps, provides a feminist perspective to the growing militarism in South Asia. The author examines the parallels between sexism and militarism and also analyses the interface of militarism and other forms of oppressions and exploitations.

The most stunning cases of community and state violence against women occurred during the time of the partition of India (1947), but equally appalling was the silence on the women's question. This was till the time feminist works started emerging on the history of women's experiences of the partition based mainly on oral narratives (Butalia 1998; Menon and Bhasin 1998), which provided rare insights into the lived experiences of women caught in conflict and gender politics of the partition. Menon and Bhasin (1998) set out to uncover the violence of the event from the perspective of women who lived it, whether they were abducted, rendered destitute, recovered, widowed, rehabilitated, or worked with women in refugees camps.

It can be said that though women have often succumbed to the pressures and willingly accepted their roles and participated in conflict situations, they have also negotiated with violent conflicts and worked out strategies of resistance and opposition. The studies have begun to challenge not only the marginalization of women's representations in conflict situations and peace processes, but also the patriarchal project in which they are located. The confinement of women's experiences of the conflict paradigm has also been critiqued. Veena Das (1990a) deals with the violence related to communities and riots. Her own essay in the book on the anti-Sikh carnage (1990b: 345–98) explores how the widows of the Delhi Sikh carnage took the symbols of mourning and pollution and gave them a political meaning in defiance of the authorities who wanted them to terminate their mourning.

Rita Manchanda's (2001a) book is related to war and peace, and the six chronicles presented in it focus on women's variegated negotiations with conflict and their capacity to move beyond victimhood to agency. The articles span the gamut of the conflict in the South Asian region involving Kashmiri women in the north to Tamil women in Sri Lanka and those caught in the *Muttahid Quami M*o*vement* in Pakistan to women in the Chittagong Hill tracts in Bangladesh and the women trapped in tribal conflicts in Assam and Nagaland and the Maoist insurgency in Nepal. Manchanda's own essay 'Women in Kashmir Conflict' (ibid.: 42–101) seeks to challenge the victimhood discourse by focussing on women's narratives about the manner in which Kashmiri women have shaped survival and resistance strategies and confronted political violence. This can be seen in their 'stretched' roles when grieving mothers sacrifice their sons and transform the mother as agency taking their private grief into public space and politicizing it through groups like the 'Association of Parents of Disappeared'. Similarly, Paula Banerjee's essay (2001: 131–76) explores the grey zone between victimhood and agency. In this, the two ends of the agency, spectrum are captured through the testimonies of women supporters of the insurgency movement on the one hand, and the work of women's peace groups on the other.

A more recent work by Urvashi Butalia (2002) is related to women's voices from Kashmir. These are voices not just of victims but also of those playing different roles from caretakers to participants or from combatants to peacemakers. The essays in the volume—authored by Krishna Mehta, Pamela Bhagat, Neerja Mattoo, Hameeda Bano, Shakti Bhan Raina, Sahba Hussain, Kshama Kaul, among others—bring out in their own ways the fear, the loss, the personal scars, the pain, and, most important, the techniques of survival in different situations of agony. These studies, thus, create a different kind of methodology which takes into account women's experiences in their own voices, through methods like oral history and personal narratives. However, most of these studies concentrate on issues such as identity or politics, and ignore other aspects of social structure and culture.

## *Theoretical and Methodological Issues*

Important contributions in women and gender studies are perceived in the context of the difference that came about in the theoretical and methodological underpinnings, especially since 1975. The studies undertaken were significant as they critiqued the mainstream discipline, challenged the invisibility of women or their partial and biased representation, introduced 'gender' as a critical category of study, understood gendered analysis of the topics, produced research which combined academics with activism, brought out studies with alternative perspectives like a Dalit standpoint or subaltern approach, and, in a significant way, tried to introduce new methods and techniques of research as well as different ethics and values in fieldwork.

 The feminist methodology and theory in sociology focusses on unearthing women's inequality, promoting activism to bring about gender equality and justice, and enquiring into women's lives from the standpoint of women, i.e. letting women talk of their lived experiences. They challenge the claim to objectivity, rationality and ethical neutrality professing that women's lives, experiences, and status become invisible in the objectification process. They question the dichotomy between objective and subjective and the break in the connection between knowledge and experience. The methods of study and analysis employed are largely qualitative involving a more subjective approach by utilizing such techniques as ethnographies, oral histories, extensive interviews, and observation studies (Ollenburger and Moore 1992: 62–66).

The recent trend in feminist studies, influenced by the postmodernist trends of 'difference' and 'deconstruction', brought an important theoretical input to women's studies. In the West the centrality of perceptions of white, privileged and heterosexual women was challenged and deconstructed by different people including the blacks, the homosexuals and the like (Wilkinson and Kitzinger 1993). In India, a similar trend is visible wherein the Dalit critique of mainstream Indian feminism emerged in the 1990s with many feminist Dalit organizations and *Dalit Bahujan* feminists pressing for the inclusion of Dalit women's concerns (Rege 2003a).

Thus in women's studies attention is being given to the formulation of concepts and theories in sociological writings. Substantive issues such as those of sexuality, violence towards women, and 'the body' came to the fore. There were conceptual and theoretical disagreements over questions such as the nature of patriarchy or male power; the relationship between gender, power and inequality; other forms of domination and exploitation; and the extent to which women shared their subordination or were influenced by other factors such as those of social class, caste, religion, or nation. The contributions of the works that focus on the different sites where sexuality has been constituted and located in different sets of discourses (John and Nair 1998) and those that focus on the role of gender in the construction of community and nation in post-colonial India (Jeffery and Basu 1999; Rajan 1999) illustrate the ways in which state and community have structured gendered identities. These studies also provide a different methodological point besides the use of qualitative techniques like oral history and narratives, that is, of women's agency and going beyond the victimhood paradigm.

A related area of interest deals with the question of 'embodiment', as the natural and essentialist understanding of 'body' is challenged by focussing on bodies in interaction and as socially located. It is through our embodiment that we recognize each other as gendered beings and engage in sexual practice. With the body becoming a focal point of feminist debate, it is important to consider how everyday understandings of gender and sexuality are mediated through embodied experience (Jackson 1998: 142). Embodiment as an important area of sociological research is gaining ground as it is being understood that aspects like caste, community, sexuality, religion, nation, race, and gender in their complex interconnections are inscribed on women's bodies (Thapan 1997) and reconstituted and reframed on situations of conflict and war (Butalia 1998; Chenoy, 2002; Manchanda 2001a; Menon and Bhasin 1998).

It is possible that in situations of war, conflict, and violence women's agency is at its best, but it is a feature of women's lives in all aspects wherein women identify contexts and ways to resist disadvantages and discriminations and deploy their agency. A methodological device emphasizing on the subjective dimension in many such studies is to increasingly listen to the voices of women (Kumar 1993). These are voices about the partition of India in and around 1947 (Butalia 1998), about conflict in Kashmir (Butalia 2002; Manchanda 2001b), about women under stress and strain who face domestic violence (Karlekar 2003), about women in everyday life (Jefferey and Jefferey 1996), about rural women and women farmers (Bagwe 1995), about Dalit women's attempts at self-definition through resistance and modification of cultural codes (Franco et al. 2000) and about women who experience and resist the impact of ecological degradation, poverty, and patriarchy in the Himalayan region (Cranney 2001).

The discipline of sociology stretches across different fields like political sociology, cultural anthropology, urban and industrial sociology, rural and agrarian society; so does the field of women's studies. As women's studies is interdisciplinary, focusing on listening and collecting women's voices, their ways of knowing and doing things, and the expression of their experiences, it requires collecting data through research methods that are largely qualitative in nature showing the diverse ways in which feminists wish to produce knowledge. These methods described as *feminists' research methods* are designed to attain three main goals—to document the lives and activities of women, to understand the experiences of women from their own point of view, and to conceptualize women's behaviour as an expression of social contexts. The interdisciplinary nature of research in women's studies, as well as sociological analysis, calls for the use of a range of methodologies. Data using these sources provides new insights and different perspectives, vital for the process of reconstructing and describing varying realities. Some of these are life histories, stories, and biographies (Bagwe 1995; Bhave 1988; Jeffery and Jeffery 1996), case studies (Desai, 1990; Karlekar 1987; Jetley 1987; Mitra 1989), oral histories and narratives (Butalia 1998, 2002; Menon and Bhasin 1998; Thapan 1997) and literary pieces and autobiographies (Karlekar, 1991; Sangari and Vaid 1989).

A significant contribution emphasizing the role of the anthropologist 'self' becoming important in the fieldwork in recent years is the work *Anthropological Journeys* (Thapan 1998). The book is based on the significance of experiences and vision and the many voices and silences of both the subject and the anthropologist. Its main focus is on the process of research, mainly fieldwork, and within this the 'subjective' elements. It is argued that studying oneself or one's own community may help probelmatize and dismantle this self–other dichotomy. The essays emphasize the ways in which fieldwork experiences are journeys into discovering the self (Veena Das, Loes Schenk-Sandbergen) and that learning one's cultural and ideological biases is important even before beginning the process of anthropological enquiry (Savyasachi). A section of the book, particularly relevant from the feminist perspective, focusses on essays which bring into view the gendering of the anthropologist's self in the field and the importance of being sensitive in this process. Saraswati Haider's dialogue, whereby the anthropologist shares her own experiences with the subjects, and Madhu Kishwar's argument of 'learning to take people seriously' tend to bring native researchers and their subjects together.

Feminists conducting field research face similar and many other ambiguities, even though they emphasize on reflexive discussions, personal narratives, and unstructured interviews and empathize with the subject and the situations leading to the development of the reflexive and inter-subjective construction of knowledge. The acceptance of middle-class educated women doing research among Dalit women in the residential quarters in Delhi and the dilemma of one's position and role in the field have been brought out quite poignantly by Malavika Karlekar's (1995) search for women's voices in reflections on fieldwork. Leela Dube (2001), in her three encounters in the field in different periods—among the tribal Gond women of Chhattisgarh, in a predominant Rajput village—Khalapur, of western Uttar Pradesh, and in the Lakshadweep island of Kalpeni inhabited by matrilineal Muslims—situates herself differently in these locations as woman but as woman belonging to a particular caste, class, and religion.

The significance of all these studies lies in the new areas and methods of research in gender studies which are related to sociological enquiry.

# **Gaps in Research**

The last ICSSR survey included a section entitled Women's Studies and Women's Development (Karlekar 2000a) for the first time in the survey series*.* Some of the research gaps mentioned in the last survey are filled, to an extent, in the period under survey in the present volume; however, there is much that remains to be done and to that list of an unfinished agenda one will have to add new emerging concerns.

Viewing family as a site of women's discrimination and exploitation through the socialization process, and control on sexuality, entitlements, and resources (Leela Dube 1997), and also as a place of domestic violence in the form of dowry deaths, incest, foeticide, marital rape, and so on, became important in the 1980s (Karlekar 1998, 2000b, 2003). It was the development in women's studies that brought in an alternative perspective to the widely prevalent structural–functional viewpoints in the study of family. However, there is still a need for empirical research on all forms of domestic violence. Such studies will not only provide documentation of data, but also question the stereotypes with which the researchers work and the policy makers formulate laws. Karlekar (2003) notes that in India there is a tendency to club most marital violence under the overall heads of 'dowry', 'dowry violence', and 'dowry deaths' (1142) glossing over the other causes and forms of violence in the family, widely prevalent but not researched and hardly talked about (such as incest), taken for granted (wife beating), and not even acknowledged (marital rape), each of which merits its own study.

Dowry, despite having been declared illegal, continues as before and remains an intrinsic part of every Hindu (as well as of other communities) marriage. The form, nature, and type of dowry transactions have changed in the recent years where dowry has taken a more coercive and instrumental form calling for its widespread condemnation. The other aspect of it, where it is a pre-mortem inheritance, a woman's *streedhan,* and where women have customary right on dowry including land, and where it provides them and their natal families honour and prestige, needs to be dealt with more thoroughly. The question of women's claim to property under the Hindu Succession Act, 1955, requires a further probe and re-examination. Since women's access and control of property (through marriage or otherwise) is crucial in determining their position, some empirical research that investigates in detail what possession of property does to women, not only in the sense of meeting their financial requirements but also in making them feel more confident and secured as shown in a few case studies (Jetley 1988), would be worthwhile. There are a few studies on dowry, but most of them are not fieldbased accounts and have become outdated.

Other areas need immediate sociological analysis are those of customary and personal laws as well as family reforms. With little uniformity and codification of personal laws and the ruling of *fatwas* and panchayats' diktats, the situation of women under religious and customary practices has become indeed vulnerable. This, in many ways brings about changes, especially among the minority groups, like the Muslims (Hussain 1998). Of equal importance is the issue of how the religious leadership and the government legitimize the identity constructions of a religious community on the basis of personal law, thus essentializing religious identity and patriarhchal practices (Hasan 1994). Indeed, the debates about personal laws in post-colonial India have been about community identities with the conceptualization of women as the markers of the cultural community (Mukhopadhyay 1994). The issue of personal law reforms has been manipulated for political gain by both the State and religious leaders and any claim for Muslim women's rights, it is said, must necessarily confront dominant religious traditions and State policies which support the patriarchal structures of authority (Narain 2001). Specific studies on these issues and how such laws are manipulated at the ground level to the disadvantage of women are required.

The other dimensions of family that require investigation and analysis are what Uberoi (1999) calls, 'the emotional tenor of family relations' (36) involving such aspects as love, sex, marriage, and family life. In fact, there are many activities within the family and the household impacting women's situations that need to be captured for a proper understanding of how family and kinship work as units of authority allocation, resource distribution, division of labour, etc. Leela Dube (1997) suggested that these were critical areas in which more empirical studies was required. Such studies will also enable one to look for the ways in which women articulate the rules and create the mechanisms to resist the patrilineal structural constraints (Chauhan 2003). Equally important in the changing context is to visualize how kin and security networks operate as support structures and how women make use of them, especially in crisis situations (Chanana 2001).

Valuable literature has emerged in recent years on gendered analysis of war, conflict, and violence, but there are very few studies which focus on exploring the family and kinship dimensions or other social and cultural support structures. How do women handle crises in the family? How are relations (based on age, gender, marital aspect) affected in such situations? How do family members take on the crises? What are the alternative support structures people look for? What happens to the education of children and the marriage of girls? There can be innumerable such questions and the answers to them have to be searched for by looking into people's lives and recording their experiences. Such situations and those where women in the family and community experience the effects of wider structures of polity and economy, of the market and the state, and indeed of the processes of globalization, could also be considered. There are some studies which focus on the shifting circles of support for women (Palriwala and Risseeuw 1996) and changing kin and security networks (Risseeuw and Ganesh 1998) under such structures and women's ways of negotiating and finding space in difficult circumstances. The articles in both the volumes mentioned above on India are, however, few (three each) and based on earlier published works (Leela Dube 1998; Saradamoni 1996; Palriwala 1996), which calls for more studies in different geographical and cultural areas.

This brings us also to the question of studying different communities, the question of ethnicity, and perhaps that of identity politics from a gender perspective. Community studies have declined over the years, though interest in such studies began to be generated with the debate centring around the present census, that whether 'caste' as a category should be included in the census (as it was done during British rule) or not Both sides expressed their views and among those who supported the inclusion, the opinions ranged from the activism aimed to end discrimination based on caste (Pinto 1998) to its implications for social science as well as applied research, especially in sociology and social sciences (Deshpande and Sundar 1998). Two points merit consideration here; one that there is very little use of census data by sociologists, except by a few of them (Shah 1998b) and, it is said, that a huge amount of data lies unattended and unanalysed. Second, it is indeed a difficult and mind-boggling task to collect reliable information from census data considering the ambiguity in the demarcation of categories in the census itself, as well as the diversity on various grounds that different communities present, cutting across regional as well as religious lines.

However, nothing should stop sociologists from venturing into these debatable issues and their implications; what is important in women's studies is the women-focussed study of communities and gendered analyses of community-related emerging issues like identity formation and politics. The studies on identity formation are important owing to the assertions by various sections of society and also the contentious issues of identity basis, as, for instance, for the Kashmiris is it the cultural identity which is more important or the religious identity or it could also be asked is it 'gender'? These questions are particularly important in the context of communities placed in 'fuzzy' categories and sharing traits of different religions, as the Meo of Mewat (Mayaram 1997). This is also the case the Gujjars of Jammu and Kashmir, who are Muslim by faith but were placed in the category of scheduled tribe in 1991. This new identity has given political space to the Gujjars (who now want the Gojri language to be included in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution, especially since Dogri has found a place) and generated an aspiration among others like the Paharis to ask for reservation.

Many case studies, narratives, oral histories, biographies, and autobiographies, as well as personal accounts of women's experiences in different areas, are still waiting to be recorded. More anthropological explorations, as in Leela Dube's work, and as many anthropological journeys as in the essays in Meenakshi Thapan's (1998) volume are required to throw light on the personal accounts of fieldwork from the gender perspective. What difference does an identity of a woman, and more specifically, of a particular kind of woman (her caste, education, job, marital status, etc.), make in the field, and how does 'situating' her in the field resolve, the questions of methodology, objectivity and ethics? These are some of the issues not covered adequately in the sociology of gender and women's studies. Women's narratives of the type of Viramma (Racine and Racine 2000) are required, and also of those women who suffered and dared to challenge the caste system and the patriarchal structure, like Phoolan Devi, or any other lesserknown women whose initiatives are not well known. There is also a need to go beyond the victimhood paradigm to include women's stories of success without valorizing or essentializing their experiences, especially of those women who opt for unconventional professions like the army or sports, or those who are the decision makers, like the panchayat leaders, thus challenging the public/private and domestic/politics divide. In this sense, these studies will not be contributing to feminist methodology alone, but also to the larger areas of sociology.

The agenda for the future involves filling in the gaps discussed in this section. The focus has to be on bridging the space between sociology/social anthropology and women/gender studies. There has indeed been a shift towards women/gender studies and feminist anthropology and sociology wherein more emphasis is being laid on gendering the discipline of sociology and also to taking the issues in sociology to gender studies. It is felt that the need for the former is more as expressed by various scholars quoted in the survey of how issues of gender have remained at the margins of sociology and social anthropology (Chanana 2001; John 2001; Uberoi 1999, 2003). It is the task of the feminist sociologists to undertake this venture, for the onus of gendering the discipline lies on them more than anyone else. The gendered analysis of kinship, caste, and family that has begun to take place needs to be strengthened by theorizing these issues as well as by undertaking empirical research. This will tell us that caste, for example, is lived and experienced by women differently, and a further argument will let us know that it has a different kind of impact, for instance, on Dalit women.

As women's studies focus on the relationship between theory and praxis, it is important to sustain this and bridge the divide between the two which seems to be growing in recent years (Poonacha 2003). The studies in the feminist scholarship must strengthen the women's movement and feminist action. The areas that have become important for the women's movement, such as dowry, rape, domestic violence, development and empowerment, reservation, communalization and criminalization of politics, personal law, and the civil code, have sociological significance and need to be dealt with from a feminist perspective. Dowry and the question of property to women generated certain sociological writings (Srinivas 1984) and debate (Agarwal 1994; Kishwar 1989; Sharma 1984), but very few studies exist on women's own perception of dowry, its practice in different communities, and the extent to which women have control over it. Similarly, sociological studies are required on topics related to domestic violence, like foeticide or infanticide, to find out why it is being practised or why a particular community or people have taken it up, and not simply to condemn these. The reservation issue, so fervently discussed in the women's movement with shifts in ideological stands, where women did not favour reservation on grounds of merit, to the present situation when it is supported on the grounds of the unequal power relations and patriarchal and casteist forces that operate in society, needs to be looked into from the sociological viewpoint. The issue of Panchayati Raj has to go beyond finding women's representation to the impact it has on gender relations in the family, community, and society.

After the Shah Bano case and the Ayodhya incident, as well as the other events that followed, in particular Godhra and its aftermath, the questions related to communalism, uniform civil code, and family laws became important. As the issue of gender and law reform acquired prominence (Agnes 1999), the debate on women's role in Hindu nationalism and the concept of womanhood within religious nationalism commenced (Basu 1993; Sarkar 2001; Sarkar and Butalia 1995). The disciplines of sociology and social anthropology call upon the feminist scholars to delve into these issues and conduct research in these areas to bring out how women's lives and actions are determined by caste, kinship, community, and religious affiliations, and what meaning women assign to these and construct their everyday world. It is important to penetrate the paradigm of the majority– minority divide and look for relationships and interactions between communities and the commonalities as much as the differences between them. Various fuzzy communities of India, identified as 415 by K.S. Singh (1992), still follow customary rules and different faiths with very different principles. Besides this, there are many more communities which follow similar aspects, like clan (including 131 Muslim groups), lineage, sects, property, residence, adoption, maintenance, as well as many rituals and ceremonies. In what way has the relationship changed in recent years? In what sense does religion become important or unimportant wherein sometimes people become hostile and at other times help each other? Or indeed, how do they construct these relationships, especially during situations of conflicts? These are important questions for consideration. Each of these questions and many more that can be raised in similar contexts, needs to be looked at from the gender perspective as they impact women's lives very closely.

Many clues have been offered by women/gender studies in the context of theoretical and methodological debate; many issues have also been suggested by the women's movement. It is time to conduct specific studies on these issues and the ways in which laws are flaunted or implemented to the disadvantage of women.

notes

 <sup>1.</sup> Because the essays contained in these books have been tabulated under articles.

 <sup>2.</sup> Special Issues of *EPW* 27 (18) 2 May, 1992 and 26, 21 December, 1991 were devoted to sex ratio and sex discrimination.

- 3. 'Women and Work' has been dealt with in greater detail in the chapter 'Survey of Research in Industrial Sociology' by Sharit K. Bhowmik in this volume. For enquiry into women's labour force in rural areas, see 'Rural and Agrarian Studies' by Sunder S. Jodhka and Paul D'Souza, this volume.
- 4. Centre for Women's Development Studies.
- 5. The chapter 'Anthropological Studies of Indian Tribes' by Vinay Kumar Srivastava and Sukant Chaudhry in this volume discusses this problem in greater detail.

# Bibliography

- Agarwal, Bina (ed.). 1988. *Structures of Patriarchy.* New Delhi: Kali for Women.
- ———. 1994. *A Field of One's Own: Gender and Land Rights in South Asia*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- ———. 1997. '"Bargaining" and gender relations: Within and beyond the household', *Feminist Economics*, 3 (1): 1–51.
- Agnes, Flavia. 1999. *Law and Gender Inequality: The Politics of Women's Rights in India*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Agnihotri, Indu and Vina Mazumdar. 1995. 'Changing terms of political discourse on women's movement in India, 1970s–1990s', *Economic and Political Weekly*, 22 July 30 (29): 1869–78.
- Agnihotri, Satish B. 2000. *Sex Ratio Patterns in the Indian Population: A Fresh Exploration*. New Delhi: Sage Publications.
- Aiyappan, A and K. Mahadevan. 1990. *Ecology, Economy, Matriliny and Fertility of Kurichiyas*. Delhi: B.R. Publishing Corporation.
- Altekar, A.S. 1962. *The Position of Women in Hindu Civilization.* Delhi. Motilal Banarasidas.
- Anveshi Research Centre for Women's Studies. 2003. 'Nurturing links between scholarship and activism: The story of Anveshi'. In Devaki Jain and Pam Rajput (eds.). *Narratives from the Women's Studies Family: Recreating Knowledge.* New Delhi. Sage Publications, 287–99.
- Atal, Yogesh. 1968. *The Changing Frontiers of Caste.* Delhi. National Publishing House.
- Avasthi, Abha and A.K. Srivastava. 2001. *Modernity, Feminism and Women Empowerment*. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
- Bagchi, Jasodhara. 2003. 'A challenging and inspiring journey: School of Women's Studies, Jadavpur University'. In Devaki Jain and Pam Rajput (eds.). *Narratives from the Women's Studies Family: Recreating Knowledge.* New Delhi: Sage Publications, 174–87.
- Bagwe, Anjali. 1995. *Of Woman Caste.* London: Zed.

Banerjee, Paula. 2001. 'Between two armed patriarchies: Women in Assam and Nagaland'.