#### The poverty of Indian political theory<sup> $1$ </sup> 1

# Bhikhu Parekh

Non-Western societies have frequently and rightly complained that Western political theory is ethnocentric and has a limited explanatory power when applied outside the West. One would have thought that they would therefore produce both a wellconsidered critique of its central categories and modes of inquiry, and an original body of ideas capable of illuminating their political experiences. Surprising as it may seem, this is not the case. No contemporary non-Western society has produced much original political theory. Reasons for what I will call the underdevelopment of political theory vary from country to country. In this chapter I intend to concentrate on post-independence India, and to explore why a free and lively society with a rich tradition of philosophical inquiry has not thrown up much original political theory. The chapter falls into three parts. In the first part I outline some of the fascinating problems thrown up by postindependence India, and in the second I show that they remain poorly theorized. In the final part I explore some of the likely explanations of this neglect.

In order to avoid misunderstanding, some points of clarification are necessary. First, by Indian political theory I mean works on political theory written by Indian writers irrespective of whether they live in India or outside it, and exclude the works of non-Indian writers on India.

Secondly, I am primarily concerned with Indian political theory rather than with Indian political theorists. Although political theory is generally practiced by political theorists, it is not their monopoly. Sociologists, historians, economists, philosophers, jurists and others too ask theoretical questions about political life. I will therefore cast my net wider and look at the works of these writers as well. It is my contention that political theory is underdeveloped among not only Indian political theorists but also their cousins in allied disciplines.

Thirdly, I define the term political theory in as culturally neutral a manner as possible. For a variety of reasons too complex to discuss here, political theory has a longer history and is more developed in the West than elsewhere. However it is not absent in most other civilizations. Minimally it is concerned to offer a coherent and systematic understanding of political life, and is three-dimensional. It is conceptual in the sense that it defines, analyses and, distinguishes concepts, and develops a conceptual framework capable of comprehending political life. It is also explanatory in the sense that it seeks to make sense of political life, and to explain why it is constituted and conducted in a particular manner and how its different parts are related. Finally, it is normative in the sense that it either justifies the way a society is currently constituted, or criticizes and offers a well-considered alternative to it. Since political theory understood in these terms is to be found in most major traditions of thought including the Indian, albeit in

different forms and degrees, our definition is not or only minimally open to the charge of ethnocentrism or universalizing its Western form (see Parekh 1989).

#### I

India is the only country in the world to enshrine in its Constitution a fairly extensive programme of positive discrimination in favour of such deprived groups as the exuntouchables and the tribals. Seats are reserved for them in parliament and in state assemblies; jobs are reserved for them in such public institutions as the civil service and the universities; and admissions are given to them on a preferential basis in professional faculties. After an interesting debate, the Constituent Assembly of India accepted positive discrimination on the grounds that it was necessary to integrate deprived groups into the mainstream of political life, to remove the handicaps resulting from their centuries of neglect and oppression, and to break down the social barriers imposed by caste-conscious Hindus.

The policy of positive discrimination, especially one as extensive as the Indian, obviously raises important questions about the nature of justice, the trade-off between justice and such other equally desirable values as efficiency, social harmony and collective welfare, and the propriety of making social groups bearers of rights and obligations. It also raises questions about the nature and basis of inter-generational obligations, the redistributive role of the state, the nature and extent of the present generation's responsibility for the misdeeds of its predecessors, and the meaning and nature of social oppression. In the traditional Western and even Indian thought, justice is generally defined in terms of what is due to an individual on the basis of his qualifications and efforts. It is an individualist concept and is tied up with the ideas of agency, merit and responsibility. If social groups are to be made subjects of justicebased rights and obligations, the concept of justice must obviously be redefined in nonindividualist terms. Agency and responsibility must be conceptualized in social and historical terms, so that we can demonstrate continuity between the past and present oppressors and oppressed. We must also analyze the nature of current deprivation and show that it is a product of past oppression and confers moral claims on the oppressed: These questions become particularly important in India where the idea of positive discrimination has no roots in the indigenous cultural tradition and is much resented.

In the United States where positive discrimination has been introduced on a limited scale considerable work has been done on these and related questions. In India where it is one of the central tools of government policy and an alien import, and where therefore one would expect considerable theoretical literature, the important questions raised by it have received little attention. It is difficult to think of a single legal or political theorist who has produced a major work on the subject either challenging or articulating the theory of justice lying at its basis. Some work has been done by sociologists, but most of them are content to rely on the American literature, without appreciating that the historical relations between caste Hindus and the untouchables and tribals bear little resemblance to those between the American whites and blacks.

The nature of the Indian state is another important area requiring investigation. Since its emergence in sixteenth century Europe, the modem state has been conceived as a homogeneous, sovereign, centralized and territorially bounded association of individuals. It recognizes only the individuals as bearers of political rights and obligations, and enjoys undivided and unlimited authority over all those within its area of jurisdiction: The modem state represented a novel political formation without a parallel either in pre-modern Europe or anywhere else in the world. When the British halfheartedly introduced it in India, it underwent important changes, partly because of the requirements of colonial rule and partly in response to Indian traditions and social structure. While at one level the colonial state subtly restructured the long-established communities to suit its interests, at another level it 'accepted' their laws and practices and superimposed on them a minimal body of mainly criminal laws. It did not, indeed dared not, transform the wider society along the modernist lines as its counterpart had done in Europe. Unlike its European counterpart, it permitted a plurality of legal systems, shared its 'sovereignty' with largely self-governing communities, and remained both socially segmentary and transcendental.

Post-independence India only partially rationalized the colonial state and remains a complex political formation. It has a uniform body of criminal but not civil laws. Muslims continue to be governed by their own personal laws, which the state enforces but with which it does not interfere. The tribals too are governed by their separate laws, and the state has committed itself to making no changes in the practices and laws of the Christians without their explicit consent and approval. The Parsis are subject to the same civil laws as the rest of non-Muslim Indians, but the interpretation and application of the laws is in some cases left to their panchayats or community councils. Thus the ordinary civil courts will hear a Parsi divorce case, but leave it to the Parsi panchayat to decide on the machinery of reconciliation and the amount of alimony. The Indian state is thus both an association of individuals and a community of communities, recognizing both individuals and communities as bearers of rights. The criminal law recognizes only the individuals, whereas the civil law recognizes most minority communities as distinct legal subjects. This makes India a liberal democracy of a very peculiar kind.

It is tempting to say, as many Indian and foreign commentators have said, that the Indian state is too 'deeply embedded' in society and too 'plural' and 'chaotic' to be considered a properly constituted state, and that it is not a state in the 'true' sense of the word. But such a view is obviously too superficial and ethnocentric to be satisfactory. There is no reason why we should accept that the modem Western manner of constituting the state is the only true or proper one, and deny India and other non-Western societies the right to indigenize the imported institution of the state and even to evolve their own alternative political formations. Rather than insist that the state must be autonomous and separate from society, and then set about finding ways of restoring it to the people, we might argue that it should not be separated from society in the first instance. Rather than insist that a state must have a uniform legal system, we might argue that it should be free to allow its constituent communities to retain their different laws and practices, so long as these conform to clearly laid down and widely accepted principles of justice and fairness. Thus the law might require that a divorced wife must be provided for, and leave it to different communities to decide whether the husband, his family or his community as a whole should arrange for her maintenance, so long as the arrangements are foolproof and not open to abuse or arbitrary alteration.

Again, there is no obvious reason why a federal state may not ignore the principle of abstract equality, and grant one or more of its constituent units a privileged status if the latter's history or the considerations of national interest so require. Nor is it necessary that the state must enjoy sovereign and undivided power over its subjects. If its historical circumstances so require, it might leave all or some of its constituent communities alone to run their affairs themselves provided that they do not transgress

#### Rhikhu Parekh 22

certain limits.<sup>2</sup> It is at least arguable that once we reject the idea that the state must be constituted in a particular manner, and allow different states to develop their distinct modes of internal organization, we might be better able to deal with ethnic conflicts and secessionist movements that the dominant model of the state finds so threatening. In the ultimate analysis the state is an institution for creating an orderly and peaceful collective life. It is not impossible that in a multi-communal or multi-national society, the modern state, uncompromisingly committed to the ideas of uniform laws, individualism, abstract equality and undivided legal sovereignty, might alienate minorities and *provoke* conflicts and secessionist movements. Instead of being an agent of *order*, it might become an unwitting instrument of avoidable *disorder*.

Whether or not one accepts the view that the modern state can be constituted in different ways, the fact remains that the Indian state does not conform to the Western model. One might consider it defective and seek to modernize it, or one might welcome it as a tentative but imaginative attempt to indigenize the Western model and to adopt it to the country's distinct needs. In either case it raises important questions, and challenges some of the basic categories of Western political thought. It is striking that hardly any Indian political theorist has wrestled with these questions and theorized the specificity of the Indian state. J. P. Narain and other political activists have thrown up interesting ideas on the best ways of reconstituting the Indian state (Narain 1959), but these remain utopian and poorly worked out and have not received critical examination at the hands of political theorists.

Since the Indian state is multi-religious and was born out of the trauma of partition on religious lines, its founding fathers concluded that it must remain secular. But they remained unclear about the meaning, implications and basis of secularism. For Jawaharlal Nehru, its first Prime Minister, religion was a private matter for individual citizens and had no public or political significance. The state was to 'transcend' and cultivate studied indifference to religion. He discouraged his ministers and party colleagues from attending religious functions, and was deeply offended when the President of India attended a function to mark the restoration of the Somanth temple whose destruction had for centuries been seen by the Hindus as a symbol of Muslim atrocity. Since Nehru's brand of secularism was impossible in a deeply religious society, it was hardly surprising that his government found it impossible to live up to its demands. Furthermore, for obvious political reasons he had no choice but to accept the autonomy of the Muslim personal law. This not only privileged Muslims, but also gave their religion a legal and political status. He was forced to grant a similar status to other minorities. His government gave public money to religious schools, especially Muslim, which was hardly a secular policy by his own definition. Again, Nehru rightly insisted on reforming the oppressive and discriminatory Hindu personal law. Since he was himself a Hindu, and since his government mainly consisted of the Hindus, they thought that they would not be accused of 'interfering' with Hindu social practices. Neither he nor his colleagues fully appreciated that in reforming the Hindu law in the teeth of considerable conservative opposition, the state was acting as the reformist arm of the Hindus and was not being neutral and fully secular.

Although Nehru and his successors defined secularism as indifference to religion, the cultural reality of India quietly continued to assert itself in these and other ways. Nehru's model was abandoned during his daughter's period of office, and secularism came to be defined not as equal indifference to but as equal respect for all religions. The new definition was as vague and incoherent as the old. No one was clear about

what 'respecting' religion meant and involved, and whether it implied taking account of religious views and practices. The idea of 'equal' respect for all religions in a state whose population and leadership were predominantly Hindu continued to pose the kinds of problems raised during the Nehru period. In effect the new definition was a skillful way of allowing government leaders including the Prime Minister to indulge their religious sensibilities with a clear conscience, and for all practical purposes India became a multi-religious rather than an areligious state. Over time it became legitimate to play the 'religious card' during the elections, the state became an arena for and indeed a party to religious conflicts, and secularism was all but abandoned.

No government since independence has fully explained why India should be a secular state in its current sense, and such arguments as they have offered are unimaginative, based on fear, and derived from Western history. Most leaders have argued that secularism is necessary to ensure religious tolerance and harmony. But the argument is false. A secular state is not necessarily tolerant, for example the Soviet Union during the Communist rule or France after the French Revolution. Conversely a religious state is not necessarily intolerant of or discriminatory against minority religions, for example traditional Hindu kingdoms in India, and Muslim kingdoms in the Middle East and most of the time even in India. It could also be argued that by denying religion public identity and expression, a secular state might *provoke* religious conflicts. The Sikh separatists, for example, have often maintained, among other things, that the secular Indian state emasculates their religious identity and denies them collective self-expression, and that they can only preserve their identity in an independent Sikh state. The argument is unconvincing but it makes an important point. Since different religions are differently structured and come to terms with the secular world in different ways and degrees, secularism inescapably impinges on them differently and cannot be wholly impartial between them. It is of course true that in a multi-religious society the state cannot afford to be identified with a particular religion. It is also true that the state is primarily concerned with the material interests of its citizens rather than with the salvation of their souls. For these and other reasons the relation between the state and religion raises acute problems in India, but they cannot be solved by importing an alien and much-misunderstood secularist model from the West developed in a very different culture during its aggressively rationalist phase.

It is striking that with such notable exceptions as T. N. Madan (1987) and Ashis Nandy (1989), hardly any Indian social or political theorist has seriously grappled with the question of secularism (see also Chatterji 1984). There are very few books analyzing the term, distinguishing its various senses, elucidating the ways in which its meaning and practice have changed since independence, explaining when and how it entered the political vocabulary of India, and what model of it best suits the country. Only a few have asked if the term itself makes sense in the Indian context where the majority religion is unorganized and doctrinally eclectic, and whether it has conceptual equivalents in the vernacular languages in which ordinary Indians think about the subject. Hardly anyone has examined if Western states are secular in the sense in which Nehru and the modernists used the term, and how religion impinges on their public life, both as a cultural force and in the shape of Christian democratic parties. Since Indian civilization has a deep religious core, many secular-minded Indians have felt that they cannot be truly secular unless they reject their past, and that they must choose between their past and their future. Hardly anyone has cared to show that the dilemma is unnecessary and arises from a falsely defined model of secularism.

#### 24 Rhikhu Parekh

The legitimacy of the Indian state and the grounds of political obligation too raise difficult questions. When India became independent, the new state drew upon two theories of legitimacy: It was legitimate because it was run by Indians and based on their consent, as expressed in the Constitution which they had freely given themselves and in the post-independence elections. It was legitimate also because it was committed to leading the country along the 'historically inevitable' path modernization initiated but later blocked by the colonial rulers. The consensual and historicist theories of legitimacy generated different perceptions and expectations of the state, and their tension has informed much post-independence political debate. For the advocates of the consensual theory, a duly elected government has a right to the obedience of its subjects; for the champions of the historicist theory, only a government modernizing the country and promoting collective well-being has such a right. For the former, the rule of law and respect for the citizens' rights and liberties are the central concerns of the government. For the historicists the modernization of the country takes precedence, and if its 'imperative' so require, citizens' rights and the rule of law may be infringed. The tension between the two was evident even during Nehru's period of office, but it became acute in the early 1970s when his daughter skillfully used it to legitimize the Emergency.

The question of political obligation is closely connected with that of legitimacy. If the Indian state is unable to protect the basic rights and guarantee the physical security of a large body of its citizens, the question arises whether they have a moral obligation to obey it. At a different level a similar difficulty arises in the case of the wretched slum-dwellers, for whom the state not only does little but to whose oppression it is at best a passive spectator and at worst an active accomplice. Such familiar grounds of political obligation as explicit or tacit consent, political participation, collective welfare, fairness and gratitude make little sense in their case. The historicist theory upon which most politicians rely, namely that poverty and wretchedness are the inevitable price of modernization, is more plausible, but it too runs into obvious difficulties. The burdens of modernization must be shared by all, not just the poor, and they must be shared equitably, if the moral obligation to obey the law is to apply to all Indians equally. One needs to show too that alternative models of modernization entailing less heavy or unequal burdens are not available to the country, and that the poverty and wretchedness of the millions does really promote the long-term collective interests of all rather than those of the rich and powerful alone.

The functions and limits of the law too raise large questions, important both in themselves and because of their implications for political obligation. The question becomes particularly acute in such a multi-cultural and multi-religious society as India. The law is not and can never be morally neutral. It enjoins one class of actions and prohibits another, and needs guiding principles. If it derives these principles from one culture or religion, it discriminates against the others. If it derives them from outside the constituent cultures and religions, which is what secularism entails, they might not accept the authority of that source or prefer to define it differently. Even the so-called secular or worldly interests, which are supposed to be shared by all, are defined and graded differently by different religions. The difficulty is avoided only when the principles on which the law acts are shown to be common to all the constituent religions and cultures. But such principles are rare and the state based on them is obviously not secular in the currently dominant sense. It is hardly surprising that the question of the sources of legal morality remains unresolved in India and is evaded by all manner of subterfuges, including appeals to the loosely defined national interest the allegedly universal but essentially liberal moral principles.

There are also several other important questions thrown up by the Indian political experience. They include such questions as the ways in which Western ideas and institutions are appropriated and filtered through their indigenous analogues, the languages of political discourse, the deep differences between the way political discourse is conducted in English and in the regional languages, the emerging distinction between private and public in a society which refuses to separate the two, and the concept of the political in a society which has long seen it as an inseparable dimension of the social. At a different level the Indian political experience raises questions about the kinds of concepts and methods of inquiry needed to capture the authenticity of the Indian political reality, and the merits and limitations of different methodological approaches. It also raises questions about what is likely to happen when a society, which is not structured around the state and does not consider political power and authority autonomous, decides to reorganize itself on statist lines.

### $II$

I offered above a brief and tentative list of the kinds of questions, thrown up by postindependence India. Surprising as it may seem, Indian political theorists have taken only a limited interest in them.

Post-independence India has failed to throw up either a major political theorist or significant theoretical works on such subjects as social justice, the specificity of the Indian state, secularism, legitimacy, political obligation, the nature and structure of political argument, the nature of citizenship in a multi-cultural state, the nature and limits of the law, the ideal polity, and the best way to understand and theorize the Indian political reality. There is little attempt even to test the major ideas and categories of Western political theory against the Indian political experience, and to show their ethnocentric biases and limitations. Although some work is beginning to be done in some of these areas, it remains isolated and patchy. Indian political theorists often do not take each other's work seriously enough to comment on it, and the questions raised and the concepts developed by one are not generally taken up by the others. As a result there is no cooperative engagement in a shared form of inquiry; and as yet no sign of the development of an Indian tradition of political theory.

Since most Indian political theorists are not theorizing their political reality, we might ask what they are doing. Broadly speaking most of their work falls into three categories. First, considerable work, some fascinating but much of it repetitive, has been and is being done on specific nationalist leaders, or on the development and structure of nationalist thought in general.<sup>3</sup> Second, some work, mostly derivative, is being done on such contemporary Western writers as Habermas. Foucault. Gramsci and the deconstructionists, or on such movements as positivism, behaviourism and post-modernism.<sup>4</sup> It is striking that such mainstream Western political theorists as Oakeshott, Rawls, Arendt, Leo Strauss, Macpherson and Nozick are almost entirely ignored. Finally, some work, much of it tentative and exploratory, is being done on the philosophy of the social sciences, historiography and relativism. During the colonial rule the British insisted that Western forms of life and thought were universally valid and superior to their Indian counterparts. Most Indians resented such a claim then, and continue to do so today. Their response took and continues to take the form of

#### 26 Rhikhu Parekh

both demonstrating the ethnocentricity of Western forms of thought and life and insisting on the possibility of an East-West dialogue as a means to mutual enrichment. Such a critical relativism is very popular in India. *Relativism* deflates Western pretensions and affirms the autonomy and integrity of Indian forms of thought and life. Critical relativism enables Indians both to borrow from the West with a clear conscience and to claim that they also have something to offer it in return. Since it establishes a partnership of equals, critical relativism has considerable following and is a subject of much discussion. There is as yet no major work in this area, but enough spadework has been done for one to emerge before long.<sup>5</sup>

Of the three categories of writings, the first constitutes the greatest bulk. It is not too difficult to see why this is so. The ideas of nationalist writers are still deeply inscribed in Indian political reality and offer clues to its nature and dynamics. Such work is also easier to undertake in a country where library facilities are poor, the knowledge of the classical and medieval past is limited, and where intellectual self-confidence, thanks to years of Western domination, is too low to permit bold and creative theorizing. Ancestral piety is an important virtue in India and it too plays a role. Although there are only limited pointers in this direction, it seems that the preoccupation with the recent past is beginning to generate interest both in the pre-modern past and in the general methodological problems raised by the study of the past.

### $III$

I argued in the previous section that Indian political theorists have taken limited interest in addressing and reflecting on the large questions raised by their unique political experiences, and that they have produced little creative political theory. This calls for an explanation. As we saw there is no shortage of material. There is no shortage of talent either, as is evident in such limited work as has been done. There is also a great need and demand for political theory to help clarify the complex and frightening nature of Indian political reality. Although political theory of the analytical and argumentative kind is relatively new to India, the country has a long tradition of writing moral and political treatises, and it has now been exposed to Western political theory for at least two centuries. In the light of all this the puzzle about the causes for the underdevelopment of political theory deepens. Without pretending to offer a conclusive or even a complete explanation, I suggest that three interrelated factors might throw some light on the subject. They are the way political theory is taught in Indian universities, the domination of the unofficially official political philosophy to which India committed itself at independence, and the complex nature of Indian political reality and the political theorist's inescapably ambiguous attitude to it.

#### **Teaching political theory**

The institutional context in which the teaching of political theory takes place in India leaves a great deal to be desired. As one would expect in a poor country the social sciences do not generally attract the ablest students, who tend to gravitate towards the professional faculties and the civil service. Furthermore, as a recently published report based on a survey of politics teaching in 70 out of the country's 150 universities points out, a large body of politics students have an inadequate command of English.<sup>6</sup> They have difficulty coping with books written in English by Indian authors; as for those published abroad, they are simply 'not … intelligible to the bulk of our students'. Most students rely on literature written in regional languages, which is generally so poor that it 'cannot be recommended or recommended only at [our] peril' (ibid.: 776–77). Many a teacher of politics is recruited from such mediocre students.

Talented Indians do, of course produce first-rate works. But they are subject to all kinds of temptation which only a few manage to resist. Thanks to the frustrating and bureaucratic academic climate, and to the widely noticed sense of colonial inferiority, Indian scholars tend to look to the West for recognition and approval, and they can obviously secure it only by writing on themes acceptable to the Western intellectual establishment. There is a rarely articulated but nonetheless unmistakable Western view of what 'serious' Third World scholars should think and write about, how they should study Western or their own societies, along what lines they may criticize either, and so on. The view is propagated through familiar channels, and well-tuned Indian scholars quickly pick up the message.

While Indian political thought remains a poor cousin, all politics departments teach Western political thought at the undergraduate: level, but it too is centred around mainly modem and somewhat badly-selected individual thinkers.<sup>7</sup> The situation is better at the postgraduate level where important concepts and problems are explored. But they are often highly general, have little relevance to India, and ignore many of the questions relating to the nature of the Indian state, political obligation, social justice, positive discrimination, violence, and the languages of Indian political discourse that were mentioned earlier.

#### India's national political philosophy

On becoming India's first prime minister, Nehru declared his total commitment to comprehensive modernization; he called it India's new 'national philosophy' or 'national ideology', which was 'settled once and for all' and to which the country was 'irrevocably' committed. In his view it was India's 'only hope' and 'last chance' to turn the corner, and any form of tampering with it was bound to prove 'disastrous'. For Nehru modernization involved the seven more-or-less clearly defined 'national goals' of parliamentary democracy, national unity, large-scale industrialization, socialism, secularism, nonalignment, and the development of the scientific temper. For 17 long years he threw his great personal and political authority behind the 'national philosophy', used his three election victories as evidence of popular commitment to it, ridiculed, abused and attacked those daring to challenge it, and created in the country a deep fear of disintegration should it ever waver in its commitment.

Since independence, then, India has had an unofficially official political philosophy. It has become so deeply embedded in national self-consciousness that even those feeling uneasy about some aspects of it rarely express their doubts, or do so in muted and hesitant tones. Since they often share the modernist analysis of the causes of Indian decline, they feel deeply worried lest they should unwittingly send the country back to its now notorious historical slumber or strengthen its regressive tendencies. The national political philosophy has also so profoundly structured the political discourse that its critics lack an adequate vocabulary in which to articulate their doubts and criticisms, let alone develop coherent alternatives. If someone is against secularism, he must be for Hindu raj; if against socialism, he must be for unbridled capitalism; if against the scientific temper, he must be for religious obscurantism and so on. As a result there is little conceptual and psychological space for a critical political philosophy to grow. Unless they feel intellectually and morally confident enough to deconstruct the national political philosophy and the mode of discourse generated by it even if only to put it together in more or less its present form, they cannot produce serious political philosophy.

#### Indian political reality

Another factor that may partly explain the underdevelopment of Indian political theory has to do with the enormous complexity and fluidity of the Indian political reality and the political theorist's deeply ambiguous relation to it.

Tradition and modernity are locked in Indian society in a fascinating relationship of partnership and combat, sometimes reinforcing, sometimes correcting and modifying, and sometimes fighting and defeating each other, and in the process redefining themselves and their relationship. Nothing has a clear and recognizable shape; nothing stands still long enough to permit careful and patient investigation; and nothing is distinct and separate enough to be studied in its own terms and without getting confused with something else. When everything is on the way to becoming something else, one is not entirely clear what concepts to use, what questions to ask, and how to go about answering them.

The Indian political reality, further, is a product of different historical influences. There is the old Hindu India, itself a product of several different influences, still full of life, and increasingly being rediscovered by a society that had for centuries lost intimate contact with its past. The Muslim rule made a deep impact on the Hindu India, and so did the British. Thanks to these and other influences, felt differently in different parts of the country and in different areas of life, India lives in different historical times and contains several undigested and unassimilated chunks of different civilizations. One cannot make sense of it, let alone theorize it, unless one is reasonably familiar with the sources of the influences that have shaped it and still contain clues to its current profile.

Unlike Western societies today, which have relatively stable structures and can at least up to a point be understood atemporally and in their own terms, India can only be understood in terms of its history. Time is a far greater political reality in India than in the West, requiring an Indian political theorist to master the history not only of his own society but also of those who shaped it. Thanks to colonialism and the 'modernist' educational policy of post-independence India, very few political theorists have had classical education or know Sanskrit. Unlike such Western theorists as Bodin, Hobbes and Locke who theorized the emerging European state, Indian political theorists have no direct access to their history and its idioms.

As if these demands were not onerous enough, the Indian political theorist must also be a keen student of Western political theory. Political theory in the West has had a continuous history and is better developed than anywhere else. Although the Indian political theorist sometimes pretends otherwise, his traditional theoretical resources are exiguous and of limited relevance to the kinds of questions he needs to ask and answer today. He cannot learn the craft of political theory and acquire the necessary skills and sensibilities without mastering the tools of Western political thought. But having done so he must return to his own society, master its forms of thought, and readjust the tools to suit its distinct character. The West can help him understand *what it is to do political theory*: his own society can help him decide *what kind of political theory to do.* To master one tradition is difficult enough; to acquire an adequate command of two is

beyond the reach of most. The Indian political theorist needs to go West *in order to* get back to the East. This is a long way back home, but it is the only way.

#### $IV$

In the previous section I discussed three factors responsible for the under-development of Indian political theory. There are also many others, which for reasons of space I have not examined. These include such things as the colonial rupture in Indian thought. the cognitive alienation of intellectuals from their society, the great difficulty of theorizing in English a reality lived and constituted partly in vernaculars and partly in a mixture of them and English, and the practical, even utilitarian, orientation of much of the traditional Indian concept of theory. The three factors I selected above are some of the most important, and both work through and provide the nodal points for most of the rest. The three are closely related and support each other. For long, Indians were more-or-less convinced that their national political philosophy was wisely chosen and that it was the only one available to them. Since most political theorists shared that view they neither subjected it to a critical examination nor explored an alternative to it. Some of those who were unhappy with the national political philosophy were put of by the daunting task of theorizing their complex reality afresh. Most of those who tried found it difficult to develop realistic and coherent perspectives. All this affected the way they taught and continue to teach political theory. In the absence of the original and creative theorizing of contemporary reality, teaching and research in political theory became unimaginative and centred largely around the history of nationalist political thought and fashionable Western writers. Such teaching and research in turn produced generations of students lacking the courage and the ability to engage in creative theorizing. In this and other related ways the three factors reinforced each other.

If our explanation of the underdevelopment of Indian political theory is correct, it has a wider message. Political theory does not develop in a vacuum. It requires bold and talented minds and a love of theoretical understanding for its own sake. It also requires challenging material, intellectual self-confidence, a climate of tolerance and fearlessness, a relatively firm political reality, the theorist's ability to get a critical purchase on it, and his stable moral and emotional relationship to his environment.<sup>8</sup> In the absence of all or most of these conditions, such a politically sensitive and existentially based form of inquiry as political theory cannot flourish. This may perhaps explain why political theory has not developed in many a Third World country, as also why it has developed in some Western countries and not others and only during certain historical periods.

#### Notes

- 1 This is an abridged version of the article that appeared in *History of Political Thought*, 13 (3), 1992
- 2 The Indian experience has shown up the limitations of the traditional notion of sovereignty. It still awaits its Bodin and hopefully a Hobbes.
- 3 Partha Chatterjee and the subaltern school in general have done some good work in this area. V. R. Mehta and V. P. Varma have also done interesting work, especially on Gandhi and Aurobindo, but it remains largely expository. Sudipta Kaviraj's book (1995) on Bankim breaks new grounds.
- 4 Thomas Pantham, Upendra Baxi and Sudipta Kavirai have done interesting work in this area.

#### 30 Bhikhu Parekh

- 5 V. R. Mehta, Thomas Pantham, Sudipta Kaviraj, Frank Thakurdas, Partha Chatterjee, V. P. Verma and others have all written in this area. For the attraction of comparative philosophy in India, see Halbfass (1990: 307ff., 548 ff.).
- 6 Report on the Curriculum Development Centre in Political Science (Delhi, 1991). I thank Professor A. P. Rana for sending me a copy.
- 7 In most universities they include Rawls, Habermas, Foucault, Derrida and Gramsci.
- 8 Rajni Kothari not only shares my view of the poverty of Indian political thought but presents an even darker picture. However he offers no coherent explanation of it. See Kothari (1986: Chapter l).

## References

- Baxi, U. and Parekh, B. C. (1995) Crisis and Change in Contemporary India, New Delhi: Sage Publications/The Book Review Literary Trust.
- Chatterjee, P. (1987) Nationalist Thought: A Derivative Discourse, London: Zed.
- Chatterji, P. C. (1984) Secular Values for a Secular India, Delhi: Lola Chatterji.
- Ghoshal, U. N. (1959) A History of Indian Political Ideas, London: Oxford University Press.
- Halbfass, W. (1990) India and Europe, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
- Kaviraj, Sudipta (1995) The Unhappy Consciousness: Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay and the Formation of Nationalist Discourse in India, Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Kothari R. (1974) Footsteps into the Future, Delhi: Orient Longman.
- —— (1988) State Against Democracy, Delhi: Ajanta.
- —— (1986) A Survey of Research in Political Science, Vol. 4: Political Thought, Delhi: Indian Council of Social Science Research.
- Madan, T. N. (1987) 'Secularism in its Place', The Journal of Asian Studies, 4.
- Mehta, V. R. (1987) 'Political science in India: in search of an identity', Government & Opposition, 22(3).
- —— (2005) Foundations of Indian Political Thought: An Interpretation: From Manu to the Present Day, New Delhi: Manohar Publishers & Distributors.
- Mehta, V. R. and Pantham, Thomas (eds) (2006) Political Ideas in Modern India: Thematic Explorations, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
- Nandy, A. (1989) 'An anti-secular manifesto', in J. Hick and L. Hempel (eds) Gandhi's Significance for Today, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Narain, J. P. (1959) A Plea for Reconstruction of the Indian Polity, Delhi: Akhil Bharat Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan.
- Parekh, B. (1989) Colonialism, Tradition and Reform, Delhi: Sage Publications.
- —— (1989) Gandhi's Political Philosophy, London: University of Notre Dame Press.
- —— (1991) 'Nehru and the national philosophy of India', in Economic and Political Weekly, January.
- Parekh, Bhikhu and Pantham, Thomas (eds) (1987) Political Discourse: Explorations in Indian and Western Political Thought, New Delhi: Sage Publications.
- Thakurdas, F. (1980) Perspectives in Political Theory, New Delhi: Radiant Publishers.
- —— (1982) Essays in Political Theory, New Delhi: Gitanjali Publishing House.
- Varma, V. P. (1954) Studies in Hindu Political Thought and its Metaphysical Foundation, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
- —— (1979) Philosophical Humanism and Contemporary India, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.