CHAPTER 7

## **Looking to the Future** of Quant Trading

All evolution in thought and conduct must at first appear as heresy and misconduct.

—George Bernard Shaw

**n** o-called black-box trading has existed for more than three decades. It is hopefully clearer to the reader that these strategies are not so much black boxes as much as systematic implementations of the kinds of things that human traders and investors have always done. Unfortunately, automation is most often received with a great deal of distress. Sometimes, this is very understandable, as in the case of job displacement where a person's occupation is being obviated by automation. Other times, ignorance is a sufficient reason for fear. In either case, I believe that the backlash against quants is, at its core, a generational issue. We are just past a point of transition in our marketplace. Automation and computerization in the markets have pretty much happened. But it's still a recent enough phenomenon that companies and individuals who are poorly equipped to participate profitably in the modern markets are bitter and vocal. But as these types of players adapt, move into other lines of work, or retire, newer participants who are perfectly happy to participate in these markets are abundant.

Looking ahead, I see a couple of interesting trends that bear watching. Markets today are undoubtedly and categorically more fair and egalitarian than they have ever been in their history. However, the level of transparency available today, coupled with the level of technology at the disposal of even less sophisticated market participants and observers, has led to a continuous pressure to ensure that markets are simply fair, not merely less unfair. I think that at least some of the elements that cause problems (e.g., the ban on locked markets) will be addressed.

At the same time, there is light at the end of tunnel in this low‐latency arms race. We are rapidly converging on that asymptotic limit of minimal latency. Most practitioners welcome such a state for the markets, because it will cause the focus of market participants back onto the more interesting challenges of outsmarting one another, rather than simply outrunning one another. It also seems likely that, once we reach this point, firms will have less reason to each rebuild the same standard, highest‐performance infrastructure. This standardization of the platform will also deal with many of the (unfounded) criticisms of HFT, because everyone will have access to the same infrastructure.

Since the time I wrote the first edition of this book, I have seen little progress in the areas of research I highlighted then. Relatively naive, frequently ineffective approaches remain in place to blend alpha models together, to size positions correctly, and to manage risk. These are fields of research in which little useful literature has been published, and the landscape remains wide open for innovation. And some fields of study within the quant trading industry have been ignored almost entirely. Models that predict whether certain strategies are likely to perform well or poorly in the future are also somewhat uncommon, though they are increasingly being explored by various systematic trading firms.

The manner in which quant trading systems are used can also evolve. There are already examples of hybrid quant‐discretionary strategies, which utilize quant systems to screen for opportunities while allowing discretion to rule the rest of the process. But more work can be done to ascertain whether certain other parts of the investment process can combine human subjectivity with the objectivity and consistency of machines. For example, it is easy to imagine analysts inputting their views into a computer system and allowing the system to determine the portfolio. In other words, instead of using machines to support human decisions, human input could support systematic decisions. At least one very prominent discretionary equity trading firm has established an effort in this area, and the initial results have apparently been very promising.

On the opposite end of the spectrum, and due largely to the ever‐ increasing power of computer processors, sophisticated machine learning approaches are becoming more and more feasible. There remains the challenge of extremely noisy, dirty data. But for those who can tackle this challenge, there may be interesting temporal inefficiencies to exploit for profit, particularly with regard to shorter‐term trading strategies.

*Big data* is a term borrowed from the tech industry, relating to datasets so large as to outstrip the capabilities of standard database tools. In quant trading, it refers to large datasets that usually come from the Internet and that may give insight into sentiment. For example, numerous strategies have cropped up that analyze Twitter, blogs, and other Internet content sources to try to determine if sentiment readings can predict near‐term stock price movements.

There appears to be an interesting opportunity set at the intersection of high frequency and more traditional quant trading strategies. These "mid‐ frequency" strategies have shorter holding periods than traditional quant strategies and are focused heavily on alpha. But the kinds of opportunities they pursue—for example, using the limit order book to predict price behavior with a time horizon of an hour or longer—require the technical infrastructure needed to do well in high-frequency trading. As such, these mid‐frequency strategies are at the borderline between two equally difficult‐to‐master styles, and the opportunity set is interesting perhaps specifically because the barriers to entry are so high. As high-frequency trading has become more challenging in many markets, with volumes declining and competition at a fierce level, this may become an interesting area to observe. So far, we have seen a few HFT firms venture into the asset management business, and the success of these ventures has not been heartening (though it is extremely early yet). That said, the demand for short‐term quant strategies appears to be high, and capital has been allocated aggressively in this area at a time when it has been difficult to generate profits.

It has been interesting to see an increased acceptance of systematic trading strategies by investors who had felt them too opaque previously. During 2012, I know of billions of dollars allocated to quant funds specifically by pensions and large, traditional fund‐of‐funds who historically would have said, "We don't invest in quant." However, far too much of this money is going to bulge‐bracket asset gathering outfits who care more about asset gathering than generating alpha.

Indeed, and at least partially because of this trend to allocate money primarily to the largest managers, the last five years have seen enormous turnover at the company and individual level among boutiques. A great many well‐respected quant trading outfits have closed down, while a large number more have entered the space. The quant liquidation of 2007, Lehman's collapse in 2008, and the hedge fund industry's institutionalization have all contributed to this trend. The implementation of the Dodd‐Frank prohibition on proprietary trading by banks has also led to a large flow of talent out of the industry. Many quants, like many other people around the world, are simply unemployed and have few prospects. I expect that a collectivist approach to some of the more tiresome and expensive aspects of building a quant strategy will be centralized and shared. Prime candidates for such a business structure include data acquisition and management, operations and compliance management, and execution. However, raising trading capital remains a huge challenge for smaller firms and any startups that are not headed by brand name quants.

In addition to the general requirement to evolve in order to survive, great challenges face the quant trader today. Regulations are becoming increasingly hostile as both quant trading and hedge funds are demonized in the popular press. The economic problems that were exacerbated by large investment banks, failed IPOs, and a host of other ailments have been foisted onto quants and HFTs without any regard for the facts. Ironically, the causality is actually in the opposite direction. Rather than causing problems, quants have mainly suffered because of the innumerable government interventions and geopolitical events that have rattled markets ever since late 2008. Many alternative investment professionals are turning away from quant trading in disgust after years of repeated once‐in‐a‐lifetime events. For quants, this may be a period of natural selection, in which the weaker or less lucky firms are forced out of the business while the stronger or luckier firms can survive only if they evolve.