- Trevathan, W., & McKenna, J. J. (1994). Evolutionary environments of human birth and infancy: Insights to apply to contemporary life. *Children and Environment, 11*(2), 88–104.
- Valdes-Dapena, M. A. (1980). Sudden infant death syndrome: A review of the medical literature 1974–(1979). *Pediatrics, 6*(4), 567–614.
- Valdes-Dapena, M. A. (1988). A pathologist's perspective on possible mechanisms in SIDS. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 533*, 31–37.
- Watanabe, N., Yotsukura, M., Kadoi, N., Yashiro, K., Sakanoue, M., & Nishida, H. (1994). Epidemiology of sudden infant death syndrome in Japan. *Acta Pediatrica Japonica, 36*, 329–332.
- Willinger, M. (1989). SIDS—a challenge. *Journal of the National Institutes of Health Research, 1*, 73–80.
- Wilson, E. (1990). *Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) and environmental perturbations in a cross-cultural context* (Masters thesis). Calgary, Alberta, Canada: University of Calgary.
- Young, J., & Fleming, P. J. (1998). Reducing the risks of SIDS: The role of the pediatrician. *Paediatrics Today, 6*(2), 41–48.

# **Tobacco Use in Medical Anthropological Perspective**

#### **Merrill Singer**

# **INTRODUCTION**

Tobacco is known to be the one commercially sold product that if used as directed by the manufacturer will lead to certain disease and death. Additionally, unlike a genetically caused disease, the health consequences of tobacco use are directly tied to behavior and to the cultural and social structuring of people's ideas, actions, and relationships. For all of these reasons, tobacco use should be of primary interest to medical anthropology. In fact, however, as discussed below, there have been relatively few focused anthropological accounts of tobacco use in a cultural and social context. This avoidance is noteworthy, reflecting both the fact that topics of study within medical anthropology (like other fields) accord greater or lesser social rewards for researchers as well as the fact that in the West, where most medical anthropologists are found, tobacco use lacks extensive symbolic or other cultural embellishment. However, from a strictly health standpoint, tobacco use is of far greater direct consequence than most topics regularly studied by medical anthropologists. Further, because of the role it has played over time in inter-group social relationships, especially between colonial powers and colonized peoples and between dominant and subordinate social classes, tobacco also has had an enormous indirect impact on human health.

# **TOBACCO AND HEALTH**

The significant health consequences of smoking are now widely known. Three commonly lethal diseases, in particular, have been closely linked to the use of tobacco: coronary heart disease, lung cancer, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Other fatal or disabling diseases known to be caused by or made worse by smoking include peripheral vascular disease, hypertension, and myocardial infarction. Smoking also causes cancer of the mouth, throat, bladder, and other organs. As anthropologists Mark Nichter and Elizabeth Cartwright (1991, p. 237) argue, smoking damages the health of families in three additional ways: it leads to or complicates chronic illness thereby reducing the ability of adults to care for and socialize children; it diverts scarce household resources from healthier items; and it exposes children to secondary smoke, a known cause of disease. Current estimates are that 3,000 lung cancer deaths and 62,000 deaths from coronary heart disease in adults who do not smoke are caused each year in the United States alone by exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke. Among children, second-hand smoke is associated with sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), chronic middle ear infections, and respiratory infections such as asthma (National Cancer Institute, 1999).

In 1989 the World Health Organization estimated that worldwide 2.5 million people die each year from

#### **The Social History of Tobacco 519**

diseases caused by tobacco use. This had risen to 3 million deaths by 1994. Put another way, one person dies every 10 seconds as a result of the diseases of smoking. World Health Organization data suggest that if current patterns of smoking continue into the future over 500 million people who are alive today will die of smoking-related diseases and by the year 2030 smoking will be the biggest cause of death in the world. Seventy percent of these deaths will occur in developing countries.

The toll of smoking on health also is felt in industrially developed nations. Americans buy approximately 22 billion packs of cigarettes each year. According to the American Heart Association, these are purchased by the 26.3 million men and 22.7 million women in the United States who are smokers. Of these, tobacco products (primarily cigarettes but also cigars, chewing tobacco, and other items) cause the death of 440,000 Americans per year. This amounts to the death of one person each 13 seconds (Ile & Kroll, 1990; Peto, 1990). Smoking is now a factor in over one fifth of all deaths in the United States, far greater than the death toll caused by automobile accidents, drug use, homicide, AIDS, airplane crashes, and suicide *combined* (Chandler, 1986)!

# **THE SOCIAL HISTORY OF TOBACCO**

### **New World Origins**

"They…brought us parrots and balls of cotton and spears and many other things, which they exchanged for the glass beads and hawks bells. They willingly traded everything they owned… . They were well-built, with good bodies and handsome features" (quoted in Zinn, 1980, p. 1). With these words Christopher Columbus recorded his first impressions of the island Arawak Indians that he encountered on his first voyage to the New World. From these people, Europe received the word tobacco (*tabaco* in Spanish), a term used by the Arawak to label the bulky cigars that they smoked with relish. Dried leaves used to make the cigars were among the gifts that the Arawak brought to Columbus. The Arawak explained to the curious Europeans that smoking tobacco soothed their limbs, made them feel less weary, and helped them to fall asleep. Columbus and his crew, seeing an item of potential monetary value, brought stores of tobacco back with them to Portugal. From there use of the substance spread, first to France in 1560 and from there

to Italy in 1561. By the turn of the century, tobacco was being cultivated on European soil and had become a widely used substance. Europeans, in turn, brought tobacco with them to much of the rest of the world, including back to the New World to areas such as the subarctic and arctic where it was unknown prior to Columbus's voyages.

While the exact New World point of origin of tobacco use remains unclear, botanical research has shown that the earliest cultivation of several species of tobacco occurred in South America. The wild ancestors of domesticated tobacco species are not indigenous to the Caribbean area but are found in Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Argentina. It is likely that tobacco and the cultural knowledge needed for both growing and consuming it passed from South America to the Caribbean along with various other cultivated food plants many years before the arrival of Columbus. The Arawak people themselves had their origin in South America, migrating north to populate the various Caribbean islands.

Some species of tobacco are indigenous to North America, and here too they are popular, being among the most widely cultivated plants grown by the indigenous peoples of what was to become the United States. Commonly, North American Indians mixed tobacco with other plants, such as the leaves of sumac and the inner bark of dogwood trees. Consequently, the Indians of the Eastern United States and Canada referred to the substance they smoked in their pipes as *kinnikinnik*, an Algonquian word meaning "that which is mixed" (Driver, 1969). While the first method of consumption encountered by Europeans became its most common method of use globally, in fact different Indian groups consumed tobacco in different ways. Among the Indians of the Northwest Coast, tobacco was chewed with lime but not smoked. Among the Creek, it was one of the ingredients of an emetic drink. The Aztecs ate tobacco leaves and also used it as snuff. Distinct cigarettes with corn husk wrappings were smoked in the Southwest (although this may not have been an indigenous means of consumption). Smoking tobacco in pipes also was widespread among Indian peoples.

Indigenous uses of tobacco were both religious and secular. Shamans, or indigenous healers, used tobacco to enter into an altered state of consciousness and communicate with spirit beings during healing rituals. During rites of passage, tobacco was used to mark changes in an individual's social status. Smoking tobacco communally marked the beginning or continuation of an alliance between tribes or affirmed the establishment of a binding agreement.

As this account suggests, tobacco was deeply rooted in the indigenous cultures of many peoples of the New World. Given the ceremonial controls on the frequency of consumption and the diluted form in which tobacco was consumed, as well as the fact that inhalation of tobacco smoke into the lungs was not emphasized, tobacco may not have been a significant source of health problems among Indian people prior to European contact. However, with the diffusion of tobacco to Europe and with the rise of industrialism, tobacco was transformed from a sacred object and culturally controlled medicament into a commodity sold for profit. With the emergence and development of the tobacco industry and the intensive promotion of cigarettes, the per capita consumption of tobacco increased dramatically (especially in the early and middle decades of the 20th century), with significant health consequences. As Barnet and Cavanagh (1994, p. 184) synopsize, "The cigarette is the most widely distributed global consumer product on earth, the most profitable, and the most deadly."

### **The Impact of Tobacco on Europe**

The pathway from ritual object to commodity was a bumpy road. When Columbus returned from the New World, he presented tobacco leaves and products to his benefactors as evidence of the economic value of his voyage. Tobacco was first introduced to Europeans as a medicinal drug, and it was at first cultivated in Europe for this purpose. European physicians of the 16th century became convinced that tobacco could be used to cure a wide assortment of diseases. Before long, however, people who were treated with tobacco, and probably their physicians as well, realized that tobacco was a powerful mood-altering drug that had recreational value. By 1600, smoking was a common practice of working people in the port cities of England and Ireland (Brooks, 1952).

As tobacco shifted from medicinal to recreational, mood-altering use among the poor and working classes of Europe produced a backlash against smoking by the dominant social classes and the church. Mintz (1985, p. 100), an anthropologist who studied the consumable commodities ensnared in colonial trade, suggests that the reason for this hostile response lay in the distinct "visible, directly noticeable" physical reaction that smoking produces, especially for the new user. Mintz (1985, p. 100) draws a contrast here with sugar, another colonial commodity that became extremely popular in Europe.

Sugar probably was not subject to the kind of religion-based criticism directed at tea, coffee, rum, and tobacco, precisely because its consumption did not produce flushing, staggering, dizziness, euphoria, changes in the pitch of voice, slurring of speech, visibly intensified physical activity, or any of the other cues associated with the ingestion of caffeine, alcohol, and nicotine. These changes in comportment in working people appear to have been threatening to the wealthier classes, who preferred a more passive, controlled demeanor in socially dominated groups. Mintz also points out that unlike tobacco, tea, coffee, and rum, all of which are dark in color, refined sugar is white, the symbolic color of purity in Europe since ancient times. Racialist symbolism of this sort (toward mood-altering products that come from foreign lands with threatening dark-skinned peoples), argues Mintz, may have been an underlying cultural influence on the moralistic opposition to tobacco as well as to tea, coffee, and rum.

The first known antismoking tract was printed and distributed in English cities in 1602. Entitled *Work for Chimney-sweepers: or A Warning for Tobacconists*, it helped to launch a high-minded crusade against tobacco use. The class character of this crusade became clear two years later when another tract, entitled *A Counterblaste to Tobacco*, appeared. Although published anonymously, it was widely known to have been produced by James I, the British king (Best, 1983). In James's view, smoking tobacco was "A custome lothesome to the eye, hateful to the Nose, harmefull to the braine, dangerous to the Lungs, and in the blacke stinking fume thereof, neerest resembling the horrible Stigian smoke of the pit that is bottome lesse" (quoted in Eckholm, 1978, pp. 6–7). Smoking also was criticized at this early moment in its use by Europeans for being harmful to health, causing insanity, sterility, birth defects, and diverse other diseases. Moreover, critics began to taint smoking as a lower-class habit, "of ryotous and disordered Persons of meane and base Condition" (quoted in Best, 1983, p. 175). Finally, in England, which at this point depended on Spain as a source of tobacco, smoking was attacked because it made the country dependent on one of its rivals in the imperial struggle for empire.

In a concerted attempt to build a moral argument against smoking, King James of England enacted a set

#### **The Social History of Tobacco 521**

of policies designed to restrict tobacco consumption. In 1604 he imposed an additional duty on imported tobacco, raising the existing state tax by 4,000%. Through this dramatic step, he hoped to put tobacco out of the reach of most people. However, James did not ban tobacco completely for two reasons. First, because it was still being used as a medicine, and second, because (contrary to the antismoking propaganda of the era) addiction to the drug appears not to have been limited to the lower classes. James sought to avoid the wrath of members of the wealthier classes and the nobility, who would have opposed a total ban on tobacco importation.

However, several other European countries, including Austria, Denmark–Norway, France, Bavaria, Cologne, Saxony, Württemberg, Russia, Sicily, Sweden, and Switzerland, did institute criminal penalties to punish smokers. Usually the punishment involved having to pay a small fine. However, Russia, at various times, adopted quite harsh legislation that called for whippings, slit noses, torture, deportation to Siberia, and even death (Brooks, 1952). Despite these efforts, illicit use of tobacco continued to be popular. For example, while King James's tobacco tax led to a drop in the quantity of legal tobacco entering England it did not produce a decline in smoking. Instead, as occurred during the 20th century with other plant-based, mood-altering substances, such as cocaine and heroin, smugglers filled the void and an untaxed black market in tobacco emerged.

### **Tobacco and the Colonies**

Ultimately, both government and moralist efforts to limit or prohibit smoking collapsed. By the end of the 17th century, the drug was legal throughout Europe. Underlying this radical shift was a re-evaluation of smoking. What had been defined as a growing social problem came to be seen as an important source of tax revenue for an expanding state structure. In the English case, colonization of North America played an important role in this process. James had invested considerable sums to launch the British colony in Virginia. The objective was to reap the same kinds of benefits that Spain had in its successful exploitation of the resources of Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. However, while Spain extracted over seven million pounds of silver from its New World colonies between 1503 and 1660 (Wolf, 1969), in Virginia no precious metals were found, nor was the colony able to produce other desired sources of wealth. Nonetheless, the colonists did find one item they could produce successfully and export to England in large quantities, namely tobacco. The soil of Virginia proved to be a good medium for tobacco growth. Dried tobacco was lightweight and therefore could be shipped across the ocean at comparatively low cost, and the demand for it in England meant that it would bring a sale price far above the production cost. Consequently, from an initial export of 2,500 pounds to England in 1616, Virginia was shipping over a million and a half pounds of tobacco less than 15 years later, and by the end of the century the amount had grown to 30 million pounds (Price, 1964). Tobacco, in short, emerged as North America's first cash crop.

In time, the shipment of tobacco from the colonies was so great that it even overwhelmed the substantial English demand, causing a slump in the market. The English turned to the other countries of Europe as potential new markets for their surplus colonial production. By the latter part of the 17th century, re-exporting came to account for the largest portion of the British tobacco trade. To open up these new markets, the British government sent delegations to other nations to convince them that it would be profitable to remove existing bans on smoking, import British tobacco, and then tax it. In this way, the tobacco trade became a force in England's foreign policy. Ironically, "the English, who at the start of the seventeenth century led Europe in an anti-tobacco crusade, came to profit immensely by taxing and trading in the drug, and closed the century serving as missionaries of smoking to the other governments of Europe" (Best, 1983, p. 180).

Paradoxically, and as an indication of the impact of tobacco on world history, while the British helped to open the French market to tobacco imports, during the Revolutionary War against England, Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin put up American tobacco as collateral for French war loans to fight and defeat the British.

### **Tobacco as a Critical Commodity**

Through this process of social, political, behavioral, and conceptual changes, tobacco was transformed from an illegal and widely condemned drug into a legal and economically important force in European, and through Europe, world history, a source of revenue accumulation that helped to fund the transformation from feudalist to capitalist production. Tobacco, in short, gained wide acceptance because of the role it came to play as a commodity critical to the emergence of a global economy. Additionally, as Mintz (1985) points out, tobacco, like other colonial products, including coffee, tea, chocolate, and sugar, were the "drug foods" that came to serve as low-cost food substitutes for the laboring classes of Europe during the rise of colonialism and the subsequent rise of the capitalist mode of production. Increasing "the worker's energy output and productivity, such substitutes figured importantly in balancing the accounts of capitalism" (Mintz, 1985, p. 148) by lowering the cost of supporting a manual labor force while increasing production.

This argument is tied also to the recognition that with the rise of factory production, the lives of laboring people were significantly transformed. Work shifted from personal involvement in craft production or production for personal consumption into segmented, often boring, mass production under conditions that were alienating for most workers. Under these circumstances, tobacco, and the other items that formed the complex of "drug foods" were so welcomed by workers they were hard to effectively legislate against, a pattern repeated in contemporary times with the current array of illicit mood-altering substances.

Drug food substitutes such as tobacco also were of critical importance in the colonial control of labor and wealth outside of Europe. As Jankowiak and Bradburd (1996, p. 718) have argued, in the colonial encounter between Europeans and other societies throughout the world, colonialists (e.g., traders, merchants, settlers, and administrators) sought to dominate and expand the labor productivity of indigenous peoples for the economic benefit of Europe. While, if necessary, military force was used to achieve this end, inducing chemical dependence on a substance such as tobacco was "more efficient, economical, [and]…easier to sustain."

While, various drug foods were used to extract both trade items and labor throughout the colonial realm, the particular substance of greatest importance in any setting differed. Thus, while alcohol was the dominant drug food used to enhance the flow of goods to Europe from the Indians of North America, in the island societies of the Pacific Ocean tobacco reigned. In a cross-cultural review of 19 Pacific societies, Jankowiak and Bradburd (1996) found that in all but four (where alcohol or opium were used) tobacco was the dominant drug food traded to indigenous people in exchange for local horticultural and other products. Resulting chemical dependence on tobacco fueled subsequent exchange with and subordination to Europe. Tobacco, in short, was taken from the colonized islands of the Caribbean and was used by Europeans in the colonized islands of the Pacific (and other locales as well), to penetrate production and reshape it to Europe's advantage, contributing thereby to greater European wealth, technological development, and political dominance.

Ironically, one of the arenas of production penetrated by the emergent capitalist mode was cigarette making itself. Prior to the 1880s, cigarettes were rolled by hand one at a time. However, in 1881, James A. Bonsack introduced the cigarette machine, which was capable of producing more than 200 cigarettes per minute (Tennet, 1950). A problem smokers still faced, however, was how to easily light their cigarettes. A common practice among smokers was to go to a tobacco shop to have their cigarettes lit from a gas or oil lamp, making smoking a planned activity that could only occur at special times and places outside of the workaday schedule. In 1912, however, a safe match was invented, altering forever the way cigarettes were smoked. Now they could be consumed during interval moments during the day, allowing the transformation from smoking from a highly conscious exercise into a rapidly initiated practice that required little thought or effort. These inventions significantly contributed to a major jump in cigarette consumption, from half a billion in 1880 to 2.2 billion in 1888, 18 billion in 1914, and 54 billion in 1919 (Sobel, 1978). By this point, smoking had become an acceptable and socially unremarkable habit, a considerable change from the days of the antismoking crusades of the early 1600s.

By the early 1990s, the largest distributor of cigarettes, Philip Morris, was operating a bank of rapid-fire automatic rollers that together turned out 17,000 cigarettes a second, 24 hours a day. Philip Morris produced 11% of the 5.5 trillion cigarettes sold. However, the largest cigarette manufacturer is the state tobacco monopoly of China, which produces more than 1.5 trillion cigarettes a year, almost all of them consumed in China.

# **ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF TOBACCO USE**

### **Factors in Anthropology's Limited Focus on Tobacco Consumption**

As noted, comprehensive anthropological studies of tobacco use are relatively rare, and the topic often is not

#### **Anthropological Studies of Tobacco Use 523**

found in medical anthropology texts. Even in general ethnographic accounts of the day-to-day social life and behavior of various societies around the world in which tobacco consumption is common, smoking often is mentioned only in passing and then most frequently with respect to people's (sometimes constant) requests for tobacco from the anthropologist. Black (1984) has suggested that tobacco use is understudied by anthropologists because of the way smoking is handled in Western cultures. For the most part, smoking, unlike drinking alcohol, is not a highly symbolic or heavily ritualized behavior in the West (at least, not since the invention of pre-rolled cigarettes and the safety match). This means that in Western cultures smoking tends to be an individual act, tied to internal states of mind and mood, that does not communicate a lot of cultural information. This is not to say that the act of smoking is devoid of symbolic content. For example, as portrayed in numerous movies, a film character may light a cigarette to convey various states of mind or character to those around him or her, including alienation from conventional society, independence from traditional role constraints, an air of mystery and daring, or sexual interest or satisfaction. The defiance theme associated with smoking may, in fact, be intensified in coming years as a result of the popular movement to ban smoking in public places because of the health consequences of passive or secondary smoke inhalation. Yet symbolic valences are known to change over time, and deviance was not always a theme linked by popular culture to smoking. Earlier in the 20th century, during World War I, in fact, cigarettes were "associated with the positive values of quiet dignity, courage, and dedication of the model soldier and became an essential part of the soldier's life" (Resnick 1990, p. 135). This connection was a product of a massive contribution of cigarettes to the U.S. military by the tobacco industry and the subsequent cognitive connection of smoking with soldiering.

In Robb's (1986) view, smoking in the West now serves symbolically as an *anticipatory rite of passage* for members of subordinated social groups such as youth, women, and ethnic minorities. Unlike socially approved rites of passage, such as a wedding or graduation, in an anticipatory rite of passage members of the subordinate group seek to unilaterally claim passage to a higher status even though this has not been sanctioned by the dominant group. In a somewhat different vein, Eckert (1983) has suggested that smoking may be used by some youth to symbolically express their membership in particular adolescent peer groups. Several studies show that smoking among adolescents, for example, is associated with perceived approval for smoking in a valued peer network (Green, 1979; Mittlemark, 1987). In her ethnographic study of smoking among Puerto Rican adolescents in Boston, McGraw (1989) strongly emphasizes an important cultural dimension of this behavior. She found that, in fact, the physical impact of cigarette use may be the least rewarding factor motivating consumption. Rather, the primary appeal lies in the use of smoking as a behavioral mechanism to create new friendships or affirm existing social connections.

While these examples are noteworthy, smoking still does not appear to be a behavior especially fraught with complex cultural meanings, especially for adults. Rather, its primary message in everyday life in Western culture appears to be the symbolic marking of either a time-out in the middle of a course of action or work, especially one that may be stressful or demanding (i.e., an equivalent to a coffee break or because of feeling "uptight"), or to mark the completion of a task or segment of the day (e.g., to mark transition into a period of relaxation). Consequently, to follow Black's argument, anthropologists working in other cultures often have not thought to look at smoking as a topic of interest or one that can be tapped to reveal rich cultural information. Of course, in some settings smoking may be quite loaded symbolically and a topic worthy of interest on these grounds, but it does not appear that many anthropologists yet have explored this possibility. This is not to say anthropologists have ignored smoking completely, but only that they rarely have made it their primary focus of research.

### **Cultural Studies of Tobacco Use**

It appears that the first anthropological examination of tobacco use in a cultural context was carried out by Alfred Kroeber, a (pipe-smoking) founder of American anthropology. In 1939 he published an article subtitled "Salt, Dogs, and Tobacco." This essay explored the distribution of tobacco and tobacco use among several Indian groups in the American West. Keenly interested in the relationships among the parts of a cultural system, Kroeber noted that tobacco was used as a ritual offering to the spirit world among those tribes who cultivated the plant. However, among tribes who did not plant tobacco but only gathered wild species of the tobacco family, it was not offered to the spirits. Similarly, he found that tobacco was used by shamans for healing purposes only in those

tribes who smoked it but not among peoples who chewed or ate tobacco. It was Kroeber's (1939) contention that tobacco and particular patterns of consumption tended to diffuse together as cultural packages among Indian groups, thus accounting for the distribution patterns that he found. Another examination of the role of tobacco in shamanism was conducted by Wilbert (1987) in South America.

Perhaps because it is one area in which ritualization of tobacco use is greatest, much of the anthropological literature on smoking comes from studies in Oceania (Haddon, 1947; Hays, 1991). Black (1984), for example, conducted an ethnographic study of the role of tobacco use on the Tobian Islands of Micronesia. Prior to European contact, the Tobian Islanders did not use tobacco. It was introduced to them during the 1800s by trade vessels searching the Pacific for wealth to bring home to Europe. In time, tobacco came to be incorporated socially and symbolically into the web of Tobian culture. Tobacco is highly valued on the islands and heavily smoked. But it still is not grown locally. Cigarettes still are obtained through trading with visiting ships, including U.S. Navy vessels or Asian fishing boats. On the islands, tobacco is an important marker of an individual's social status. Because tobacco is highly sought after and must come from off-island sources, those individuals who control a supply reap the social benefits of becoming centers of social attention. These individuals are noted for having "considerable skill, immense social knowledge, and a good deal of self-control, forethought and social autonomy" (Black, 1984, p. 483). When tobacco supplies on the islands become especially low, social gatherings, such as communal meals, diminish in frequency. One reason for this loss of sociability, according to Black, is that individuals become increasingly irritable and antisocial as they withdraw from their nicotine addiction. To avoid social conflicts, they withdraw as much as possible and wait as patiently as possible for the next shipment of their drug of choice.

In a related study, Marshall (1979) examined the role of tobacco on the Pacific islands of Truk. Like the people of the Tobian Islands, the Trukese did not have tobacco prior to the arrival of European vessels. Nonetheless, this lack of experience did not prevent the Trukese from avidly seeking tobacco early in the contact period. The date at which tobacco first reached Truk is unknown, but, like many other Pacific Islanders, the Trukese seemed willing to do almost anything to obtain it. This weakness was of course exploited by the traders who eventually moved into the area (Marshall, 1979, p. 36).

By the end of the 1870s, Marshall (1979, p. 36) reports, the Trukese were "hopelessly addicted" to tobacco, holding it to be dearer than food or drink. Christian missionaries who arrived in the area in the late 1800s made giving up tobacco a symbol of Christian conversion.

In the modern period, Marshall notes, beginning at about 18 or 19 years of age all young men in the village he studied begin smoking. Girls, who are more apt to be involved in the church, are much less likely to smoke. In a 1985 survey of 1,000 adults in Truk, Marshall found that only about 10% of women were current smokers, compared with over 70% of men (Marshall, 1990). In Marshall's (1979) assessment, both tobacco and alcohol have been fully incorporated as symbols of masculinity and young men are under considerable social pressure to use them. In another paper, Marshall (1987) describes similar cultural incorporation for the wider Micronesian area of the Pacific.

Elsewhere in the Pacific, anthropologists have described tobacco use in passing in the course of studies on social organization, political conflict, and ecological adaptation. For example, on the Palau Islands of Micronesia, Barnett's (1961, p. 27) brief account of tobacco use shows a pattern similar to Truk (which lies about a thousand miles to the east). Here, too, smoking is "a man's vice" and very few women adopted the practice. Because cultivation practices are not well known, islanders rely on the import of European cigarettes.

By contrast, to the south, in Melanesia, smoking among women is common. A striking example is found in Roger Keesing's (1983) book entitled *Elota's Story*, a life-history account of a local leader in the Solomon Islands. While Keesing gives little mention of tobacco use in the written text, the book is well illustrated with numerous photographs of men, women, and children smoking pipes as they go about their day-to-day activities. Douglas (1955, p. 35), who also conducted research in the Solomon Islands, affirms that these people "smoke almost continually." In the Trobriand Islands, collective cigarette smoking is customary at social events. For example, at the birth of a baby, Weiner (1988, p. 51), an anthropologist who has done fieldwork in the Trobriands, observed people breaking off a piece of thick trade-store tobacco, separating it into tiny pieces, and rolling the pieces in newsprint to make long, funnel-shaped cigarettes. These were passed around the group to smoke. At the same

#### **Anthropological Studies of Tobacco Use 525**

time, the Trobrianders view tobacco as a powerful substance that sorcerers use to attack their victims. Indeed, almost all deaths are believed to be the work of a sorcerer who has managed to chant magic spells into the victim's betel nut or tobacco. Weiner (1988) has recorded an account of tobacco-related sorcery in which a sorcerer gave an unbelieving Christian convert a cigarette to smoke to prove his rejection of pre-Christian belief. Later that night, the individual fell ill and died, affirming to all the power of indigenous practice. Not surprisingly, people in the Trobriands are very cautious about accepting tobacco from powerful individuals who have knowledge of sorcery. Among friends and relatives, however, smoking together is a common social activity.

Among the Sambia of New Guinea, the largest island in Melanesia, Herdt (1987, p. 71) notes the psychosocial role of tobacco at the end of a day of toil in the gardens: "Smoking and betel-chewing relax people, who turn to gossip, to local news, to stories—the old men always ready to spin tales of war and adventures of the past, the children always ready to hear the ghost stories that make them wideeyed and giggly with excitement." Communal smoking is not peculiar to the islands of the Pacific. Shostak (1983) describes in some detail the strong desire for tobacco she encountered among the !Kung San of southern Africa, the frequent requests they made of her for the substance, and the predominantly group method of consumption.

In an unpublished study in South India among subsistence farmers of the Sudra and Harijan castes, Mark Nichter (cited in Nichter & Cartwright, 1991) found that tobacco is consumed in almost every household in a variety of ways, including smoking and snuff, and in conjunction with the chewing of betel nut. Among males over 25 years of age, 65% reported smoking cigarettes. People explained that smoking increased relaxation, contributed to sociability, helped to reduce the pain of hunger and toothache, enhanced digestion, and assisted with regular defecation. He estimated that tobacco purchases consumed 7–10% of household income. In another unpublished study from the Middle East, Marcia Inhorn (cited in Nichter & Cartwright, 1991) examined tobacco consumption in Alexandria, Egypt. She found that 151 of the 190 (79%) lower-class male heads of household in her sample had smoked, and 53% of these were smoking at least one pack of cigarettes a day. This expense consumed between one third and one half of disposable family income and was seen by many women as hurting the family's ability to properly feed their children. Addicted to cigarettes, most men were unable to quit, having begun smoking when they were in late adolescence.

As these accounts reveal, tobacco use is now ubiquitous in the developing world and is integrated with wider cultural complexes. In Micronesia, tobacco smoking is a culturally constituted male activity; in Melanesia it is not gender-typed. Similarly, in some places smoking is continuous, while in others it is limited to particular times and contexts. In either case, many local smokers have become dependent on the international tobacco market and on supplies of cigarettes from the West. Contrary to Western images of traditional primitive peoples leading pristine lives in exotic lands, as these accounts suggest, through their consumption and their labor peoples of the developing world have come to be locked into the global economic system. Indeed, as Stebbins (2001, p. 148) points out, many of the traditional smoking practices described by anthropologists have now all but disappeared having been overwhelmed "by aggressive marketing by transnational tobacco companies."

### **Tobacco in Critical Medical Anthropology**

In more recent years, some anthropologists have been involved in focused studies of cigarette smoking in the Western world. For example, anthropologist Joel Gittlesohn et al. (1999) initiated a study of social influences on the smoking behaviors of African American and European American adolescents in Baltimore, MD. This qualitative study employed both individual interviews and focus group interviews. They found that European American females were more likely to perceive permissive messages from parents about smoking than either European Americans males or African Americans. They concluded that lower rates of smoking among African American youth was tied to desires not to be disrespectful of parents and being "turned off" by parental addiction to nicotine. All of the adolescents, regardless of ethnicity or gender, noted that lax antismoking policies at school contributed to smoking among students on campus. A few anthropologists also have become involved in applied work in smoking, including prevention efforts among youth (Corbett, 1999; Willims, 1991), although this arena too is more notable for its quite limited degree of anthropological involvement.

Since its emergence in the early 1980s, critical medical anthropology has developed a keen interest in the social origin of disease. This concern has focused critical theoretical attention on the manufacture and promotion of consumer products such as tobacco that are known to be harmful. Several critical medical anthropologists have studied the tobacco industry. Foremost in this regard is Kenyon Stebbins, who has undertaken studies of smoking in Mexico and of the impact of transnational tobacco companies on the health of underdeveloped nations. In addition, until his retirement, he was an anti-industry activist in the heart of tobacco country (Stebbins, 1994, 1997). In 1991, Stebbins and Dennis Willms developed a special issue on anthropology and smoking for the journal *Social Science & Medicine*, the only collection of articles available on this topic.

Of special concern to Stebbins' work has been the effort of the tobacco industry to make up for stagnating sales in the United States by developing markets in underdeveloped nations that are already struggling with infectious, nutritional, and other diseases. He notes that transnational tobacco corporation have found that developing countries are particularly appealing markets because the governments are short on cash and in need of revenue-producing products, laws that restrict consumption are limited, and awareness of the health effects of smoking is not fully developed. Under such condition, Stebbins argues, tobacco industry advertising can be quite effective in recruiting new smokers, especially given the prestige that often is accorded imported items from the West. Thus, the handful of super-rich transnational tobacco corporations have moved ahead quickly to capture new Third World markets, while expending about \$12.5 billion annually on advertising. As a result, worldwide tobacco consumption is increasing at the rate of 1% a year, with Brazil, India, and Kenya leading the way. In underdeveloped nations, sales are growing at least three times faster than elsewhere. In some Third World settings smoking is ubiquitous, Stebbins points out, even among physicians. For example, in some parts of Nepal "84.7% of males and 71.5% of females smoke… . In areas of Bangladesh, China, and Senegal between 55 and 80% of the males are reported to be smokers" (Stebbins, 1990, pp. 229–230). As a result, rising rates of lung cancer and related disease have been identified in heavy smoking countries such as Pakistan, among South African Blacks, and in Malaysia, Bangladesh, and Brazil. Stebbins also cautions about the serious environmental costs associated with tobacco cultivation and curing, especially from deforestation, erosion, and desertification.

Despite these recognizable dangers, Stebbins' analysis of the actions, power, and monetary resources of transnational tobacco corporations does not leave him optimistic about the ability of the Third World to avoid a smoking epidemic. To do so, he asserts, will require a level of political will by the governments of developing nations that was never demonstrated by the governments of developed nations.

Ironically, at the same time that the United States has pressured the governments of South America to control the production and export of cocaine, U.S. administrations have used their economic and political muscle to open up the markets of South America to the import of U.S. tobacco, a substance that is responsible for far greater levels of disease and death than all illicit drugs combined. Stebbins (2001) has examined the aggressive tactics employed by tobacco companies to gain access to South American markets and to attract new smokers. As he notes (Stebbins, 2001, p. 164), with cigarette imports and advertising rising and smoking levels increasing transnational tobacco companies "have been making a killing (in more ways than one)" in South America. Cigarette companies have successfully fought antismoking legislation in a number of South American countries and have even been successful in getting some smoking-control laws vetoed, such as the 1993 antismoking legislation passed in Argentina that was subsequently rescinded by the president. In the minds of many people in Argentina, "the veto was the result of industry bribes at the highest level" (Stebbins, 2001, p. 162).

Also involved in the critical medical anthropology analysis of smoking and the impact of the tobacco industry on health are Mark and Elizabeth Nichter (Nichter & Cartwright, 1991; Nichter & Nichter, 1994). The Nichters note that the United States has played an important role in fostering child-survival (e.g., oral rehydration and immunization) and safe-motherhood programs on a global scale. Unfortunately, the benefits to human health and survival gained through these large-scale efforts will be for naught, they argue, because of the complicity of the U.S. government in promoting cigarette sales in the Third World. Indeed, they maintain, a focus on child health internationally diverts attention from the political and economic dimensions of illness in a world of enforced inequality.

The U.S. government, the Nichters point out, has exerted its influence in developing a world market for tobacco in three identifiable ways. First, since the 1930s, hundreds of millions of dollars of Commodity

#### **References 527**

Credit Corporation loans and price supports have gone to tobacco growers, enlisting them to grow more tobacco. Because of these subsidies, an acre of tobacco brings in 16 times the profit from an acre of soybeans. Second, in the 20 years following World War II, the government spent one billion dollars buying up surplus tobacco from U.S. distributors and supplying it to Third World countries, thereby helping to develop a craving for tobacco. Third, U.S. trade policy is designed to assist American tobacco companies overseas. Countries such as Japan, South Korea, and Thailand have all been intensely pressured by the U.S. government to begin importing tobacco or face stiff trade sanctions. In fact, the pressure on Asian countries to increase tobacco consumption has been called "a new opium war" (Ran Nath, 1986).

Additionally, noting that 75% of tobacco cultivation occurs in the Third World, the Nichters point out that international lending programs such as the World Bank and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations actively make loans, extend advice, and provide seed and pesticides to small farmers to help them enter into tobacco growing. Ostensibly committed to the development of Third World nations, these programs will, in the long run, help the Third World to develop a significant health problem. Tragically, because of the limits on what these nations will be able to spend on health care, most Third World victims of tobacco-caused diseases will not benefit from advances in the medical treatment of these conditions. Contributing to this outcome will be the fact that the manufactured cigarettes marketed by transnational tobacco corporations often have much higher tar (the chemical source of health problems in cigarettes) and nicotine (the chemical source of addiction to tobacco) levels than those sold in the West. For example, the Nichters point out, the median tar level in cigarettes sold in the United States is 20 mg per cigarette, while in Indonesia it is almost double this level.

Consequently, the Nichters argue for the development of an anthropology of tobacco use that does not limit itself to the narrow confines of studying the motivations or behaviors of individual smokers but rather pays attention to the actions of governments, international organizations, and the tobacco industry in shaping smoking behavior. They argue as well for the study of the social relations of consumption and the semiotics of consumables (i.e., the social meanings invested by people in consumed items and the communication of meanings enacted through their consumption behavior) within a broader political–economic framework. In other words, it is the Nichters' view that it is important to understand how the tobacco industry acquires new markets and with whose help, at the same time that we analyze how people come to infuse tobacco products with particular cultural meanings and to respond to these cultural meanings as if they had the same material reality as the products themselves.

Stebbins (2001, p. 151) stresses that

Fighting Big Tobacco is entirely different from combating most public health problems. Unlike cigarettes, most infectious diseases and maternal and child health problems do not provide profits to transnational corporations and governments. Similarly, most public health problems are not exacerbated by extensive advertising campaigns that promote the cause of the health problems.

# **REFERENCES**

- Barnet, R., & Cavanagh, J. (1994). *Global reams: Imperial corporations and the New World Order*. New York: Simon & Schuster.
- Barnett, H. G. (1961). *Being a Palauan*. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
- Best, J. (1983). Economic interests and the vindication of deviance: Tobacco in Seventh Century Europe. In M. Kelleher, B. MacMurray, & T. Shapiro (Eds.), *Drugs and society* (pp. 173–183). Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.
- Black, P. (1984). The anthropology of tobacco use: Tobian data and theoretical issues. *Journal of Anthropological Research, 40*, 475–503.
- Brooks, J. (1952). *The mighty leaf*. Boston: Little, Brown.
- Chandler, W. (1986). Banishing tobacco (Worldwatch Paper No. 68). Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute.
- Corbett, K. (1999). Intervention strategies to prevent adolescents from smoking. *Proceedings of the Asia Pacific Association for the Control of Tobacco, 10th Annual Symposium, Taipei*.
- Douglas, O. (1955). *A Solomon Island society*. Boston: Beacon Press.
- Driver, H. (1969). *Indians of North America*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Eckert, P. (1983). Beyond the statistics of adolescent smoking. *American Journal of Public Health, 73*, 439–441.
- Eckholm, E. (1978). *Cutting tobacco's toll* (Worldwatch Paper #18). Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute.
- Gittlesohn, J., McCormick, L. K., Allen, P., Grieser, M., Crawford, M., Davis, S. (1999). Inter-Ethnic Differences in Youth Tobacco Language and Cigarette Brand Preferences. *Ethnicity and Health*, *4*(4), 285–303.
- Green, D. (1979). *Teenage smoking: Immediate and long term patterns*. Washington, DC: National Institute of Education.
- Haddon, A. C. (1947). Smoking and tobacco pipes in New Guinea. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B, 232*, 1–278.
- Hays, T. (1991). "No tobacco, No hallelujah": Missions and the early history of tobacco in Eastern Papua. *Pacific Studies, 14*, 91–112.

- **528 Tuberculosis Research and Control**
- Herdt, G. (1987). *The Sambia: Ritual and gender in New Guinea*. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
- Ile, M., & Kroll, L. (1990). Tobacco advertising and the first amendment. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 264*, 1593–1594.
- Jankowiak, W., & Bradburd, D. (1996). Using drug foods to capture and enhance labor performance: A cross-cultural perspective. *Current Anthropology*, 717–720.
- Keesing, R. (1983). *Elota's story: The life and times of a Solomon Islands big man*. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
- Kroeber, A. (1939). Cultural elements and distributions XV: Salt, dogs, and tobacco. *Anthropological Records, 6*(1).
- Marshall, M. (1979). Introduction. In M. Marshall (Ed.), *Beliefs, behaviors and alcoholic beverages* (pp. 2–11). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
- Marshall, M. (1987). Tobacco use in Micronesia. *Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 42*, 885–893.
- Marshall, M. (1990). Toward an anthropology of immunology: The body as nation state. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* (n.s.), 410–426.
- McGraw, S. (1989). *Smoking behavior among Puerto Rican adolescents: Approaches to its study*. (Doctoral dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University of Connecticut, 1989).

Mintz, S. (1985) *Sweetness and power*. New York: Penguin Books.

- Mittlemark, M. (1987). Predicting experimentation with cigarettes: The childhood antecedents of smoking study (CASS). *American Journal of Public Health, 77*, 206–208.
- National Cancer Institute (1999). *Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: The report of the California Environmental Protection Agency* (Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph No. 10, NIH Publication No. 99-4645). Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, Author.
- Nichter, M., & Cartwright, E. (1991). Saving the children for the tobacco industry. *Medical Anthropology* (n.s.), *5*, 236–256.
- Nichter, M., & Nichter, M. (1994). *Tobacco research in the U.S.: A call for ethnography*. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Atlanta, GA.

- Peto, R. (1990). *Future worldwide health effects of current smoking patterns*. Paper presented at World Health Organization Workshop, Perth, Australia.
- Price, J. (1964). The economic growth of the Chesapeake and the European market, 1697–1775. *Journal of Economic History, 24*, 496–511.
- Ran Nath, U. (1986). *Smoking: Third World alert*. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- Shostak, M. (1983). *Nisa: The life and words of a !Kung Woman*. New York: Vintage.
- Sobel, R. (1978). *They satisfy: The cigarette in American life*. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
- Stebbins, K. (1990). Transnational tobacco companies and health in underdeveloped countries: Recommendations for avoiding a smoking epidemic. *Social Science & Medicine, 30*, 227–235.
- Stebbins, K. (1994, November). *Clearing the air: Introducing smoking restrictions in West Virginia, America's leading consumer of cigarettes per capita*. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Atlanta, GA.
- Stebbins, K. (1997). Clearing the air: Challenges to introducing smoking restrictions in West Virginia. *Social Science & Medicine, 44*, 1395–1401.
- Stebbins, K. (2001). Going like gangbusters: Transnational tobacco companies "making a killing" in South America. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 15*, 147–170.
- Tennet, R. (1950). *The American cigarette industry: A study in economic analysis and public policy*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Weiner, A. (1988). *The Trobrianders of Papua New Guinea*. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
- Wilbert, J. (1987). *Tobacco and shamanism in South America*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Willims, D. (1991). A new state, a new life: Individual success in quitting smoking. *Social Science & Medicine, 33*, 1365–1372.
- Wolf, E. (1969). American anthropologists and American society. In S. Tyler (Ed.), *Concepts and assumptions in contemporary anthropology* (pp. 3–11). Athens: University of Georgia Press.
- Zinn, H. (1980). *People's history of the United States*. New York: Harper and Row.

# **Tuberculosis Research and Control**

### **Anthropological Contributions**

#### **R Shrestha-Kuwahara, M Wilce, HA Joseph, JW Carey, R Plank, and E Sumartojo**

# **INTRODUCTION**

Worldwide tuberculosis (TB) kills more young and middleaged adults than any other infectious disease (WHO, 1999). Though it is curable and preventable, more than 5,000 people die of TB *every day* (2 to 3 million people per year) (WHO, 1999). TB often strikes the most vulnerable members of society and, if left untreated, causes its victims to lose weight, weaken, and eventually waste away (Ryan, 1993). TB disproportionately affects the