# **Alcohol Use**

#### **Dwight B. Heath and Irene Glasser**

The use of alcohol is a part of the social fabric of many cultures in the world and has been so since ancient times. There are many and varied uses and outcomes of such use, some of which are closely related to the health beliefs and practices. Ethnographers have long described these, and medical anthropologists in recent years are actively engaged in dealing with the subject in practical and applied ways.

It is important at the outset to recognize that there is much more to alcohol than alcohol*ism* and that much drinking has nothing to do with drunkenness or alcoholrelated problems. Furthermore, even colleagues in other disciplines generally agree that nothing less than a biopsychosocial perspective is necessary if one is to understand alcohol and its effects. Nevertheless, there are important implications that are specific to the field of medical anthropology.

## **ALCOHOL AND ALCOHOL USE**

Several types of alcohol are known, but ethanol is of special interest to anthropologists, having long been an influential component of many beverages among a large portion of the world's population. A relatively simple chemical compound (C2H5OH), it often occurs naturally without human intervention, although the hominid imagination has resulted in manifold elaborations and refinements of the basic processes of fermentation and distillation. In fermentation, it is microorganisms that convert carbohydrates to sugars, with ethanol as a by-product. Distillation results from the heating of a fermented liquid, whereby ethanol can be further concentrated because it has a boiling-point lower than that of water.

Although we routinely speak as if people drank alcohol, it is widely recognized that fermented beverages (beers, ales, wines, pulque, chicha, hard cider, and a variety of other brews) contain less that 20% ethanol (by volume), usually less that half that much. Distilled beverages (spirits or liquor) contain between 40% and 90%, usually in the lower part of that range. There is an enormous variety of beverages that contain alcohol based on a vast range of raw materials, additives, aging, and other considerations.

Ethanol readily diffuses into the blood and hence through the body. A psychoactive (or mind-altering) effect is commonplace with minute concentrations; such changes in thought and action are usually recognized and often actively sought and valued. There are marked differences in those effects depending on the dose, the drinker, and the setting. In terms of dose, the overall volume of a drink and the concentration of ethanol within it determine how much alcohol has been ingested. Being water-soluble, a given amount is more readily dispersed through a small body, or one with less fat. Because of adaptive changes that occur in the brain, previous repeated alcohol experience can enhance the body's tolerance to alcohol, lessening its behavioral impact. The presence of food delays absorption, and carbonation, exercise, or altitude accelerate it.

The psychoactive quality of alcohol relates to its effect on neurotransmitters in the brain. This can result from a minute concentration of ethanol in the blood. For most individuals, the effect is biphasic, stimulant for the first few drinks, and then depressant. Endogenous processes of metabolism can reduce ethanol within the body; various enzymes and the liver gradually convert it to carbon dioxide and water.

From an anthropological perspective, it is noteworthy that there are customary uses, attitudes, and behavior patterns associated with alcohol, even when it is ingested at levels that do not significantly affect the physiology. Drinks containing ethanol often serve as basic beverages, integral to the diet; others tend to have important symbolic or ritualistic uses and associations. Drinking may be an accompaniment to a meal or it may be an act valued and practiced in itself. Solitary drinking occurs, although drinking is usually a social act, often viewed as enhancing sociability and symbolizing camaraderie. It is the very diversity of drinking and its outcomes that have made it a subject of intense ethnographic study.

Although acute observers had long commented on alcohol, there was little systematic investigation of its uses, misuses, and outcomes until the mid-20th century. At that time, isolated chemical, biological, and physiological studies began to be published in a handful of journals, and within a decade a few introductory textbooks appeared. Such studies often were presumed to have universal relevance, although they were conducted on small samples of undergraduate students, homeless men in industrialized cities, institutionalized patients, prisoners, or other unrepresentative categories, usually with "White" males predominating. These marked the beginnings of what has grown to be a multidisciplinary field of alcohol studies (or, some would even say "alcohology").

## **ANTHROPOLOGY AND ALCOHOL STUDIES**

The ethnographic or cross-cultural perspective was important early in establishing the simple fact that differences in attitudes, behaviors, and outcomes exist and are important among different populations. Interested observers had long been writing some insightful descriptions but they tended to be fragmentary and scattered in recondite sources. The rapidly expanding cadres of social and cultural anthropologists in the 1950s and 1960s brought a sharper focus to what they called drinking patterns, not defining that term precisely but implicitly referring to who drank, what they drank, when, where, how, in the company of whom, while doing what else, and with what apparent consequences. In addition to providing ethnographic descriptions and analyses of drinking patterns, they have spelled out the sociocultural model (emphasizing the importance of meanings and values as well as consumption), offered some constructive comments about typologies and diagnostic criteria, studied populations that are difficult to survey, developed survey instruments that are appropriate to specific subcultures, evaluated various policies and their effectiveness, and worked on expanding and improving various modalities of prevention and treatment.

Another way in which anthropology had a major impact on alcohol studies in those early years was in providing some broad theories about the roles of drinking in various cultures. A number of studies were conducted that were hologeistic in nature, in which scholars used a sample of societies from throughout the world to test general theoretical hypotheses at the societal level. The data most often came from ethnographies in which drinking behavior was described, along with other aspects of the culture. Among the associations found through the hologeistic method were that drinking and or drunkenness appears to have served to relieve anxiety, to cope with feelings of dependency related to child rearing practices, or to feel powerful. Communal sobriety was found to be associated with corporate kin groups, residence near the husband's family, bride price, and a concentrated form of settlement. Such cross-cultural studies and their associated models were especially appreciated at a time when there were few alternative conceptualizations available.

The vast and varied experience in the cross-cultural record raised serious questions about findings that treated drinking as if it were uniform and alcohol as if it were a universally invariant variable. Notably, the voice of anthropologists has been influential in countering or at least tempering several kinds of determinism that prevailed at various times in relation to drinking and a few such deserve to be mentioned. It was long believed that alcohol had a rapid pharmacological impact, supposedly deadening "higher levels" of the brain that were said to be the centers of control over inhibitions. A brief but convincing review of ethnographic and historical sources, MacAndrew and Edgerton's' *Drunken Comportment*, appears to have successfully helped convince scientists that some environmental factors (beyond chemistry, physiology, and personality) are important in understanding how people behave during or after drinking. Another success for anthropologists in the field of alcohol studies was the increasing recognition that uniform modalities of diagnosis, prevention, and treatment, whether for alcoholism or for a variety of alcohol-related problems, were neither efficient nor effective, especially when populations with different cultures or subcultures were concerned.

Within the broad field of alcohol studies, many different kinds of work progressed at different rates. Early efforts at definition and classification often preceded compilation of data, and considerable effort was devoted to practical applications from the outset. Because long-term heavy drinking harms many organ systems and because extreme intoxication is both highly visible and often harmful to the drinker as well as to others, that aspect of use attracted attention out of all proportion to its actual occurrence. Alcoholics, alcoholism, and types of each continue

#### **Anthropology and Alcohol Studies 295**

for some to be more interesting than other aspects of alcohol, and funding for research is overwhelmingly focused on attempts to counter negative outcomes.

From a psychological perspective, there were efforts to identify the causal roots of heavy drinking, and to characterize an "alcoholic personality" type. Studies of twins were of special interest in the hope that investigators could differentiate between hereditary and environmental factors, isolating nature from nurture; the findings from these studies in fact implicate both. Tracing the association of psychological factors such as motives, and expectances with alcohol and drinking continues to attract attention. Social psychologists also study the effects of media and advertising of alcohol.

Sociological studies of drinking behavior have specialized in the following ways: using questionnaires and surveys, they attempt to assess quantity and frequency of drinking among populations as large as entire nations; categories are differentiated and compared on the basis of age, gender, socioeconomic class, and other variables; and linkages are made between such data and reports of alcohol-related problems.

Biological studies of alcohol have become increasingly specialized as knowledge has increased and techniques have been refined. From early questioning about whether alcoholism was a disease, we have progressed to the point of knowing which allele triggers facial flushing in some when exposed to ethanol. Much work is done at the neurological level, and the long-term effects of different beverages are often attributed to trace elements.

A number of issues of definition have occupied the field of alcohol studies in its short history, and an anthropologist should be aware of them because some of the implications still reverberate (if only implicitly) in views that are expressed by others who address similar situations from various disciplinary perspectives. There was considerable controversy over whether alcoholism was a disease and then over whether it was unitary or of various types. The concept of addiction was largely supplanted by dependence, and much attention has been paid to progressive delineation of special observable criteria for the diagnosis of different kinds of disorders.

Now the international community of scholars, many of whom are also outstanding in more traditional academic disciplines, are able in recent decades to take part in international conferences and to publish in books and journals in the fields of alcohol or addiction studies. There is often overlap with studies of illegal drugs, partly because poly-drug use is increasing among individuals, partly because drinking often tends to be treated socially in terms that are similar to drug-taking, and because the effects of alcohol and drugs on brain neurobiology are similar.

When a few interested social scientists organized an Alcohol and Drug Study Group (ADSG), they did so within the American Anthropological Association, and when that underwent major reorganization requiring that each of the many interest groups become affiliated with an intermediate sub-disciplinary society, ADSG was accommodated within the Society for Medical Anthropology.

#### **Alcohol as a Window on Culture**

In reviewing the vast and scattered anthropological literature on drinking, it becomes readily apparent that alcohol can serve as a convenient window through which to appreciate the many and varied aspects of cultures. A few brief examples illustrate such linkages; to diet, medicine, religion, children-rearing, gender differences, attitudes, economics, and age-stratification.

To be specific, alcohol is often an integral part of diet or shows close links thereto. Homebrews throughout Africa, Asia, and much of South and Central America are not only the predominant beverages for people of all ages but also provide vitamins and minerals that are otherwise lacking. Medical values were attributed to drinking long before they were amply documented in scientific terms. Alcohol was served to spirits of the ancestors in China 3,500 years ago, as it still is there and elsewhere. Although some groups insist that drinking is a prerogative of adults, Zulus in Africa (like many groups) favor beer for infants, supposedly to build strong bones and to clean the blood. Although men almost everywhere drink more than women do, there are specific contexts in which females are expected or even required to drink. Whereas Muslims are exhorted in the Koran not to drink, wine is a sacrament among some Christian groups. In czarist Russia, as in many jurisdictions today, a major portion of the government's budget derived from the production and sale of drink. In many societies, drinking should be done only in sequence of descending age when men are in a group; in others, drinking together (often with a toast) is important. There are innumerable instances in which paying attention to alcohol, its manufacture, distribution, consumption, and meaning articulate in significant ways with many other aspects of culture.

The inclination to put great weight on emic statements (what the "insiders" say), combined with a slant toward cultural relativism that characterized many social and cultural anthropologists in the 1960s, and a strongly functionalist perspective (attending to how the parts of a cultural system work together) resulted in interpretations of the roles of alcohol among various populations as being predominantly beneficent. A striking example is the Camba of Bolivia, among whom nearly all adult males routinely drink to the point of drunkenness for days at a time, using an extremely strong beverage. Nevertheless, they claim that doing so does no harm to them or to others.

As we look at the place that such drinks hold in various societies, a striking ambivalence can be noted. We have already seen that different populations have diverse—often diametrically opposed—views about alcohol. Apart from that, often, within the same society, it is enjoyed as an adjunct to celebration at some times and sought out as a consoling refuge at others. Even while convincing scientific evidence in recent years demonstrates that moderate use of alcohol is healthful for most people, it is equally recognized that long-term or immoderate use results in many accidents as well as grave damage to a number of organs through the body.

### **Alcohol Abuse and Alcohol-Related Problems**

There is ample justification for ambivalence about alcohol. Even while appreciating the many benefits derived from some of kinds of drinking, one may realistically fear the harms or risks that are associated with others. Recent studies suggest that intoxication is often highly correlated with a wide range of alcohol-related problems, ranging from headaches and hangovers to absenteeism at school or work; from generalized aggression to spouse or child abuse, including homicide, suicide, illnesses, accidents, and fetal alcohol effects. Drinking and driving is of speical concern because its consequences affect not only the driver but also others on the road. Specifically, a blood-alcohol concentration of over 0.10% can realistically be viewed as risky at any given time, and chronic drinking at that level tends to be injurious to the body.

In recent years some anthropologists have joined laypersons in being ambivalent about alcohol use. The reportorial ethnographic perspective on drinking was derided by some as a case of "problem deflation," especially in contrast with the epidemiological or public health perspective, which some of the same scholars warn about as "problem amplification." By paying special attention to dominant patterns within populations, ethnographers tended to emphasize the integration of drinking with other aspects of culture, often noting associated social and individual benefits. It is not that they failed to recognize that some risks or harm were occasionally associated with drinking, but that they chose not to emphasize them. What some misconstrue as a controversy between pro- and anti-alcohol researchers can more accurately be described as equally valid emphases on alternate aspects of the complex reality of drinking behavior and its outcomes.

## **RECENT TRENDS AND PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS**

In the 1970s, anthropologists increasingly turned from descriptive ethnographic work to more applied or practical studies in many fields, and this was especially true with respect to alcohol. Sources of funding also increased markedly in fields of public health and social welfare, while simultaneously decreasing for non-problemoriented ethnography. Anthropologists have increasingly been employed by institutions that emphasize the costs rather than an impartial view of drinking, so that more recent anthropological writings on the subject have similarly tended to emphasize the abuse rather than use of alcohol, various kinds of risks and harm of alcohol consumption, the prevention or lessening of such problems, and treatment to help problem drinkers.

Anthropologists have never played a dominant role in the emerging field of alcohol studies, but they continuously provided minority views that have been important reminders to others who have a less global or holistic approach. At the outset, a confrontation with the reality of cultural differences provided a salutary challenge to understandings that had been built up on the basis of "mainstream Middle Americans." Critical analysis of drunken comportment in historical and ethnographic perspective disproved the dominant pharmacological interpretation of disinhibition. Transnational studies showed that how people drink must be considered in looking at problems, and not merely how much they drink.

#### **Some Milestones**

In one sense it is disappointing that anthropology has not had more impact on how people use and think about alcohol. In another sense, it is gratifying that so much has been accomplished by so few in a field long dominated by biomedical interests.

Openness to considering cultural differences with respect to alcohol is often stated as a goal although many in the field must be reminded of it when dealing with specific issues. A bibliography, a periodic newsletter, and a few anthologies and occasional review articles, or special issues of journals on various topics, make it easier now to keep abreast of the diverse and scattered literature.

### **Epidemiology and Public Policies**

The problem aspect of alcohol use was a focus of interest not only for scientists but also for practitioners in the fields of health and welfare, and for administrators seeking appropriate policies. To demonstrate that it should be of broad social concern, epidemiological studies were undertaken on a rapidly increasing scale. That became a major part of a combination of influences that converged to shape alcohol studies in the 1980s. Most psychological and social problems became increasingly medicalized as physicians extended their influence and assumed new importance throughout Western cultures.

Social and cultural research was generally marginalized by government and other funding agencies. Biochemistry, neurology, and genetics came to dominate the field of alcohol research.

The World Health Organization (WHO) was active in promulgating the idea that alcohol-related problems occurred universally in a direct and invariant proportion to the consumption of alcohol. They posited that not only for individuals but also, using average per capita consumption per month or year, among populations. Data from their own survey often contradicted that axiom, as when Luxembourg, France, Portugal, and some other countries that rated at the top of the international list for consumption tended to have low rates of most alcohol-related problems, whereas Ireland, the United States, and some others with much lower consumption reported higher rates of most problems. Nevertheless, a "control of consumption" model emerged as dominant among those constituencies who

recommend policies. They continue to emphasize adoption of a bundle of measures intended to lessen such problems. These include increasing taxes on beverage alcohol, restricting advertising, mandating health-warning labels, increasing the minimum legal drinking age, curtailing sales outlets and hours of business, and other measures aimed at decreasing the overall consumption of alcohol.

Many individuals abstain and even so-called moderate drinkers generally consume very little. It should not be surprising that most control measures cut drinking among non-abusers while hardly affecting those who engage in heavy drinking. It is a concern that so little has been achieved in the way of reducing harm or preventing problems.

The inordinate emphasis on the consumption model has resulted in an imbalance in research and writing about alcohol by those who claim to have a primarily social or cultural interest. By far the greatest portion of such work is epidemiological, correlating the quantity and frequency of drinking with various alcohol-related problems and compiling quantitative data on alcohol as used by diverse demographic categories. Most such studies are conducted by means of social surveys, with close attention to the exact wording of the instrument or questionnaire, and to the process of sampling within the large population. Such studies can be conducted by unskilled personnel using standard survey instruments, and they yield quantitative data that can be tabulated and statistically manipulated, have the superficial appearance of "hard science," and are easily communicated in visual format. Unfortunately, too often even the principal investigator is at a loss to explain or to interpret findings in terms that would have meaning to the subjects or to colleagues.

By contrast, most ethnographic studies require close and sustained work by skilled observers and yield qualitative data that do not easily lend themselves to tabulation or visual presentation. Brief papers based on such qualitative studies too often are regarded as little more than interesting anecdotes and few bother to read the expository style that is often judged to be "soft" in comparison with numerical findings. Those who mistakenly confuse numbers with science give credibility to quantification, even while many methodological issues remain questionable among survey practitioners.

It is becoming commonplace to give lip service to the ideal of combining qualitative with quantitative methods and data in alcohol studies, but only a few pioneers are doing it systematically. One encouraging example is the use of ethnographic observation and interviewing as a preliminary to survey work. In that way, it is possible to get a good feel for what issues are important to the population and what terms are appropriate in the formation of questions before the instrument is created. Another imaginative combination is the subjecting of open-ended interviews to detailed content analysis, so that it is possible to quantify what the respondents said in their own words, rather than relying on a few precoded forced choices among alternatives worded by someone else.

### **Education as Prevention**

It is primarily anthropologists who proposed the sociocultural model (as an alternative to the consumption model discussed above) as a means of preventing or lessening alcohol-related problems. Centuries of experience demonstrate that (contrary to what many believe) drinking at an early age, drinking every day, or drinking more than two drinks at a sitting, are not major factors in identifying who will have alcohol-related problems (as throughout southern Europe), suggesting instead that familiarity with alcohol and its effects, an unglamorous view of drinking, and learning to do so with food and in the company of kin may be protective.

On the assumption that sociocultural integration of alcohol is preventive, education about it seems to be called for to remedy widespread ignorance and inaccurate stereotypes about drinking and its outcomes. Numerous experiments with brief educational efforts, often unrelated to other topics and taught by people who are not knowledgeable, relying heavily on scare tactics, have been discredited, but there have been few attempts at long-term accurate teaching in ways that relate alcohol in credible ways to other things people care about. Rather than attempting to diminish drinking by everyone, such an approach would probably help abstainers to understand their choice as well as help some of those who might otherwise drink inappropriately, creating problems for themselves and others.

#### **Alcoholics Anonymous**

Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is a fellowship of individuals whose primary concern is to stop drinking. An anomalous organization with no dues, formal membership, or budget, it has millions of attendees and a meeting can be found in most countries around the world almost anytime. AA has served as the model for numerous other "self-help" (or 12-step or mutual support) groups involving addicts, overeaters, gamblers, and others. An outgrowth of an evangelical group, AA early dropped references to "God" in order not to alienate prospective affiliates, and substituted "Higher power" as that to which one should surrender. In socialist Poland, even that allusion was deleted. Other striking adaptations have occurred in different cultural contexts. Far from protecting anonymity, many Mexican AA groups share meals and other social services with poor and ill neighbors. In France, some forgo anonymity, finding a sense of liberation in declaring their freedom from alcohol. It is not surprising that AA has become the object of many interesting studies; special contributions of anthropologists to that literature relate largely to discourse analysis, ritual, folklore, and group dynamics.

#### **Treatment and Alternatives**

Drinkers who feel that they have been harmed by alcohol have access to a broad range of treatments, under the best of circumstances. These range from month-long in-patient medical programs to psychiatric analysis, aversion therapy, pharmaceutical interventions, or brief counseling. An enormous literature describes and evaluates most such treatments, and it appears as if each is about equally successful—for different individuals. What anthropologists have contributed to the subject varies depending on the setting. When halfway houses were numerous, they were often sites of intensive ethnographic observation. Asian alternatives emphasizing prayer and monastic asceticism have been studied, as have some Native American initiatives that combine spirituality, traditional rituals, and cultural pride.

Suspicion about stereotypes and openness to considering minority adaptations have involved anthropologists in some controversies that are peculiar to alcohol studies: evolution of the concept that alcoholism is a disease, challenging the presumption that anyone who once has a problem with drinking can never again drink without becoming drunk, and investigating the otherwise ignored phenomenon of "spontaneous recovery" (abandonment of heavy drinking without any help from others).

#### **Recent Trends and Practical Implications 299**

Only early in the 1970s did a few individuals and organizations that focus on prevention and treatment of problem drinking begin to recognize that there was a need to make programs "culturally appropriate" or "culturally sensitive" if they were to achieve any success, especially with minority populations. It was some time before those new code-words were translated into action, but there has been gradual improvement from the time when all such programs were based on simplistic views of a supposedly mainstream shared culture. At first, there was little more than an attempt to hire a few token individuals who spoke languages other than English, or to pay some attention to various forms of family, different gender roles, or attitudes toward work and leisure.

Another flurry of activity was intended to identify and characterize various patterns of belief and behavior, and to adapt schedules in minor ways in order to improve communication and cooperation with various minority populations. Unfortunately, the few categories of ethnicity that were identified in the U.S. census ("White," "Black," Hispanic, American Indian/Alaska Native, Asian/Pacific Islanders) became widely adopted as if they were meaningful, even though those terms have little to do with self-identification or cultural or demographic regularities. It is noteworthy that anthropologists were among the first and most persistent in challenging those supposedly "ethnic" categories, and the census now permits self-identification rather than implying broad cultural uniformities that do not exist.

Much has been written about the prevalence of drinking and drinking problems among so-called marginal populations, with "culture-loss," "acculturative stress," "sociocultural deprivation," or simply "acculturation" glibly cited as the causal factor. As we have learned more about drinking, attitudes, and the great variety of problem drinkers and drinking problems, it has become increasingly clear that such oversimplification tended to obscure rather than to resolve the real issues. For example, acculturation has been variously measured on surveys by place of birth, national heritage of father, mother, or friends, or neighbors, years of residence in the country, language used at home, or other indices that bear little relation to stress, identity, or culture change. Of the many meanings that are applied to "anomie," the one that does appear to have relevance, with reference both to individuals and to communities, implies a combination of loss or repudiation of traditional skills and values, major restriction of choices in terms of workaday activities, disruption of channels and means of socialization, and a feeling that elders have little to contribute that is relevant to the present situation. First Nations in North America and Australia have been explicitly compared in those terms where major communal disruption is linked with alcohol abuse, and other populations around the world seem to fit the model. Subsequently, as various reference groups became better organized, secured funding, and developed their own programs, cultural appropriateness became an occasional reality. National and other local traditions came into play; significant tribal differences were recognized; earlier stereotypes were disproved and rejected. Among Native Americans, a number of forms of native healing have been adapted in effective ways, such as Sweatlodge, Sundance, and others. Often these combine traditional purification and healing rituals to provide strengthening of self-concept, pride in heritage, and a return to a world-view that had been abandoned or rejected.

There exist some examples of approaches to treatment of alcohol-related problems that depend on knowledge of cultural and subcultural groups. For example, anthropologists have played a major role in engaging traditional healers such as spiritists, shamans, clerics, and elders as treatment providers for those with drinking problems; spiritists for some, shamans for others, clerics, elders, and others. Commonly there is also some brokering so that such specialists may collaborate with social workers and practitioners of Western medical methods. Clients and their kin often have greater comfort and confidence in dealing with familiar healers, even if some specific procedures are syncretic.

#### **Attempts to Universalize Discourse**

Since its inception, the WHO has paid considerable attention to alcohol and related problems as pertinent to public health. That organization encouraged the broad dissemination of epidemiological studies using translations (and later, adaptations) of survey instruments that had been developed in major Western research centers. In an attempt at standardization, workgroups and special committees often labored over defining terms, and spelling out objective diagnostic criteria. Because English has become the universal language of science and because so many non-Western practitioners and scientists are trained in the United States and the United Kingdom, there was heavy international reliance on conceptualization and terminology that were inextricably imbedded in thought-patterns of the metropole. It recently became evident that many of those meanings were being significantly misunderstood abroad, even by those who had studied them in English, and WHO has engaged some anthropologists and others in efforts to ensure that research and communication on the subject be better understood transculturally and transnationaly.

## **Anthropology's Contribution to the Understanding of Alcohol Use**

Two major continuing contributions of anthropology to the study of alcohol use are in the areas of qualitative methodologies and cross-cultural and cross-national understanding. Anthropology has already pioneered the use of observation, participant observation, focus groups, in-depth interviews, and life histories as methodologies that seek to understand alcohol use from an insider's point of view and in the broadest cultural context.

The qualitative approach is especially useful when investigators seek to understand cultures and subcultures that are different from their own. Studies that link qualitative approaches with quantitative and epidemiological studies can offer us better methods for understanding alcohol use, abuse, and possible culturally compatible treatments.

Long before the field of alcohol studies was recognized anthropologists were contributing to our understanding of alcohol use and its outcomes by observing, analyzing, and reporting drinking patterns among different peoples. There was a brief period when drinking patterns tended to be viewed by those in other disciplines as irrelevant except inasmuch as they related to sheer volume of consumption. At the beginning of the 21st century, drinking patterns have re-emerged in the consciousness of alcohol researchers. They are now being recognized as important by survey-investigators who no longer claim that only consumption matters. There is a scramble to devise quick and easy ways to count and measure drinking patterns in ways compatible with the social survey format.

A few spokespersons for critical medical anthropology have been careful to demonstrate that many alcohol-related problems do not result from specifically individual, constitutional, or personality issues but can be better understood in relation to the historical context emphasizing political economy, that is, primarily relations of power and wealth. Recurrently, around the world such problems tend to be especially prevalent among the homeless, unemployed or underemployed, migrant workers, minorities who are subject to racial and other forms of discrimination; in sum: the poor and powerless within societies, even those societies that are ostensibly open and allowing mobility. It is as if heavy drinking and drunkenness were an adaptation to systemic frustrations, providing relief from stress, opportunities to act or speak in ways that would otherwise be censured. Such an interpretation has important implications in terms of both prevention and treatment.

Perhaps a breakthrough can be achieved now that drinking patterns have been explicitly identified as crucial intervening variables between sheer consumption and the occurrence of alcohol-related problems. This came about through qualitative studies by anthropologists in which they have identified specific patterns—some behavioral and some ideational—that are associated with the harms and risks of alcohol abuse. Of special importance with reference to populations that are thought to be difficult to study, the traditional methods of participantobservation and non- or semi-directed interviewing are often streamlined to allow short-term assessments that are more congenial to the timetables and budgets of agencies concerned with public health and social welfare. Similarly, greater attention to political economy and relations of power access within social systems promise to enhance our understanding of causes, consequences, and alternatives to problem drinking and drinking problems.

## **BIBLIOGRAPHY**

- Baer, H. S., Singer, M., & Susser, I. (1997). Legal addictions, Part I, Demon in a bottle. In H. S. Baer, M. Singer, & I. Susser (Eds.), *Medical anthropology and the world system: A critical perspective* (pp. 73–101). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Douglas, M. (Ed.). (1987). *Constructive drinking: Perspectives on drink from anthropology*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Heath, D. B. (Ed.). (1995). *International handbook on alcohol and culture*. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
- Heath, D. B. (2000). *Drinking occasions: Comparative perspectives on alcohol and culture*. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/Mazell.
- Lowinson, J., Ruiz, P., Millman, R., & Langrod, J. (Eds.). (1997). *Substance abuse: A comprehensive textbook*. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins.
- MacAndrew, C., & Edgerton, R. (1969). *Drunken comportment: A social explanation*. Chicago: Aldine.