## Unit 5 Law and Society

### **Law and Society**

# **16**

In primitive societies, the folkways, mores, and customs were suffi ce to control the individual behaviour since there is almost unquestioned compliance with them. But in modern civilized societies, customs tend to loosen their hold with the result that laws are enacted by the state to control the individual.

#### **THE MEANING OF LAW**

Th e term 'law' has been variously defi ned by writers. According to Sumner 'laws are actually codifi ed mores'. Kant defi ned law as 'a formula which expresses the necessity of an action.' Krabbe defi nes law as 'the expression of one of the many judgements of value which we human beings make, by virtue of our disposition and nature'. According to Green, 'law is a more or less systematic body of generalized rules balanced between the fi ction of performance and the fact of change, governing specifi cally defi ned relationship and situations, and employing force or the threat of force in defi ned and limited ways'. According to Duguit, laws are 'the rules of conduct which normal men know they must observe in order to preserve and promote the benefi ts derived from life in society.' Another sociologist writes, 'Law is the standard of conduct, which, in consequence of the inner impulse which urges men toward a reasonable form of life emanates from the whole, and is forced upon the individual. It is distinguished from morals, customs, and, religion as soon as the point is reached at which compulsory standards are separated from those demands that involve merely social amenity'. According to MacIver and Page, 'law is the body of rules which are recognised, interpreted and applied to particular situations by the courts of the State.' B. N. Cardozo writes, 'Law is a principle or rule of conduct so established as to justify a prediction with reasonable certainty that it will be enforced by

#### **178** Chapter 16

the courts if its authority is challenged'. According to Max Weber, law 'is an order, the validity of which is guaranteed by the probability that deviation will be met by physical or pyschic sanction by a staff specially empowered to carry out this sanction'. Hertzler comments, 'Law in eff ect structures the power (SUPERORDINATE SUBORDINATE) relationship in society; it maintains the status quo and protects the various strata against each other, both in governmental and non-governmental organisations and relationship'. According to Roscoe Pound, 'law is an authoritative canon of value laid down by the force of politically organised society'. Austin defi ned law as 'the command given by a superior to an inferior'. He says, 'Laws properly so called are a species of command. But, being a command, every law properly so called fl ows from a determinate source or emanates from a determinate author'.

#### **Two Approaches**

Th us, there is marked disagreement among scholars as to what the law is. Th ere is no single defi nition of law which will encompass preliterate legal arrangements, the Code of Hammurabi, and law in modem civilization. As MacIver puts it, 'Th e law of the "savage" is not our law'. Th ose who take juristic view of law defi ne it as the command of the sovereign or the dictates of the state. Th ose taking the sociological view defi ne law as the rules of right conduct. Th e problem here is, shall we keep the word 'law' for the specialized system with their codes, their apparatus for settling disputes, and the penalties for those who have broken the rules, or shall we regard these as mere specializations of a similar kind of control which may be found in unorganized forms or in organized forms, but without what we ordinarily think of as 'legal sanctions'?

Before proceeding further, the following characteristics of law may be observed:

**1.** Laws are the general conditions of human activity, prescribed by the state for its members.

**2.** Law is law only if enacted by a proper law-making authority. It is a product of conscious thought, planning, and deliberate formulation.

- **3.** Law is defi nite, clear, and precise.
- **4.** Law applies equally to all without exception in identical circumstances.
- **5.** Th e violation of law is followed by penalties determined by the authority of the state.

#### **THE SOCIAL BASIS OF LAW**

Generally speaking, law is interpreted in juristic sense: it is enacted by a proper law-making authority and its violation is followed by punishment determined by the judiciary. However, in order to be eff ective, a state-enacted law has to have a social basis and moral sanction of the society. In the earlier societies, laws were usually based on customs and religious principles. But as societies grew from simple to complex, there was an extensive growth of legal rules. Th is led some sociological thinkers to emphasize the signifi cance of social factors in the study of law. According to them, law is rooted in social institutions, in socio-economic networks. Th ese social factors infl uence the course of law. What enacted is not always followed in practice. According to Maine, there is always a necessity for law to adjust itself to social necessities and social opinions. When a law expresses the moral consensus of the society, it will be eff ectively enforced. If it is not backed by fi rm moral consensus, eff ective enforcement is less likely. Law divorced from custom is bound to become artifi cial which would not be seriously observed by the people. Take the case of Sarda Act prohibiting marriage of children. Th is Act is honoured by the people more in breach than in observance. A law which does not give offi cial sanction to customs loses a certain force of sentiment which customs have behind them and which help in obedience. Edmund Burke said, 'Manners are of more importance than laws. Upon them in great measure the laws depend. Th e law touches us but here and there, manners are what vex or sooth, corrupt or purify, exalt or debase, barbarize or refi ne us by a constant, steady, uniform, insensible operation, like that of the air we breathe in'. Customs consolidate law and facilitate its practice. If the law is not aided by customs, it cannot succeed.

As the American James Wilson wrote, 'Of all yet suggested the mode for the promulgation of human law by custom seems the most signifi cant and most eff ectual. It involves in it internal evidence of the strongest kind that the law has been introduced by common consent and that this consent rests upon the most solid basis-experience as well as opinion. Th is mode of promulgation points to the strongest characteristic of liberty as well as of law. For a consent thus practically given must have been given in the freest and most unbiased manner'. Laws which are not supported by customs have little chance of being enforced. Certainly, a law cannot succeed permanently if it is opposed by deep-seated customary attitudes. Custom is an important source of law. Th e 'common law' of England is exclusively based on custom. Th e passing of laws against certain practices can be eff ective when the mores underlying those practices are in the process of disintegration and a considerable number of people no longer hold to them because then it is mostly a matter of forcing the reluctant ones to accept the new legal way.

Just as custom supplements law, so law also supplements custom. Th ere is reciprocal relationship between law and society. Law functions as an educator. It creates a moral consensus where none exists. Today, law is used to change obsolete customs such as untouchability, dowry system, and child marriage. In the primitive societies, custom well served to regulate the conduct of life, but in modem urban-industrial societies, customs become blurred and are challenged by newly emerging loyalties and interests. Th e custom becomes less a guideline to conduct, sets limits less, where people are motivated not so much within family and territorial community as by shared interests within secondary group associations. Today, law takes a very large part in total social control. Th ere are several reasons for it. Firstly, custom lacks an agency of authoritative jurisdiction due to which the interests of the community do not remain fully secure. Law with special agency of enforcement is required if interests are to be pursued in peace. Secondly, it is a shortcoming of custom that it cannot adapt itself readily to changing conditions. Being fi xed and permanent customs change very slowly. Social necessities are always in advance of custom. Th erefore, to meet the social necessities and for quick adaptation to changing conditions, another kind of code is demanded, a code which does not slowly evolve but one which is made expressly for the situation. Th us, with the coming of railroads and automobiles, it was impossible for their regulation to be exclusively in terms of the old customs because these did not provide specifi c rules to meet the new situation created by the new modes of transportation. Consequently, a whole system of law sprang up in every country to regulate them—the clearest example being the system of traffi c rules governing automobiles. Th e society became so complex and the devices were so new that deliberate regulation became necessary. Th irdly, since there are diff erent customs of diff erent groups, therefore, to have a single and uniform rule of behaviour where it is desirable, it is necessary to supplement custom by law; for example, the need for a uniform civil code is now being felt in India though the issue is being looked at from a political angle by diff erent political parties.

It often happens that the state makes a law attacking the customs of the people. In such cases custom and law come into clash and the people are hard put to choose between custom and law. In practice, it has been observed that people render obedience to custom rather than to law in case of

#### **180** Chapter 16

a clash between the two. When law attacks custom, it has to depend very largely on the precarious sanction of force. People might be forced to obey the law as against the custom, but this obedience of theirs would be only unwilling and temporary. Th e forced obedience may even create a force of resistance which may endanger the authority of law. As MacIver observes, 'Custom when attacked, attacks law in turn, attacks not only the particular law which opposes it, but what is more vital, the spirit of law-abidingness, the unity of the general will'. Custom has one superiority over law in that it is obeyed by people more spontaneously and does not come from without, curtly demanding their obedience. Th erefore, a law which is opposed to custom lacks the ground of support which is essential to its eff ective operation. Ultimately, the law must carry with it the sanction of public approval. It must operate with, and not against the forces, of social change. Although there may be behind law the force or the physical powers of the government and majesty of the state, these will not be enough to secure active obedience to the law if it infringes too far upon 'the sense of right' of the individuals and groups to which it applies.

Above we gave the examples of Sarda Act; similarly, consider Anti-untouchability Act, the Hindu Marriages Act, and the Prohibition Act, and it would become clear that while law can put certain limitations, it cannot by itself fully control the customary practices of people whose attitudes are grounded in ignorance and group prejudices.

As we said above, sometimes laws which are contrary to the customs are promulgated by the state. Th e question is how such laws ever become instituted. Th e answer is 'pressure groups'. In every society certain pressure groups are always working which seek to gain control over the law-making body. Th ese groups, following their own interests, get laws engineered which off end the sentiments of the rest of the society. Among such groups, the government itself is the greatest pressure group. Th e government group wishes to stay in power and is thereby tempted to use the machinery of the government in its own interest. Th e dictator in a dictatorial form of the government obviously does so, but even in democracy the governing group tries to please the organized interests in the state to get their support and cooperation and give them all help, legitimate or illegitimate. Th ese interests may often be far from representing the interests of the people at large. Th e role of pressure groups in modern society need hardly be emphasised.

It has also been asserted that in a period of change the law lags behind other aspects of society, but this is not necessarily true. Th e law is often utilized as an instrument of social reform. Th us, the Anti Untouchability Act, the Hindu Code Bill, the Sarda Act, and the Prohibition Act are 'forwardlooking' Acts. Th ey are certainly ahead of the customs. In the twentieth century, much enlightened legislation has been passed everywhere. Th us, law does not always lag behind the times. As said above, one great merit of law is that it adapts itself to the changing needs of society and maintains stability when the rapid alterations disturb the relations in society. Law helps the society assimilate the changes by adjusting group advantages and injuries resulting from them.

Finally, by aff ecting the social framework in which relations take place, law may become an advanced instrument of social change on a national as well as international level. However, if law is greatly in advance of, or greatly behind, the trends of change in the society, it remains unenforceable. If it is in harmony with the processes of change, it accelerates and institutionalizes changes.

#### **LAW AS AN INTEGRATIVE MECHANISM**

As we saw in the chapter on social control, law is the most important formal means of social control. Early societies depended on informal means of social control, but in modern societies, which are large in size and complex in structure, law has taken an ever larger part in total Social control and has grown into the voluminous codes of modern times. Th e body of law in every state is always increased. Th e parliament and state legislature enact hundreds of laws every year, baffl ing the common people and opening the golden paradise for the lawyers. Th e language of law is beyond the comprehension of an ordinary citizen; even well-educated people fail to understand its i ntricacies and legal meanings. Th at is why the number of lawyers and courts is increasing infi nitely in India. Diff erent kinds of special courts, for example, labour courts, family courts, open adalats, tax tribunals, consumers protection courts, and common judicial courts, have come up.

Th e main reason for the growth of law into the voluminous codes of is the failure of customs to impose social control in view of the changing complexities of modem society. In the primitive society, custom well served to regulate the conduct of life, but in modern urban-industrial societies customs have become blurred and are being challenged by newly emerging loyalties and interests. Th e custom becomes a guideline to conduct and set limits where people are motivated not so much within family and territorial community as by shared interests within secondary group associations. Today, law takes a very large part in total social control. Th ere are several reasons for it. Firstly, customs lack an agency of authoritative jurisdiction due to which the interests of the community do not remain fully secure. Law with special agency of enforcement is required if interests are to be pursued in peace. Secondly, it is a shortcoming of custom that it cannot adopt itself readily to changing conditions. To meet the social necessities and for quick adoption to social changes, a code which can be immediately enacted and made expressly to meet the new situation is required. Th irdly, since there are diff erent customs of diff erent groups, to have a single and uniform code of behaviour is desirable. Th e need for a uniform civil code is now being felt in India, though the issue is being looked at from a political angle by diff erent political parties.

On account of the above defi ciencies of custom as regulator of social conduct, law has grown up to meet the challenges created by industrialization, urbanization, decay of family life, new political situation, new economic conditions, growth of consciousness caused by spread of education, and other various agencies of media.

#### **SOCIOLOGY OF LEGAL PROFESSION**

Sociology is the study of human in society. Legal system is a part of social system and therefore society aff ects the legal system and the legal system infl uences the society. Today, particularly in developing societies governed by rule of law, the interaction between legal and social processes are so close that the study of behavioural and policy dimensions of legal norms and processes cannot be ignored by any student of law. Similarly, no students of sociology can ignore the study of legal frameworks and procedures in their understanding of human behaviours. Law deals in a way with human's behaviour in society and so it has been called behavioural science and the lawyer has been called 'social engineer'. It is now not suffi cient for them to get acquainted with the laws of the society but equally more important to broaden their knowledge of society so that they may competently understand its structure and processes. Th e impact of sociology on law is so vast that it has led to the emergence of the sociological school of jurisprudence.

It need not be pointed out that the challenge of Marxian philosophy, the emergence of the social welfare state, and the growth of sociological literature necessitated a new approach to the conventional study of law. Th e light sociological sciences threw on human society made the study of law more meaningful and interesting. Th e knowledge of law was so far confi ned to the narrow world of statutes and cases. Th e study of sociology made the lawyers more sensitized to the social problems and needs and gave them a humanistic attitude in the application of their legal skills and knowledge.

#### **182** Chapter 16

Sociology has rendered great service to the legal profession by throwing light on how the laws actually work and how the crime can be eff ectively dealt with. Sociology has undertaken the study of various social problems, such as crime, drug addiction, prostitution, and sexual crimes, which society has to solve. Th e sociological knowledge has given a new meaning to criminal jurisprudence that laws are to be made for people and the law makers and its executors are to take into consideration the human and social aspects while making or executing it.

Th e social mission of the lawyers is not to get the accused convicted or released. It is their mission to facilitate social change in a manner that creates the minimum friction and maximum happiness for the maximum number of people. Law, so far, has been used as an instrument of repression and deterrence. Law should adopt a new development-related approach in the Indian context. Today, legal profession is isolated from social realities and continues to adhere to colonial procedures and socially barren approaches. Sociology has helped to illumine legal knowledge both in thought and in action to the advantage of society.

Th e application of sociological knowledge to legal phenomena and the operation of legal institutions will help to develop an appreciation of the possibilities, diffi culties, and limitations of legal profession in social ordering and social change. In conclusion, legal profession cannot aff ord to remain untouched with the social realities, policies, and values.

#### **QUESTIONS**

- 1. Discuss the relationship between sociology and law.
- 2. Discuss the meaning of law and its role in society.
- 3. 'Law is the command of the sovereign'. Do you agree?
- 4. How does law diff er from custom? Compare their respective roles in society.
- 5. Defi ne 'law' and describe its characteristics.
- 6. What do you understand by the term 'social basis of law'?
- 7. To what extent and in what cases can law override the customs of the people?
- 8. 'Custom supplements law'. Explain.
- 9. Describe the role of law as an integrative mechanism.
- 10. What explains the growth of law into the voluminous codes of modern times?
- 11. Write a note on sociology of legal profession. Do you think it necessary for a student of law to study sociology?