## COMBATING FRAUD

## Measures to minimise risk of digital cheating must guard against friction in payments system

INCE ITS LAUNCH in 2016, the Unified Payments Interface has transformed the payments landscape in the country. The pace of its adoption has been staggering - in October, 11.4 billion transactions worth Rs 17.15 lakh crore were routed through this system - driven in part by the increase in smartphone usage and access to cheaper mobile internet services. As a significant share of the peer-to-merchants and peer-to-peer transactions routed through this payments architecture are of less than Rs 2,000, it shows how widely this payments system is being used. However, accompanying this surge in digital transactions, has also been a sharp rise in digital/financial frauds. As per the Reserve Bank of India's annual report, in 2022-23, 6,659 digital frauds (card/internet) were reported amounting to Rs 276 crore. This is up from 3,596 fraudulent transactions worth Rs 155 crore reported in the year before. To curb the growing incidence of such online frauds, the government is now planning to introduce some measures.

As reported in this paper, the government is contemplating introducing a minimum time threshold for transactions occurring for the first time between two individuals beyond a prescribed amount. This could entail a four-hour window for transactions above Rs 2,000. This could create friction in payments - as per data from NPCI, in October, 22.5 per cent of peer-to-peer transactions were above Rs 2,000. Government officials, though, view this as warranted for alleviating cyber security concerns. After all, reports have suggested that the fraudsters employ a range of techniques, some quite sophisticated, such as phishing, malware, fake identity frauds and SIM cloning to cheat individuals. In some cases individuals have even been tricked into providing account details or downloading fraudulent apps, which indicates that the frauds have become even more technologically innovative.

India, however, is not the only country that is witnessing a surge in digital frauds. As per a report by TransUnion, across the world, 4.6 per cent of all customers' digital transactions were "suspected to be fraudulent". The report added that the "total volume of such suspected digital fraud attempts has increased dramatically." This issue needs to be tackled at multiple levels. One, it requires that players in the payments ecosystem regularly upgrade not only their IT infrastructure but their protocols as well in order to plug the gaps and minimise the vulnerabilities. Two, as fraudsters tend to prey on the individuals' lack of awareness, improving consumer awareness, educating them about the newer methods of frauds is of critical importance. On Tuesday, finance ministry officials met to discuss the growing incidence of digital payment frauds and financial crimes and the steps needed to counter them. A careful balance needs to be struck between minimising the risk of digital frauds and ensuring minimal frictions in the payments system.