# **Bioethics**

#### **Contemporary Anthropological Approaches**

**Elisa J. Gordon**

# **INTRODUCTION: THE IMPORTANCE OF ANTHROPOLOGY TO BIOETHICS**

Anthropology offers much to the world of bioethics, including theoretical approaches, methods, and practical guidance to health care professionals. Theoretically, anthropological research challenges cultural and social norms about identity, personhood, distinctions between self and other, definitions of life and death, and what it is that makes us human. Our comparative approach enables us to reveal just how moral assumptions and norms are not universal while demonstrating at the same time the cultural basis of moral reasoning. The social sciences also contribute to a view of ethical issues as societal problems, in this way illuminating the cultural processes that constitute ethical concerns (Haimes, 2002). Methodologically, anthropology has helped to "humanize" (Kleinman, 1995a, 1995b) bioethics by using ethnographic methods that enable a thick description of cases which illuminate people's grounded experiences of responding to ethical dilemmas and the values that enter into their moral reasoning (Hoffmaster, 1990, 1992; Marshall & Koenig, 2001). A contextualist approach to bioethics therefore prioritizes the "is" (people's actions and the values informing those actions) over the "ought" (what people believe they ideally should do), while recognizing that moral ideals vary cross-culturally. Anthropological approaches help develop "a more empirically grounded theory of morality" (Hoffmaster, 1992) and herald new or previously unrevealed moral considerations that help refine normative analysis (Haimes, 2002; Hoffmaster, 1990). Such first-hand experiences facilitate informed health policy-making.

In the following discussion I will explore ways in which anthropologists and sociologists have worked toward "humanizing" bioethics (Kleinman, 1995a, 1995b). First, I will briefly review the development of the field of bioethics and present some relevant concepts. I will then review anthropological research that examines bioethics as a cultural domain of inquiry and cultural process. A number of theoretical issues and topical areas will be discussed in light of cross-cultural research in the field. Second, I will cover various applied efforts of anthropologists working in bioethics. Lastly, I will explore some promising avenues for further research in bioethics. While anthropological contributions to the field of bioethics are central to our discussion, it is paramount to include some related work by those outside the discipline since: (1) anthropologists are increasingly engaged in interdisciplinary collaborations, and (2) nonanthropologists, for example sociologists and philosophers, are adopting anthropological methods and theoretical approaches to better understand bioethical issues from a cultural perspective. These trends are not surprising given that bioethics is a multidisciplinary field without its own discipline. This discussion picks up where several review articles have left off to provide a more current review of contemporary debates and issues in the anthropological inquiry into bioethics (Kleinman, 1995a; Marshall, 1992; Marshall & Koenig, 1996; Muller, 1994).

# **HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF BIOETHICS AS A CULTURAL DOMAIN OF INQUIRY**

Bioethics emerged in the 1960s in response to myriad factors including: biotechnological developments, namely hemodialysis, organ transplantation, and mechanical ventilation; the civil rights movement; the backlash against physician paternalism; and revelations about abuses in human subjects research (Beecher, 1966; Fox, 1990; Rothman, 1990). Technological developments, for instance, raised questions about allocation of scarce resources and whether quality or quantity of life should figure in decisions about the use of life-prolonging interventions. Patients' rights efforts challenged physician authority to know what is in patients' best interests and paved the way for greater patient involvement in medical decision-making. The revelations of experimentation atrocities committed during World War II against human prisoners, against human subjects in the course of clinical practice in the 1960s, coupled with ongoing revelations of abuses such as the syphilis study in Tuskegee, GA, and human radiation experiments conducted in the 1940s–1970s, have opened the door to new protections of human subjects participating in scientific research (Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments, 1996; Jones, 1993).

Though some early work appeared in the 1980s (Kunstadter, 1980), anthropological interest in bioethics began to take root in the early 1990s. Medical sociologists' earlier works inspired anthropological theories about moral worlds within biomedicine (Bosk, 1979; Fox & Swazey, 1978, 1984). Anthropological interest in bioethics grew out of the work in anthropology of biomedicine. Within the biomedical health care setting, ethical or moral dilemmas arise every day since biomedicine is fraught with uncertainty and medical decisions must be made. Medical decisions, particularly those at the end of life and beginning of life, are informed by a host of moral values about doing what is considered best for the patient, particularly preventing suffering (Kleinman, 1995a, 1995b) and ensuring an acceptable quality of life. Similar issues within the study of biomedicine also drove the study of bioethics, especially concerns about how power dynamics affect the relationship between doctors and patients. Thus, anthropologists studying bioethics examine how issues come to be defined or established as moral quandaries, people's grounded experiences of engagement with and responses to ethical dilemmas, and the cultural values, beliefs, and social structural dynamics that contribute to ethical decision-making. Additionally, just as medical anthropologists have examined the cultural values underpinning biomedical theory and practice (Gordon, 1988; Hahn & Gaines, 1985), anthropologists have similarly turned their attention toward examining the cultural assumptions of normative principles of bioethics (we will explore this theme later on). Through these efforts, anthropologists have been leaders in the development of empirical bioethics (Frank et al., 1998; Gordon, 2001a;

Levin, 1988; Marshall, Koenig, Barnes, & Davis, 1998; Siminoff & Chillag, 1999).

# **DISTINCTIONS: BIOETHICS AND MEDICAL ETHICS; ETHICS AND MORALITY**

The terms "bioethics" and "medical ethics" are frequently used interchangeably but they are distinct (Marshall & Koenig, 1996). Bioethics pertains to the ethical dilemmas and moral norms of health professionals (primarily physicians) emerging within contemporary biomedicine. In contrast, some scholars advocate a comparative approach to the study of medical ethics or "ethnoethics" that expands its purview beyond Western biomedical systems (Fabrega, 1990; Lieban, 1990). "Ethnoethics" is concerned with cross-cultural variations in ethical issues and moral norms within any health care setting or healing environment to illuminate their cultural underpinnings (Lieban, 1990, p. 223). Most anthropological research has concentrated on bioethics perhaps due to the breadth of compelling moral quandaries generated by biotechnology. Less work has been done on ethical issues arising outside of biomedicine (see Weisz, 1990), except for issues that more traditionally fall under the rubric of human rights, such as cliterodectomy (Gordon, 1991; Lane & Rubinstein, 1996).

There are multiple philosophical definitions of "ethics" and "morality." For instance, "ethics" refers to the theoretical, practical, and descriptive study of moral life: people's standards of good action (as in professional codes) and moral behaviors and beliefs; "morality" refers to socially shared worldviews or conventions about right and wrong human conduct (in the context of medical care) (Beauchamp & Childress, 1994, pp. 4–5). Moral values are shaped by socio-cultural values and beliefs. "Ethical dilemma" denotes a situation in which a clinical decision must be made but there are at least two valid, opposing options, which are informed by moral values. Anthropologists may find these distinctions useful so that they can determine which cultural activities to analyze: values or decisions or both. Anthropological distinctions emphasize the cultural basis of local moral worlds (Kleinman, 1995a, p. 42). Certainly, not all anthropological inquiry into bioethics focuses on decision-making; much work has sought to thickly describe cases and experiences of moral issues.

# **BIOETHICS AS A CULTURAL DOMAIN OF INQUIRY AND CULTURAL PROCESS**

#### **Theoretical Issues in Bioethics**

An exciting area of anthropological and sociological research has focused on critiquing the field of bioethics by highlighting the social, political, and cultural dimensions of its theoretical frameworks and what bioethics construes as topics of interest and topics to silence, for example cultural relativism (Crigger, 1998; Kleinman, 1995a, 1995b; Marshall, 1992; Muller, 1994). Echoing concerns noted by Fox and Swazey (1984) of bioethics' "provincialism," Kleinman (1995a, 1995b) contends that bioethics is limited in orientation because it is ethnocentric, psychocentric, and medicocentric in its inattention to non-Western moral traditions. Much of the critique aims to uncover the Western cultural foundations of the normative philosophical principles contributing to bioethical discourse. Early bioethics philosophers contend that the principles of autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence, and justice are universal concepts (Beauchamp & Childress, 1994). However, several U.S. studies show that, for example, expressions of "justice" in terms of allocating scarce medical resources in a rural primary care practice setting differ from practices in urban settings (Brown, 1994; Jecker & Berg, 1992). The contingencies of rural life that engender face-to-face, everyday interpersonal relations with health providers who must make allocative decisions reveal that justice is not a blinded, impersonal process, as many philosophers contend. The principle of respect for "autonomy"—selfrule or agency that is free from interference from others (Beauchamp & Childress, 1994)—has been the target of greatest criticism because it prioritizes a sense of personhood as the individual, which is clearly Western, particularly American in orientation (Fox & Swazey, 1984; Wolpe, 1998). When most cultures espouse a sociocentric conception of personhood as opposed to an ego-centric or indexical self (Gaines, 1982; Shweder & Bourne, 1982), the enduring preeminence of an individualistic approach to moral reasoning and medical decisions appears limited, since families play an important role or even greater role than the individual in care-taking and decision-making in the United States and cross-culturally (Kuczewski & Marshall, 2002). A noteworthy contribution toward this line of work examined preferences for autonomous decision-making among four different

ethnic groups in the United States (Blackhall, Murphy, Frank, Michel, & Azen, 1995; Frank et al., 1998). Other bioethical constructs and assumptions that serve to buttress ethical arguments and health policies have also been subject to cultural analysis. For instance, while bioethics scholars presume that altruism drives people's decisions to donate their loved one's cadaveric organs, anthropological research shows that altruism plays little or no role in their decisions, but rather, decisions are made out of the personal desire to witness the loved one living on in another person, thus helping to make a devastating experience meaningful (Siminoff & Chillag, 1999). Moreover, concomitant to such challenges to the four principles is a growing recognition of other cultural norms that guide how people experience and resolve moral dilemmas and ethical issues, including the value of the community, respect for the elderly, or care (Das, 1999; Fox & Swazey, 1984; Gilligan, 1982; Kohn & McKechnie, 1999).

#### **Topical Issues in Bioethics**

Anthropological inquiry into bioethics has spanned a wide array of issues. However, many studies focus on the moral issues raised by the use of technological innovations in biomedicine because these technologies push social and cultural boundaries to new limits (e.g., Brodwin, 2000; Lock, Young, & Cambrosio, 2000). Also, much research shows high variability in decision-making processes by ethnicity, age, and cultural group. Let us consider the main topical areas by highlighting some of the relevant cross-cultural studies and current controversies.

**Definitions of Death.** Defining death fundamentally entails arbitrarily determining the end of an individual's personhood. The demarcation of death moves in concert with the use of mechanical ventilation and the recognized need for organ donation. Determinations of biological markers of death and of indicators of social death are largely culturally based. In Japan, for instance, death is traditionally construed as a process in which the spirit disconnects from the body in stages; thus, brain death is not recognized (Lock, 1996, 2002; Lock & Honde, 1990; Ohnuki-Tierney, 1994). In contrast, U.S. laws regarding definitions of death are established by individual states which define death as an event marked by the cessation of either respiratory, cardiac, or brain functioning to allow for cadaveric organ donation (Lock, 2002; Lock & Honde, 1990). Importantly, Lock and Honde (1990) remind us to problematize the biomedical model of death such that we question why Americans so willingly accept new definitions of death. Definitions of death directly affect organ donation rates; living donation is more common in Japan whereas cadaveric donation is more common in the United States (Lock & Honde, 1990). Studying definitions of death reveals much about cultural politics and the cultural basis of health policies within a global context. Japanese resistance to organ donation and transplantation can also be attributed to reluctance to utilize imported transplant policies and technology because these are imbued with Western values of individualism and autonomy which run counter to traditional Japanese cultural values of family (Lock, 1995).

**Organ Transplantation and Donation.** Much anthropological research has concentrated on organ donation in the United States, exploring the cultural construction of gift-giving and the gift-giving bind emerging between organ donor family and recipient (Fox & Swazey, 1992; Fox, Swazey, & Cameron, 1984; Ikels, 1997; Joralemon, 1995; Sharp, 1995, 2001, 2002). Cultural beliefs and values greatly affect organ donation rates (e.g., Siminoff & Arnold, 1999). In Japan, cadaveric donation rates are low due in part to Japanese social practices dictating that taking things (organs) from others is socially unacceptable (Lock & Honde, 1990). Since giftgiving in Japan is grounded in a framework of reciprocity, organ recipients are in an awkward situation because they are obliged to repay the donor but cannot (Lock, 1995, p. 31). Given the greater need for organs than availability worldwide, some anthropologists have analyzed policies designed to increase national and international rates of organ and tissue donation, particularly financial incentives (Das, 2000; Joralemon, 2000; Marshall & Daar, 2000; Scheper-Hughes, 2000; Siminoff, Arnold, Caplan, Virnig, & Seltzer, 1995). Research examining the human experiences involved in the trade in human organs has shown that philosophical assumptions about the anonymity and freedom of exchange and improved lot in life among organ sellers and recipients do not bear out, as in the case of India (Cohen, 1999; Marshall & Daar, 2000). Other work has focused on organ procurement practices and policies in Germany (Hogle, 1999), decisions about distribution of organ transplants in the United States (Gordon, 2000), or socio-demographic disparities in gaining access to kidney transplantation in the United States (Gordon, 2001a, 2001b).

**Truth-Telling: Disclosure of Terminal Diagnosis and Prognosis.** The issue of disclosure of terminal diagnosis and prognosis (usually of cancer) has been examined in great depth cross-culturally. The comparative research has revealed much about the cultural influences on the doctor–patient relationship and the relative importance of autonomy. In Italy, China, and Japan, physicians have traditionally viewed their role as protecting patients by not disclosing to patients a diagnosis of cancer or prognosis of terminal illness, though this view is changing (Gordon, 1990, 1994; Gordon & Paci, 1997; Long, 1999, 2000b). In the United States, physicians disclose terminal diagnoses because of informed consent statutes (the Common Rule), which legally require patients' consent before physicians can administer treatment. Nevertheless, many American physicians hold a metaphysical view of hope as essential for patients in maintaining a will to survive (Christakis, 1999; DelVecchio Good, Good, Schaffer, & Lind, 1990; DelVecchio Good, Munakata, Kobayashi, Mattingly, & Good, 1994). In contrast to European Americans, diverse ethnic and religious groups in the United States, including Mexican Americans, Korean Americans, Chinese Americans, and non-protestants, report being averse to the idea of oncologists telling patients about a diagnosis of metastatic cancer and a terminal prognosis (Blackhall et al., 1999; Muller & Desmond, 1992; Orona, Koenig & Davis, 1994). Among such groups, discussions of impending death are avoided and believed to cause further suffering and believed to even be physically harmful to the dying; instead, a family-centered model of medical decision-making is preferred as a form of familial duty (Blackhall et al., 1995; Marshall et al., 1998; Muller & Desmond, 1992; Orona et al., 1994). Disclosing negative information such as a diagnosis of terminal illness is likewise avoided among Navajos because it undermines their cultural value of *hózhó*—a composite sense of beauty, goodness, order, and harmony—since language and thought have the power to affect reality (Carrese & Rhodes, 1995). Similar views about disclosure are maintained among Aboriginal patients in Canada (Kaufert, 1999). Most of these studies focus on the attitudes of patients and on the disclosure of diagnosis of cancer. Much less is known about disclosing prognosis to patients cross-culturally, though one U.S. study analyzed the metaphors implicit in oncologists' perceptions of disclosing the prognosis of advanced cancer (Gordon & Daugherty, 2003a).

**End-of-Life Care.** End-of-life decision-making has been the focus of considerable anthropological attention, particularly as it relates to ethnic and cultural perspectives toward issues such as completing advance directives (do-not-resuscitate orders, living wills), withdrawal of ventilator support, artificial nutrition, and hydration, and euthanasia in the United States and Japan (Crawley, Marshall, & Koenig, 2001; Hern, Koenig, Moore, & Marshall, 1998; Koenig & Gates-Williams, 1995; Long, 2000a, 2001; Marshall et al., 1998; Slomka, 1995). Many of these studies frame the discussion in light of facilitating culturally effective care at the end of life by focusing on ethnic group values and practices. Few studies have explicitly examined the social and political processes by which patients and health care professionals come to make end-of-life decisions, as in the case of medical residents negotiating do-not-resuscitate orders for critically ill patients (Muller, 1992; Muller & Koenig, 1988; Slomka, 1992).

One of the key issues to emerge is the significant role families play in end-of-life decision-making. Often, families are more involved than the individual patient. This fact contrasts with the biomedical expectation of patients in the United States which holds that they are actively engaged in treatment decision-making, are future oriented, and are willing to participate in frank discussions about their medical conditions (Hern et al., 1998; Marshall et al., 1998; Muller & Desmond, 1992). Efforts to implement end-of-life planning, namely, the use of advance directives, are contingent upon such traditionally dominant Western values, for example as derived from Northern European protestants (Gaines, 1992). Yet most other cultural or ethnic groups do not share these values. This divergence is apparent, for example, in the ambivalence Japanese citizens feel toward using hospices, which espouses a philosophy of autonomous decision-making (Long, 2001; Long & Chihara, 2000), and research showing ethnic differences in the use of life-sustaining treatment (Blackhall et al., 1999). Still others have taken bioethical concepts and examined the impact of these on actual patient experiences, such as how the clinical ethics concept of "futility" can influence precisely when death occurs and thus affect experiences of death and dying (Joralemon, 2002).

**Beginning-of-Life Decision-Making.** Relatively little attention has been paid to beginning-of-life decision-making, including whether to pursue treatment or allow newborns to die based on medical and/or parental assessments that their condition is too critical and future quality of life is too grim to warrant continued intervention. Some ethnographic research in the United States has explored the organizational and intra-professional dynamics that figure in decision-making for critically ill babies in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) (Anspach, 1993; Guillemin & Holstrum, 1986; Heimer & Staffen, 1998; Jennings, 1990). Anthropological work has investigated the cultural factors that enter into treatment decisions highlighting how different cultures contextually create different decisions in the NICU (Levin, 1985, 1988, 1989). Decisions are couched within ever-evolving bioethical, political, and societal constructs of social worth, quality of life, rights of the handicapped, parent versus government authority, and the technological imperative (the proclivity of health care professionals to use high technology because of its availability) (Levin, 1988). Different social constituencies play important roles in neonatal decision-making cross-culturally: for instance, the best interest of the child is the core framework in the United States, while the best interests of the extended family is important in Japan, and the best interests of parents and siblings is paramount in Britain (Levin, 1990). One cross-cultural study currently underway compares how the doctor–parent relationship affects decision-making for critically ill neonates in France and the United States (Orfali, 2001, 2002, in press). Notably, mothers in both countries participated little in medical decision-making. In France, this is due to a "paternalistic" context where mothers provide consent at the beginning of the baby's hospital stay, which neonatologists believe helps prevent parents from feeling guilty; in the United States, mothers were asked for consent for most procedures to respect legal claims to parental autonomy; however, the mothers felt they provided assent instead. The difference pertains to cultural values about severe disability: while French neonatologists viewed letting babies with severe disabilities live as the worst case scenario, American neonatologists maintained the opposite view, due to the American practice of erring on the side of life, uncertainty about prognosis, proclivity toward medical interventionism, and concerns about respecting Baby Doe Regulations in light of the best interests of the baby. Others have examined how various ethnic and

cultural groups construct notions of risk and benefit (Burgess, Rodney, Coward, Ratanakul, & Suwonnakote, 1999), and identified how the professional culture of hospitals creates and maintains moral interpretations of technology used for neonates and consequently patient identity (Nelson, 2000).

**Reproductive Ethics.** The development of reproductive technologies has created a host of new reproductive choices and experiences. Anthropological studies explore the social processes and cultural assumptions embedded within U.S. prenatal screening practices (Browner, Preloran, & Cox, 1999; Franklin, 1998; Press, Browner, Tran, Morton, & Le Master, 1998; Rapp, 1999) and genetic counseling (Bosk, 1992), especially the value of professional neutrality. Others reveal the cultural values informing: mothers' resistance to giving birth in a hospital instead of at home (Kaufert & O'Neil, 1993), the use of reproductive technologies (Beeson & Doksum, 2001), and parents' frustrations with insufficient informed consent for what life is like with multiple gestations, often resulting from in vitro fertilization (Price, 1999). Much of this discourse centers on the cultural construct of "risk" as negotiated between parent-to-be and health practitioner.

**Genetics, Identity, and "Race".** At the forefront of anthropological investigation into genetics is the issue of identity deconstruction of kinship, "race," ethnicity, and religion. While anthropologists problematize the concepts of "race" and family, bioethicists generally do not, and thus use these constructs as though they were naturally occurring. One line of research critiques the genetic basis of medical conditions, for example Alzheimer Disease, by pointing out the cultural bases of "risk" and kinship systems, which are essential to understanding hereditary diseases (Gaines, 1998; Koenig & Silverberg, 1999). Anthropologists are collaborating with philosophers and bioethicists to investigate the impact of genetics on cultural understandings of individual and collective identity (Brodwin, 2002). Such research raises politically charged questions about the use and interpretation of genetics data and the authority to obtain and request DNA tests (Brodwin, 2002). Should genetic knowledge trump other claims to group identity such as oral history and cultural practices? For example, should evidence of a genetic link to Semitic peoples among the Lemba of South Africa and Zimbabwe have the authority to confirm their already present claim to Jewish identity (Brodwin, 2002)? Claims to an identity entail certain rights and thus politically, genetic knowledge can impact one's sense of group cohesion and access to resources, and has implications for redressing human injustices (Brodwin, 2002).

Anthropologists are keen to point out that genetics knowledge and research poses the danger of essentialism (Brodwin, 2002; Gordon, 2002; Wolpe, 1996)—the assumption that people who share a culture, nationality, sex, or putative "race" will think and act in similar ways that are purportedly unique to that group (Gordon, 2002). This point is especially relevant to research examining putatively "racial" differences in health, illness, and access to care, for example the "black" sickle cell disease (Wailoo, 1997), the "Jewish" Tay–Sachs disease (Wolpe, 1996), social disparities in access to kidney transplantation (Gordon, 2002), and health disparities research (Lee, Mountain, & Koenig, 2001). Such studies are important for identifying the cultural construction of clinical realities that figure in bioethical debates and for suggesting other criteria for documenting inequities in health so as to avoid essentialism. Others have examined the cultural constructs of "whiteness" within bioethics theory, methods, and practice to challenge the dominance and normativity of white values inscribed therein (Myser, 2002).

## **ETHNO–ETHNIC TRADITIONS**

Another body of work presents various religious, ethnic, or cultural perspectives on bioethics (e.g., Ellerby, McKenzie, McKay, Gariepy, & Kaufert, 2000). This work is less empirical and more theoretical in orientation. While one may find entire books devoted to Jewish bioethics or Muslim bioethics, for instance, these do not necessarily problematize the value systems of a religion or present the religious systems within a broader cultural context. Both *A Cross-Cultural Dialogue on Health Care Ethics* (Coward & Ratanakul, 1999), and *Transcultural Dimensions in Medical Ethics* (Pellegrino, Mazzarella, & Corsi, 1992) provide excellent collections of papers comparing religious (e.g., Jewish, Islam, Buddhist) and cultural (e.g., Thai, Indian) developing world views about health care ethics and health policy issues from a crosscultural perspective. These texts fall within a larger group of handbooks written by non-anthropologists and designed to guide health professionals in providing culturally competent care. Anthropologists are debating the value of these books and the casual use of the word "culture" therein.

## **IDENTITY OF BIOETHICISTS**

The field of bioethics is currently undergoing a moment of self-awareness and self-reflection as it seeks to define itself. Anthropologists and sociologists are particularly interested in examining the people who comprise the field of bioethics because their identity helps us understand the world of ethics; moreover, the field exhibits signs of undergoing the process of professionalization given various developments (Bosk & Frader, 1998; Churchill, 1999; Crigger, 1995, 1998; Haimes, 2002). One indication of professionalization is the increasingly routinized role of clinical ethicists who serve as ethics consultants in hospitals to improve patient care by analyzing ethical dilemmas (Fletcher & Siegler, 1996, p. 125), which is legally mandated by the the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (1992). To better understand who bioethicists are and what they do, anthropologists and sociologists have turned their attention to studying bioethicists in their everyday practice. Ethnographic studies examining the process of clinical ethics consultations and hospital ethics committees in the United States and Canada reveal how consultations involve negotiation of cultural values and ethical constructs depending on the agendas of the participants, and that power relations and social status within the medical hierarchy constrain who may request an ethics consultation as well as efforts to attain consensus among the medical team and patient/family (Flynn, 1992; Kelly, Marshall, Sanders, Raffin, & Koenig, 1997; Marshall, 1996; McBurney, 2001). Yet anthropologists and others should be aware that studying bioethicists may be a difficult process because there is reluctance to self-identify as a bioethicist (see DeVries & Conrad, 1998). This reluctance is due in part to the tentative relationship bioethicists have with the public and critics who view them as "moral police" in health care matters (Satel, 2000; Smith, 2000) as well as a lack of consensus on what training and background are necessary to engage in bioethics or clinical ethics consultation. Moreover, while some anthropologists now work as a hybrid anthropologist– bioethicist, by serving on institutional review boards or ethics committees, and even consulting for Presidential

Advisory Commissions, including the National Bioethics Advisory Commission (Marshall, 2001), to date there are no first-hand accounts of becoming an anthropologist– bioethicist. The confluence of a move toward professionalization and multiple identities of bioethicists make for interesting research into who bioethicists are and what they do.

# **APPLIED ANTHROPOLOGICAL WORK IN BIOETHICS**

Bioethics lends itself well to anthropologically informed applied work. Since legal and bioethics guidelines, notably informed consent, are particularly relevant to clinical practice and research, anthropologists have much to contribute to shaping clinical practice and moral reasoning through analyzing bioethics and health policy. Consequently, research conducted in this vein tends to be oriented less toward understanding bioethics as a cultural process, and more toward using anthropological methods and theory to analyze bioethical issues and resolve moral quandaries both in theory and practice. Consider two examples of how anthropologists have been doing applied work in bioethics.

## **Ethics Consultation and Cultural Diversity**

Anthropologists have been at the forefront in advocating for ethical clinical practice and decision-making that takes into account the cultural values and beliefs of all involved parties. Much of this work describes the kinds of crosscultural ethics cases (predominantly end-of-life issues) that can occur and provide guidance to health care professionals and bioethicists to resolve ethical dilemmas in a culturally respectful manner (Carter & Klugman, 2001; Crawley et al., 2001; Hern et al., 1998; Jecker, Carrese, & Pearlman, 1995; Kaufert & Putsch, 1997; Koenig & Gates-Williams, 1995; Marshall, Thomasma, & Bergsma, 1994; Orr, Marshall, & Osborn, 1995). This process has come to be referred to as "cultural competency." Such attention and guidance is essential because respecting patient and family cultural and moral values and practices can conflict with U.S. law. For example, the U.S. Patient Self-determination Act mandating that hospitals ask all admitting patients whether they have an advance directive can disrespect Navajo values of balance and beauty by forcing them to discuss future health problems (Carrese & Rhodes, 1995). Similarly, health care professionals and bioethicists may wonder what they should tell a patient with terminal cancer when their family members request that no information be disclosed in order to respect traditional Chinese or Latino/a values of respect for the elderly and/or protection from the harm of the truth of the diagnosis and prognosis. Should health care providers disclose this information because they are bound by U.S. legal imperatives requiring informed consent so as to respect an individual's autonomous self-determination? Contributors to this discourse have suggested helpful steps to engage in cross-cultural ethical dialogue as well as a variety of techniques for enhancing cross-cultural communication, including making reference to a hypothetical third party, reframing a clinical problem in terms of benefits instead of poor outcomes, and acknowledging that individuals have the right to relegate decision-making authority to others as an expression of their own autonomy (Hern et al., 1998; Jecker et al., 1995; Orona et al., 1994).

## **International Human Subjects Research Ethics**

Informed consent is the mechanism by which healthcare professionals and researchers protect human selfdetermination in the context of participation in scientific research nationally and internationally. Informed consent requires the provision of information (including procedures, risks, benefits, ability to withdraw), ensuring subject comprehension, and voluntary participation (Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences, 1993; U.S. National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1978). Clinical research conducted internationally faces critical challenges in adhering to guidelines because of cultural factors—including the fact that codes of research ethics derive from Western cultural values of individual autonomy, the prevalence of language barriers and difficulties with using interpreters, different ethnomedical understandings of the body, and power dynamics between investigators and subjects (Barnes, Davis, Moran, Portillo, & Koenig, 1998; Kaufert & O'Neil, 1990; Kaufert & Putsch, 1997; Marshall, 2001). A compelling area of investigation determines whether research concepts translate into other languages or cultural worldviews, and if not, determining how to translate them in such a way as to ethically justify the conduct of research

in those cultures (see Marshall, 2001; Wertz, 1998). For example, comprehension of genetics research is minimized when translating the English consent form to Yoruba, as there are no words for "genotyping" or "gene" (Marshall, 2001). Implementing Western standards of research ethics is compounded when other cultures establish their own codes of research ethics shaped by local, cultural values, as in Egypt (Lane, 1994).

Conducting research in communities, nationally or internationally, raises additional questions about the application of standards set forth in Western research ethics. Traditionally, informed consent is obtained from the individual asked to participate in the research. However, decisional authority does not always rest within the individual, but among extended family, community groups, or with tribal leaders. In the United States, African Americans may be weary of participation in clinical research given a history of medical abuses (Jones, 1993; Reverby, 2000). Thus, anthropologists have illuminated the cultural processes for conducting communitybased research that respect the needs of the local group through mechanisms of community involvement in the study design while simultaneously ensuring respect for individual autonomy (Marshall & Rotimi, 2001). These examples demonstrate the usefulness of employing anthropological approaches to analyze bioethical issues and develop health policy (Gordon, 2001a; Koenig et al., 1998; Siminoff et al., 1995).

# **FUTURE RESEARCH AREAS**

Areas holding promise for future anthropological investigation in bioethics include: justice and public health ethics, and evidence-based medicine.

#### **Justice and Public Health**

The principle of "justice" has been examined in subfields of bioethics and has recently gained broader consideration (Daniels, Kennedy, & Kawachi, 1999). Within the rubric of justice and equity, the issue of socio-demographic disparities in health and access to health care warrants substantial examination. Although public health specialists and epidemiologists are already at the forefront of such investigations, anthropologists could take a stronger role by exploring how cultural competency and social structural factors contribute to disparities both nationally and

#### **References 81**

internationally (e.g., Levin & Schiller, 1998). Specifically, some have argued for extending bioethics attention beyond biomedical matters within Western borders to the global arena (Brodwin, 2001; Das, 1999; Farmer, 1999). For instance, attention to the impact of globalization on policy-making requires that we consider public health issues of managing epidemics and disease given the increased international movement of people, including refugees, immigrants, and travelers (Das, 1999). Some anthropologists and bioethicists are beginning to create a code of ethics for public health (Callahan & Jennings, 2002; Kass, 2001; Levin & Fleischman, 2002). Similarly, international bioethics requires that we consider ethical pluralism, and recognize how local contexts shape the construction of ethical dilemmas; for instance, low-income countries raise moral issues of dealing with scarcity and equity rather than individualism (Brodwin, 2001).

#### **Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM)**

Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is "the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients" (Sackett, Straus, Richardson, Rosenberg, & Haynes, 2000). Within Western countries, EBM has grown in importance in the clinical arena as a mechanism to eliminate the over- or under-use of medical services and thus to maximize efficient care (Sackett et al., 2000). Few anthropologists have begun to explore the cultural values underpinning both the reliance on randomized clinical trials to inform health policy, and health professionals' resistance to implementing such guidelines into clinical practice (Bogdan-Lovis, 2001; Gordon, 2003b). Ethically, EBM raises questions about macro-allocation in the provision of quality care because health insurance plans increasingly depend on EBM guidelines to determine which problems receive coverage (Hope, 1995). Since EBM has become integrated into medical education, future research could investigate shifts in medical knowledge (epistemology) and concomitant changes in clinical practice by, for instance, investigating how physicians negotiate between drawing on population-based data (consistent with the goals of public health) and drawing on the knowledge and preferences of individual patients (consistent with the traditional goals of medicine and ethics) (Tonelli, 1998). Thus, research in EBM is a fertile area that entails the intersection of cultural studies of science, decisionmaking, and health policy.

## **CONCLUSION**

Anthropological research in bioethics has flourished in its first decade. We can see that the relationship between anthropology and bioethics is twofold: some do research "of" bioethics as a cultural domain while others do research "in" bioethics, often collaborating with others outside the field to better address more applied concerns. The field of bioethics as well as its methods, theories, and practices are all rich areas for anthropological inquiry given the diverse range of topics and issues that call for a contextualized exploration of what it means to be a moral human being. The continued development of biotechnological advances, health care challenges, and greater concern for the moral life or suffering experienced by patients, families, and clinicians in a global world context generates new questions about the definition of life and death, self, other, personhood, power dynamics, and right and wrong in the context of illness, health, and healing. To answer these questions and to better inform health policies, anthropologists are increasingly participating in interdisciplinary collaborative bioethics research. Such participation enables anthropological concerns to be given greater voice in ensuring that taken-for-granted cultural assumptions are not accepted prima facie but are instead contextually considered when analyzing theory and practice within the bioethics enterprise.

# **REFERENCES**

- Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments (1996). *The human radiation experiments: Final report of the President's Advisory Committee*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Anspach, R. R. (1993). *Deciding who lives: Fateful choices in the intensive-care nursery*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Barnes, D. M., Davis, A. J., Moran, T., Portillo, C. J., & Koenig, B. A. (1998). Informed consent in a multicultural cancer patient population: Implications for nursing practice. *Nursing Ethics, 5*, 412–423.
- Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (1994). *Principles of biomedical ethics* (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Beecher, H. K. (1966). Consent in clinical experimentation: Myth and reality. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 195*, 34–35.
- Beeson, D., & Doksum, T. (2001). Family values and resistance to genetic testing. In B. Hoffmaster (Ed.), *Bioethics in social context* (pp. 153–179). Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
- Blackhall, L. J., Murphy, S. T., Frank, G., Michel, V., & Azen, S. (1995). Ethnicity and attitudes toward patient autonomy. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 274*, 820–825.