34

# **Reservation Policy in India**

# Madhu Jha

he recent country-wide debate and discussion and the proceedings in the Parliament, with the introduction of Women Reservation Bill, has once again brought the concept of reservation in Indian politics into limelight. The issue of reservation, however, is not an alien concept to the India Society. In fact, it has been in operation prior to our independence.

After so many years of its implementation, the reservation policy has reached a stage where both its supporters and critics are unhappy about it. The former are unhappy because it has not created a noticeable impact on the social and economic conditions of the Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs), majority of whom still continue to be socially isolated, illiterate and poor. Its critics complain that in matters of employment, promotions and admissions, reservations have been stretched too far at the cost of merit and equity giving rise to frustration and alienation among the unreserved category.

The direct outcome of this policy was supposed to be more equitable distribution of economic resources and a worthwhile sharing of power at different levels in the running of the state affairs. But in reality, what has actually happened is that this policy has been exploited by various pressure groups and vested interests within and outside the beneficiary castes and tribes. Extension of reservations to the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) and demand for reservation for the Dalits, Christians, Muslims and women are a few examples of the opening up of the Pandora's box. The constitution of India is the whole crux of the problem from which emanates the reservation policies. The constitution is based on the class philosophy of the bourgeoisie which is not supra historical, eternal and ideal to be accepted by all, and for all the time.<sup> $1$ </sup> The reservation policies became more and more the tools for electoral gain rather than a system for delivering the goods for economic and educational upliftment of the poor.

The policies did provide economic and political opportunities for individual mobility. A section of the untouchables and tribes who were

at the fringe of the Indian societies moved out of their social position and became part of the privileged class of the system. They were incorporated into the exploitative system. Reservation Policies, thus, widened the support base of the system and made it more durable.<sup>2</sup>

Marxists have also provided a philosophical basis to the existing reservation policy. They view the 'reservation policy' as a safety measure which the Government uses in order to sustain its own existence. Instead of undertaking a series of welfare measures required to solve the problems of unemployment, illiteracy and poverty especially prevalent amongst the minority groups in India, the Indian state chose the easier way out. It began giving special assistance in the name of reservation to these communities in order to appease them.

## **The Concept of Reservation**

A caste-ridden Indian society, which never had the opportunity to be organized on the basis of equity even in the formal sense, needs to be structured in a way leading to the goal of social equality. The caste system is not rooted only in economic inequality; hence a decisive social change towards social equality cannot be left to economic functions alone. Justice demands fair distribution of authority, income and status. Marc Galanter characterizes Indian society as a "compartmental society",<sup>3</sup> within which a vast number of groups maintain distinct and diverse styles of life. The need to integrate the ethnic groups, minorities and other socially and culturally localized groups made the constitution makers opt for providing constitutional safeguards to these sections of the society in the form of reservation or protective discrimination. According to Justice K. Subba Rao, in a limited sense, the right to social justice may be defined as the right of the weak, aged, destitute, women and children and other under privileged persons, to be protected by State against the ruthless competition of life. It is a bundle of right: in one sense it is carved out of other's rights and in another sense, it is a preserver of other's rights.<sup>4</sup>

Equality before law is the most precious democratic right of an Indian citizen. However, by merely ensuring quality of opportunity to all citizens in respect of educational and employment opportunity, we may be ignoring the special problems of some backward sections of our society who have suffered from social, cultural, educational and economic deprivations for hundreds of years. It is a well-known dictum that there is equality only among equals. To equate unequal is to perpetuate inequality. When we allow weak and strong to compete on an equal footing, we are loading the dice in favour of the strong. As a matter of fact, unless adventitious aids are given to the under privileged people, it would be impossible to suggest that they have equal opportunities with the more advanced people. It is the real justification for the demand of social justice that the under privileged citizens should be given a preferential treatment.

#### **History of Reservation Policy**

An analysis of the history of 'reservation', as a means of promoting equality of opportunity, will be useful in providing an insight regarding the debate over the intended beneficiaries of the protective discrimination and the conflicting pulls and pressures, both social and political, necessitating preferential policies.

The Scheduled Castes consist of the groups that are considered to be unapproachable and untouchables according to the Hindu social order. The functioning of this unit of Hindu social order was made according to the syntax of purity and pollution, devising a social economic framework with a religious and political sanction behind it. SCs are spatially segregated in the villages and towns and are engaged in occupations with negative prestige and had no role in the power structure of the local community. Hence they demanded to be brought into the mainstream and to be given the power to decide for their upliftment.

The case of tribes have an altogether different history. Tribal insurgencies that intermittently challenged the state, eventually led the colonial rulers to accept them as a distinct social and political category. They were either quarantined in specific areas or were granted some patriarchal protective measure, but there were no reservation or any similar special provisions in the State services or in education. At the provincial level, in addition to castes and tribes, other socially identifiable collectives also came to be recognized. The origin of present day "OBCs" is located here. Two Indian states, Mysore and Travancore Cochin, took the lead along with two British Presidencies-Madras and Bombay-in this regard. Most of these OBCs came under the rubric of "Depressed Classes", a category that originally came into official parlance with the introduction of Montague-Chelmsford reforms in 1919.

The era of emancipation of untouchables began with the advent of the British rule and major spokesman like Dr. Ambedkar and Mahatma Gandhi; but, it would not be entirely correct to conceive that reservation is a British legacy. The advent of the British rule on the other hand, with the consolidation of political regimes and introduction of the Western oriented education system, produced many structural disturbances in the Indian caste structure.

Brahmins being the literate caste responded quickly to the western education and entered in big numbers to governmental services and professions. The emphasis of British rule upon the egalitarian system of justice with new ideas of equality of opportunity impressed the Brahmins. Although later, the distributive aspects of justice appealed to non-literate caste on the ground that these values were totally inconsistent with the gap between different castes. It gave rise to social reform movements aimed at eliminating caste disabilities, abolition of sati, upliftment of depressed classes etc.

It can be noted that Provincial Governments in India were also implementing special programmes for the welfare of the depressed classes. The first such step was taken by Madras Government with the framing of grants in aid code in 1885 to regulate financial and educational institutions, providing special facilities to the students of the depressed classes.<sup>5</sup> Subsequently in 1921, acting on a resolution passed by the State Legislative Council, Madras Government took steps for higher representations of non-Brahmins in Government services.

On the basis of representations received from the depressed communities in 1918, the Maharaja of Mysore had appointed a committee under the Chairmanship of Sir L.C. Miller, the then Chief Justice of Mysore to recommend steps for adequate representations of non-Brahmins in the services of the State. On the basis of the Report of the Committee, the Government of Mysore issued orders in 1921 extending special facilities to the depressed communities with regard to education and recruitment in State Services. Earlier, Census Report of 1910 had divided the Hindus into three categories (1) Hindus, (2) Animists and Tribes and (3) the Depressed Classes or Untouchables. Giving separate importance to untouchables acquired a new political dimension. Later, the Government of India Act 1919 provided for communal representations for Muslims, Sikhs, Anglo Indians, Christians, Depressed classes, etc. Similar communal reservation was provided by the Government of India Act 1935. The purpose of such reservation was to pacify different sections of minorities in India, especially the Muslims and to consolidate their positions.

The Round Table Conference held in 1930 marked the beginning of the claims of the untouchables in the area of the devolution of the political power from the British rulers to the Indian natives. In the Second Round Table Conference in 1931, Gandhi refused to consider both the separate electorates for the depressed classes as well as any form of special representation involving reserved seats. On the other hand, Ambedkar wanted future constitution to give some means such as equal citizenship, fundamental rights for equality before law and possession of equal civil rights and abolition of disabilities arising out of untouchability, representation of depressed classes in the cabinet. After the Third Round Table Conference in 1932, Communal Award was declared under which the depressed classes were given seats that were to be filled up by sections from special constituencies in which they alone could vote. However, Gandhi's displeasure ended in Pact, which provided for reservation of seats in the Provincial and in Central Legislature for the depressed classes through Joint electorates. It also declared about the representation of these classes in the public service. The numbers of seats, reserved for the depressed classes, were increased to equal to their proportion of population.

# **Making of the Constitution**

On 13th December 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru, moved a resolution, which was in the nature of a pledge, a statement of policy and an introduction to the philosophy underlying the Indian constitution. Clause 5 of the resolution stated, 'wherein shall be guaranteed and secured to all the people of India Justice, social, economic and political, equality of status of opportunity and before the law, freedom of thought and expression, belief, faith, worship, vocation, association and action subject to law and public morality', Clause 6 provides, 'Wherein adequate safeguards shall be provided for minorities, tribal areas and depressed and other backward classes'.<sup>6</sup> Notwithstanding the above resolution, a controversy was gaining ground for sometime between Muslim League and Congress party over the question of job reservation for Muslim minorities. Nehru opposed such demand not only for Muslims but for any other minority group. In pursuance of the suggestion of the Cabinet Mission Plan an advisory committee on the Fundamental Rights and Minorities was set up by the Constituent Assembly containing due representation of all minorities in India. In the Advisory Committee, special demands for reservation of posts for their communities were made by Sikhs and Anglo Indians. Ambedkar made a very strong case for Schedule Castes. The Sub-Committee on minorities submitted its report to the Advisory Committee with Sardar Patel as its Chairman. Patel showed opposition to any proposal for reservation in services for any minority community. The Committee recommended that there should be some part of the constitution or the Schedule to keep view the claims of all minorities in making appointments to public services consistently with the maintenance of efficiency in administration.

The constitution straight away accorded specific recognition to both SCs and STs (Arts. 341 and 342) and made corresponding guarantees in the form of reservations in legislatures (Arts. 330 and 332), claims in services and posts (Art. 335) and in other forms (Arts. 17, 338 and 339). Their interests are also to guide the Directive Principles of State policy (Arts. 38 and 46).

The Constituent Assembly accepted community based classification for the purpose of preferential treatment only in case of the Anglo-Indian community (Arts. 331, 333, 336 and 338), but categorically rejected religious minorities as a separate category. However, it guaranteed certain safeguards in relation to freedom and practice of religion (Arts. 25, 26, 27 and 28), protection of their interests (Art. 29) and their educational institutions (Art. 30). The constitution accorded recognition to gender based discrimination in case of 'special provisions' (Art. 1513). Except in case of some Scheduled Areas, the State of Jammu and Kashmir and other cases, the constitution did not explicitly recognize any region-based classification, especially for the purposes of preferential treatment.

Thus, when it comes to preferential treatment of groups of people who otherwise face discrimination in our society, the constitution left many uncovered areas in an explicit fashion except in the case of SCs and STs. However, the makers of the constitution were aware of the need for such facilities to other similar groups, otherwise the promise of equality would make no sense in an inherently iniquitous society. It is in this context that the expression-backward class of citizens or socially and educationally backward classes of citizens-should be understood.

It is to be noted here that the reservation policy included in the constitution in 1950 was based on certain assumptions. Firstly, it is not a permanent way of bringing the deprived sections of the society into the mainstream of Indian society on the basis of equalilty, freedom, dignity, self respect and power. A time limit of 10 years was set in the constitution in 1950, with the hope that the government would implement the policy sincerely. Secondly, it was anticipated that with this policy the power and the creative energies of the tate and the individuals in India will be deployed towards bringing out structural changes such as medical reforms, basic educational reforms, efforts to return to India's cultural and civilizational roots and for building up of a political and economic democracy in tune with the needs of the country. Thirdly, the majority of the members of the Constituent Assembly endorsed the policy as a continuing social duty and as an expression of atonement on their part for the inhuman exploitation of the untouchables.

What emerged ultimately was an unequivocal constitutional policy providing for reservation of appointment and posts for the backward classes including the schedule castes and tribes. One thing is clear from the above analysis that the underlying purpose of compensatory discrimination was to counter balance the disadvantages suffered by certain classes for past wrongs suffered by them because of unequal social structure of the Indian society.

#### **Provision for Reservation Under the Indian Constitution**

It was on 26th November 1949, that the draft constitution of India provided for such preferential treatment in the form of reservation to the SCs and STs and recognized the need of the OBCs to be protected by the state. The Indian constitution clearly says that justice is not only political but economic and social as well. Equality is not only of opportunity but also of status.

The constitution specifically bars the State from discriminating against any citizen of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex and place of birth or any of them. Article 29(2) also guarantees protection to educational institutions on grounds of religion, race, caste and language or any of them. The first amendment of the constitution incorporating clause (4) to Article 15, empowers the State to make special provisions for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward class of citizens or for the SCs and STs. Article 16(4) incorporated in the constitution shall not prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation who in the opinion of State are not adequately represented is the services under the state. The law of protective discrimination also finds its place in Article 29(2) which says that nothing is this Article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward class of citizens or for SCs and STs. Article 46 also contains similar provision.

#### **Reservation for Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes**

The constitution provides for 15 per cent reservation of seats for the SCs and 7½ per cent for STs in services and legislatures. This has been adopted for ensuring their participation in proportion to their population in the country. Articles 16(4) and 335 of the constitution ensure their participation in administration. Articles 330, 332 and 334 of the constitution provide for reservation of seats in Parliament and State Legislatures for the SCs and STs in proportion to the percentage of their population in their respective States and Union Territories. 'Schedule Castes' is an official euphemism for untouchables. Untouchablity, as the two faced monster of Hindu social institution, is a social stigma making them economically poor, educationally backward and culturally low. It is the caste system coupled with the pernicious system of untouchablity that confounded the class conflict by making social mobility next to impossible.

The constitution abolished untouchability and made the practice of untouchablity in any form forbidden on 29th November 1948. The social realities that existed forced the founding fathers of the constitution to give recognition to the untouchable communities as the SCs. This transition from the untouchable communities to the recognition of the SCs under the schedules has come to stay because of the constitutional abolition of untouchability. The term 'SC' is defined under Article 366 (24) read with Article 341 of the constitution<sup>7</sup> "366 (24) 'SCs' means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under Article 341 to be SCs for the purposes of this constitution." The provision that has been made under Article 341 runs as the President, (may with respect to any State or Union Territory) and where it is a State after consultation with the Governor, thereof, by a Public notification, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall, for the purposes of this constitution, be deemed to be SCs in relation to that State (or Union Territory, as the case may *be*)*.* The most important point to be noted in connection with the meaning of the terms SCs is that the list of SCs has the legislative status. In exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (1) of the Article 341 of the constitution, the President issued the constitution (SCs) Order in 1950 for the purpose of reservation to the SCs. The statistical figures of the SCs listed in the Schedule in 1935, 1950, 1956, 1976 establishes beyond doubt that the number of SCs is not fixed but changeable.<sup>8</sup>

The preferential treatment is meant to bring about social transformation from uplifting the lowest of the low. When the purpose of establishing the social democracy is achieved and equality is established and inequality is totally eliminated, then not only the disabilities suffered by the SCs would hopefully disappear but even the utility and the purpose of the schedule listing the SCs would disappear. SCs have indeed gained more under political influence (though one is not sure about their power) in State and Centre-level politics. The massive occupational mobility in general, taking place since independence, has had some significant bearing upon the status of SCs as well.

STs, on the other hand, have a different meaning. The term tribe generally means an ethnic group geographically isolated or semi isolated, identified with one particular territory and having distinct social, economic and cultural traditions and practices, kinship ties, common territory, one language, joint ownership, one political organization which have all been referred to as the main characteristics of a tribe. Under these, certain tribes have been specified as the STs and only they have been given special treatment or facilities envisaged under the constitution.

The attitude of the British towards the tribes initially was paternalistic and protective but the compulsion of situation forced them to send their engineers and contractors and civil and military officials of all ranks, the traders and shopkeepers into all these inaccessible regions of the interior frontiers. Thus a money economy was introduced among the tribal communities. Along with this land hunger of the non-British vested interests worried the tribes. This affected their agriculture, their hunting and fishing rights.

The friction between tribes and non-tribes was limited to a restricted scale due to British policy of exclusion of tribal areas. The isolation of tribes from the main currents of Indian life helped them in preserving their traditions but at the same time it hindered the growth of competence in them to face growing competition in a wider society. The rapidly increasing interference and exploitation resulted in clashes and bloody uprising like Santhal rebellion (1855), Birsa movement (1895), Kandh rising (1837-56) etc.<sup>9</sup> This led to reforms in the administration of the tribal areas by the British. Some of the areas were made non-regulatory areas and were exempted from the operation of general law.

The constitution carried forward this dual treatment of tribal areas and tribal people in a set of provisions for their protection and advancement, for more elaborate than the provisions, for the other categories of backward classes. Article 16(4) and 335 of the constitution ensures their participation in administration. As per Article 16(4), the State shall make reservation for appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which is not adequately represented in the services under the State. Article 335 provides that the claims of SCs and STs shall be taken into consideration consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration in the making of appointments to services and posts. Articles 330, 332 and 334 of the constitution provides for reservation of seats in Parliament and State Legislatures for the SCs and STs, in proportion to the percentage of their population in their respective States and Union Territories.

Even after seven decades of independence, it is sad to note that the representation of SCs and ST s in various departments and public sector enterprises in Government of India has not reached the prescribed level of reservation.<sup>10</sup> Their representation has never gone beyond 7 per cent. National Commission for SCs and STs has been recommending in its various reports that the Government need to make all special efforts to fill up this short fall by taking such steps as special training and coaching for SCs and STs, passing of Central Legislation to enforce reservation in Government services, public sector enterprises, banks, etc.

There is also the problem of an elite class that has emerged in the midst of SCs and STs whose social base and numerical strength is larger than ever before. This is putting pressure for conformity to integrative principles of new Indian society.

#### **Reservation for the OBCs**

On 7th August 1990, the National Front Government announced its decision of reserving 27 per cent of posts for other backward classes under the Central Government and public undertakings. With this declaration the reservation policy that was hither to confined to SCs and STs got extended to OBCs as well.

The constitution is the solicitor about the welfare of the backward classes of the society while expertly providing for the reservations of posts in the country's public administration for sections of such classes namely, the SCs and the Sts. It makes a general mention of similar promotional measure for what it calls "OBCs".<sup>11</sup>

The constitution provided for the recognition of socially and educationally backward classes. Article 340 provided for the appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of the backward classes. On receipt of the report of the Commission thus appointed, the President may, by order specify OBCs under Article 338(3) of the constitution. Preferential treatment to the OBCs is to be covered under an egalitarian framework. While on one hand equality before law and prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth, equality of opportunity in matters of public employment and equality in cultural and educational rights are guaranteed as Fundamental Rights under article 14, 15 (1 and 2), 29(2) respectively, on the other hand, Article 46 included in the Directive Principles of State Policy enjoins upon the State to 'promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people'.

The apparent contradiction between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of the State Policy came out shortly after the commencement of the constitution through a pair of Supreme Court decisions in April 1951. In the case of State of Madras *vis* Chapakraman Dorajian, the Supreme Court struck down reservation in educational institutions in Madras and by implications barred all preferential treatment outside the areas of government employment for all groups other than the SCs and STs. These decisions caused a political furor in South India and occasioned the prompt addition of clause 4 to Article 15 of the constitution. It reads: "Nothing in this Article or in clause (2) of Article 29 shall prevent the State from making special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the SCs and STs."

Before going into the question of determination of the backward classes, it is necessary to appraise oneself about the historical usage of the term.

The term "Backward" is contextual. In one sense, it implies the presence of a forward or advanced counter part of the same entity. In another sense, in social realm, it may mean the presence of disadvantaged and advantaged sections in mutual interaction. However, in whatever sense the term 'backward' is used, it implies presence of inequality. Marc Galanter has traced the use of the term 'backward class' since the last part of the 19th Century.<sup>12</sup> According to him, the term was also meant as illiterate or indigent classes entitled to allowances for study in elementary schools. In 1928, the Hartog Committee defined "Backward Classes" in their glossary as 'castes or classes which are educationally backward'. They include the depressed classes, aboriginal hill tribes and criminal tribes. In 1930, the State Committee in Bombay recommended that the term 'depressed classes' should be used in the sense of untouchables. They also proposed that the wider groups should be called 'backward classes' which should be sub-divided into 'Depressed Classes (Untouchables), Aboriginals and the hill tribes, and other backward classes (including wandering tribes)'. The committee noted that the groups then currently called backward classes should be renamed 'intermediate classes'.<sup>13</sup> Simon commission refers to intermediate castes but makes no mention of backward classes. The objective resolution of Constituent Assembly, moved by Jawaharlal Nehru on December 1946, called for adequate safeguards to be made for OBCs along with general other categories of population.

There are many judicial pronouncements, which have interpreted the use of the term 'class' in a general sense with reference to the socially and educationally backward classes. The most important judgement which has been influencing judicial thinking is that between Balaji vs. State of Mysore, wherein the constitution held that caste, poverty, occupations, place of habitation were some relevant factors for determining backwardness.

The President of India, under Article 341 of the constitution is empowered to specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes, which shall be deemed to be scheduled castes by notification. Under Article 342, he may, by public notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within it which shall be, deemed to be STs. There is no such parallel article of the constitution for the backward classes. In fact no uniform nomenclature has been used in the constitution to devote backward classes, e.g., Article 15, (4) and 340 use the expression 'socially and economically backward classes'. Article 16(4) uses 'backward classes' whereas in Article 46, the terms used is 'weaker sections of the people'. As such it is one of the difficult problems to define the backward classes for the purpose of the constitution.

It is the state responsibility to take effective steps for the upliftment of backward classes of citizens socially, educationally and economically. Backwardness may be measured in terms of low level of income, the extent of illiteracy and the low standard of life demonstrated by living conditions.

Many communities desire to be characterized as backward because of the facilities of admissions and services which are available to such classes and thus they bring all their political influence to bear upon the Government for being recognized as backward. The danger is that the State may abuse its power and permit such reservation of seats to the socially and educationally backward classes, which may not be justified.

#### **Central Backward Classes Commissions**

The First Backward Classes Commission: On 29th January 1953, the President appointed the 1st Backward Classes Commission, by virtue of the power entrusted to him under Article 310 of the constitution, under the chairmanship of Kaka Saheb Kalelkar. The Commission was entrusted the task of determining the criteria for listing OBCs, investigating their conditions and recommending measures for their upliftment.

Kalelkar Commission prepared a list of 2399 backward castes or communities from the entire country and made use of criteria such as inadequate or no representation in joint service and commerce, lack of educational advancement, low social position in society, etc. The Commission recommended reservation of 70 per cent of seats in all technical and professional institutions for qualified students in all government services and local bodies for OBCs.

However, the report disclosed a considerable divergence of opinion among its members and the Commission failed to specify any easily discernible objective test to define 'backwardness'. Moreover, it seemed that caste was the chief basis of enumeration and preparation of the list of backward classes. The Central Government could not accept such criterion.

The Second Backward Classes Commission: On 20th December 1978, then Prime Minister, Morarji Desai announced in the Lok Sabha that under provision of Article 340 of the constitution, the Government has set up a commission to probe the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes with B.P. Mandal as Chairman. The Commission made use of 11 indicators under the three headings; social, economic and educational, to identify the degree of backwardness and granted them certain weightings in order to determine the OBCs.<sup>14</sup>The Commission submitted its report on 31st December 1980, and identified 3,743 OBCs. The failure of the Commission to clearly formulate the criteria for identification of Socially and Educationally Backward Classes (SEBC) has led to absurdities. For instance, one of the most literate upper caste, which is also highly represented in services and politics, the Bengali Kayasths, have been listed as SEBC in Assam, the Patnaik (surname mostly used by high caste Oriyas) are SEBC in Bihar. The Rajput in Karnataka has been similarly listed. The Bengalis as a whole are listed as SEBC in Madhya Pradesh*.* One can find many such entries in the Mandal Commission as undeserving. They would be able to take advantage of the privileges conferred by the Government as per the recommendations of the Commission and further enhance their position in the rural power structure.<sup>15</sup>

The Report of the Mandal Commission held that since the SCs and STs which constituted 22.5 per cent of the country's population had been given 22.5 per cent reservation in Government and public sector jobs, the OBCs who constituted 52.1 per cent of the population should be given reservation accordingly. Keeping in view the Supreme Court's judgment in Balaji *vis* State of Mysore and Devadasan *vis* Government of India that reservation of more than 50 per cent of the vacancies would be volatile of Article IS (1) of the constitution and also in view of the fact that SCs and STs were already having reservation of 22.5 per cent, Mandal Commission recommended 27 per cent of reservation for the SEBC listed by them. Reservation should apply to promotions and unfilled reserved quota should be carried forward for 3 years before being unreserved. After the formal presentation of the report of the Mandal Commission in the Parliament in 1982, the Report was shelved down by the Government led by Mrs. Indira Gandhi.

It was the National Front Government led by V.P. Singh, which chose to make the report public and to extend reservation benefit to the OBCs. In the year 1990, V.P. Singh announced in the Parliament the decision represented the first phase of the implementation of the report of the Mandal Commission.<sup>16</sup>

The report caught national attention and it was discussed widely and autopsied in the national press. The announcement triggered massive and widespread protest. There was large-scale violence in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab and Karnataka. About 100 persons were killed in police firing. Government property including railway, postal and telephone installations, State transport, State buses suffered extensive damage. The most tragic aspect of the agitation was the wave of attempts at suicides, mostly by students.

The Prime Minister and his close ministerial colleagues sought to justify the Government's decision as having meant to ensure social justice to the SEBCs and hence there would be no question of withdrawing his decision. It is perhaps not without significance that V.P. Singh decided to begin implementing the Mandal Commission's recommendations by reserving 27 per cent of the Central Government and Central public sector jobs for the OBCs; he had not initiate any developmental steps like literacy drives, special educational measures, assistance to become entrepreneurs, professionals, etc, prescribed to overcome the social, educational and other backwardness of the OBCs., nor did he begin the measures like land reform. People hence could not be blamed if they felt that the then Prime Minister's intention was to win over the support of the more powerful, advanced and rich among the OBCs. This intention was further suggested by his refusal to modify the proposed 27 per cent reservation by introducing an economic criterion or implement the Karpoori Thakur formulae on reservation which set apart a percentage of the jobs reserved for OBCs exclusively for weaker castes amongst them.<sup>17</sup>

In an article in the *Indian Express,* Neerja Chaudhaury mentioned three factors which according to her influenced the timing of V.P. Singh's decision on 27 per cent reservation.<sup>18</sup> The first was the rally staged in Delhi on 9th August 1990 by Devi Lal, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture, to prove his strength in the wake of his removal from the Union Cabinet, on 1st August. By announcing his decision, V.P. Singh wanted to win away the backward castes from Devi Lal and delink them from the Jats who constituted the power base of Devi Lal. The second factor was the Janata Dal's answer to the Vishwa Hindu Parishad's and Bhartiya Janata Party's movement for building a Ram temple at the site of what they considered to be the birth place of Ram after relocating the Babri Mosque that had been constructed there. The third factor was V.P Singh's desire to convey his readiness to go for a midterm poll and thereby take on his adversaries in the party. Thus it becomes clear that the decision to extend reservation for the OBCs was a politically motivated one and there were many criticisms labelled against it.

L.K. Naik, one of the members of the Mandal Commission has stressed on the need to identify the better off among the backward classes to prevent them from covering all the benefits of reservation in a note of dissent to the Mandal Commission. It also needs to be pointed out that the Commission made use of archaic methods of taking population figures as the guidelines to determine the quantum of reservation. Basically the Commission used the cover of the 1931 census to ignore the upward mobility that had taken place in many cases from 1931-1980.<sup>19</sup>

While dealing with reservation in the Public services, the constitution of India wants the claims of the target sections of society to be taken into consideration consistently with the maintenance of efficiency in administration. Of late, the efficiency of Public administration is getting ignored and by passed in the quest for vote. The immediate future is likely to see a further extension of reservation facilities to new groups. This trend is bound to lead to a backlash of the Gujarat style. When the Congress Chief Minister, Madhav Singh Solanki announced in early January 1985, that the reserved quota for the backward castes in universities and government employment in Gujarat would be raised from 10 to 20 per cent, it unleashed large scale riots in the State by the anti reservationist groups.<sup>20</sup>

The country is still fumbling with the implementation of 27.5 per cent reservations for SCs and STs. The hefty addition of 27 per cent reservation for OBCs is sure to place an enormous strain on the social system, unless lessons are learnt from the past and it is made sure that the maximum benefits are not covered by the more powerful castes. It is important to evolve a package that would help to identify the real needy among the backward classes. Everyone should feel justified in asking for a meaningful implementation which is not just symbolical but actually assists the impoverished sections of the OBCs and thereby uphold the sanctity of a "welfare oriented constitution".

#### **Issue of Reservation for Women in the Legislature**

It has now been over two decades of tremendous excitements and disappointment for the women rights activists. Starting with the President's address to the 11th Lok Sabha on 24th May 1996, where the promise to give 33.3 per cent reservation for women in the National Legislature was included, the women in India have been looking keenly forward for the all important legislation that will guarantee them seats at the political decision making levels of National Parliament and State Legislatures. It seems that the last half of the century was a painful period during which our educated, urban women were reinventing the wheel before learning the lessons the Dalits could have taught them; that despite India becoming a democracy, a feudal and false mythology of inferiority grounded on gender and in caste was used, time and again, to keep women away from the political mainstream. So the latest demand for 33 per cent reservation for women is a natural organic development of the events over the last 50 years.

It does not require much research or data to establish that, judged by any major economic or social or other relevant indicator, women as a category are not only literally the 'weaker' sex but clearly a disempowered section. Comprising approximately half of the population, the female-male sex ratio has steadily improved to 940 females for 1000 males, as per 2011 census. Despite great stride in reduction of literacy since independence, female illiteracy continues to outstrip male illiteracy.<sup>21</sup> The last 52 years of competitive politics under the existing system have failed to give more than a token representation to women in the highest political decision making. Since decisions at the policy making level effect women lives and have a significant impact on them, it is important that more women occupy decision making positions. Right now, women's representation in the last 16 Lok Sabhas stands at 12.2 per cent.

India is the largest democracy of the world. Democracy as we know is not just about mainstream politics. It is also about the values that guide our personal, financial and social existence. Various notions connected to democracy are rights, power and participation. Women constitute half the population of the country and therefore the issue of political empowerment of women needs re-interpretations, reanalysis and redefinition. Political empowerment simply means the right to be in the decision making process and this has eluded women in India, making gender equality a dream in our country. Professor Dahl has truly pointed out that equality and popular consent are perhaps the most important social values underlying pluralist democracy.<sup>22</sup>

Political equality is one of the defining characteristics of democracy. We simply cannot talk of a democratic system without qualification if any significant part of the adult citizenry is deprived of full political rights, at best we can speak of a 'limited' democracy in such cases. The basic argument for political equality is of course that any social group with limited political rights or none is always at a serious disadvantage-not only in political matters but also in economic, social and cultural affairs. For lacking political power, it will be in no position to defend its interests against politically more powerful groups. Access to power to democracy in India means mainly taking part in the electoral processes. In any modern political system, election occupies the most central place. According to Prof. Susheela Kaushik, the nature, periodicity and rate of the participation of people in the elections can be reviewed as the touchstone for the representative character of the democracy itself indicates the health and strength of democracy.<sup>23</sup>

Trend of women's representation in the last 64 years:

| Election<br>Year | Total No.<br>of Seats | Seats Contested<br>by Women | Seats won<br>by Women | Percentage of<br>Women Members |
|------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------|
| 1952             | 499                   | 51                          | 22                    | 4.40                           |
| 1957             | 500                   | 70                          | 27                    | 5.40                           |
| 1962             | 503                   | 68                          | 34                    | 6.70                           |
| 1967             | 523                   | 66                          | 31                    | 5.90                           |
| 1971             | 521                   | 86                          | 22                    | 4.20                           |
| 1977             | 544                   | 70                          | 19                    | 3.40                           |
| 1980             | 544                   | 142                         | 28                    | 5.14                           |
| 1984             | 544                   | 159                         | 44                    | 8.10                           |
| 1989             | 517                   | 189                         | 27                    | 5.30                           |
| 1991             | 544                   | 325                         | 39                    | 7.16                           |
| 1996             | 544                   | 491                         | 39                    | 7.18                           |
| 1998             | 543                   | 274                         | 43                    | 7.9                            |
| 1999             | 543                   | 274                         | 48                    | 8.8                            |
| 2004             | 543                   | 355                         | 45                    | 8.35                           |
| 2009             | 543                   | 556                         | 59                    | 10.87                          |
| 2014             | 543                   | 668                         | 61                    | 12.15                          |

Participation in the Lok Sabha Elections:<sup>24</sup>

Women's presence in the top decision making committees.<sup>25</sup>

|              |                     | No. of | Total  | Percentage |
|--------------|---------------------|--------|--------|------------|
| Party        | Committee           | Women  | Member | of Women   |
| CPI (M)      | Politburo           | 0      | 15     | 0          |
|              | Central Committee   | 5      | 70     | 7          |
| CPI          | Secretariat         | 0      | 9      | 0          |
|              | National Executive  | 3      | 31     | 10         |
|              | National Council    | 67     | 125    | 5          |
| Janata Dal   | Political Affairs   | 0      | 15     | 0          |
|              | Parliamentary Board | 0      | 15     | 0          |
|              | National Executive  | 11     | 75     | 15         |
| United Front | Steering Committee  | 0      | 15–17  | 0          |
| B.S.P.       | Parliamentary Board | 10     | 9      | 11         |
|              | Election Committee  | 2      | 17     | 12         |
| Congress     | Working Committee   | 2      | 19     | 11         |

A study of the above tables makes it immediately apparent that political parties have generally given less importance to women issues in terms of ideology, either as priority in their electoral manifesto or in terms of the number and importance of the position that women occupies in individual political parties. Women are not even seen as a vote bank to be approached and canvassed, as it is expected that once the men are mobilized women will merely endorse their choice of party and candidate. Such kind of expectations emanate due to a long historical background of women's subdued role in the society.<sup>26</sup>

#### **Debate on Reservation for Women in India**

From the beginning, the women's movement was divided on the issue of reservation of seats for women.<sup>27</sup> One wing of the movement labeled 'moderate' was more willing to accept certain features of the proposals of the colonial Government such as reservation, nomination, co-option and wifehood qualification for women voters. The other wing represented a difference in approach to women's question. The Women's Indian Association (WIA), All India Women's Conference (AIWC) and National Council for Women in India (NCWI) were steadfast in their demand for fundamental rights and universal adult franchise.

In 1931, Jawaharlal Nehru, succeeded in setting the concepts of 'equal obligations and equal rights', into the Fundamental Rights Resolution of the Karachi Congress. In 1939, a women's sub-committee was appointed under the National Planning Committee of the All India Congress Committee to examine the role of Indian women and to make recommendations on their behalf. The members of the sub-committee endorsed the 1931 Fundamental Rights Resolution made at the Karachi Session of the Congress and rejected reservation of seats for women.

In independent India, the debate on reservation was kicked off by the Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in India (CSWI) in 1974. The Report brought to the notice that despite being given equal rights under the constitution, and the right to vote under a system of universal adult franchise, the number of women in State and National legislatures had been dwindling in the past 50 years. The Report recorded arguments in favour of reservation of seats for women voiced by experts in the field and representatives of women in groups. To do justice to women who constitute practically half the population, reservation of seats appeared to be the only solution. Both the government and political parties viewed the problems of women from the view of social welfare.

However, the declaration of the year 1975 by United Nations as International Women's Year and the next ten years—1976 to 1985 as the International Women's decade shifted the emphasis from women's welfare to women's development and later on to women's empowerment, women's participation at the grassroots level and 33 per cent reservation for them at that level.

Democracy and development, in order to be successful, needs maximum participation of people at the ground level. Panchayati Raj is an important political innovation and a vital conduct in independent India for popular participation and democratic development. Panchayati Raj Institutions, the grassroots unit of self-government have been proclaimed as the vehicle of socio economic transformation in India. Empowerment of women for effective participation at various levels in Panchayati Raj Institutions has been discussed and debated in different forms particularly from 1957 onwards. First concrete measure to give constitutional sanction to it was taken by late Rajiv Gandhi's Government by introducing the 64th Amendment Bill. The Bill aimed to reform the Panchayati Raj Institution by bringing changes in their power structure and functions. The bill was defeated by a small margin in the Rajya Sabha. However, Narsimha Rao's Government became successful in enacting the constitution 73rd and 74th Amendment Acts in December 1992, which included various provisions for strengthening Panchayats at all levels. The Act is extremely important for political empowerment of women. Not less than 1/3rd of the total membership of Panchayati Raj bodies has been reserved for women. These reserve seats would be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat. The chief idea behind such a move was to enable more women to enter the political stream and create a 'critical mass' of women leaders.

Reservation under Panchayati Raj for rural women is in a state of flux at present and the women are not adequately empowered to play an effective role because of social, economic and political factors.<sup>28</sup> So far elections for Panchayats have been held in most of the states like Rajasthan, Haryana, Orissa, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh etc. More than one million women have become part of the political set up. Study undertaken on elected representatives of 67 Panchayats at Mhow Block of Indore District during training programmes revealed that women out numbered men in attendance, expression and their concern for the deprived and depressed.<sup>29</sup> Similar findings have been made in states like Haryana and Maharashtra. However, the result of reservation policy at the Panchayati Raj level has yet to be consolidated and studied. Whether it has revitalized the democratic functioning of these bodies or not, only time will tell. What we can say, is that it has surely helped them enter into the decision making process and provided opportunity for deciding priorities pertaining to the real needs of the community.

Women Reservation Bill: The next logical step, after the 73rd and 74th Amendment Bills, was naturally its extension to the State Assemblies and the Parliament. The constitution Amendment Bill, 1996 as it is called, provided not less than *1/3rd* seats to be reserved for women in the Lok Sabha and Legislative Assemblies.<sup>30</sup> The proposed Bill cannot be said to trench upon any of those fundamental principles of India's policy: Article 14 of the Indian constitution which forbids discrimination clearly permits classification into different groups and classes as long as the classification is reasonable. Article 15(1) categorically prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion, sex, caste, birth, etc., but Article 15(3) declares that "Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from making any special provision for women and children". Article 16 further focuses on the specific subject of equality in public and state employment. The other relevant constitutional provisions are those in part IX and part IXA of our constitution which contains Articles 143A to 243G which deals with the structure and content of our instruments and institutions of local self-government like Panchayats and Municipalities, which were inserted by 73rd constitutional Amendment of 1992.

The Bill in the midst of Controversy: Ever since its inception in September 1996, the Women Reservation Bill has gone through several controversies. This is in spite of the fact that all the major national parties had unambiguously supported *1/3rd* reservations for women in Parliament and State Assemblies in their election manifestoes during the 1996 general elections. The debate that followed in the Parliament on the day the Bill was introduced (13th September 1996) exposed certain doubts about the "unanimity in the House about the Bill."<sup>31</sup> The Bill had to be deferred for the time being and got referred to a Joint Select Committee of Parliament. The main argument for holding the Bill was that it should ensure representation for other Backward Class women otherwise women from the upper caste sections will cover the seats.

The Joint Select Committee although accepted few amendments in the Bill like instead of not less 1/3rd the amendment was as near to 1/3rd, but it could not accept the provision of reservation for women belonging to the OBCs. This amendment had been tabled by Nitish Kumar, Ram Kripal Yadav and P.N. Shivam. The Bill could not be introduced in the Winter session of the parliament again due to the anti-Bill sentiments. On 13th July 1998, when the Bill was to be introduced, the opponents of the contentious Women Reservation Bill physically prevented the Law Minister from introducing it in the Lok Sabha.<sup>32</sup> The Bill was shuttled on the plea that it did not guarantee for Muslims and OBC women. The controversial Bill was again introduced on 1st December 1998 amidst several adjournments, complete pandemonium and loud protests by those opposing the Bill<sup>33</sup> such as Rastriya Loktantrik Morcha and BSP. Janta Dal had decided to move an amendment seeking reservations for minorities SCs and STs in the Reservation Bill. Even in December 1999, the Bill got shelved down due to lack of consensus among the various political parties.

If we take an objective look at the issue of women reservation, we can definitely say that it is unfortunate that Indian women, who had participated so actively during our freedom struggle, have now to fight for their own freedom, freedom from patriarchy. Reservation though may be considered by few to be a retrograde step from equality conferred by the constitution, but then it has been used as the last straw, a means that would help them to enter public spheres. 73rd and 74th Amendments did not raise any controversy. The resentment over the Bill only conforms to the facts that men wish to preserve their position of power and do not wish to share them with the other half of the population. It has to be noted that women are not a minority group. Where the marginalization of certain castes and classes have been reorganized, efforts to redress these sections of women has completely been ignored. Women are not a community, they are a category, and hence the rationale for their demand of reservations should be seen from a different perspective. Of course, claims of creating a Zenana Dabba,<sup>34</sup> coterie of elitist women, coming up as proxy candidates cannot be discounted altogether. Nevertheless, reservation in Legislature for women shall help in building up a 'critical mass' so that a change in the nature of policy formulations can be expected. Democracies have to be made real after all.

To conclude, it needs to be noted that, when judged by reservation policy's own objectives and the values and goals that underlie it, its performance on all counts is much below any reasonable expectation. Even after half a century of preferential treatment, only negligible number of the SC, ST and OBC officers can be found in class I positions of the Government services. For of all the class I officers on the rolls of the central government in 1979, only 5.68 per cent belonged to the SCs and STs taken together and were 4.69 per cent came from the OBC category.<sup>35</sup> Provision of reservations is not enough. For reservations to improve the life chances of the socially disadvantaged significantly, other components of the policy will have to show a much higher operational efficiency. The low rate of utilization, for instance, is indicative of the poor performance of the entire policy for utilization is essentially a function, not of availability of benefits but to the capacity of the potential beneficiaries to receive the benefits.<sup>36</sup>

It should be remembered that reservations are part of a much larger policy package. It comprises a series of legislations, ameliorative programmes and preferential schemes designed to benefit the weaker sections of the society. Hence there is no need of rejecting preferential politics for pragmatic and utilitarian considerations. Reservations, along with other measures of protection and upliftment of the weaker sections of society, should be viewed as an instrument of a larger social policy of the State addressed to a long-term goal of creating a civil society through extending effective citizenship rights to the vast sections of the population, who have been historically deprived and marginalized.

## **Notes and References**

- 1. Himanshu Roy, "Reservation-The Safety Valve", *Frontier,* Vol. 25, N. 21, January 1993, p. 12.
- 2. *Ibid.*
- 3. Marc Galanter, *Competing Equalities,* Delhi: Oxford India Paper Back, 1984, p. 7
- 4. Government of India, *Report of the Second Backward Classes Commission* 1980, Vol. II, p. 2.