# **Constant Proportion Portfolio Insurance**

Portfolio insurance is a dynamic management technique that aims at giving the investor the ability to limit the downside risk while allowing some participation in the upside market. Option-based portfolio insurance combines a position in the risky asset with a put option on the asset to achieve this goal. In many cases, options on a portfolio may not be available. *Constant proportion portfolio insurance* (CPPI) is an alternative to that approach. CPPI was first introduced by Perold [4] for fixed-income instruments and by Black and Jones [2] for equity instruments.

CPPI utilizes a rule-based strategy to allocate assets dynamically over time. It involves maintaining a dynamic mix of a "riskless" asset (usually treasury bills or liquid money market instruments) and the risky asset, usually a market index. In the case of having more than one risky asset, an index is formed, which would be treated as a single risky asset. The weights in the index do not change during the life of the trade.

The strategy is based on the notion of *cushion*, which is the difference between the current portfolio value and the guaranteed level, called bond floor. Obviously, the initial floor  $F_0$  is less than the initial portfolio value  $V_0$ . Define  $C_t$  to be *t*-time value of the cushion, that is

$$C_t = V_t - F_t \tag{1}$$

The final payoff at maturity is the maximum of these two quantities: (i) the value of the portfolio at maturity and (ii) the guaranteed level. In a nutshell, CPPI is a path-dependent, self-financing capital guarantee structured product that has final payoff linked to the performance of a pool of assets.

Throughout the existence of the contract, an amount of wealth is invested into the risky asset. This amount called exposure is proportional to the cushion and is calculated by multiplying the cushion by a predetermined *multiple*.

$$e_t = mC_t \tag{2}$$

The remainder of wealth is allocated into the riskless asset. Trivially, the higher the multiple, the more the holder will participate in rising markets and the faster the portfolio value approaches the bond floor in downturn markets.

Both the bond floor and multiple are specified in the contract and indicate the investor appetite for risk. Assuming Black-Scholes framework for risky asset  $S_t$ 

$$dS_t = \mu S_t dt + \sigma S_t dW_t \tag{3}$$

and assuming floor evolves as follows:

$$dF_t = rF_t dt \tag{4}$$

the value of the portfolio at time  $t$ , as shown in [5] and  $[3]$ , is

$$V_t(S_t, m) = F_0 \exp(rt) + \alpha_t S_t^m \tag{5}$$

where  $\alpha_t = \frac{C_0}{S_0^m} \exp(\beta t)$  and  $\beta$  is given by

$$\beta = r - m\left(r - \frac{1}{2}\sigma^2\right) - m^2 \frac{\sigma^2}{2} \tag{6}$$

In periods of negative performance, a specified amount of the risky asset, according to a predetermined asset allocation formula, is liquidated and used to purchase riskless assets. On the other hand, when market goes up, a specified amount of riskless assets, according to the formula, is liquidated and proceeds are used to purchase the risky asset. The provider undertakes the risk of managing of the pool of assets (both risk-free and risky assets).

For risk managing of the pool in CPPI, the provider receives an annual fee. The fee is specified in the contract in one of the following ways: (i) as a fixed percentage of the initial notional per annum, (ii) as a fixed percentage of the value of the portfolio per annum (path dependent), and (iii) as a fixed percentage of the value of the equity held in the pool per annum (path dependent). The first two are more common than the third one.

The provider also receives the potential value of dividends on the equity. This amount is also path dependent.

If there is more than one risky asset in the pool, they would be treated like a basket in a basket option, so that in the event of rebalancing the collection of risky assets is treated like a single underlying.

#### **Rebalancing Procedure**

The asset allocation formula is a part of the contract. The terms in the formula are negotiated between the provider and the counterparty before entering into the transaction.

A feature is built into the allocation formula in order to avoid constant rebalancing. Rebalancing occurs where the difference between theoretical equity exposure from the formula and the actual equity allocation is greater than a predefined number of percentage points specified in the contract.

In the case that it is triggered, the provider sells/purchases an amount of equity and purchases/sells risk-free assets to make the actual ratio equal to the number generated by the formula. The timetable for rebalancing is up to the investor, with monthly or quarterly rebalancing being often cited.

## **Gap Risk**

The risk that the value of the portfolio is less or equal to the bond floor is called the *gap risk*.

If there is no drastic jump in the value of the risky asset for the life of the trade, then there is no need for injection of money for rebalancing of the pool. Therefore downfall is lower than the gap risk and the value of the pool would be above the bond floor. In that case, hedging the CPPI trade would be risk free.

There are cases that the value of the pool may go under the bond floor. Either the provider cannot liquidate the risky asset due to illiquidity or the value of the equity asset has dropped so much that proceeds are not sufficient to maintain the value of the portfolio above the floor—the market simply drops by more than the gap risk before a rebalancing can be undertaken. In either case, the provider must make up the shortfalls. Whenever the portfolio value reaches a given floor, the investor receives a given amount. At this point, the entire pool comprises of 100% exposure to riskless asset. The gap risk is presented as basis points per annum.

## **Modeling Gap Risk**

Modeling the gap risk is the main concern in CPPI. It is analogous to a string of one-day out-of-the-money put options.

Using standard Black–Scholes formula would not be ideal for the following two reasons: (i) lack of volatility information on such deep out-the-money options and (ii) fat-tailed behaviors observed in stock returns distributions.

In [1], the authors apply extreme value theory to determine the multiple. A quantile hedging approach is introduced, which provides an upper bound on multiple. This bound is statistically estimated from the behavior of extreme variations in rates of asset returns. The authors also introduce the distributions of interarrival times of these extreme movements and show their impacts on CPPI.

In [5] the authors analyze the cost of the guarantee and the performance of portfolio based on such a strategy. They provide two extensions. One is based on Levy processes that allow jumps into the dynamics of the underlying asset. Second, they deal with insurance against all hitting times of modified floor.

In [3], Cont and Tankov study the behavior of CPPI strategies in models where the price of the underlying portfolio may experience downward jumps. That allows them to quantify the gap risk while maintaining the analytical tractability of the continuous-time framework. With respect to the work done in [5], in [3] the authors consider various risk measures for the loss and provide an analytical method to compute them.

CPPI techniques have also been applied to credit portfolios (*see* **Credit Portfolio Insurance**).

## **References**

- [1] Bertrand, P. & Prigent, J.-L. (2002). Portfolio insurance: the extreme value approach to the CPPI method, *Finance* **23**(2), 69–86.
- [2] Black, F. & Jones, R. (1987). Simplifying portfolio insurance, *Journal of Portfolio Management* **14**(1), 48–51.
- [3] Cont, R. & Tankov, P. (2009). Constant proportion portfolio insurance in presence of jumps in asset prices, *Mathematical Finance* **19**(3), 379–401.
- [4] Perold, A.R. (1986). *Constant Proportion Portfolio Insurance*, Harvard Business School, Working Paper.
- [5] Prigent, J.-L. & Tahar, F. (2005). *CPPI with Cushion Insurance*, University of Cergy-Pontoise, working paper.

## **Related Articles**

#### **Credit Portfolio Insurance**.

ALI HIRSA