# **RIGHTS**

*breadth, scope, and applicability*

### ANANTH PADMANABHAN

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

THE guarantee of fundamental rights in **Part III** of the Constitution represents a tectonic shift in constitutional philosophy from the Government of India Act 1935. The latter put in place a comprehensive governance structure, but with minimal protection to the governed. Part  $III$  replaces this notion of authority with a bidirectional vision of rights and duties. There are five issues raised by Part III:

1. the actors which possess such rights, and the actors against which such rights apply (the 'actor' question);

- 2. the forms of state action that stand subject to scrutiny (the 'form' question);
- 3. the effect of unconstitutionality on the validity of a law (the 'effect' question);
- 4. the substantive rights and their respective limitations (the 'content' question); and
- 5. the remedies available for infraction of these rights (the 'remedies' question).

This chapter answers the first three, and the fourth and fifth are addressed in the chapters that follow. An important limb of the first question, being the application of fundamental rights to private actors, is addressed in the chapter titled 'Horizontal Effect'. (This chapter will instead examine how the State is defined under the Constitution.) Likewise, two significant controversies relating to the second question, being the applicability of fundamental rights to personal laws and to constitutional amendments, are covered in the chapters on 'Constitutional Amendment' (chapter 14) and 'Personal Laws' (chapter 50).

This chapter addresses the three questions in its two separate parts. In defining the 'State', the Supreme Court has placed considerable emphasis on the structural aspects of the organisation in question, and the interpretive approach can be characterised as structuralism as opposed to functionalism. Section II argues that because private bodies may, under certain specific circumstances, carry out actions *attributable* to the State, the Court has to appropriately modify the present structural test to bring such bodies within the ambit of 'State'. At the same time, transitioning to an open-ended functionalist interpretive approach will introduce considerable uncertainty, simply because multiple conceptions of the State and its functions are possible at any given point in time. Section II then proceeds to discuss the contentious issue of treating the judiciary as 'State' for the purposes of <u>Part III</u> of the Constitution. The second limb of the first question, that is, the variance in the identity of rights holders based on the person–citizen distinction maintained throughout Part III, is then discussed. Section III briefly discusses the meaning of 'law' in Article 13 of the Constitution. This section then proceeds to discuss the effect of unconstitutionality. The doctrine of severability, a mechanism by which an unconstitutional law is treated as void only to the extent of its

unconstitutionality and no more, the technique of reading down a provision to keep it within permissible constitutional limits, and the doctrine of eclipse, which carries particular relevance in the case of pre-constitutional enactments, are discussed here.

### **II. THE 'ACTOR' QUESTION**

# **1. Rights for Whom?**

Before evaluating the actors against which a rights holder can assert his fundamental rights, it is important to ask who can qualify to be a rights holder. There are two words carefully chosen in respect of some rights and not others that capture the controversy here: 'persons' and 'citizens'.<sup>1</sup> The first is wider, the second narrower. The first, defined in the General Clauses Act  $1897$ , covers artificial entities such as companies and associations. The second, governed by **Part II** of the Constitution and the Citizenship Act 1955, can only apply to natural persons.<sup>3</sup> This makes it moot whether rights reserved for citizens can be availed by artificial persons. The Supreme Court in *State Trading Corporation v Commercial Tax Officer* (hereinafter *STC*) held that rights under Article 19, reserved for citizens, could not be availed by corporations. $\frac{4}{3}$  An attempt to circumvent this by impleading shareholders along with the corporation was similarly scuppered in *Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd v State of Bihar*. <sup>5</sup> The Court later watered down the absolutist framing of this bar in *Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v Union of India*, <sup>6</sup> by permitting shareholders to agitate the corporation's cause. This precedent has been subsequently followed, leading to the prohibition in *STC* amounting to no more than a technical objection that can be overcome by way of impleading shareholders or other interested natural persons and sufficiently pleading personal injury caused to them in the writ petition.<sup> $7$ </sup>

### **2. Who is the 'State'?**

### a. *Structural Beginnings*

We can now turn to the meaning of 'State'. Article 12 of the Constitution reads as follows:

In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, 'the State' includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.

The device of an inclusive definition makes it clear that the Constituent Assembly did not wish to fossilise the list of actors against whom fundamental rights could be claimed. This is made all the more evident by the expression 'other authorities'—one which, akin to an accordion, is capable of contextual stretches and compressions in meaning. Commenting on the draft Article 7, Dr BR Ambedkar clarified that the purpose of **Part III** was not only to bind the Central and State

Governments but also every district local board, municipality, *panchayat, taluk* board, *and* every other authority created by law and vested with the authority to make laws, rules, or by-laws.<sup>8</sup> At the time, local authorities issued by-laws to bind citizens.<sup>9</sup> Ambedkar's reference to this mode of lawmaking reveals the distinctive governmental structure he had in mind when formulating the notion of State. This structuralist idea of 'State' did not, on its face, appear accommodating of broader functional considerations such as operational influence wielded over citizens, or State patronage. The earliest decision on Article 12, that of the Madras High Court in *University of Madras v Shantha Bai* (hereinafter *Shantha Bai*), 10 reflected this by concluding that 'other authorities' would only include those exercising *governmental functions*, when construed *ejusdem generis*.

For citizens, a narrow interpretation of Article 12 was unsatisfactory for three important reasons. First, there would be lesser actors against whom fundamental rights could be claimed. Secondly, an ordinary civil suit would take anywhere from five years to more than a decade to come to a final resolution, at the trial stage alone. Writ petitions, both under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution, have always consumed less time and seen higher disposal rates. Moreover, with less procedural and evidentiary constraints binding the Court, it would have greater flexibility to innovate as regards speed tracking the case and fashioning effective remedies. Thirdly, though Article 226 was not technically confined to 'State' actors, the fact that the body in question was 'State' under Article 12 would foreclose challenges to the maintainability of the writ petition. Non-State actors could, with relatively greater ease, challenge maintainability by contending that their actions were in the purely private realm.<sup>11</sup> These factors combined to drive the push for a functionalist approach to interpreting Article 12, the guiding principles of which are detailed below.

Before we proceed, it will be helpful to say a little about structuralism and functionalism. Structuralism, as a method of constitutional interpretation, attempts to derive constitutional rules from the relationships and interactions between various constitutional institutions or 'structures'. $\frac{12}{12}$ Structuralists conceptualise the Constitution as a document creating an overall structure of governance, with substuctures therein, and devices such as checks and balances, separation of powers, and federalism, governing the relationship between these substuctures.<sup>13</sup> In the present context of individual rights, structuralism focuses on the structure of the government and the relationship between the government and the governed 'individuals'. $\frac{14}{11}$  Structuralist modes of interpretation suffer from a major problem, this being their failure to factor in the possibility of redundancy of the structure, with efflux of time, to fulfil its intended objectives.<sup>15</sup>

Functionalism, in contrast, works inductively, shaping constitutional policy and practice through the case-by-case application of independent normative values that the law ought to promote.<sup>16</sup> Pragmatic values, such as adaptability, efficacy, and justice in law can potentially tip the scales, <sup>17</sup> with the judge eventually preferring one set of values over another and placing equal, if not greater, emphasis on the context as much as the text.<sup>18</sup> Within the constitutional context, functionalist judges perceive the Constitution as an evolving document, and constantly refine established precedent to actualise preferred values.<sup>19</sup> Due to the extreme open-endedness in this method, functionalism suffers from higher indeterminacy than structuralism. This method of constitutional interpretation is more likely than structuralism to remain unmoored from the constitutional text,  $\frac{20}{2}$  and for this reason is often referred to as a non-interpretive method driven by the *consequences* of the construction placed on the text and the *socio-political predilections* of the judge. 21

# b. *The Functional Turn and the Agency or Instrumentality Doctrine*

Mathew J's concurring opinion in *Sukhdev Singh v Bhagat Ram* (hereinafter *Sukhdev*) sowed the seeds of functionalism in the Supreme Court's interpretive approach to Article  $12.22$  Previously, the Court had considered the meaning of 'State' in *Rajasthan State Electricity Board v Mohanlal* (hereinafter  $RSEB$ ),  $\frac{23}{2}$  and found the Electricity Board to be within the scope of 'other authorities' due to the presence of a single structural characteristic—its creation by a statute. But for Mathew J's concurrence, *Sukhdev* would have ended up being a similar exercise in narrow structuralism. The facts here were simple. Two *statutory* corporations and a *statutory* commission had, in accordance with powers conferred by their respective statutes, framed regulations pertaining to removal of their employees from service. Contravening these regulations, they fired their employees, leading to writ petitions that averred violation of fundamental rights. The majority relied on the structural features of the three different bodies and their statutory character, to eventually conclude on their status as 'agencies' of the Union government.

Mathew J straddled a different path to reach the same destination. He propelled the discussion by presenting two conceptions of the State—one, a 'coercive machinery wielding the thunderbolt of authority', and the other, a 'service corporation'—and disclosed his preference for the latter in setting the boundaries of Article  $12.\overline{24}$  To him, even a body with no financial funding from the government could qualify as 'State' if its functions were of high public importance and closely related to, or allied with, those of the government.  $\frac{25}{5}$  Conversely, a body receiving financial support from the government could fall outside the purview of 'State' if its functions were purely private in character.<sup>26</sup>

At the same time, Mathew J was conscious of the perpetration of power through private mechanisms such as standardised contracts, price fixation, and media control.<sup>27</sup> He unambiguously denounced a narrow structuralist construction that cabined private and State action within separate chambers. Instead, he laid emphasis on the 'agency or instrumentality' character of the body in question, thereby factoring in financial support coupled with an unusual degree of control exercised by the government over a body's management and policies. In this context, he referred to the State Action doctrine applied by courts in the United States. Though he did not, in the ultimate analysis, rely on this doctrine to formulate the boundaries of the 'agency or instrumentality' test, his conception of 'State' under Article 12 did extend to even pure private bodies whose actions could be 'fairly attributed to the State'.  $\frac{28}{11}$  is in this broader sense that he used the term 'agency or instrumentality'.  $\frac{29}{11}$ He was, through this framework, advocating the sort of meta-analysis that factored in the 'totality of the circumstances' before branding an authority a 'State actor'.<sup>30</sup>

This novel framework of 'agency or instrumentality' guided the Court's approach, by and large, to the definition of 'State' in subsequent decisions that set the trend of stretching the accordion to bellow the availability of fundamental rights protection. A more inflexible approach of narrow structuralism would, however, linger on in the background, and the root cause for this was another decision of the same bench, issued on the same day as *Sukhdev.* In *Sabhajit Tewary v Union of India*, 31 the Court, in a poorly reasoned two-page order, held that the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) would not fall within the purview of 'State' simply because its legal form was that of a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, and thus lacking in 'statutory character'. As examined in the subsequent parts of this chapter, this ghost of structuralism came to haunt the later jurisprudential growth of Article 12.

### c. *Conceptualising the State*

Despite *Sabhajit Tewary*, the wider notion of 'agency or instrumentality' of the State became the judicially applicable standard to determine the 'State' character of a private body. In *Ramana Dayaram Shetty v International Airport Authority* (hereinafter *RD Shetty*), 32 the Court categorically held that 'agencies or instrumentalities' of the State would be amenable to a fundamental rights-based review of their actions. *RD Shetty* also made clear references to the welfare state model and to Charles Reich's seminal piece<sup>33</sup> on the growing influence of government through its regulatory power of licensing and conferment of economic largesse to private entities.<sup>34</sup> These, in turn, furnish a better sense of the State and its functions, as conceived by the Court, when steering the transition to a functionalist interpretation of Article 12.

This conception was a product of its times, nurtured in its imagination by the philosophy of Nehruvian socialism and the welfare state model. The Court was fixing the reach of fundamental rights protection in an era of all-pervasive State presence, where the role of even private actors was dictated by the Planning Commission and regulated through a system of licences and permits. In this era, the Court naturally perceived the State–citizen interaction as one where the State, using its pervasive hold over all aspects of public life ranging from education to public health to plain commercial activities such as the running of banks and the management of airports, would be able to effectuate social change.

This conception of the State was in stark contrast with another possible model that a functionalist approach could equally accommodate—that of a neo-liberal State whose role was limited to guaranteeing wealth maximisation through more efficient and low-transaction cost interactions between private actors. 35 In *RD Shetty*, the Court could well have concluded that the Airports Authority of India, a statutory corporation mandated with the task of running airports efficiently, could never be saddled with additional procedural burdens when awarding contracts, bearing in mind the inordinate transaction costs tied in with such procedures. The Court refused to take this position, bearing in mind the pervasive influence that such statutory authorities had over the citizen, even when dealing with them as commercial entities at arm's length. This conclusion paints for us the picture of an expansionary State, tasked with a higher responsibility of fairness in its dealings, sometimes even at the altar of efficiency.

Later decisions of the Court add colour to this canvas. In *Managing Director, Uttar Pradesh Warehousing Corporation v Vijay Narayan Vajpayee*, Chinnappa Reddy J, in his concurring decision, referenced the preamble to the Constitution to hold building, irrigation, and engineering projects, and trading, distribution, and purchase of goods and services as within 'intense governmental activity'. 36 Similarly, the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation, a government company under Section 617 of the Companies Act 1956, was held to be 'State' under Article 12, despite its functions being completely outside the traditional domain of the government.<sup>37</sup> The Court here reasoned that even trading and business activities of the State would constitute 'public enterprise'.<sup>38</sup> In a more recent case, the Court considered it material that a particular entity was incidentally tasked with the duty to sponsor rural development—an important public duty allied with duties of the State—for the purpose of holding it 'State' under Article 12.<sup>39</sup> These decisions point to an expansive conception of State functions too, one where almost any activity bearing some impact on public life would qualify as a State function.

This expansionary notion of what a State meant, and was meant to do, ultimately resulted in a

strong doctrinal push back with strong structuralist undertones. The growing inconsistency between the functionalist model, as articulated in welfare state terms by the Court, and the economic changes that swept the nation post the early 1990s, leading it to embrace what could arguably be branded a neo-liberal form of government, plausibly contributed to the recoiling. But before concluding thus, it is important to realise that the Court, even at the peak of its functionalist phase, failed to provide the much-required doctrinal transition from a structuralist to a more expansive functionalist test. And this, above all, could have resulted in dislodging the functional flexibility in Article 12. The pathway to this realisation lies in a close reading of *RD Shetty*'s successor, the much-lauded *Ajay Hasia v Khalid Mujib Sehravardi* (hereinafter *Ajay Hasia*). 40

#### d. *The Juristic Veil*

The Court in *Ajay Hasia* introduced the juristic veil principle, thus disclosing for the first time a conceptual rationale for the 'agency or instrumentality' approach. Specifically, the Court held that the juristic veil of corporate personality, worn only 'for the purpose of convenience of management and administration' could not be 'allowed to obliterate the true nature of the reality'.<sup>41</sup> The reality was undoubtedly the 'deeply pervasive presence of the Government' behind the formal ownership cast in corporate mould. 42 In this fashion, *Ajay Hasia* took the conversation to the purpose served, in law, by the 'agency or instrumentality' approach: disregard of the corporate structure.

Used frequently by courts in the United States, the 'agency or instrumentality' principle traces its origins to Cardozo J. In *Berkey v Third Avenue Railway Co*, <sup>43</sup> when adjudicating whether the holding company could be held liable for the negligence of its subsidiary railroad company, the great judge held that '[D]ominion may be so complete, interference so obtrusive, that by *the general rules of agency* the parent will be a principal and the subsidiary an *agent*.<sup>244</sup> Soon enough, this common law theory of agency made way for a more structured 'instrumentality' analysis, probably due to a more than optimal imposition of liability on the parent corporation under the agency theory.<sup>45</sup> However, the use of the term 'agency' continued, resulting in interchangeable application of terms such as 'agency', 'alter ego', 'mere instrumentality', 'sham corporation', and 'identity'. $\frac{46}{10}$  Attempting to provide doctrines unique to the law of corporations that went beyond traditional common law concepts such as 'agency' and 'trust', courts in the United States formulated the 'instrumentality' and 'alter ego' doctrines to govern piercing of the corporate veil.<sup>47</sup>

With regard to the 'instrumentality' doctrine, *Lowendahl v Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Co* laid down its basic three-pronged formulation, the first prong of which was insistence on the presence of 'control, not mere majority or complete stock control, but complete domination, not only of finances, but of policy and business practice in respect to the transaction attacked so that the corporate entity as to this transaction had at the time no separate mind, will or existence of its own'.<sup>48</sup> Lending further structure to this first prong was Powell's leading treatise of the day, which flagged the presence of eleven factors or circumstances to establish the presence of such control. $\frac{49}{2}$ 

Even this brief examination of the 'instrumentality' doctrine discloses the extent of structuralist probing intrinsic to it. And this is precisely what set apart this doctrine from the State Action doctrine in constitutional law that seemingly ignited Mathew J's functionalism. The notion of an 'agency or instrumentality', traditionally understood, addressed the actor and not the action, thus encompassing a minor part of the State Action doctrine's much wider sweep. The State Action doctrine, on the other hand, extended to situations where purely private actors, with no structural presence of the State in their organisation or financing, could still commit to action that ended up being 'attributed' to the State. The US Supreme Court's decision in *Lebron v National RR Passenger Corp*, <sup>50</sup> where Scalia J relied on this difference in scope to consider the State Action doctrine redundant when Amtrak, a leading railroad corporation, was already found to be an 'agency or instrumentality' of the State, makes this point clear. Therefore, Mathew J erred in using the 'agency or instrumentality' framework, because he did not intend the juristic veil principle to confine the scope of State under Article 12.

By using juristic veil as the conceptual basis for the 'agency or instrumentality' framework, *Ajay Hasia* replaced Mathew J's functional approach to the meaning of 'State' with a structuralist approach that took into account a few more factors than the narrow one advocated in *RSEB*. Essentially, the Court continued to look at whether the relationship of the entity in question with the citizen extended the government's relationship with the latter through the presence of government in the former's structural setting. This is clear from the following six principles laid down by the Court,  $\frac{51}{2}$  which have subsequently played a role in channelling judicial inquiry into the public nature of the authority: $\frac{52}{2}$ 

1. If the entire share capital of the corporation is held by the government, it would go a long way towards indicating that it is an agency or instrumentality.

2. Where financial assistance from the State meets almost the entire expenditure of the corporation, it would indicate governmental character.

3. The corporation enjoying a monopoly status conferred or protected by the State, would be of relevance.

4. Existence of deep and pervasive State control indicated 'agency or instrumentality' character.

5. Functions of the corporation being of public importance and closely related to governmental functions would be relevant in classifying the corporation as an instrumentality or agency of government.

6. Specifically, if a governmental department was transferred to a corporation, it would strongly support an inference of its instrumentality or agency status.

Though the Court held the Regional Engineering College, Srinagar, to be 'State', the juristic veil rationale introduced to conceptually support the 'agency or instrumentality' framework facilitated the re-emergence of a narrow structuralist doctrine over time. Unfortunately, the juristic veil rationale provided little conceptual support for the third and fifth principles above. This would eventually push the Court to rein in the sweep of 'State' by introducing a narrow structural test of 'functional, financial *and* administrative' control, rendering these two principles obsolete in effect.

As Krishna Iyer J articulated with even greater precision in *Som Prakash Rekhi v Union of India* —a case that held Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd to be 'State'—the law had evolved to encompass a 'mere agent or surrogate of the State, in fact owned by the State, in truth controlled by the State and in effect an incarnation of the State' within the purview of 'State'.<sup>53</sup> Krishna Iyer J additionally, and incorrectly, held that an agency or instrumentality must also be vested with the authority, by or under law, to affect the legal relations of oneself or others.  $\frac{54}{1}$  The subsequent decision in *All India Sainik Schools Employees' Association v Sainik Schools Society*, <sup>55</sup> where the Sainik Schools Society was determined 'State' under Article 12, makes clear that no such requirement

exists. <sup>56</sup> The Court in *Manmohan Singh Jaitla v Comr, Union Territory of Chandigarh*, <sup>57</sup> went even further, to hold as 'State' an aided school that received 95 per cent of its expenses from the State Government.<sup>58</sup>

#### e. *Post-Ajay Hasia*

Soon after *Ajay Hasia*, the Court held another registered society, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), to be 'State'.<sup>59</sup> The Court observed that from its inception, the ICAR had been uninterruptedly supported and controlled by the government, rendering it an instrumentality of the State. The wider structuralist approach that *Ajay Hasia* had provided conceptual support for, under the veneer of an expansive functionalist approach,  $\frac{60}{2}$  has found expression in several subsequent decisions. 61 In *BS Minhas v Indian Statistical Institute*, 62 the Court conducted an almost perfunctory analysis of the respondent Institute's structure to find deep and pervasive control by the government. A closer look would have thrown up a different outcome. Even structurally, only three of the twentyfive members in the governing council were nominated by the Union government, and the Institute was free to receive private funding. In similar vein, the Supreme Court considered the Uttar Pradesh State Land Development Bank as 'State', mainly because the relevant statute specifically provided for only one such bank in respect of the whole State, and exercised some controls over its functioning.<sup>63</sup> Here too, the Court used structuralism incorrectly.<sup>64</sup>

The structuralism in the interpretive practice passed on from *Ajay Hasia* manifests itself on a close reading of the few decisions where the entities in question were not considered 'State'. In *KM Thomas v Cochin Refineries Ltd*, <sup>65</sup> a decision of the Kerala High Court, the entity involved was a joint venture company, with State and State instrumentalities holding 74 per cent of the share capital and a foreign investor holding the rest. The investor also nominated two of the nine directors, while the State and its instrumentalities (the Life Insurance Corporation of India in this specific case) nominated the rest. Despite this, the Court held that the substantial shareholding in the hands of a single foreign investor, coupled with its reasonable representation in the board of directors, worked against a finding that the company was 'an agent or surrogate of the State' or a 'limb of Government'.<sup>66</sup> Similarly, in *Tekraj Vasandi v Union of India*,<sup>67</sup> the Supreme Court concluded that the Institute of Constitutional & Parliamentary Studies fell outside the purview of 'State'.

The Court, after closely evaluating the structural features of this Institute, considered it material that the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and Cabinet Ministers were involved in its administration in their *personal* capacity, and that external funding from private entities replenished the Institute financially, despite the government being the most significant source of funding. In *General Manager, Kisan Sahkari Chini Mills Ltd v Satrughan Nishad*, <sup>68</sup> a private mill, run by a registered society, was declared as falling outside the purview of 'State' because the government's shareholding was only 50 per cent, and its presence through nominees in the governing committee only 33 per cent. Moreover, the society's by-laws did not vest power with the State Government to issue directions to the Mill or determine its policy. Similar reasoning was instrumental in keeping the Punjab State Co-operative Land Mortgage Bank<sup>69</sup> and National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation of India Ltd<sup>70</sup> outside the purview of 'State'.

*Chander Mohan Khanna v National Council for Educational Research and Training* involved
another society, the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), which enjoyed wide advisory and policy implementation powers in the field of education. $1/1$  The Union government had fairly extensive supervisory authority over the NCERT's discharge of its functions. Various government officials were part of the Council and its executive committee. Yet, the Court held the NCERT to be an autonomous body, reasoning that governmental control existed merely to ensure proper utilisation of financial grants made by the government. Had the Court applied its functionalist conception, the contours of which have been outlined above, this was the prototypical authority to fall within the expanded definition of 'State'. Similarly, in *Ram Parshad v Indian Institute of Bankers*, 72 performance in the examination conducted by the respondent Institute was, for all practical purposes, determinative of career advancement of bank employees because nationalised banks, as a practice, conferred pre-eminent recognition to this examination. The Institute may not have extended the government's relationship with the governed, but it wielded considerable authority due to State patronage, and yet was held to fall outside the purview of 'State'.

Regardless, the Court's doctrine probed beyond the legal form and status of the entity in question to the parallelism between its relationship with the citizen and the *government's*relationship with the latter. This caused much dissatisfaction in governmental circles, because the government desired blanket exclusion of certain forms of entities from the purview of 'State'. This desire led to the Onehundred-and-forty-fifth Law Commission Report, which considered and rejected the proposed Explanation to Article 12: 'A statutory corporation, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act shall not be considered as "State" for the purposes of this Part.'

The Law Commission concluded that neither was this proposal's constitutional validity certain when held against the basic structure doctrine,  $\frac{73}{2}$  nor did it really address any of the causes advanced by the State for the malfunctioning of public service corporations. $\frac{74}{ }$ 

Other than the above proposal, there was no substantive attempt on the part of any of the institutional actors to confine the scope of the 'agency or instrumentality' doctrine. In fact, in *Biman Krishna Bose v United India Insurance Co Ltd* (hereinafter *Biman Krishna Bose*), 75 the respondent insurer was held to fall within the ambit of 'State' because it was one of the acquiring companies *given the exclusive privilege* to carry on the business of general insurance in India. Unfortunately, the decision reveals no conceptual principle for this expansive understanding, except stray references to an unexplained 'trappings of the State' found present in the insurer. And the Court in any case soon moved to a narrow form of structuralism in *Pradeep Kumar Biswas v Indian Institute of Chemical Biology* (hereinafter *PK Biswas*) <sup>76</sup> and *Zee Telefilms Ltd v Union of India* (hereinafter *Zee Telefilms*). 77

# f. *Structuralism Returns: 'Functional, Financial, and Administrative Control'*

*PK Biswas* formally overruled *Sabhajit Tewary*, but more importantly, further narrowed the 'agency or instrumentality' test. Tracking the interpretation of 'State' from *RSEB* through *Sukhdev, Ajay Hasia*, and up until *Mysore Paper Mills*, the Court held that a body would qualify as 'State' under Article 12 where, in light of the cumulative facts, it was 'financially, functionally, and administratively dominated by or under the control of the Government'.<sup>78</sup> Mere regulatory control over the body would

not suffice.<sup>79</sup>

Though apparently summing up the law, the majority decision in *PK Biswas* did much more.<sup>80</sup> It confirmed the Court's preference for structuralism. Secondly, it imposed a more onerous standard than previously because the body had to now meet governmental domination on all three fronts: financially, functionally, and administratively. Thirdly, it sealed the future of an open-ended functionalist inquiry by completely ignoring *Biman Krishna Bose* and the 'trappings of the State' framework applied there. Fourthly, it ignored the text of Article 12, which made a distinction between local or other authorities 'within the territory of India' on the one hand, and 'under the control of the Government of India' on the other. This distinction was explained early on by the Supreme Court in *KS Ramamurthy Reddiar v Chief Comr Pondicherry*, <sup>81</sup> another constitutional bench decision. There, the Court held that the first category, that is, local or other authorities within the territory of India, 'included all authorities within the territory of India whether under the control of the Government of India or the Governments of various States *and even autonomous authorities* which may not be under the control of the Government at all'. <sup>82</sup> However, *PK Biswas* categorically ruled out attribution of 'State' character to autonomous authorities that did not satisfy its onerous three-pronged standard.

These concerns played out in *Zee Telefilms*, when a writ petition under Article 32 was filed against the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) due to a refusal on its part to deal with a television broadcaster for the live broadcast of games organised by the Board. BCCI, a registered society, enjoyed extensive powers in selecting cricketers to the national team representing India in international tournaments, and a virtual monopoly in organising major cricketing events in India. The broadcaster contended that BCCI, though an autonomous entity, received widespread State recognition, without which the team selected by it would not be able to represent itself as the Indian cricket team. BCCI countered that it did not satisfy the three conditions laid down in *PK Biswas*, and also took advantage of a major deficiency in the 'all-or-nothing' approach of characterising a body as State followed thus far by the Court. BCCI contended that were it to be held 'State' under Article 12, several other sporting and cultural bodies would also get caught within this net, opening the 'floodgates' and severely burdening the judiciary with writ petitions pertaining to any dispute involving these bodies.<sup>83</sup>

The majority ruled in favour of BCCI because it did not fulfil the *PK Biswas* criteria, thus making the doctrinal inquiry close-ended. Paradoxically, the majority took note of two considerations that would typically present themselves in a functional approach, to fortify the structurally aligned 'functional, financial and administrative control' test laid down in *PK Biswas*. These considerations were (i) the 'floodgates' argument, explained above; and (ii) the shift in socio-economic policy to usher in privatisation and the consequent distancing of the State from the commercial realm.  $84$ Realising that some of BCCI's functions significantly impacted the exercise of fundamental rights by citizens, the Court pointed to a writ petition under Article 226 as a possible safety valve.  $85$  Doing so, the Court conflated rights and remedies. Exclusion of BCCI from 'State' closed the door on fundamental rights review under Article 226 as well.

Sinha J, in a strong dissent, correctly pointed out that the majority was confining the meaning of 'State' to only those entities directly controlled by the government. He took note of a transmission of State power to autonomous bodies such as BCCI through indirect forms of patronage, thus placing them in a position of tremendous influence over citizens. Disfavouring the blanket exclusion of such autonomous entities from the purview of 'State', he enumerated seven additional criteria, influenced largely by functional norms, that could not be overlooked when deciding the issue.<sup>86</sup>

Presently, the *PK Biswas* test of 'functional, financial and administrative control' has assumed overarching significance over all other tests in evaluating the 'State' character of all entities.<sup>87</sup> As a structural test, it has largely worked well, except where judicial discretion has played truant in reading the three prongs as disjunctive as opposed to conjunctive.<sup>88</sup> However, this begs the question: to what end? The test may be helpful in identifying the few situations today where an entity is in reality the government but cloaked with the juristic veil. But most authority over citizens is exercised by autonomous authorities with the benefit of State patronage or encouragement. This was Mathew J's functional rationale for a transition to the 'agency or instrumentality' framework, but *Ajay Hasia* and then *PK Biswas* have built an overtly confining superstructure on this foundation.

### g. *The Path Forward*

An all-or-nothing approach to Article 12, which focuses only on the narrow structural attributes of the organisation in question and ignores wholesale the nature of the action taken, can be both over- and under-inclusive. It is over-inclusive because it renders open to challenge any action taken by entities such as public sector undertakings, even if they be actions taken in the pure commercial realm.  $\frac{89}{11}$  it is under-inclusive because many actors without a formal 'functional, financial and administrative control' over them but wielding significant power over citizens due to direct or indirect State authorisation would be able to get away in respect of all their actions despite the public impact caused by some of them. $\frac{90}{2}$  At the same time, there is the strong possibility that a more open-ended functional approach will push us on the path of endless uncertainty. Because such an approach makes available for adoption by individual judges differing conceptions of State function, decisions on maintainability of writ petitions under Article 32 will be rendered hugely discretionary. In short, a tight doctrinal framework is as much difficult as it is the need of the hour. Below is outlined a sketchy travel plan for this arduous journey between Scylla and Charybdis.

The proposed solution is to let the concept of 'agency' in the 'agency or instrumentality' framework do more conceptual work than it does currently. Agency is broader than 'juristic veil' because it places emphasis on the 'action'—an emphasis glaringly absent from the 'juristic veil' investigation. It is also more flexible than 'juristic veil', simply because the line between acts carried on for the principal and for oneself is fuzzy. This fuzziness assists the judiciary to redress both over- and underinclusivity in a single stroke. Under an 'agency' investigation, the only significant question is whether a particular action has been authorised by, or actualised with the predominant support of, governmental authority, even when the actor in question is a wholly private body. This in turn signals a sliding-scale approach, where the deeper the pervasiveness of governmental control, the lesser the need to show specific governmental authorisation in respect of the action under challenge, and vice versa. So, instrumentality and its conceptual cousin, 'juristic veil', will continue playing their role, because in situations where the entity in question is 'functionally, financially, and administratively' controlled by the State, there would be no reason to look beyond to the 'action' in question. Such bodies would automatically qualify as 'State' under Article 12. In less striking instances, such as that of State-conferred monopolies or private actors carrying on a public duty, the sliding-scale approach can be suitably deployed to assess the presence or absence of a relationship of agency between the State and the entity in question.

A concrete example from one of the decided cases would help flesh out the details of such an

inquiry. Assume that BCCI takes two unilateral decisions. The first is a decision to arbitrarily exclude cricketers from a particular State from playing for the 'Indian' cricket team, and the second a decision to award terrestrial rights to one broadcaster over all others despite significantly lower royalties being paid by the preferred broadcaster. BCCI will potentially be considered an agent of the State in respect of the first decision, because it is in a position to pick the 'Indian' cricket team largely by virtue of the implied authority conferred upon it by the Indian State. On the other hand, in respect of its second decision, BCCI has to be treated on a par with any other private actor because the government has played no special role in helping BCCI actualise this decision. So, a writ under Article 32, and a challenge based on violation of the right to equality, will be maintainable only as regards the first decision.

# h. *The Judiciary as 'State'*

Concerns with the extension of fundamental rights to the judiciary arise only due to the unique nature of adjudicatory functions, and not because of any express limitations in Article 12. Administrative functions and procedural rules of the Court certainly open themselves up for challenge on the ground of fundamental rights violation, and attract the issuance of appropriate writs to remedy the same.<sup>91</sup> Because the discharge of judicial functions, on the other hand, leads to no generally applicable action and only decides *lis inter partes,* there cannot be a violation of fundamental rights, goes the argument. This was broadly accepted by the Court in *Naresh Sridhar Mirajkar v State of Maharashtra* (hereinafter *Mirajkar*). <sup>92</sup> The multiple views expressed in this case have been analytically dissected in Seervai's leading treatise, and need no repetition. At the end of this incisive discussion, the learned jurist concludes that Hidayatullah J's dissent, holding the judiciary 'State' for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights and a consequential writ under Article 32 issued by the Supreme Court to the High Court maintainable, is the correct view.  $\frac{93}{8}$ 

This question came up again for the Court's consideration in *AR Antulay v RS Nayak* (hereinafter *Antulay*). <sup>94</sup> Here, the Court, in a peculiar and highly fractured verdict, held that a writ of certiorari would not issue to another bench of the Court under any circumstances. Yet, the Court arrogated wide powers to itself to remedy an earlier order that violated Article 14 and perpetrated grave illegality. Sourcing authority from its inherent powers under Article 142, the Court held that serious errors could be rectified *ex debito justitiae*, that is, as a matter of right, and in pursuance of the maxim *actus curiae neminem gravabit—*an act of the court shall prejudice no man. Despite all the fuzziness surrounding this decision, both in reasoning and conclusion, there is one proposition that emerges clearly. The judiciary could, when discharging its judicial functions in any given case, violate fundamental rights. <sup>95</sup> Unfortunately, the Court in its subsequent decision in *Triveniben v State of Gujarat <sup>96</sup>* misconstrued the holding in *Antulay* that a writ of certiorari under Article 32 was unavailable against the order of an earlier bench, to support the proposition that the judgment of a court can never be challenged under Article 14 or 21. This observation is incorrect. *Antulay* proceeded to grant relief to the appellant largely on the basis of infraction of these rights by the earlier set of directions by the Supreme Court that diverted trial from the Special Judge to the High Court and in the process deprived the appellant of a statutory appeal he would otherwise have had to the High Court.

The Supreme Court has in its later decision in *Rupa Ashok Hurra v Ashok Hurra* (hereinafter *Hurra*)<sup>97</sup> built on *Antulay*, a one-off case where the Court corrected an earlier error, to fashion the institutional remedy of a curative petition in all cases where the petitioner has been denied a hearing or the judge is biased. The Court here clarified that a writ under Article 32 shall not lie from the Supreme Court to the High Court, or from one High Court to another, because 'no judicial order passed by any superior court in judicial proceedings can be said to violate any of the fundamental rights enshrined in **Part III'**.<sup>98</sup> The Court added that superior courts of justice fell outside the ambit of State under Article  $12.\overline{99}$  While the conclusion of the Court on non-maintainability of the writ petitions may be correct as a technical matter, its reasoning is inconsistent with *Antulay*, though an affirmation of the majority ruling in *Mirajkar*.

In effect, the Court has confined the scope of errors that could potentially violate fundamental rights while in the discharge of judicial functions to the two tenets of natural justice: no man shall be condemned unheard, and no man shall be a judge in his own cause. Though the Court was careful to qualify that all the grounds on which a curative petition was maintainable could not be possibly enumerated, such petitions have definitely been very restrictive in their scope. In the single instance where a curative petition has, out of the thousands of such petitions filed since *Hurra*, been allowed, it was for violation of the first tenet of natural justice.<sup>100</sup> The Court has also made it amply clear in decisions post *Hurra*that it should be entertained only within the narrow parameters set forth therein.<sup>101</sup> Though the Court has recently identified another circumstance, a scenario where public confidence in the integrity of administration of justice is shaken, as inviting appropriate intervention through a review petition under Article 137 or a subsequent curative petition,  $\frac{102}{102}$  there has been no mention of violation of fundamental rights as an express ground for reconsideration post *Hurra*.

An important development since the *Mirajkar* era has been the exponential growth of public interest litigation and consequential judicial activism. In many such cases, the judiciary, even while discharging judicial functions, goes about its role more like the legislature or the executive, framing directions and guidelines and overseeing their enforcement. There is no longer an easy, or strict, separation between these functions, and no longer is the judicial function merely restricted to *lis inter partes*. Unfortunately, the decisions in *Antulay* and *Hurra* have not even considered this strong additional reason to formally overrule *Mirajkar*. The curative petition does not seem to achieve any more than a writ petition. Arguably, it does a lot less, but at higher cost to the Court's resources and time. It also stands on weak foundations, being carved out from a very expansive reading of the Court's inherent power to do complete justice. Instead, the right course of action would be to overrule *Mirajkar*, accept the judiciary to be 'State' for all purposes and in respect of all its functions, and quash judicial orders that violate fundamental rights by issuing a writ of certiorari.

### **III. THE 'FORM' AND 'EFFECT' QUESTIONS**

This section briefly considers two questions: the forms of State action that are subject to fundamental rights scrutiny, and the effect of such actions being declared as unconstitutional.

#### **1. The Meaning of 'Law'**

Unlike the American Constitution, the Indian Constitution contains an express provision conferring power on the Court to strike down a 'law' inconsistent with fundamental rights as being void. Article 13(2) reads in this connection as follows: 'The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.' Article 13(3)(a) defines 'law' to include 'any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of law'. As Seervai notes, this is a very broad definition that covers subordinate delegated legislation as well as law that has not been enacted by the legislature, that is, long-held customs. $\frac{103}{103}$  On the strength of this provision, almost all orders passed by the legislature and the executive that affect the rights of citizens are today caught within the ambit of Article 13(2), paving the way for the Court to issue appropriate writs of declaration of nullity when they violate fundamental rights.  $\frac{104}{100}$ 

Pre-constitutional enactments are also affected by the vice of unconstitutionality. Article 13(1) provides that all laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of the Constitution shall be void to the extent of their inconsistency with fundamental rights. In *John Vallamattom v Union of India*,  $\frac{105}{100}$  the Supreme Court, on the strength of this provision, struck down as unconstitutional Section 118 of the Indian Succession Act 1925, which restricted the rights of Christians to bequeath their property for religious or charitable purposes, for being in violation of Article 14. Whether the law under scrutiny be pre- or post-constitutional legislation, a common question that arises is as to the effect of unconstitutionality on such law. The doctrines of severability, reading down, and eclipse thus assume significance.

### **2. Doctrines of Severability and Reading Down**

Both pre- and post-constitutional legislation are only declared void to the extent of their inconsistency with any of the fundamental rights. The rest of the law can be saved using the doctrine of severability. This doctrine, as explained in *RMD Chamarbaugwalla v Union of India*, <sup>106</sup> entails probing into multiple factors such as the legislative intent, semantic structure, scheme of the Act, and substantiality of truncation, to determine whether the valid provisions of a legislation ought to be enforced despite the finding of invalidity in respect of its other provisions.

The decision in *Delhi Transport Corporation v DTC Mazdoor Congress 107* reveals how the technique of reading down avoids unconstitutionality by internally addressing the scope and coverage of the statutory provision.<sup>108</sup> Severance, on the other hand, mitigates the effect of unconstitutionality by saving those provisions that fall outside its vice. Therefore, sequentially, the latter follows the former, and the Court proceeds to sever only in cases where a reading down is not possible. $\frac{109}{ }$ 

# **3. Doctrine of Eclipse**

The doctrine of eclipse goes to the specific manner in which the nullification of a provision operates, and has been explained in *Bhikaji Narain Dhakras v State of Madhya Pradesh*. <sup>110</sup> There, the Court explained that the operation of fundamental rights eclipses a law that has been validly enacted otherwise. As a consequence, if the constitutional bar is removed by way of a subsequent amendment,

the law would be automatically revived without any further legislative intervention. This doctrine is of limited relevance today because the Supreme Court has categorically held it inapplicable to postconstitutional legislation that was invalid at the time it was passed. No subsequent action can revive such legislation, except where the initial invalidity of the provision was due to a procedural lapse such as failure to take prior Presidential assent—rather than a substantive bar such as Part III or legislative incompetence.<sup>111</sup>

#### **IV. CONCLUSION**

The Supreme Court's understanding of Article 12 displays considerable incoherence, the primary reason for which is the shift between versions of structuralist and functionalist interpretation without much regard for the over- and under-inclusiveness that mars its doctrine. Mathew J's concurrence in *Sukhdev* has been praised for its willingness to explore the 'reality' of the State, but unfortunately the decision reads more like an open-ended essay on the nature of the State than a doctrinal framework that produces some certainty in outcomes. This explains the structuralist pushback over the years, especially when Mathew J's conceptions of the State and its descriptive role were found inconsistent with the newly liberalised India of the 1990s and the twenty-first century. This chapter has attempted to emphasise the 'agency or instrumentality' framework by stressing the long-forgotten 'agency' relationship that may potentially exist between the State and the authority in question, and advocates a 'sliding-scale' approach that takes account of both the pervasiveness of State control and the public nature of the role performed by the entity in question.

The Court's doctrinal confusion has also extended to the understanding of its own functions, as seen from the constant flip-flops when it comes to recognising its status as 'State' under Article 12. The current system of curative petitions has merely added one more round of review, in an altered format. It is both impractical and devoid of any constitutional sanctity. Seervai's reasons for considering the judiciary 'State' under Article 12 carry considerable intellectual force. It is time the Court recognises this, does away with curative petitions, and begins to entertain writ petitions against its own orders in the most exceptional of cases.

<sup>1</sup> For an overview of the different rights available to persons, and those confined to citizens, see *State Trading Corporation v Commercial Tax Officer* AIR 1963 SC 1811.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>2</sup> Incorporated by reference vide Constitution of India 1950, art 367(1), the General Clauses Act 1897, s 3(42), defines 'person' to *include* 'any company or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not'.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>3</sup> The Citizenship Act 1955, s 2(f): "person" *does not include* any company or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not'.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>4</sup> AIR 1963 SC 1811.

 $\frac{5}{2}$  AIR 1965 SC 40.

 $6$  (1970) 1 SCC 248.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>1</sup> Bennett Coleman & Co v Union of India (1972) 2 SCC 788; Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd v Union of India (1983) 4 SCC 166.

<sup>8</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 610, 25 November 1948.

<sup>9</sup> *Sri Konaseema Cooperative Central Bank Ltd v N Seetharama Raju* AIR 1990 AP 171 [17].

 $\frac{10}{10}$  AIR 1954 Mad 67.

 $\frac{11}{2}$  Supriyo Basu v West Bengal Housing Board (2005) 6 SCC 289; G Basi Reddy v International Crops Research Institute (2003)