# **11**

# Jinnah: Liberal Constitutionalism and Islam

*Dinesh Kumar Singh*

I am a nationalist first, a nationalist second, a nationalist last.

*M. A. Jinnah*

I still consider myself to be an Indian.

*M. A. Jinnah, Governor-General of Pakistan*

Mohammed Ali Jinnah is one of the most controversial figures in modern Indian history. India's collective consciousness and popular imagination still consider him a villain who was instrumental in creating Pakistan. He started off as a staunch secularist, advocating Hindu-Muslim unity to face the oppressive and divisive policies of the British government. However, after 1937 he propounded the two-nation theory, which held that Hindus and Muslims were two separate nations who could not live together. His intellectual journey from the 'apostle of Hindu-Muslim unity' and hero of 'Indian liberation' to the 'propounder of two-nation theory' necessitates analyses of his political ideas and his place in Indian history. The present essay attempts to contextualize and analyse critically the political ideas of Jinnah.

# Nationalism and Constitutionalism

Jinnah was influenced by the liberal and secular ideas of John Morley, who authored the book *On Compromise*. John Stuart Mill's greatest disciple, Morley remained Jinnah's hero. The liberal and democratic ideas of *On Compromise* fired Jinnah's imagination. He was also influenced by Burke and Mill, who stirred his mind and heart.1

Jinnah was also greatly inspired by personalities like Dadabhai Nauroji, Pherozeshah Mehta and Gokhale. Jinnah joined the national movement as a liberal nationalist. In 1906 he attended the Indian National Congress of Calcutta as a secretary to Dadabhai Nauroji. Commenting on the attitude of the Britishers, he told his sister: 'If Dadabhai was black, I was darker, and if this was the mentality of British politicians, then we would never get a fair deal from them. From that day I have been an uncompromising enemy of all forms of colour bar and racial prejudice.'<sup>2</sup> He strongly defended individual rights and liberties. He advocated a nation's right to self determination. Without freedom of speech, he argued, any nation would remain 'stunted' or wither 'like a rose bush that is planted in a place where there is neither sunshine nor air'.3

Jinnah was a fierce critic of the British rule in India. He believed in constitutional methods for the emancipation of India from the foreign domination. Despite being Muslim, he vehemently opposed the system of separate electorates and considered it a threat to the basic tenets of Indian nationalism. Till 1912, he remained the most vocal critic and opponent of the Muslim League's communal and loyalist politics. Aga Khan, first elected honorary president of the Muslim League, wrote in his memoirs:

Who was our doughtiest opponent in 1906? A distinguished Muslim Barrister in Bombay, with a large and prosperous practice, Mr Mohammad Ali Jinnah … We had always been on friendly terms, but at this juncture he came out in bitter hostility towards all that I and my friends had done and were trying to do. He was the only well-known Muslim to take up this attitude, but his opposition had nothing mealy-mouthed about it; he said that our principle of separate electorate was dividing the nation against itself, and for nearly a quarter of a century he remained our most inflexible critic and opponent.<sup>4</sup>

He was opposed to any sort of communalism, whether Hindu or Muslim, and argued that these divisive trends of Indian politics should be discouraged. He realised that the communal differences between Hindus and Muslims was the main challenge to the national liberation movement. It would pose a challenge to the secular and egalitarian foundations of a modern nation state. He moved a resolution disallowing the proposal for extension of the principle of separate electorates to municipal and local bodies.<sup>5</sup>

The annual meeting of Congress and the council meeting of the Muslim League was held in Bankipur in 1912. Jinnah was invited to attend the council meeting of the Muslim League. He attended the council meeting as a Congressman and appreciated a resolution of the Muslim League that indicated its broader outlook. In his speech he said: 'the attainment of a system of self-government suitable to India', to be brought about 'through constitutional means, a steady reform of the existing system of administration; by promoting national unity and fostering public spirit among the people of India, and by co-operating with other communities for the said purpose'.6 Jinnah joined the All India Muslim League in 1913. He was persuaded by Mohammad Ali and Wazir Hasan of the Muslim League to sign its membership form. But he declared that his 'loyalty to the Muslim League and the Muslim interest would in no way and at no time imply even the shadow of disloyalty to the larger national cause to which his life was dedicated'.7

Jinnah strongly believed that the future of the nation would depend on the harmonious relations between Hindus and Muslims and tried to convince leaders of both communities to device mechanisms for collective action on the issue of the national liberation movement. At every political meeting from the platform of the Muslim League, he advanced nationalist and patriotic arguments. He marginalised the British loyalist forces and strengthened the nationalist forces within the Muslim League. His patriotic speeches changed its ideological character. In the Muslim League meeting of Agra in 1913, he strongly denounced the principle of communal representation and appealed to Muslims that separate electorates would only divide India into two watertight compartments.<sup>8</sup> He started a two-way movement for amicable relations between Hindus and Muslims. In the Karachi Congress of 1913, he seconded a resolution that appreciated the Muslim League for adopting 'the ideal of self-Government for India within the British Empire'. He expressed 'complete accord with the belief that the League has so emphatically declared at its last sessions that the political future of the country depends on the harmonious working and co-operation of the various communities in the country'.9 Speaking from the platform of the Muslim League he asserted: 'In its general outlook and ideas as regards the future, the All India Muslim League stands abreast of the Indian National Congress and is ready to participate in any patriotic efforts for the advancement of the country as a whole'.10

Jinnah was the main architect of the pact between the Congress and Muslim League in 1916 and succeeded in convincing both organizations to hold their annual sessions at the same place and time. He was also instrumental in creating unity between the moderates and extremists. He was elected the president of the Muslim League to lead it on the path of nationalist and patriotic principle. Presiding over the League he asserted:

Modern India is fast growing into unity of thought, purpose and outlook, responsive to new appeals of territorial patriotism and nationality, stirred with new energy and aspiration and becoming daily more purposeful and eager to recover its birth right to direct its own affairs and govern itself.11

He urged the Congress to understand Muslim anxieties and overriding national concern of conceding sufficient quota of elected legislative council seats to Muslims. It would pave the way for convincing Muslim League that joining forces with Congress in articulating a single national set of demands was, in fact, in their own best communal interest.12

'India for the Indians' was the central concern of Jinnah's political thinking. He cautioned the Muslims not to nurture the feelings of mistrust, suspicion and discord against the Hindus. Addressing the Muslim League session in 1917, he suggested to the Muslims:

'if seventy millions of Musalmans do not approve of a measure, which is carried by a ballot box, do you think that it could be enforced and administered in this country? Do you think that Hindus statesmen, with their intellect, with their past history, would ever think of … when they get self-government … enforcing a measure by ballot box? Therefore, I say to my Muslim friends not to fear. This is a bogey, which is put before you by your enemies to frighten you, to scare you away from the co-operation with the Hindus, which is essential for the establishment of self-government. If this country is not to be governed by the Hindus, let me tell you in the same spirit, it is not to be governed by the Mohammedans either and certainly not by the English. It is to be governed by the people and sons of this country.13

He suggested both organizations:

formulate a scheme of reforms and do it as far as possible in conformity with the scheme to be formulated by the League and the Indian National Congress. After the scheme had been formulated by the League and the Indian National Congress, they could go to the authorities and say these were the reforms which they demanded in the name of united India.14

The Delhi war conference was organised by the British in 1918 to enlist the support of Indians in war-efforts. Jinnah confronted Gandhi's loyalist role on the issue of recruiting Indians for the army. He vehemently criticised Britain's recruiting drive. He moved a resolution on constitutional reforms linking India's participation in the war-efforts with British government's promise for reforms in India. In a telegram to Chelmsford, the Governor General of India, Jinnah asserted:

We cannot ask our young men to fight for principle, the application of which is denied to their own country. A subject race cannot fight for others with the heart and energy with which a free race can fight for the freedom of others. If India is to make great sacrifices in the defence of the empire, it must be a partner in the empire and not as a dependency … Let full responsible government be established in India within a definite period to be fixed by statute with the Congress-League scheme as the first stage and a Bill that effect be introduced into parliament at once.15

Governor Willingdon convened the Provincial War Conference in Bombay in 1918. Willingdon doubted the sincerity of the leaders of the Home Rule League in war efforts. Jinnah criticised the shallow assurance the British had given to the Indian nationalists. He commented:

I say that if you wish to enable us to help you, to facilitate and stimulate the recruiting, you must make the educated people feel that they are citizens of the Empire and the King's equal subjects. But the Government do not do so. You say that we shall be trusted and made real partners in the Empire. When? We don't want words. We don't want the consideration of matter indefinitely put off. We want action and immediate deeds.16

Even Gandhi appreciated Jinnah's political position on British war efforts. He said: 'As soon as I set about my task, my eyes were opened. My optimism received a rude shock. We had

#### 144 Dinesh Kumar Singh

meetings wherever we went. People did attend, but hardly one or two would offer themselves as recruits. 'You are a votary of Ahimsa, how can you ask us to take up arms? What good has Government done for India to deserve our co-operation?' These and similar questions used to be put to us.'17

The Rowlatt Bill was introduced to contain and suppress rising national movement. Jinnah assailed the bill as the 'Black Bill'. He vehemently opposed the bill and said that 'no civilised government will accept, no civilised government will ever dream of putting these recommendations in the form of laws'. In his strongly worded letter of resignation to the Viceroy, he considered the Imperial Legislative Council as 'a machine propelled by a foreign executive' and the bill as 'obnoxious and decidedly coercive'.18 He was of the opinion that

the fundamental principles of justice have been uprooted and the constitutional rights of the people have been violated at a time when there is no real danger to the state, by an over fretful and incompetent bureaucracy which is neither responsible to the people nor in touch with real public opinion … a Government that passes or sanctions such a law in times of peace forfeits its claim to be called a civilized government.19

The session of the Muslim League and Congress was held in Nagpur in 1920. Gandhi moved a resolution proposing 'the attainment of Swaraj by the people of India by all legitimate and peaceful means'. Important Congress leaders supported Gandhi's advocacy of noncooperation. But Jinnah was the single leader who objected that it was impractical and dangerous to sever connections with the British. He argued that the Non-cooperation Movement 'may be an excellent weapon for the purpose of bringing pressure upon the Government, but … will not succeed in destroying the British Empire'. His proposal was rejected. Gandhi's resolution was passed with 'deafening, prolonged cheers and applause'. Commenting on the resolution, Jinnah argued, 'At the moment the destiny of the country is in the hands of two men and one of them is Gandhi … I appeal to him to pause, to cry halt before it is too late'.20 Colonel Wedgwood, a member of the British Labour Party said that, 'if India had a few more men of Mr Jinnah's strength of character, she would be free before long'.21

Jinnah was a champion of civil liberties, individual rights and equal justice. He pleaded, on behalf of readmitting the deported editor of the *Bombay Chronicle*, B. G. Horniman, 'I do maintain, and I have drunk deep at the fountain of constitutional law, that the liberty of man is the dearest thing in the law of any constitution and it should not be taken away in this fashion'.<sup>22</sup>

The Raja of Mahmudabad reminisces about his meeting with Jinnah in 1926. He writes, 'he called me to his side and asked me about my studies. Then came the question, 'what are you, a Muslim first or an Indian first …' I replied 'I am a Muslim first and then an Indian'. To this he said in a loud voice, 'My boy, no, you are an Indian first and then a Muslim'.23

Presiding over the All India Muslim League session held in 1937, Jinnah succeeded in passing a resolution for complete independence for India. He appealed to the Congress for a united front with the League. He argued 'What requires is a completely united front and honesty of

purpose, and then by whatever name you may call your government is a matter of no consequence so long as it is a government of the people, by the people, for the people'. Addressing the students of Osmania University he claimed himself to be nationalist and liberator of India. He said:

I must assure you that I yield to none in the determination to safeguard the interests of my country, nor would I yield to anybody in striving for the attainment of freedom for my country. I am essentially a practical man; I have been in practical politics for over a quarter of a century. The words 'Nationalism' and 'Nationalist' have undergone many changes in their definition and significance. Some people have a dictionary of their own, but within the honest meaning of the term, I still remain a nationalist.<sup>24</sup>

## Religion, State and Secularism

He worked hard to bring the two communities together. He argued that the 'salvation of India lies in the true union of the people and her onward march of progress depends upon the constitutional and constructive methods'. Addressing the Muslim students in 1915, he said 'one of the chief objects should always be co-operation, unity and goodwill not only among the different sections of Mohammadans but also between Mohammadans and other communities of the country'.25 Jinnah advocated the cause of the Muslims before the Hindus, and of the Hindus before the Muslims. He wanted to create goodwill and remove the misunderstandings between the two communities for cooperation in the larger interest of the national liberation movement. He observed that 'all thinking men are thoroughly convinced that the keynote of our real progress lies in the goodwill, concord, harmony and cooperation between the two great sister communities. The true focus of progress is centred in their union … But the solution is not difficult …'26

He strongly advocated the formulation of a common demand for both communities. At his initiative, an all parties' conference of the Muslim League and the Congress was organised in Delhi in 1927 for ensuring unity between them. He suggested to the Muslims to abandon the system of separate electorates and adopt the mixed ones under certain conditions of mutual give and take. For him the question of separate or mixed electorates was more a question of methods and means to an end. Jinnah asserted that 'Mussalmans should be made to feel that they are secure and safeguarded against the Hindus majority during transition period'. Jinnah was not enamoured of separate electorates although the overwhelming majority of the Muslims believed that this system would not retard the growth and development of representative government. He also suggested to the Hindus to agree on fair and reasonable constitutional safeguards, which alone could remove Muslim suspicions. He was in favour of negotiating an equitable sharing of power between Hindus and Muslims at the central and provincial levels. He believed that all communities should share the fruits of liberty equally. His central concern was on how to give a real sense of confidence and security to the minorities.27

Reacting to the Motilal Nehru report which advocated joint electorates without sufficient safeguards for the Muslims, Jinnah declared that the minorities must have a complete sense of security before its broader political sense could be evolved for co-operation and united endeavour in the national tasks. He argued that, 'majorities are apt to be oppressive and tyrannical'. He considered that the constitutional safeguards and security of the Muslims were requisite conditions for ensuring the political unity between both communities. Speaking as a spokesman of India and not Muslims, he stressed for resolving the vexed and complex problems of minorities. He pointed out that 'the two major communities in India are Hindus and Mussalmans and naturally, therefore, these two communities have got to be reconciled, united and made to feel that their interests are common and they are marching together'. He put forwarded his famous 'Fourteen Points' which included problems of minorities, issue of separate electorate-s- and the power of the provinces. He cautioned 'if you do not settle this question today, we shall have to settle it tomorrow, but in the meantime our national interests are bound to suffer'.<sup>28</sup>

Jinnah was branded as a communalist and called an exponent of Muslim interest by Hindus. Muslim communal leaders had defeated and repudiated his policy. He did not budge from his ideological position even under pressure from conservative Muslim sections. He remained a defender of Hindu-Muslim co-operation. He considered the Hindu-Muslim issue as a national one which had to be solved in a national way. Jinnah viewed that the Hindu-Muslim unity as a 'sine qua non' of the any future constitution. A constitution would be successful if it provided a comprehensive sense of security to the Muslim community. He argued that 'no constitution will ever receive the support of the minorities unless they can feel that they, as an entity, are secured under the proposed constitution'. At the Second Round Table Conference, he said 'I am an Indian first and a Muslim afterwards. But at the same time I agree that no Indian can ever serve his country if he neglects the interests of the Muslims'. Unity and an honourable settlement between both communities was the pivot upon which national self-government for India could be constructed and maintained.29

Jinnah was keen on nationalising and secularising communal Muslim politics. He was opposed to the provincialisation of national politics. He criticised the interference of communal and obscurantist principles in the public sphere and civil society. He advocated the creation of a secular and democratic society. He upheld the liberal, egalitarian and human value systems. Jinnah was critical of religious orthodoxy and the sectarian views of the priestly classes of both communities. He argued, 'I think I have a solution for the Hindu-Muslim problem. You destroy your orthodox priestly class and we will destroy our Mullahs and there will be communal peace'.30

He considered that the mixing of religion and politics might help the non-cooperation movement initially, but would later inflict incalculable damage to the national interests of India. He rejected the 'pseudo-religious approach to politics' injected by Gandhi. He deplored the Khilafat agitation which had brought the reactionary religious orthodoxy element to the surface. He warned Congress leaders that this movement would encourage the pan-Islamist sentiment and buttress the tottering empire of the Sultan of Turkey. It would dilute the secular and nationalist spirit of the Indian Muslims. He abhorred the deep religious colouring of the movement. He called it 'an essentially spiritual movement' based on destructive methods which did not take human nature into account.31

Jinnah strongly advocated social reforms. He opposed sectarian ideologies, caste and gender hierarchies and the inhuman value systems. He criticised the institutionalised inequality of the caste system which was legitimised by Brahminical ideology. He wanted to create a society which would be free from the shackles of orthodoxy and obscurantist principles. He strongly supported the Hindu Marriage Validity Bill which intended to liberate Hindus from shackles of caste orthodoxy. He argued:

are you going to deny liberty to those whom you have trained on western ideas, and are they to remain the victims of this caste shackles? … I am as much interested, my Lord, in coming to rescue of Hindu minority suffering today because of this law as anybody else would be interested in coming up to the rescue of a Mussalman minority if it was suffering.32

Jinnah considered human liberation from social and religious bondage as an important component of the democratic transformation of society. He advocated the eradication of evil practices prevalent in Indian society. He favoured the extension of the Sharda Bill, which originally aimed at forbidding Hindu child marriage, to bring Muslim girls under its purview. He repudiated the mullah's arguments that it ran counter to basic principles of Islamic injunctions. He claimed to represent all Indians and not just the Ulema. Jinnah condemned all orthodox ideologies prevalent in Hinduism and Islam which sanctioned cruel, horrible and disgraceful inhuman practices. He felt that the backwardness of the Muslim would retard not only the development of the community but also would handicap and injure the national interest of India.33

Jinnah repudiated Congress' claim that it represented the entire nation. He argued that any future constitutional structure must protect and safeguard the position and interest of the Muslims. This demand of the Muslims did not go against the basic principles of secularism. Muslims stood shoulder to shoulder with Hindu communities and did not lag behind in their patriotic co-operation with Hindus. He asserted that:

it may appear to any amateur politician that such demand savours of communalism, but in reality to those who understand the political and constitutional history of the world, it must be evident that it is not only natural but is essential by ensuring whole-hearted and willing co-operation of the minorities who must be made to feel that they can rely upon the majority with a complete sense of confidence and security.34

Even after establishing Pakistan on the basis of two-nation theory and religion, he wanted a modern, liberal, secular and democratic state. Delivering the presidential address to the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan, he talked about an inclusive and impartial government, religious freedom, rule of law and equality for all. He also argued for the separation of church and state. He assured the minorities, i.e., non-Muslims that they would be treated on the basis of equality of mankind. He argued that the minorities would enjoy fullest security of life, property and honour. Muslims and non-Muslims would be treated on equal footing. He further argued that the new state would function with the will and sanction of the entire body of people in Pakistan, irrespective of caste, creed or colour.35

Jinnah was not sure about what the ultimate shape of the constitution of Pakistan was going to be, but he visualised Pakistan polity to be structured on democracy and secularism. Commenting on the future constitution he declared:

I am sure that it will be democratic type, embodying the essential principles of Islam … In any case Pakistan is not going to be a theocratic state … to be ruled by priests with a divine mission. We have many non-Muslims - Hindus, Christians and Parsi - but they are all Pakistanis. They will enjoy the same rights and privileges as any other citizens and will play their rightful part in the affairs of Pakistan.36

Speaking on the first session of the Pakistan Constituent Assembly, he asserted:

You are free; you are free to go to your temple, you are free to go to your Mosques or any other places of worship in this state of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or caste or creed- that has nothing to do with the fundamental principle that we are all citizens and equal citizens of one state … Now I think, we should keep that in front of us as our ideal and you will find that in course of time, Hindus would cease to be Hindus, and Muslims would cease to be Muslims, not in the religious sense, because, that is the personal faith of each individual, but in the political sense of the citizens of the state.37

Jinnah's speech in Pakistan's Constituent Assembly on 11 August 1947 throws light on the nature of the Pakistani state. The father of Pakistan had dreamt of a secular state which would guarantee not only every citizen's freedom to practice his or her religion but also ensure that they would not be discriminated by the state on the basis of religion, race and caste. He argued:

If you will work in co-operation, forgetting the past, burying the hatchet you are bound to succeed. If you change your past and work together in a spirit that everyone of you, no matter to what community he belongs, no matter what relations he had with you in the past, no matter what is his colour, caste or creed, is first, second and last a citizen of this state with equal rights, privileges and obligations, there will be no end to the progress you will make. I cannot emphasise it too much. We should begin to work in that spirit and in course of time all these angularities of the majority and minority communities, the Hindu community and the Muslim community—because even as regards Muslim you have Pathans, Punjabis, Shias, Sunnis and so on and among the Hindus you have Brahmins, Vaishnavas, Khatris, also Bengalees, Madrasis, and so on—will vanish.38

## Islam and State

After 1937, Jinnah's politics took a different course. He enunciated the 'Two Nation Theory' to advance the interests of his co-religionists after the British withdrawal from the Indian subcontinent. The partition of India caused catastrophic and untold misery for the Muslims who remained in post-colonial India.

The 'Two Nation Theory' had germinated much before Jinnah. The late 19th century witnessed the evolution of this theory. Muslim modernist and reformer Sir Syed Ahmad Khan started the movement for self-awakening and identity. He established the Aligarh Muslim University. The university was one of the centres where the idea of Pakistan was conceived and germinated. The poet and philosopher Muhammad Iqbal's presidential address to Muslim League on December 29,1930 at Allahabad is considered as the first articulation of the two-nation theory. He talked about it in very vague and uncertain terms. He said:

I would like to see the Punjab, the North-West Frontier Province, Sindh and Baluchistan amalgamated into a single state, self-government within the British Empire, or without the British Empire, the formation of a consolidated North-Western Indian Muslim State appears to me to be the final destiny of the Muslims, at least of North-west India.39

Rahmat Ali was the first person who publicly articulated this theory and produced a clear-cut plan. A definite shape to an idea of Pakistan was given by him. He coined the word Pakistan. In a pamphlet, 'Now or Never', issued in 1933 from Cambridge, he proposed that the Punjab, N.W.F.P. (Afghanistan), Kashmir, Sindh and Baluchistan be separated from India and formed into a federation of their own.

Jinnah translated the two-nation theory into the political reality of a nation state. He argued that the Muslims of the subcontinent were separate and a distinct nation from the Hindus. He wanted to negotiate a constitutional arrangement based on equitable sharing of power between the Congress and Muslim League, representing Hindus and Muslims respectively. The Congress insisted on the unity of the nation and refused to share power at British India's unitary centre. It paved the way for the articulation of the two nation theory by Jinnah and the subsequent partition of India.40 Rebuking the Congress's intransigencies at the annual session of the League at Patna, he considered it, 'a misfortune of our country, indeed it is a tragedy, that the High Command of the Congress is determined, absolutely determined, to crush all other communities and culture in this country, and to establish Hindu Raj'. He further argued, 'I say the Muslims and the Muslim League have only one ally, and that ally is the Muslim nation'.41

The idea of Pakistan was in his mind even before 1940. But he did not discuss the idea of a separate state with anybody. In 1938, after the refusal of a Muslim representation in the provincial cabinet by the Governor of Bombay, he conveyed his ideas to the editor of the *Times of India:*

This means that we of the Muslim League who represents the Muslims are to have no further say in the government of this province or of any other province in India where

#### 150 Dinesh Kumar Singh

Congress is in majority. That is the end. There is nothing more to do except to get a state of our own for the Muslims of the country'. He argued that the Congress had created, 'a serious situation which will break India vertically and horizontally.<sup>42</sup>

Despite the advocacy of partition of India by colleagues and followers, he was reluctant to forcefully articulate the two nation theory.

Jinnah, in his article in *Time and Tide* in January 1940, argued that the Muslim League was opposed to the domination of Hindu majority over Muslim and other minorities and vassalisation of Muslim India. He vehemently opposed any federal arrangement which may result in domination of the majority community over the minority under the guise of parliamentary democracy. Parliamentary democracy was not sensitive to concerns and problems of the minorities. India was a pluralist and multi-cultural society. This system was totally unsuited to the genius of the people of the country which was composed of various nationalities. He argued that the Hindus and Muslims were two separate nations. He said:

A plan of action must be evolved that recognises that there are in India two nations, but both must share the governance of their common motherland. In evolving such a constitution, the Muslims are ready to co-operate with the British Government, the Congress or any other party so that the present enmities may cease and India may take its place among the great countries of the world.43

Jinnah presided over the second session of the Lahore Muslim League in 1940. He was instrumental in passing the famous resolution which called for a separate Muslim homeland. It was considered as the intellectual bedrock of Pakistan. It did not mention the two nation theory. It stated:

that it is considered view of this session of the All India Muslim League that no constitutional plan workable in this country or acceptable to the Muslims unless it is designed on the following basic principles, viz., that geographical contiguous units are demarcated into regions which should be so constituted, with such territorial readjustments as may be necessary, that the areas in which the Muslims are numerically in a majority, as in the North-Western and Eastern zones of India, should be grouped to constitute Independent states in which the constituent unit shall be autonomous and sovereign.<sup>44</sup>

The Lahore Resolution called for a separate Muslim homeland in vague and uncertain terms. It did not use the word Pakistan. The Indian and British press considered it as a 'vivisection of the motherland,' 'dividing the baby into two halves' and 'cutting the cow'. Congress leaders attacked him using derogatory language. He was branded as anti-Hindu. Reacting on these attacks, he argued:

we had not used the word 'Pakistan'. Who gave this word … You know perfectly well that Pakistan is a word which is really foisted upon us and fathered on us by some sections of

the Hindu Press and also by the British Press. Now our resolution was known for a long time as Lahore Resolution, popularly known as Pakistan. But how long are we to have this long phrase? I now say to my Hindu friends and British friends: we thank you for giving us one word.<sup>45</sup>

Jinnah stated that Hindus and Muslims belonged to two different religious philosophies, with different social customs and literature, with no intermarriage and based on conflicting ideas and concepts. Their outlook on life and of life was different and despite one thousand years of history, the relations between the Hindus and Muslims could not attain any level of cordiality. Delivering a political speech, he argued:

It is extremely difficult to appreciate why our Hindu friends fail to understand the real nature of Islam and Hinduism. They are not religions in the strict sense of the word, but are, in fact, different and distinct social orders, and it is a dream that the Hindus and Muslims can ever evolve a common nationality, and this misconception of one Indian nation has troubles and will lead India to destruction if we fail to revise our notions in time. The Hindus and Muslims belong to two different religious philosophies, social customs, literature. They neither intermarry nor interdine together and, indeed, they belong to two different civilizations which are based mainly on conflicting ideas and conceptions. Their aspects on life and of life are different. It is quite clear that Hindus and Mussalmans derive their inspiration from different sources of history. They have different epics, different heroes, and different episodes. Very often the hero of one is a foe of the other and, likewise, their victories and defeats overlap. To yoke together two such nations under a single state, one as a numerical minority and the other as a majority, must lead to growing discontent and final destruction of any fabric that may be so built for the government of such a state.46

He considered religion as the basis of nation. He argued:

Religion alone is a cohesive force for the idea of a nationality. In countries where the allegiance of people is divided on the basis of religion, the idea of a single nationality has never finally succeeded. In Germany, the Christians and Jews have lived together for centuries and yet failed to weld together into a single nation.47

For rationalisation of his two nation theory he argued that they are not simply religions, but a distinct cultural and national community. He asserted:

Religion is considered not merely religion, in the strict sense as understood in the West by a Hindu or a Muslim but a complete social order which affects all the activities of life. In Islam, religion is the motive spring of all actions in life. A Muslim of one country has far more sympathies with a Muslim living in another country than with a non-Muslim living in the same country … Even now an Indian Muslim feels far more stirred by the distress of his Muslim brothers beyond India than by a similar calamity affecting non-Muslims in India.48

#### 152 Dinesh Kumar Singh

Jinnah advocated the compatibility of democracy and Islamic principles. The ideological structure of Islam's world view was conducive to democracy. He argued that democracy was in consonance with the principles of Islam. He did not advocate an orthodox Islamic state. Islam would provide ethical value to the modern democratic structure of the state. It was not to be a religious or theocratic state. Addressing the Muslim legislators' convention in Delhi in 1946, he argued: 'What are we aiming at? It is not theocracy. It is not for a theocratic state'.49 He did not provide a detailed description of the constitution. His vision of Pakistan polity saw it structured on the lines of democratic principles. Commenting on the future constitution, he declared:

I do not know what the ultimate shape of (Pakistan's) constitution is going to be, but I'm sure it will be democratic type, embodying the essential principles of Islam. Today they are applicable in actual life as they were 1300 years ago. Islam and its idealism have taught us democracy. It has taught equality of men, justice and fair play to everybody … In any case, Pakistan is not going to be a theocratic state to be ruled by priests with a divine mission. We have many non-Muslims—Hindus, Christians and Parsis—but they are all Pakistanis. They will enjoy the same rights and privileges as any other citizens and will play their rightful part in the affairs of Pakistan.50

#### Conclusion

Jinnah represented the aspirations and interests of the Muslim elite. Jinnah's main concern was to protect the interests of the upper middle classes (aristocratic-feudal and western educated) and capitalist classes of the Muslim community. He was articulating the communitarian interest of the upper classes. As Moin Shakir argued that the response of lower and upper classes of the Muslim society to colonialism stood in sharp contrast to each other. The political thinking of the lower classes was entirely different from the political thinking of the Muslim elite. He further opined that 'the upper classes, even if they happened to be losers in consequences of the colonial policies, did not join hands with the aspirations of the lower classes. The reasons were many: absence of any contact with the lower classes, perception of cultural values and historical identity, great desire to have a share in jobs and the political imperatives to find out ways and means to strike a compromise with the ruling powers'.51

Jinnah's conceptualisation of nationalism and democracy was based on the ideology of the bourgeoisie. His notion of nationalism seems to be hegemonic from the perspective of poor Muslims. Gramsci, through the twin concept of the 'national-popular' and 'hegemonic', discussed forging commonality of purpose and of programme among people differently located within the power structure in the national context. Gramsci argued that class rule was to be transformed into a national one through the active and collaborative consent of the masses. For him, hegemony '… is a system of alliances which enables it to mobilise the majority of working population'.52

The Congress was ready to partition Punjab and Bengal as the price for acquiring centralised state power. The British colonial power was eager to quit with the least possible damage to imperial interests. Ayesha Jalal argues that the demand for the partition of India was a colossal miscalculation. The prevailing conditions compelled Jinnah to acquiesce in the creation of the very 'maimed, mutilated and moth-eaten' nation which he had rejected in 1944 and again in 1946.53

The two-nation theory is beset with theoretical fallacy and a lot of problems. The majority of Muslims decided to stay back after partition. The emergence of Bangladesh in 1971 falsified the Two-Nation Theory. Salman Rushdie, in one of the most ingenious parts of *Shame*, a political commentary on Pakistan scripted as a novel said: 'Pakistan may be described as a failure of the dreaming mind … perhaps the place was just insufficiently imagined'.<sup>54</sup>

### Notes and References

- 1. Stanley Wolpert, *Jinnah of Pakistan* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984), pp. 12–27.
- 2. Ibid., p. 11.
- 3. Ibid.
- 4. Saad R. Khairi, *The Journey from Indian Nationalism to Muslim Statehood* (Delhi: Oxford University, 1996), p. 78.
- 5. Ibid., p. 84.
- 6. Stanley Wolpert (see note 1), p. 34.
- 7. Sarojini Naidu, *Mohd. Ali Jinnah: Ambassador of Unity*, (1918), p. 11.
- 8. S. S. Pirzada, *Foundations of Pakistan, All India Muslim League Documents 1906–1947*, Vol. 1 (New Delhi: Metropolitan Book Company, 1982), p. 316.
- 9. Stanley Wolpert, *Jinnah of Pakistan* (see note 1), p. 35.
- 10. Sarojini Naidu (see note 7) p. 45.
- 11. Ibid., p. 30.
- 12. Stanley Wolpert (see note 1), p. 48.
- 13. Saad R. Khairi (see note 4), pp. 97–98.
- 14. S. S. Pirzada (see note 8), p. 354.
- 15. Ibid., p. 55.
- 16. Ibid., p. 56.
- 17. Ibid., p. 57.
- 18. Ajeet Javed, *Secular and Nationalist Jinnah* (New Delhi: Kitab Publishing House, 1997), pp. 44–45.
- 19. Saad R. Khairi (see note 4), p. 176.
- 20. Stanley Wolpert (see note 1), pp. 71–72.
- 21. Saad R. Khairi (see note 4), p. 174.
- 22. Stanley Wolpert (see note 1), p. 82.
- 23. Ajeet Javed (see note 18), p. 60.
- 24. Ibid., pp. 74–75.
- 25. Saad R. Khairi (see note 4), p. 92.