# **15 Social Change**

Change is the law of nature. Society is also an ever-changing phenomenon, growing, decaying, renewing, and accommodating itself to changing conditions and suff ering vast modifi cations in the course of time.

# **MEANING OF SOCIAL CHANGE**

Th e word 'change' denotes a diff erence in anything observed over some period. Social change, therefore, would mean observable diff erences in any social phenomena over any period. Th e following are some of its defi nitions:

**(i)** *'*Social change is a term used to describe variations in, or modifi cations of, any aspect of social processes, social pat terns, social interaction or social organisation'. —*Jones* 

**(ii)** 'Social change may be defi ned as a new fashion or mode, either modifying or replacing the old, in the life of a people, or in the operation of a society'. —*H. T. Mazumdar* 

**(iii)** 'Social change means that large number of persons are engaging in activities that differ from those which they or their immediate forefathers engaged in some time before'. —*Merrill and Eldredge*

**(iv)** 'Our direct concern as sociologists is with social relationships. It is the change in these relationships which alone we shall regard as social change'. —*Maclver and Page*

**(v)** 'Social change may be defi ned as modifi ca tion in ways of doing and thinking of people'. —*M. D. Jenson*  **(vi)** 'Social change refers to the modifi cations which occur in the life patterns of people'. —*S*. *Koenig*

**(vii)** 'Social change refers to any modi fi cation in established patterns of inter human relationships and standards of conduct'. *—Lundberg and others*

On the basis of these defi nitions, it may be concluded that social change refers to the modifi cations which take place in the life patterns of people. Social change will mean variations of any aspect of social processes, social patterns, social interactions, or social organization. It is a change in the institutional and norma tive structure of society.

# **NATURE OF SOCIAL CHANGE**

Th e main characteristics of the nature of social change are as follows:

**(i) Social change is a universal phenomenon:** Social change occurs in all societies. Th e speed and extent of change may diff er from society to society. Some change rapidly, while others change slowly.

**(ii) Social change is community change:** Social change does not refer to the change in the life of an individual or the life patterns of several individuals. It is a change which occurs in the life of the entire community. In other words, only that change can be called social change whose infl uence can be felt in a commu nity form. Social change is social and not individual.

**(iii) Speed of social change is not uniform**: While social change occurs in societies, its speed is not uniform in every society. In most societies, it occurs so slowly that it is often not noticed by those who live in them. Social change in urban areas is faster than in rural areas.

**(iv) Nature and speed of social change is aff ected by and related to time factor:** Th e speed of social change is not uniform in each age or period in the same society. In modern times, the speed of social change is faster today than before 1947. Before 1947, there was less industrialization in India; after 1947, India has become more industrialized. Th erefore, the speed of social change after 1947 is faster than before 1947.

**(v) Social change occurs as an essential law:** Change is the law of nature. Social change is also natural. It may occur either in the natural course or as a result of planned eff orts. By nature we desire change. Our needs keep on changing. To satisfy our desire for change and our changing needs, social change becomes a ne cessity.

**(vi) Defi nite prediction of social change is not possible:** It is diffi cult to make any prediction about the exact forms of social change. Th ere is no inherent law of social change according to which it would assume defi nite forms. We may say that on ac count of the social reform movement untouchability will be abol ished from the Indian society; that the basis and ideals of mar riage will change due to the marriage laws passed by the govern ment; that industrialization will increase the speed of urbanization but we cannot predict the exact forms which social relationships will assume in future. Likewise, it cannot be predicted as to what shall be our attitudes, ideas, norms, and values in future.

**(vii) Social change shows chain-reaction sequence:** A society's pattern of living is a dynamic system of inter-related parts. Th ere fore, change in one of these parts usually reacts on others.

For example, industrialism has destroyed the domestic system of production. Th e destruction of domestic system of production brought women from the home to the factory and the offi ce. Th e employ ment of women meant their independence from the bondage of men. It brought a change in their attitudes and ideas. It meant a new social life for women. It consequently aff ected every part of the family life.

**(viii) Social change results from the interaction of a number of factors:** Generally, it is thought that particular factors such as changes in technology, economic development, or climatic condi tions cause social change. Th is is called monistic theory which fl eeks to interpret social change in terms of one single factor, but the monistic theory does not provide an adequate explanation of the complex phenomenon of social change. As a matter of fact, social change is the consequence of a number of factors.

**(xi) Social changes are chiefl y those of modifi cation or replacement:** Social changes may be broadly categorized as modifi cations or replacements. It may be modifi cation of physical goods or social relationships. For example, the form of our breakfast has changed. Although we eat the same basic materials which we ate earlier—wheat, eggs, or corn—their form is changed. Ready-to-eat cornfl akes, breads, and omelettes are substituted for the form in which these same materials were consumed in yester years. Th ere may also be modifi cations of social relationships.

Th e old authoritarian family has become the small equalitarian fam ily, and the one-room school has become a centralized school. Our ideas about women's rights, religion, government, and co-educa tion stand modifi ed today.

Change also takes the form of replacement. A new material or non-material form supplants an old one. Horses have been replaced by automobiles. Similarly, old ideas have been replaced by new ideas. Th e germ theory of medicine has replaced older views on the causes of diseases. Democracy has replaced aristoc racy.

# **THE FACTORS OF SOCIAL CHANGE**

Social change has occurred in all societies and in all periods of time, but the rate of social change diff ers from society to society. In one society the rate is rapid, while in another it is necessarily slow. Th ere are various factors which determine the rate and direction of social change.

### **Biological Factors**

Under biological factors of social change, we include (i) plants and animals in the area and (ii) human beings themselves. Th e non-human biological environment aff ects human, social, and cultural life. People utilize the available plant and animal life in ways determined by their culture. Th us, Indians worship snakes and holy fi g trees. Many plants are used for medicinal purposes which have given birth to the Indian system of medicine. Cow is re garded sacred among Hindus. Humans ward off bacteria, poisonous plants, insects, pests, and dangerous animals with the best means they have been able to invent. Changes in geographic conditions such as change in climate, change in soil composition, drying up of lakes, or streams kill some organisms and give birth to others. Th ese changes aff ect the nature of human's struggle for existence.

Th e human biological environment includes the factors that determine the numbers, the composition, the selection, and the hereditary quality of the successive generations. If we compare ourselves with our parents, we will know that we are diff erent from them in our make-up, in ideas, and in most other things. No new generation is an exact replica of the old.

Th e change in population, both in numbers and composition, has a far-reaching eff ect on society. Th e growth of population has given birth to a great variety of social problems—unemploy ment, child labour, use of contraceptives, wars, competition, production of synthetic goods, etc. It has also led to urbanization with all its attendant evils. Since the death rate too has dimin ished in society, there are more of the older people than there used to be about a century back. Naturally, there is a change in the social attitudes and beliefs.

Moreover, if the growth of population is checked, it would mean a higher standard of living, the emancipation of women from child-bearing drudgery, better care for the young, and conse quently a better society. When the growth of population threatens the standard of living, it inspires a change of attitude. Thus, in the nineteenth century contraceptives were designated immoral, but today they are not so regarded; rather their use is encouraged and patronized by the society. With the decrease in the size of the family, the facility of marriage and divorce, the relation be tween husband and wife, the relation between children and par ent, the mode of upbringing of children, the position of the mother in the house, and the degree of economic self-sufficiency of the family have all been changing. Thus, it is evident that the changes in the numbers and composition of population are causing a number of changes in social relations.

Besides, there is a close relationship between the growth of population and the level of physical health and vitality of the people. Because there are many mouths to feed, none gets enough to eat with the result that chronic malnutrition and associated diseases become prevalent, and these induce physical incompetence, apathy, and lack of enterprise. It may be noted that all the subsistence populations of the world are socially backward and unprogressive and their indiff erence to improve their mate rial welfare is largely a consequence of their low level of physical well-being.

Th e following are the defects of population growth:

- **(i)** High birth rate
- **(ii)** High death rate
- **(iii)** Greater number of children
- **(iv)** Greater number of old people
- **(v)** Great number of widows and widowers
- **(vi)** Disproportionate number of male and female population
- **(vii)** Large number of disabled people
- **(viii)** Large number of rural people
- **(ix)** High rate of infant mortality
- **(x)** Short span of age

All these defects aff ect the quality of population, and consequently, aff ect the social structure and social institutions adversely. Needless to say that on account of high population growth, the Indian society is passing through a critical period of great poverty unemployment, moral degeneration, criminality, and backwardness.

#### **Physical Factors**

Th e surface of our planet is never at rest. Th ere are slow geographical changes as well as the occasional convulsions of na ture in storm, earthquakes, and fl oods. Th ese changes in the physi cal environment sometimes bring about important changes in society. Th e fl oods in India may hasten the birth of model villages in place of those which have been washed off or they may lead to the construction of dams in order to prevent future fl oods. Th e great volcanic eruption of Yokohama in 1923 was responsible for the new kind of architecture in Japan, while London may be called a blessing of the great fi re that destroyed it.

It may also be remembered that physical environment gov erns the social conditions. Every culture develops in some sort of physical setting. Environment limits or permits the growth of civilization. At the poles and in the deserts, there can be little art and no learning, and the available time is spent in the business of keeping alive. In the more temperate climates, there are rapid changes in society. Th e absence of some factors can prevent the change in a certain direction. Th e non-availability of coal, iron, and oil within the borders can prevent a large and populous na tion from becoming a great military power, but the physical habi tat in no way 'causes' the culture. It only sets the stage for social life, but the geographical environment cannot explain most social changes. Nothing much happened to the climate of Europe during the past fi ve centuries, yet the social system was tremendously transformed by industrial revolution. Th e same geographical en vironment may support extremely diff erent civilizations, and simi lar civilizations can exist in quite diff erent physical settings.

#### **Technological Factors**

Technology aff ects society greatly, and a variation in tech nology causes a variation in some institution or custom. Our attitudes, beliefs, and traditions have crumbled before technologi cal advance. Industrialism has destroyed the domestic system of production, and brought women from the home to the factory and the offi ce. Increased productive effi ciency in industry released a con siderable proportion of the population for service functions. A large body of people, such as engineers, book keepers, buyers of raw material, and sellers of fi nished products, not actually engaged in doing production work, grew. Changes in production and trade posed new problems of political regulation. Th e functions of law expanded. Th e number of law makers, of bureaucrats to apply the law, of lawyers to interpret the laws increased. Th e application of science to industry, agriculture, and health gave rise to a host of new service activities. If we just look around us, we will realize the enormous change that is going on in society owing to techno logical inventions. Th e most spectacular invention of our aye, the atomic energy, has vastly infl uenced our life. As an agent of war, it brought about the most appalling annihilation of people in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. As an agent of peace, it may bring an unprecedented era of plenty and prosperity. We can see how the automobile expands the range of social relationships and reduces the communal character of the neighbourhood. Th e rise of stan dard of living, the transformation of class structures and of class standards, the rise of middle class, the undermining of local folk ways and the disintegration of the neighbourhood, the breaking up of the old family system, the increasing dominance of urban ways over those of the country, the improvement in the condi tions of women, the birth of new conceptions, and movements like communism and socialism are the result of the changes in pro duction technology.

Changes in the agricultural techniques have aff ected the rural community. With the invention of new agricultural tools and chemical manures, agricultural production has increased, thereby raising the standard of living of the rural people. Fewer people are now needed for agriculture. Consequently, many agricultural labourers have shifted to cities to fi nd employment.

Th e basic function of all communication devices is the con quest of time and space. Th e rapidity, with which cultural changes have been occurring in modern age, can be attributed greatly to the increased use of the printed word as a means of communication. Th e press has infl uenced entertainment, education, politics, and trade. It has brought the country dwellers to knowledge of the urban life and has often led them to want the things of the city or go to the city. Similarly, the invention of radio, telegraph, and telephone has infl uenced the business, recreation, and public opinion and furthered the development of new modes of organization.

Th e changes in the modes of transportation have variously aff ected our social relationships. Th e methods and means of trans portation determine how easily people can move themselves and how easily they can meet people of other places or other societies to exchange goods or ideas. Th e importance of transportation in modern social life can hardly be stressed. Modern humans live so much on wheels that they would not be able to live in suburbs and work in the city were it not for the local transport, that they could not leave home for the station with only a few minutes to spare were it not for the automobile, that they could not use many a thing for breakfast were it not for the ships and trains that tie the many places of the world together commercially. If the wheels of transportation were to stop for a single day, the life of the modern society would be put out of gears.

Th e rapid means of transportation have encouraged the growth of intercontinental trade and the interdependence of countries. Th e intermixing of people belonging to various countries led to the removal of much of misunderstanding, and feelings of hatred and jealousy were replaced by sympathy and cooperation. Th is assisted in the progress of the sense of universal brotherhood. Th e latest inventions in the fi eld of transport, the aeroplanes, have brought swift delivery of goods. Th e growth of cities with their consequent problems of urban life is another important result of the development of the means of transport. Th ere is greater mobility of population today in which the modern rapid means of transport have played an important role. Th ey have broken the barriers to cultural isolation. Technological changes have aff ected social val ues and norms. Family ties have broken and there is a movement away from family and community loyalty to a movement towards individualism. Bureaucracy has grown in number and power. Hu man relations have become impersonal and secondary.

Th e eff ects of technology on major social institutions may be summed up as follows:

**(I) Eff ects on family life:** Modern technology has changed the family organization and relations in several ways. Th e main eff ects are the following: (i) It has led to the disintegration of joint family system. (ii) Th e employment of women in factories and offi ces has changed the form of husband–wife relationship and aff ected the family struc ture and functions in several ways. (iii) It has led to the liberation of women. (iv) Love marriage, inter-caste marriage, and late marriage are the other eff ects of technology. (v) Th e invention of birth control devices has reduced the size of the family. (vi) It has increased the number of divorces. (vii) It has lessened the importance of family as an agency of social control.

**(II) Eff ects on economic life:** (i) Industry has been taken from the household and new types of economic organizations such as factories, agencies, stores, and banks have come up. Economy has acquired a global character. (ii) It has led to the concentration of industries into huge, closely packed cities. (iii) It has given birth to capitalism and its attendant evils. (iv) It has brought in higher standard of living. (v) Division of labour and specialization are the products of technology. (vi) It has caused economic depression, unemployment, industrial dis putes, accidents, and

 diseases. (vii) It has given birth to trade union movement. (viii) It has created a middle class of white collar employees.

**(III) Eff ects on social life:** (i) It has led to the decline of community life. (ii) It has grown the sense of individualism. (iii) It has created the problem of houses and slums in the cities. (iv) Recreation has become commercialized. (v) It has changed the basis of social stratifi cation from birth to wealth. (vi) It has narrowed the gap of caste system. (vii) It has grown psychic confl icts and diseases. Th e modern human suff ers from great mental strain, emotional instability, and economic insecurity. (viii) It has led to 'consumerism'.

**(IV) Eff ects on state:** Technology has aff ected the state in the following ways: (i) A large number of functions have been transferred from the family to the state. Th e idea of social welfare state is an off shoot of technology. Th e scope of state activity has been enlarged. (ii) Th e infl uence of pressure groups over the state has been increased. (iii) It has led to a shift of functions from local government to the central government. (iv) Th e barriers of na tionalism have been broken and the idea of world state is gaining ground. (v) Democracy has become the common form of government. (vi) It has made the state secular. (vii) It has increased the size and power of bureaucracy.

**(V) Eff ects on religious life:** With the growth of scientifi c knowledge, the role of superstitions has decreased. Th ere is now more of religious toleration. Th e followers of diff erent religions have shed off their orthodoxy and mix with each other. Religion has now become more secular and scientifi c.

# **Social Inventions**

Technological inventions may also give rise to what Ogburn calls social inventions. By social invention he means 'any invention that is not material and that is not a discovery in natural science'. Boycott, woman suff rage, non-co operation movement, proportional representation, old age pensions, juvenile court, matrimonial bureau, civil service, bonus to wage earners, visiting teacher, psychological clinics, rotary club, research institute, and the United Nations are some of the examples of social inventions. So, non-material inventions are social inventions. Although sometimes mechanical inventions go into the creation of a social invention, often mechanical infl uence may be slight, negligible, or even non-existent; for example, to boycott a social invention does not depend on any immediate mechanical invention. Neither does woman suff rage. It should not be concluded, therefore, that mechanical elements are necessary to social inventions. However, like mechanical inventions social inventions spring from the perception of some adjustment need.

**Social inventions bring social changes**: Social inventions bring about social changes is quite evident. Th e invention of language, which is perhaps the greatest of all inventions, has made possible the development of the sciences which have in turn made possible most of the important modern physical inventions. A graduated income tax has the social eff ect of redistributing wealth. Bonus to wage earners brings about a higher standard of living to workers. Woman suff rage has brought the women into the political fi eld, thus aff ecting our family life. Legislation making school attendance compulsory has reduced the control of parents over their children. Prohibition has altered the drinking habits of the population. Th e enactment of Hindu Code has changed the customs relating to marriage and divorce. Th e control system has created the black market, the anti corruption department, and new ideas of morality. Th e two world wars infl uenced the whole range of social institutions. Th ere was hardly any industry that was not aff ected. Farmers felt the shortage of labour. Th e marriage rate and the birth rate were lowered. News were censored and prices went up. It may be concluded, then, that social inventions such as mechanical inventions have far- reaching eff ects on society.

**Opposition to social inventions**: Just as technological inventions have been opposed by people, similarly resistance to social inventions has been stubborn and long-lasting. To use old forms is easier than to make or adopt new ones. In the United States, the abolition of slavery and in Britain the introduction of woman suff rage were stubbornly resisted. It was only after a prolonged and devastating war that the abolition of slavery could be accomplished. It took virtually centuries for the democratic form of government to become established. In India the people opposed the enactment of Hindu Code, and now there is opposition to the enactment of a uniform civil code. Th e Vajpayee Government had to climb down on the issue. In France, Government reform was opposed so vigorously by those in power that the culmination was a revolution in 1789. 'It is a curious phenomenon', write Ogburn and Nimkoff , 'that some of the greatest blessings of the human race should have been bitterly resisted, at times with the spilling of blood, before humanity was allowed to profi t by them .... It is as though there were enemies within the gates; as though many of us did not want to increase our blessings'.

# **INFLUENCE OF CULTURE ON SOCIAL CHANGE**

It has been acknowledged by all that there is an intimate connection between our beliefs and our institutions, our valuations, and our social relationships. Th e social and cultural changes are so closely interwoven that all cultural change involves social change. It was the social philosophy of Marxism, which gained control of the economic and political orders in Russia. In India Gandhism has infl uenced to an extent of the economic and social orders. According to some thinkers, religion is the prime initiator of social change. Max Weber in his *Sociology of Religion* has pointed out that there is a direct relation between the practical ethics of a community and the character of its economic system. He found out a close relation between certain forms of Protestantism and early capitalism. Hinduism and Budhism had a great infl uence on Indian social institutions. Our religious beliefs determine the structure of our institutions. No institution can endure an instant longer than it is maintained by the contemporary beliefs and attitudes of social beings. Social systems are directly or indirectly the creations of cultural values, and any change in valuations on the part of social groups makes its eff ect felt on social institutions. As Hobhouse said, there is 'a broad correlation between the system of institutions and mentality behind them'. Our view of the role of sex in human life having undergone a change has changed the family organization and interest. Th us, there is a defi nite relation between changing attitudes and beliefs and changing social forms.

It may also be noted that culture not only infl uences our social relationship but also infl uences the direction and character of technological change. It is not only that our beliefs and social institutions must correspond to the changes in technology, but our beliefs and the social institutions determine the use to which the technological inventions will be put. Th e atomic energy can be used for munitions of war or for production purposes. Th e industrial plant can turn out armaments or necessaries of life. Steel and iron can be used for building warships or tractors. Th e indiff erence of the means of production to the use to which they are put expresses the degree in which culture is itself a determinant factor. Dawson and Gettys rightly remark, 'Culture tends to give direction and momentum to social change to set limits beyond which social change may not go'.

Even if the people of the world were to lose all the material objects in one great catastrophe, the loss would not mean the end of the various societies of the world. For the people who survive

the catastrophe would still possess the ability to construct houses, roads, cities, and machines and rehabilitate their fi elds. In other words, we may say that as long as the non-material aspects of a culture survive, so can the society. It may, therefore, be said that non-material aspect of a culture is more important than the material aspects. Th e burning of ancient Rome did not destroy the Roman society nor has the physical devastation of Europe destroyed the European civilization.

We are apt to think that the new industrial civilization has dethroned the old culture. Every new invention disturbs the old adjustment. Th e transformation of class structures, the breaking up of traditional family system, and the disintegration of social nearness are some of the consequences of changes in technology which appear to be the enemy of our culture. Th e machines brought ugliness, shoddiness, haste, and standardization. Th ey brought congestion, slums, new hazards, new diseases, and industrial fatigue, but culture began to reassert itself and redirect the civilization. It ceased to tolerate the inhumanity of the new civilization and endowed the machine with beauty. New arts blossomed in the ruins of the old.

# **QUESTIONS**

- 1. What do you mean by social change?
- 2. Describe the main characteristics of social change.
- 3. Describe briefl y the numerous factors of social change.
- 4. Examine the eff ect of technological factors in social change.
- 5. To what extent do technological factors govern social change?
- 6. Explain the factors responsible for social change in India.