# War and Breakdown

Russia entered the war with a weak arms industry and relatively poor communications. The mobilization of a vast army adversely affected the labour situation. Russia was quite unprepared for the huge expenditure of arms and ammunition, particularly artillery, which modern war required. In the first six months the reserves of military hardware had been largely dissipated and ammunition was running dangerously short. When in the spring of 1915 the Germans attacked with vastly superior fire power, the Russians were forced into prolonged retreat. *Soldiers* found that they were forced to pick up the rifles *of* fallen comrades. The retreat itself led to the abandonment of considerable stores to the enemy. The disasters in Poland and the general atmosphere of incompetence shook the faith of the people in the regime. The Tsar decided in 1915 to take command of the army himself, thereby taking an unnecessarily direct responsibility for failures and losses. Ministers did not take effective action, and there was constant friction between them and various voluntary organizations, of industrialists and others, who claimed that the government was unable to organize the country for war.

It is true of course that other countries also suffered greatly from inability to cope with the munitions problems. One has only to refer to Lloyd George's War Memoirs to see how acute the difficulties were in Britain. However, British industrial capacity and transport facilities were, in relation to the task in hand, greatly superior to the Russians'. Britain was also able to import arms and equipment from the United States. Russia was virtually cut off from her allies, save for difficult and roundabout routes,

**and** also paid the penalty for the underdevelopment of her engineering and machinery industries. (In 1912, 57 per cent of Russia's industrial equipment was met by imports.<sup>1</sup> ) By switching her engineering capacity almost wholly to the production of armaments, she deprived herself of the means of maintaining her existing industrial and transport equipment intact, let alone expanding it. There were grave shortages of spare parts. The already inadequate transport network became increasingly strained as more locomotives and rolling stock went out of use. Of course, attempts were made to remedy these defects, and munitions production became considerably more satisfactory by 1916. Early in 1917 a railway line to the ice-free port of Murmansk was completed, making possible year-round importing of Western munitions. The army's equipment was improving. However, the appalling losses of earlier years had undermined morale in the army, and the population in rear areas was not now in the mood to bear the sacrifices imposed upon it by the strain of war and the chronic difficulties of transport. St Petersburg was particularly likely to be affected by shortages, since it was far from the main food-producing areas and also had to import its coal vast distances by rail; it had been importing British coal, but this was cut off by the war. It was in fact shortage of food in St Petersburg which finally broke the back of the Russian Empire. The troops refused to fire on a rioting crowd, and Tsardom collapsed. To say this is far from adopting a purely economic explanation of the Russian revolution. Other powers too suffered from defeats and from food shortages. Russia herself was in a much worse situation in 1942, both from the standpoint of military losses and of food supplies for rear areas, than she had been in 1917. Thus it is a combination of such factors with the political demoralization of regime and people, and social breakdown, that swept away the Empire.

# **The Provisional Government**

The Provisional government faced an appallingly difficult task. In the midst of war and threatening economic collapse and social anarchy, it had somehow to establish itself as the legitimate

government. For many reasons, the discussion of which is beyond *the* scope of this book, it conspicuously failed to do this. It took a number of socially progressive measures, the implementation of which was rendered extremely difficult by the circumstances of the time. It adopted protective labour legislation and approved or tolerated the establishment of factory committees, which were to make the operation of industry so difficult in subsequent months. It even attempted to formulate plans. Already in 1916, the Tsar's government endeavoured to compel the peasants to sell grain to the state at state-fixed prices (and the peasants' reluctance to supply was a contributory factor to the shortages that fuelled the riots that broke the Empire). The Provisional government too proved incapable of enforcing deliveries at prices it was prepared to pay. It is interesting to note that the elimination of private trade in grain, and the beginnings of compulsory deliveries, which many imagine to have been initiated by Lenin, were begun even before the fall of the  $\text{Tsar}^2$ 

The industrial situation continued to deteriorate. There were many causes for this. There were the consequences of past failings in maintenance and replacement and the shortage of spares. There was the cumulative effect of a creeping transport crisis; the railways were beginning to break down, and the nonarrival of essential fuel supplies adversely affected all branches of industry as well as the operation of the railways themselves.

As an acute contemporary observer put it: 'The fuel and raw materials supply position continued to deteriorate, and this did not lead to a sharp and shattering crisis only because, for other reasons, their use was being rapidly curtailed.<sup>13</sup> The same writer bitterly assailed 'the self-assured ignorance and irresponsibility' of ministers facing the problems of general collapse, though he did not fail to note that one cause for this was the fact that 'under the old regime Russia had been deprived of political and social forms which could regulate the relationships of labour and capital on a modern basis. ... The working class had no organizational or political experience of responsible and open activity.<sup>4</sup> The Soviets which were set up alongside the Provisional government showed a lack of realism and fear of responsibility. The authority of the government in all matters was increasingly undermined not

**only by the** existence of the Soviets (more or less representative bodies of workers and soldiers who shared authority with organs of government) but also by the dangerous growth of separatist and autonomist tendencies, notably in the Ukraine and in Transcaucasia. Finally, the increasing militancy of the factory committees was making it more and more difficult for industrial management to operate. Strikes were frequent, workers' demands more and more extreme, and the voices of extremist parties ever louder. Matters were not helped by rapid inflation. Communist historians sometimes spoke of sabotage by the industrialists, and indeed Lenin did at the time. However, Lenin also denounced 'capitalist ministers', and it seems unlikely that more than a handful of businessmen consciously tried to make the work of the economy and of the government impossible. But they certainly did react adversely to what appeared to them to be unreasonable pressure from the factory committees, and there were many lockouts as well as strikes.

There was also increasing confusion in the villages. The peasants resented having to supply the government with produce for which they were paid in rapidly depreciating roubles. But more fundamental was the demand, even more loudly voiced, for the distribution of the landlords' land. In principle the moderate socialist parties which dominated the government were in favour of this type of land reform. However, the whole question was particularly explosive because the army was largely composed of peasants, and to raise the issue of land reapportionment in the midst of a war was to risk mass desertion; the troops would go home to ensure that they and their families got their due. This was an important reason for the failure of the Provisional government to enact any swift land reform measures, even though they were perfectly well aware of the danger of not doing so. A second reason for delay was the appalling complexity of any such land reform measures. The majority of the government wished them 'to be properly prepared and carried out in an orderly manner, and there was by no means any agreement about the question of compensation for the landlords or the principles of reapportionment (see below). It was finally decided to put a decision off until **the** summoning of a constituent assembly. However, spontaneous

land seizures were already occurring on an increasing scale in the summer of 1917, egged on by the militant 'left' Socialist Revolutionaries as well as the Bolsheviks.

Both in the towns and in the villages the situation was approaching chaos even without the help of Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Of course, they tried to make matters worse, since they were unconcerned with an orderly land settlement, industrial production or the military situation. They sought to reap the whirlwind. They contributed to the breakdown but did not cause it. The authority of the government had virtually collapsed for some weeks before the Bolsheviks seized the Winter Palace with a relatively insignificant group of ill-armed Red Guards. Galbraith has said that the man who breaks through a rotting door acquires an unjustified reputation for violence; some credit should be given to the door. The fact that the Bolsheviks took charge of a disintegrating society because it was disintegrating is a fact of great importance, which must be borne in mind in analysing their subsequent actions.

# The Ideas of the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks

On 7 November 1917 Lenin announced that they would now set about building the socialist society. Before endeavouring to analyse the events that followed, which form the essential subject matter of the book, it is necessary to consider the economic ideas of the Bolsheviks as they had developed up to the seizure of power, and to contrast them with those of their principal rivals.

The body of ideas which came later to be called Leninism may be described as Marxism adapted to the political and economic situation of a relatively backward country, with emphasis on the 'voluntarist' aspect of Marx's doctrines. Marx, it will be recalled, wrote his works in Western Europe; his ideas were in the main related to his experiences in England. He was primarily concerned with how the increasing concentration of capital in the leading capitalist states would bring about ever-growing contrasts between the small group of monopolists who owned the instruments of production and proletarian masses into whose ranks would be

pressed dispossessed peasants and the petty bourgeoisie. This would facilitate the takeover of power and holding it on behalf of the bulk of the people, while exercising coercion against the tiny group of exploiters and their retainers ('the dictatorship of the proletariat'). The correctness or otherwise of the analysis of monopoly capitalism is not a matter for discussion here. The point is that Lenin and other Russian Marxists at the turn of the century had the task of reconciling this doctrine with the reality of Russia. It is true that Marx wrote also of the 'Asian mode' of production and noted the relationship between oriental despotisms and control over water, a point developed more recently by Wittfogel in his concept of a 'hydraulic society'. It is also true that Marx did react quite specifically to a question put to him by the Russian revolutionary Vera Zasulich. This arose in the course of debates in Russia itself concerning a possible specifically Russian road to socialism. Might there not be a way of avoiding the capitalist road by utilizing the primitive-socialist potentialities of the peasant communes? Such a question must be seen in the context of the Slavophil doctrines, their idea of a peculiarly Russian experience and world view, whose proponents were in the main hostile to capitalism and to its merchant ideology.

. Marx had a good deal of trouble in devising an adequate answer to Zasulich, as is witnessed by the existence of rejected variants of this letter. Finally he replied along the following lines. The expropriation of the peasants which had already taken place in England would also take place in other countries of Western Europe. But the reasons that rendered this inevitable were confined to Western Europe. In the West 'one kind of private property is turned into another kind of private property. In the case of the Russian peasants, however, it would be necessary on the contrary to convert their communal property into private property.' He went on to state that his analysis did not give any grounds or arguments either for or against the Russian communal form. However, he came to the conclusion that 'this *obshchina* is the basis of the social rebirth of Russia, but it would only function as such if it would be possible to remove the disintegrating influences to which it is now subject on all sides, and then to ensure for it the normal conditions of free growth'.<sup>5</sup>

This reply proved so embarrassing to Russian Marxists of all hues that it was not published until 1924. In fact they were distinguished from the non-Marxist populists, and from the later Socialist Revolutionary party, precisely by their belief that capitalist development in Russia had become decisively established and that the kind of short cut via peasant socialism implied by Marx's letter was impracticable. Lenin's first major work, 'The Development of Capitalism in Russia' (1896-9), devoted much energy and an array of statistics to proving that even among the peasants commercial capitalism was making rapid headway. Lenin's more moderate rivals, the Mensheviks (as they were known from 1903), were just as convinced that capitalism would develop in Russia.

Given these assumptions, there were still at least two possible lines of Marxist thought. One, espoused by most of the Mensheviks, based itself on the evolutionary aspects of Marxist doctrine. If socialism was to grow out of advanced capitalism, then evidently Russia was not and would not for a long time be ripe for socialism. The Tsarist regime was a pre-capitalist and semi-feudal system of oppression. The situation was ripe for a bourgeoisdemocratic revolution designed to overthrow Tsarism. To this extent the Mensheviks were indeed revolutionaries. But what would happen when Tsarism was overthrown? The Mensheviks saw themselves as the social democratic opposition in a bourgeois-democratic republic. Martov, their leader, could claim that they were in line with what Marx had recommended in Germany in 1850, when that country too was underdeveloped.' Social change would in due course create the conditions for socialism. This process would involve industrialization under capitalist auspices. They, like the Bolsheviks, had little support and few supporters in the villages, and so had little hope of a parliamentary majority in a country in which, if their objective of universal suffrage were to be achieved, the vast majority of the electorate would be peasants.

The Bolshevik position before the revolution was distinguished from that of the Mensheviks by tougher language and an emphasis on tightly-knit organization of professional revolutionaries. It was also the case that Lenin saw more clearly the revolutionary potential of the peasants. To do this he had to some extent to go **outside die** established Marxist tradition. Orthodoxy at the turn of **the** century was exemplified by the argument of the German theoretician, Karl Kautsky. Following Marx, Kautsky had envisaged a gradual expropriation of the German peasants by Capital. He was also a firm believer, as was Marx, in the technical superiority of large-scale agricultural enterprise. Therefore both on technical grounds, and because the proletarianization of the peasants was a step in the direction of the ultimate socialist takeover, Kautsky opposed the adoption of a programme of support for the interests of the small peasants. If they were doomed by history, and if this was a progressive step in terms of the historical evolution of society, what business had the social democrats to delay this inevitable and progressive evolution? (Not very surprisingly, the social democrats never won much support in rural areas in Germany.) The adoption of such a policy in an overwhelmingly peasant country such as Russia was tantamount to political suicide. A sense of political self-preservation therefore inclined all shades of Marxian opinion to take a line favourable to peasant demands, in particular over the expropriation of the landlords. But Lenin also came to see the possibilities of a seizure of power on the basis of a peasant as well as a working-class revolution, in a country unripe for socialism, yet with a weak and 'cowardly' bourgeoisie. He spoke in 1905 of 'the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry'. It was far from clear what this would mean in terms of practical politics, and at this period Lenin was under no compulsion to demonstrate the practicability of his ideas. However, it did show that he was going beyond the Menshevik conception of a bourgeois-democratic republic in which the capitalists would presumably supply the government parties. He was concerned above all with the problem of power, and showed himself willing to adopt and adapt policies according to the needs of the tactical situation, so as to manoeuvre into the position of being able to seize power when opportunity presented itself. In a peasant country with massive discontent, the attitude of a party to the peasant question would naturally predetermine much of its political efficacy. Once power was seized, the problem of the peasants would loom very large (and as we shall see it did loom very large indeed in the economic and political history of the Soviet Union). Lenin was well aware of this. He saw that while the peasants as a whole were likely to be a revolutionary force so long as land was to be obtained from the landlords, at least the better-off peasants would turn conservative once this aim was achieved. He pinned his hopes on the increasing and deepening differentiation among the peasants. The majority of the poorer peasants, he held, would remain in alliance with a working-class government and perhaps collaborate in a future socialist transformation of society.

There is indeed much more that could be said about Lenin's attitude to the peasants, especially as this underwent changes in detail as circumstances altered. But despite tactical manoeuvring he consistently held to the basic strategy of using the revolutionary potential of the peasant land-hunger as an integral part of the socialist takeover. In a speech which he made a few weeks after Lenin's death in 1924, Zinoviev, for years his close associate, put this first among Lenin's contributions to revolutionary theory and practice. 'This was his attitude to the peasants. Probably this was the greatest discovery of Vladimir Ilyich: the union of the workers' revolution with the peasant war.' In the same speech he made the point again. 'The question of the role of the peasantry, as I have already said, is the basic issue of Bolshevism, Leninism.'<sup>7</sup>

Lenin thus developed the concept of a seizure of power by a conscious socialist minority with the help of non-socialist elements in a country where capitalism was unevenly developed. It was wrong in this view to await the ripening of the social and economic situation; this change would therefore have to be achieved after the seizure of power. Lenin understood that such a transformation after a successful revolution would be an exceedingly difficult one. However, he hoped that Russia would prove to be the weak link in the unevenly developing group of imperialist states, that a revolution in Russia would be the first stage of a world revolution, and that the more advanced countries of Western Europe would help in the colossal task of the building of socialism. Trotsky had evolved (in his *Results and Prospects,*  published in 1906) a theory of so-called 'permanent revolution', in which a revolution originally bourgeois-democratic is pushed

irresistibly in a socialist direction by a working class unwilling to be satisfied with bourgeois rule. He afterwards argued that Lenin had by 1917 come to share Trotsky's view, which he had earlier rejected. (While Trotsky came to accept Lenin's view of the party, which he previously had criticized.) Lenin now asserted that it was the duty of revolutionary socialists to set the example to the laggard proletarians of the more advanced countries, and not to wait passively or merely to act as the left wing of a bourgeois-democratic revolution. The hopes for a world revolution naturally received a powerful impetus during the First World War, whose revolutionary potentialities were greatly stressed by Lenin, even while he denounced the 'social patriotism' of the bulk of European social democracy which, including a large portion of the Mensheviks (and some Bolsheviks too), backed their own governments. Lenin died before he was compelled to face the immense and daunting task of changing backward Russia in isolation from the advanced West European countries, on whose support he had doubtless counted. The Mensheviks held that a seizure of power on behalf of a proletarian party with socialist objectives was premature under Russian conditions and that it would lead to deplorable consequences. Many of them were uneasy about Lenin's agricultural views. They saw many dangers and little socialism in the kind of elemental peasant risings to which Lenin appeared to be pinning his hopes.

The Mensheviks none the less also advocated a programme designed to win peasant support. Considering that nationalization of the land would be an unpopular slogan, they advocated socalled municipalization, i.e. control of the land by local elected authorities, which in rural areas would be peasant authorities. They hoped also by this means to encourage the peasants to work together, to avoid individualist fragmentation, even while the peasant land-hunger would be assuaged. There were differences of opinion among the Bolsheviks in the years before 1917 on the difficult subject of just what to put into the party programme concerning the land. In the end they decided to advocate nationalization, claiming with truth that the principal peasant party also accepted this.

# The SRs and Lenin's Peasant Policy of 1917

This party was the Socialist Revolutionaries, which everyone referred to as the SRs.

This once great party, which continued the Narodnik (Populist) tradition, has now been almost forgotten. Its peasant policy was deeply influenced by a non-Marxist socialist conception of peasant democracy, with strong traditionalist egalitarian overtones. It declared itself for equal distribution of the land and therefore opposed the Stolypin 'wager on the strong'. The SRs favoured the expropriation of the landlords. They favoured social ownership of the land; it was to be at the disposal of those who cultivated it. Moreover, the SR programme of 1906 was on record as advocating the prohibition of the purchase or sale of land. Such an outlook in a peasant party on the morrow of the Stolypin reform, with commercial relations growing in the villages, virtually guaranteed political paralysis and splits within the party. In 1917 the right wing of the party leadership participated in the Provisional government and discouraged illegal peasant seizures of land. It seemed more than likely that, given time, this wing of the party would identify itself with the better-off peasants, and scrap or put into cold storage the anti-commercial and egalitarian principles of their own programme. These principles would demand the redistribution of the land of those peasants who had benefited from the Stolypin reform. The more prosperous and the more efficient peasants were bound to oppose such a policy. By contrast the SR left wing supported direct action and for a while participated in the Bolshevik government. Such was the strength of traditional SR ideology that a peasant congress held in August 1917, still dominated by the SRs, adopted policy resolutions ('242 mandates') which included such provisions as nationalization ('land belongs to the people'), the prohibition of buying and selling of land, its equal distribution and the outlawing of the employment of hired labour. They therefore stood for peasant family smallholdings, and for periodic redistribution of the land in order that its allocation to families should conform to some principle. It was not clear whether this principle was to be

**the** number of mouths to feed or the number of able-bodied persons capable of working the land. It was certain that the right wing of the SRs would do their utmost to prevent a policy of this kind from being implemented. Eminent experts - men like Chayanov, Chelintsev, Kondratiev - were evolving doctrines based on peasant proprietors. Some SRs were bound to back these ideas, which were indeed being expressed in other parties which existed at the time: the *Trudoviki,* the Populist Socialists, Cooperators, etc.

Lenin in 1917 consistently pursued one overriding aim: the seizure of power. His programme varied with the tactical situation, and his peasant programme varied too. In his famous April 1917 'theses', published soon after his return to Russia, there was a plain reference to the superiority of large-scale agriculture, and to the need to convert efficient private estates into large and productive (state) model farms. Lenin also wrote scathingly of the 'petty bourgeois illusions' of the SRs, of the 'helpless, unwittingly naive wishful thinking of down-trodden petty proprietors', which showed itself in the proposed ban on wage-labour.<sup>8</sup> But 'it is not enough to expose theoretically the petty bourgeois illusions of socialization of the land, equalized land tenure, a ban on wagelabour, etc ' The line should be: 'the SRs have betrayed the peasants. They represent a minority of well-to-do farmers .. . Only the revolutionary proletariat, only the vanguard that unites it, the Bolshevik Party, can actually carry out the programme of the peasant poor which is put forward by the 242 mandates' (the programme adopted by the peasant conference mentioned above). At the same time Lenin also foresaw the split among the peasants themselves and was laying long-term plans to use it for his own purposes. Thus on 7 and 8 July 1917 one sees him advocating an Agricultural Labourers Union, which would be 'the independent class organization of the rural workers'. He took the opportunity to remind his readers of the 1906 resolution of the party at its fourth congress, which spoke of 'the irreconcilable antithesis between its interests and the interests of the peasant bourgeoisie' and which went on 'to warn it against illusions about the smallholding system, which can never as long as commodity production exists do away with the poverty of the masses'.<sup>9</sup>

However, by the autumn of 1917 it seemed tactically sensible to adopt the SR-inspired programme which had been adopted by the peasant congress in that month. This would represent a most potent bid for mass support among the peasants, and have the further advantage of widening the split in the SR party.

Therefore the Bolsheviks' agricultural and peasant programme was a masterly tactical improvisation, on an original Leninist theme, and contained from the first the seeds of the future conflict with the peasantry.

# **Industry, Finance, Trade, Planning**

Soviet writers indignantly denied Western allegations that Lenin had no idea what to do after seizing power, that he had to make it up as he went along. The evidence on the subject is somewhat mixed. Before 1917 Lenin had made some contributions to economic thought: he had in his early work analysed socialeconomic statistics and expressed strong views in the 'Development of Capitalism in Russia'. However, his writings were not distinguished by any attempts to define just how a socialist industry could or should be run. Nor is this surprising. Neither was Marx given to drawing blueprints of a socialist future, and prior to the war Russian socialists could not realistically envisage the sort of situation in which they could have power to act. Lenin, of course, had views about tactics, about the function of workers' immediate demands in relation to the revolutionary aims of a highly disciplined party organization. It was not until 1917, on his return to Russia through Germany in the famous sealed train, that we find Lenin's ideas on industry and planning taking some sort of shape. But the shape was decisively affected by the everyday exigencies of the struggle to gain power. Much of what he said and wrote reads like the purest demagogy.

Make the profits of the capitalists public, arrest fifty or a hundred of the biggest millionaires. Just keep them in custody for a few weeks ... for the simple purpose of making them reveal the hidden springs, the fraudulent practices, die filth and greed which even under.the new

**government are** costing our country thousands and millions every day. That is the chief cause of our anarchy and ruin!

Thus he spoke to the first congress of Soviets in June 1917.'° In a similar spirit he returns again and again to 'workers' control', but the Russian word *kontroT* means not a takeover but inspection and checking (like the French *controle des billets),* and his emphasis was on the prevention of sabotage and fraud by the capitalists. Yet now and again kontroF shades into control, developing into complete regulation of production and distribution by the workers, into the 'nation-wide organization' of the exchange of grain for manufactured goods, etc." But how this was to happen was left undefined. Lenin denied syndicalism: 'Nothing like the ridiculous transfer of the railways to the railwaymen, or the tanneries to the tanners.'<sup>12</sup> The cure-all was to be 'all power to the Soviets', though how (or whether) they are to operate railways and tanneries is not stated.

In the same month of June 1917 he was writing: 'Everyone agrees that the immediate introduction of socialism in Russia is impossible."<sup>3</sup> Perhaps the most complex 'programme' of the months before the seizure of power may be found in Lenin's 'The Impending Catastrophe and How to Combat It', published as a pamphlet at the end of October 1917 and written a month earlier. Ifc begins dramatically with the words 'Unavoidable catastrophe is threatening Russia'. The railways were breaking down, famine was threatening, the capitalists were sabotaging; the following measures should be taken, he declared:

(1) Centralization and nationalization of banking.

(2) The nationalization of the 'syndicates', i.e. of the main capitalist associations (for sugar, oil, iron, coal, etc.).

(3) Abolition of commercial secrecy.

(4) Compulsory 'syndicalization' of industry, i.e. that independent firms should form part of syndicates.

(5) Compulsory membership of consumer cooperatives, this measure being related to the strict enforcement of wartime rationing regulations (rationing having been introduced in cities in **1916).** 

He explained what he meant by nationalization of syndicates:

'Transform reactionary bureaucratic regulation [i.e. by the Provisional government] into revolutionary democratic regulation of simple decrees providing for the summoning of a congress of employees, engineers, directors and shareholders, the introduction of uniform accountancy, control [kontroP] by the workers' unions, etc."<sup>4</sup> This sounds as if he had in mind effective control over the syndicates rather than expropriation of capitalists and nationalization of the actual firms. But perhaps this was simply his view of what ought immediately to be done, and not a programme for the party.

This was a time when some of Lenin's thoughts were somewhat Utopian. Thus in 'State and Revolution' we can read:

We, the workers, shall organize industrial production on the basis of what capitalism has already created .. . We shall reduce the role of state officials to that of simply carrying out instructions as responsible, revocable, modestly paid 'foremen and accountants' (of course with the aid of technicians of all sorts) .. . The function of control and accountancy, becoming more and more simple, will be performed by each in turn, will become a habit and will finally die out as the *special* function of a special section of the population .. . To organize the *whole* economy on the lines of the postal service so that technicians, foremen and accountants, as well as *all* officials, shall receive salaries no higher than workers' wages, all under the leadership of the armed proletariat, that is our immediate aim."

Lenin was greatly impressed with the German war economy. He thought that the concentration of state-capitalist power gave rise to possibilities of direct socialist takeover of the levels of economic power. One finds this expressed with particular clarity in 'Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?', also written on the eve of the revolution. It is worth quoting from this at some length:

This brings us to another aspect of the question of the state apparatus. In addition to the chiefly 'oppressive' apparatus - the standing army, the police and the bureaucracy - the modern state possesses an apparatus which has extremely close connections with the banks and syndicates, an apparatus which performs an enormous amount of accounting and

registration work, if it may be expressed this way. This apparatus must not, and should not, be smashed. It must be wrested from the control of the capitalists; the capitalists and the wires they pull must be *cut off, lopped off, chopped away from* this apparatus; it must be *subordinated* to the proletarian Soviets; it must be expanded, made more comprehensive, and nation-wide. And this *can* be done by utilizing the achievements already made by large-scale capitalism (in the same way as the proletarian revolution can, in general, reach its goal only by utilizing these achievements).

Capitalism has created an accounting *apparatus* in the shape of the banks, syndicates, postal service, consumers' societies, and office employees' unions. *Without big banks socialism would be impossible.* 

The big banks *are* the state apparatus which we *need* to bring about socialism, and which we *take ready-made* from capitalism; our task here is merely to *lop off what capitalistically mutilates* this excellent apparatus, to make it even *bigger,* even more democratic, even more comprehensive. Quantity will be transformed into quality. A single State Bank, the biggest of the big, with branches in every rural district, in every factory, will constitute as much as nine-tenths of the *socialist* apparatus. This will be country-wide *book-keeping,* countrywide *accounting* of the production and distribution of goods, this will be so to speak, something in the nature of the *skeleton* of socialist society.

We can *lay hold of and set in motion this state apparatus* (which is not fully a state apparatus under capitalism, but which will be so with us, under socialism) at one stroke, by a single decree, because the actual work of book-keeping, control, registering, accounting and counting is performed by *employees,* the majority of whom themselves lead a proletarian or semi-proletarian existence.

By a single decree of the proletarian government these employees can and must be transferred to the status of state employees, in the same way as the watchdogs of capitalism, like Briand and other bourgeois ministers, by a single decree transfer railwaymen on strike to the status of state employees. We shall need many more state employees of this kind, and more *can* be obtained, because capitalism has simplified the work of accounting and control, has reduced it to a comparatively simple system of *book-keeping,* which any literate person can do. [Emphases are Lenin's throughout.]

This is followed by the oddly ambiguous statement: 'The important thing will not be even the confiscation of the capitalists' property, but country-wide, all-embracing workers' control [kontroP again] over the capitalists and their possible supporters. Confiscation alone leads nowhere, as it does not contain the element of organization, of accounting for proper distribution. Instead of confiscation, we could easily impose *a. fair* tax ... ' He goes on to insist that the rich should work, that it would be right to put poor and homeless families into their houses.<sup>16</sup>

Still in October 1917 Lenin wrote of the revision of the party programme. Here we find him criticizing Bukharin, a young and able colleague who had studied economics in Vienna and who will figure prominently in the chapters that follow. Bukharin in 1917-20 was one of those who suggested an extremely radical line of instant socialism. Lenin was more cautious. True, 'we are not at all afraid of stepping beyond the bounds of the bourgeois system; on the contrary we declare quite clearly, definitely and openly that we shall march towards socialism, that our road will be through a Soviet Republic, through nationalization of banks and syndicates, through workers' control, through universal labour conscription, through nationalization of the land ... ' But later, 'experience will tell us a lot more .. . Nationalize banks and syndicates .. . *and then we shall see ni* (his emphasis).

Lenin did, however, speak of 'not being able to nationalize petty enterprises with one or two hired labourers'. The implication would seem to be nationalization of larger ones. However, this was not spelled out.

Dobb, in his very full survey of Russian development published in 1929, rightly emphasized that economic policy at this stage was subordinated to the political objectives: to break the power of the bourgeoisie, to seize the state machine, to take over the levers of economic power. Details were left for subsequent improvisation.<sup>18</sup>

A month after the revolution, Lenin himself wrote that 'there was not and could not be a definite plan for the organization of economic life'." There was a political strategy, there were general socialist objectives, there was ruthless determination. And, last but far from least, was war, disorganization and growing chaos.

We must never For a moment forget that Lenin and his followers, **and** his opponents too, were operating in an abnormal and indeed desperate situation. Who knows what reforms, policies, remedies, they might have proposed in less troubled times? But in less troubled times they would not have been in power.

Most other Bolshevik intellectuals were too busy with political issues. However, it is worth noting that the Bolsheviks at this time were far from being a monolithic body. There were plenty of Utopian illusions, some ideas verging on anarcho-syndicalism, some ignorant tough-guys, some intellectuals with gentlemanly scruples, fanatics, dogmatists. It is hardly surprising that there were splits and factions in the first years of Soviet power.

On 7 November 1917 Lenin declared to the Congress of Soviets: 'We must now set about building a proletarian socialist state in Russia. Long live the world socialist revolution!'

And now our story really begins.