# 6

## Survey of reSearch in induStrial Sociology

Sharit K. Bhowmik\*

## **Introduction**

Industrial sociology has been in existence in the developed countries since the early twentieth century. There were two basic objectives of this sub-discipline that distinguished it from the other specialties within sociology. Firstly, industrial sociology used current sociological theories to study the organizational structure of industries (Rose 1979). Weber's theory of bureaucracy provided the key impetus to this area. Besides this, there were attempts to improve the efficiency of organizations by modifying the existing structure or by improving interpersonal relationships. The studies of F. W. Taylor, which came to be known as scientific management, became part of this aspect of industrial sociology. Later, the Hawthorne experiment, initiated by Elton Mayo and his team from Harvard University, provided useful inputs. Mayo's studies came to be known as the 'human relations approach'. This was also included in management courses.

The second objective of industrial sociology was to study the impact of industry on society. Industrial sociology studied changes in social institutions resulting from industrial development. The works of Wilbert Moore, Clark Kerr, John Dunlop, and Tom Burns, among others, represent this approach. Studies of these types were of use to planners and to those engaged in issues of economic development. They corrected the views of the economists who believed that all social change is caused by economic development. Studies in the field of industrial

\*This chapter attempts to assess the research done in the field of industrial sociology during the period 1987 and 2002. It was a difficult task locating all the work done during this fairly large period of time. This chapter contains only published work. It does not cover unpublished M.Phil. and Ph.D. dissertations. Neither does it take into account unpublished research reports. Much of the data collection for this chapter was done by Ms Anonna Banerjee, research scholar, department of sociology, University of Mumbai. I am grateful to her for her painstaking work, without which it would have been difficult to write this chapter. Dr R. G. Goswami of the documentation section of the ICSSR helped in locating the articles and book reviews I needed and he sent me photocopies of these. I am very thankful to him for his help. Finally, I thank Dr Yogesh Atal, editor-in-chief of the *Fourth Review of Literature on Sociology and Social Anthropology*, for painstakingly editing the copy. The shortcomings, however, are entirely mine.

sociology showed that it was wrong to assume that social institutions change mechanically with economic change.

The scope of industrial sociology has changed over the years. The two objectives mentioned above define the areas of study, but given the major changes in what was once known as industry, it became necessary for the discipline to broaden its scope. In most economies the industrial base has shrunk. The sections of the working class engaged in manufacture have reduced in number. Technological upgrading has cost jobs in manufacture or, as in the case of India, most of these activities are in the low-paid, low technology informal sector. For example, the growth of labour in the large-scale sector was less than 1 per cent per annum in 2004–05 (GOI 2005: 230) whereas the small sector recorded a growth of 4.4 per cent per annum (ibid.: 166).

The services sector and the financial sector have registered high growth rates. Jobs in these sectors are not related to industry or manufacturing. One may ask, that if industry (meaning manufacture) has declined to such an extent should one talk about industrial sociology? A lot of activities in the informal sector, especially in the low-paid activities, are not in manufacturing. Hence can we include all this in industrial sociology?

There could be other options such as *sociology of work* as it is done in most developed countries. This could include all non-industrial activities such as activities in services, trade and commerce, and informal activities. Another option is, *sociology of occupations*, which could include industrial and other types of occupations. Perhaps both could replace industrial sociology as a discipline.

The present author, however, does not agree with this. In India, where there is such a large section of the population dependent on agriculture, 'work' would include agricultural activities as well. Similarly, professions cannot capture the changes that industry has caused. Moreover, we cannot restrict industrial sociology to such narrow confines as studying relations within factories and life outside of it. Industrialization, with sweeping changes in the production processes, has brought about wide-ranging changes in the lives of people. It has changed the social organization of work and introduced norms of discipline such as punctuality and group work. The main effect it has had is the introduction of money as a medium of exchange and a store of value. It is through money that trade and economic exchange take place all over the world. Moreover, work is done by individuals and not by a group, such as a family. Consider the manufacturing done by a family of weavers. The task is performed by several members of the family and sometimes also by other kin. There is strict division of labour with men performing certain activities like weaving and women carrying out other activities such as spinning. Children too have their specific work. The weaver and his family learnt their skills as part of their socialization within the family; there were no schools to teach them these skills. As against this, consider the work in a textile mill. There too the same processes are involved such as spinning, weaving, dyeing, etc. But there are two basic differences: (i) machines have replaced most of the activities; and (ii) work is done by individuals and not by the family as a joint activity. Hence, at his home, the weaver works in coordination with his family members, whereas in a textile mill he has to work as an individual.

These and other similar changes were caused primarily by the system of factory production. However, their ramifications go far beyond this narrow field and affect every aspect of one's life, including those outside the industry. Hence even when countries are not industrialized, the traditional localized types of exchange, such as *Jajmani* relations, are destroyed by the much wider system of distribution based on money. The influence of industrialization goes further than the narrow confines of factory production.

In India, industrial sociology developed as an independent sub-discipline some decades after the introduction of sociology. In fact, the first works in this sub-discipline appeared only a decade after independence, in the late 1950s. India was mainly a rural country and the study of agriculture was considered more important. The earlier empirical studies conducted by Indian and foreign sociologists were focused on village India. There is no doubt that village studies contributed towards a better understanding of the dynamics of Indian society. But researches on industry remained largely neglected.

The first studies in industrial sociology were by N. R. Sheth (1958) and Charles Mayers (1958). Sheth did a study of a factory in Baroda (now Vadodara) while Mayers studied managerial practices and labour productivity. Richard Lambert's (1963) study of five factories in Poona (now Pune) was also considered as an important contribution. These studies provided insights into the attitudes of factory workers in India. In fact, they showed that the approach of the Indian worker to the factory was no different than that of workers in the industrially advanced countries.

The following sections will discuss the present researches.

### **Survey of Research in Industrial Sociology 1987–2002**

At present industrial sociology is offered as a compulsory or elective paper in most universities at the undergraduate level as well as at the postgraduate level. Besides, most management institutes that offer courses on industrial relations or on human resource management include topics relative to industrial sociology. The subject has gained in popularity since the 1950s and at present seems well entrenched as a much sought after paper. University courses may not always offer a specific paper on industrial sociology. It could be packaged under different labels such as sociology of work, work and occupations, industry and society, or industry and labour.

At first the task of compiling the studies for this survey did not appear very difficult. The survey team was fortunate that the ICSSR has a series of journals devoted especially to the current researches in each discipline. Thus if one relied on the specific sections of the ICSSR *Journal of Abstracts and Reviews in Sociology and Social Anthropology* it would be possible to cover most, if not all, of the work done. The journal summarizes articles published in leading research journals and also reproduces book reviews from these journals. An analysis of the relevant entries in this journal should be almost sufficient to complete the task. Besides this, a survey of journals like *Sociological Bulletin*, *Contributions to Indian Sociology*, and, of course, *Economic and Political Weekly*, would more or less complete the task. Unfortunately, the team found that the ICSSR journal is not published regularly. In fact, the journal had been discontinued for a number of years, hence there was a gap in the information. Articles and book reviews were scanned and summaries of these made. There were some books and articles that had not been reviewed. Efforts were made to locate such books, and these have been included in the chapter. The present survey includes writings of not only sociologists but also others that are of sociological significance.1

After sifting through the material collected, it was classified into different sections. This exercise served another purpose: it helped the team to pinpoint the popular research areas and the areas that are neglected. For example, there are a large number of studies on labour and trade unions, industrial organizations, women, work and technology, and industry and environment. However, Indian sociologists have not produced much in areas such as work and technology and the labour market.

#### *Organization of Industry: Managerial Strategies and Problems*

In this section we shall attempt to review the researches relating to industrial organization and structure.

In 1982, the Sri Ram Centre for Industrial Relations and Human Resources undertook a survey of 51 organizations in order to understand the nature of industrial organizations in the country and to analyse their influence on labour management relations, more specifically, supervisory-management relations. The report of this study was written by Baldev R. Sharma (1987a). The study was significant in that for the first time such a large sample of industrial organizations was covered and quantitative data collected. Nine dimensions of organizational climate were covered in the survey. The report states that both private sector and public sector organizations believed that safety and security (at work) and monetary benefits constitute the most important needs of the employees. Other important dimensions of the organizational climate include participation in decision-making, redressal of grievances, and training and advancement. Sharma also refers to the theoretical controversy between human relations and scientific management approaches, more specifically, the tendency to separate mental work from physical work. In trying to resolve this controversy, he suggests that monetary benefits alone cannot overcome workers' alienation (the title of the book *Not By Bread Alone* suggests this).

Four years later, in 1986, Sharma conducted a restudy of one of the organizations covered by the previous survey (Sharma 1987b). He found that all the variables had remained unchanged except one, namely, monetary benefits. However, he found that though it now ranked higher, the increase in emoluments had not affected production. He concluded that perceptions of organizational reality are intimately related to the action and inaction of management.

A. V. Subharao (1987) selected two steel plants for studying cooperation and conflict between labour and management. One of these plants was in the private sector (Tata Steel in Jamshedpur) and the other in the public sector (Bokaro Steel Plant). Subharao found that industrial relations at Jamshedpur were better than at Bokaro. The difference between them is attributed to the fact that there was only one union at Jamshedpur while Bokaro had a number of recognized unions competing with each other. The author's conclusions appear to be somewhat simplistic.

C.S. Rangarajan (1997) studied how workers, supervisors, and executives perceive their work. The author holds that role conception is an important aspect of one's participation in the work organization, as role performance depends upon role conception. He examines the organizational dimensions of the bureaucratic structure. The study also attempts to understand the problems of migrant labour while adjusting with the urban-industrial order and their traditional values.

K. Mamkoottam (1994) discussed the changes in labour management relations after the economic reforms of 1991. He noted that after liberalization, the need arose for changes in technology and manpower planning to enable industry to compete in the global market. Initially, employers insisted on a deregulated environment with a flexible labour force, while the workers and trade unions resisted these moves. However, there is a gradual process of change taking place in both the manpower strategies adopted by the employers and the response to the imperatives of change on the part of the employees and unions. Mamkoottam concluded that professionally oriented human resources management strategies and positively oriented collaborative employee/union strategies are beginning to emerge. Mamkoottam's predictions now seem like wishful thinking because 10 years after he published his article, the divide between labour and management seems to have hardened. In most of the large formal sector organizations, employees are more interested in holding on to their jobs as these are being reduced in large numbers. These moves leave very little option for building positively oriented collaborative strategies.

The problem of unionization of the managerial cadre is the focus of another study by Baldev R. Sharma (1993). In this study, he deals with how managerial staff form their own associations known as officers' associations (OAs). The book has an exhaustive survey of the existing literature in the field and has vast amounts of data on managerial unionism. He finds that OAs are found only in the public sector, their main objective being the welfare of their members.

Debi S. Saini (1995) edited a volume on the different aspects of labour and law. The papers in the volume offer a critical examination of the existing labour laws in the country. They are divided into four sections. The first section examines the existing labour laws and finds that they provide protection to only the organized sector. The second section provides descriptions of the pathetic working conditions of migrant, bonded, and agricultural labour. The third section discusses the issues of globalization, industrial restructuring and industrial relations laws, while the fourth section deals with the alternatives in labour justice dispensation.

Pradip N. Khandwala's (1992) study of innovative corporate turnarounds produces an enquiry on how 'sick' organizations go about regaining health and shape. Of the 65 cases studied, 16 belong to India. The main findings show that turnarounds are caused by a variety of factors. These include change at the helm of affairs in the corporation, change in organizational structure, change in product mix, and change in market focus—from domestic to international.

Strategic management as a technique is new in India and there is hardly any research on it. E. A. Ramaswamy (1994) notes that this is precisely because industrial management in India comprises largely knee-jerk responses to crises. His study of a rayon factory in Coimbatore addresses several important issues in the contemporary industrial relations scenario. It is the outcome of over twenty years of research by the author. The study examines the role of the state in industrial relation management, which Ramaswamy finds has not been positive. He also discusses other issues such as the relevance of collective bargaining and bilateral negotiations, the nexus between unions and political parties, and the relations between unions, workers, and management. This longitudinal study shows how brittle the union–worker relationship can be and how easily the workers shift their loyalties from one union to another. It also exposes the irrational attitudes of the management towards the unions.

Though multinational corporations have made their mark in India and there have been heated debates on their functioning, there are hardly any significant studies on the conglomerates. Only two such studies during this period were found, one by Jairus Banaji and Rohini Hensman and the other by V. Janardhan.

Banaji and Hensman (1990) studied industrial relations in two major Dutch MNCs operating in India, namely, Philips, and Hindustan Lever Limited. The study provides a comparison of industrial relations in the establishments of the same MNC in India and Europe. The authors find that foreign companies in Mumbai have created a section of workers whose consciousness is dominated by the fact that they are employees of international organizations. These workers are also unionized but their unions are not linked with any of the national federations. The authors see merit in this as the national federations are politicized and run by political parties. The internal unions have greater stake in the working class in the concerned organizations.

A major problem with such an argument is that it fails to take into account the political conditions at the time of independence (in 1947) which gave rise to these internal unions in MNCs. In 1948, there were three major trade unions, namely, the All India Trade Union Congress of the Communists, the Indian National Trade Union Congress of the Congress Party, and the Hind Mazdur Sabha of the Socialists. These federations were arch rivals but they had one thing in common: they were all against the indiscriminate role of foreign capital. This made them inherently anti-MNC. Hence it can be argued that the MNCs themselves encouraged their workers to form internal unions (instead of joining a federation) as these organizations were less likely to be against foreign-capital. On the contrary, these workers were very proud of their employment in foreign owned companies. They felt superior to the run-of-the-mill workers in other factories or mills. One must also consider the fact that most of the MNCs did not have unions under colonial rule. These company unions came up only after independence. Hence, one needs to ask why the same employers, who were reluctant to allow their workers to unionize before independence, suddenly allowed them this right at a time when unions were becoming increasingly anti-foreign capital.

V. Janardhan's (1997) article on MNCs examines the manner in which companies, especially in Asia, are globalizing and the strategies they tend to follow. The paper provides an analysis of the strategies adopted by a leading multinational corporation, British American Tobacco, and its Indian affiliates.

#### *Entrepreneurship Studies*

There have been some significant studies on entrepreneurship during the period under review. These studies are broadly of two types: studies on the development of entrepreneurship with a focus on small industries, and studies on industrial or business houses. One such book, edited by Rabindra Kanungo (1998), is a collaboration between scholars in India and abroad. It tries to meet the need to develop comprehensive research-based models of entrepreneurship so as to increase the readers' understanding of the subject and also to act as a practical guide for action. The articles are grouped under four heads. The first deals with the conceptual models of entrepreneurship; the second focusses on entrepreneurs as individuals, particularly women entrepreneurs; the third part contains articles on the enterprises; and the last concentrates on management skills for small businesses.

Peter Knorringa's (1996) study on the Jatav shoemakers of Agra attempts to analyse the motivations, opportunities, and compulsions in the small-scale shoemaking sector. Knorringa has done a detailed ethnographic study of the relations between the Jatav shoemakers who are scheduled castes and the traders or exporters who belong to upper castes. He finds that the relations between the small self-employed shoemaker and the owner are based on the traditional relations in the caste hierarchy. Thus, even in a commercial, monetized environment, caste relations are difficult to shake off.

Douglas E. Haynes' study (1999) of labour in the power-loom sector also has shades of what Knorringa found in Agra. His study looks at discourses about the past formulated by owners, workers, and trade unionists in the cities of Surat and Bhiwandi. A particular focus here is on the willingness of different participants in the power-loom industry to accept a portrayal of past relations between workers and owners 'like a family'. For the workers, nostalgic attitudes and critical recollections both serve as a means of contesting a present characterized by serious strains between capital and labour, by serious fears of losing work, and by widely shared perceptions that collective actions are futile. The author contrasts these views with those of the employers and the trade union leaders.

Takashi Shinoda's (2000) study analyses entrepreneurial development among the different social groups in Gujarat. It attempts to study the caste and social background of small entrepreneurs.

There have been a few significant studies on business families. A very insightful book on business houses in western India was produced by Dwijendra Tripathi and Makrand Mehta (1990). Tripathi is a well known business historian who collaborated with Makrand Mehta—another distinguished historian from Gujarat University—on the book, a study in entrepreneurship which seeks to comprehend the forces impinging on occupational choices and business strategies. Tripathi later did a comparative study of industrialization and entrepreneurship in India and Japan (Tripathi 1997).

Another work on business houses was undertaken by V. S. Patwardhan (1990). He studied the Garwares as an industrial house as part of a larger study undertaken to trace the growth of entrepreneurial families in Maharashtra. The author undertook this work precisely to contest the widely held belief that there are no indigenous entrepreneurs in the state. His object was to study the existing houses to serve as reference groups for others.

Sudipt Dutta's (1996) study on family businesses traces the history of some of the larger business houses in India. He notes that the role of the family is very important in understanding the functioning of industrial houses in India. He states that nearly 70 per cent of the hundred largest corporations, and almost all enterprises, are owned or controlled by families. Dutta contends that at one level Indian business has similarities with Western business. However, in practice there are wide differences between them as the business houses in India have unique methods of conducting business based on tradition and age-old values. In another study, Dutta (1999) tried to establish that Indian businessmen come into their own only around the age of 40. He went further stating that successful family business depends not only on the ability of the young sons but also on the timing of their coming of age.

#### *Studies on Labour Markets*

As mentioned earlier, sociologists have, by and large, neglected the study of labour markets. This section look at some of the current studies. L. K. Deshpande and Gerry Rodgers (1994) edited a book on the impact of the policies of structural change on the labour market in India. Besides the introduction by Deshpande and Rodgers, the articles are grouped into four sections. These are, aggregate employment level, institutional arrangements, technology and labour, and policy issues in economic reform.

John Harris, K. P. Kannan, and Gerry Rodgers (n.d.) produced a slender volume of their research on the labour market structure of the city of Coimbatore. The purpose of their research was to develop a methodology for the study of labour markets in general so as to capture the multifarious aspects that escape attention when labour markets, especially in developing countries, are viewed as being divided into segments, namely, organized/formal, and unorganized/informal.

Bam Dev Sharda's (1998) study on labour markets and status allocation starts by pointing out that economic theories of the labour market explain differences in earning with models of demand and supply. However, with the increasing diversity in the labour force, there are other issues such as race, ethnic groups, and gender that influence wage differentials. In India, the changes in policies since 1991 have created a more diverse labour force. Sharda feels that rapid changes in the labour market would lead to changes in mobility and income levels. These would influence status allocation. In other words, if, due to restructuring, a permanent worker enjoying fair wages loses his job and is compelled to join a lower paid insecure job, it would adversely affect his status.

The issue of gender discrimination in the labour market is discussed by Lalit Deshpande and Sudha Deshpande (1997). They argue that, while gender discrimination has not been eliminated, it has been reduced by the forces of the labour market. Such reduction has taken place because of the sustained high demand for labour brought about by high investment ratios. They quote the experiences of East Asian countries to illustrate their argument.

Renana Jhabvala's (1998) work discusses the main problems workers in the informal sector face. The most important problem is that of poverty which can be seen through reduction in wages and large-scale unemployment. Wages are low because workers are willing to work for such wages rather than remain unemployed. She then discusses the interventions that can be made on behalf of labour. These include intervention through trade unions, help in asset building, enhancing employment opportunities, reducing migration, and social security.

Bali Ram (2001) takes a look at data from 80 countries to analyse the relationship between gender and the labour market. Basing his analysis on decennial time series data between 1960 and 1980, he finds that at the early stages of industrialization, sex segregation is low but it increases during the intermediate stage. He concludes with the note that sex segregation and women's economic marginalization are primarily a reflection of overall societal economic inequality whether or not it accompanies industrialization. There is nothing original in what has been observed. In fact sociologists have all along maintained that gender differentials are created by a patriarchal society. One wonders why time series data from 80 countries needed to be studied to come to the same conclusion.

C. S. K. Singh (2002) studied the daily labour market in Delhi. Based on a sample of workers from the job 'squares' or *naakas* in the city, the study found that labourers in this market represent pauperization of the peasantry rather than a migration of choice for better wages. All workers covered had no awareness of the labour department of the state or of trade unions. Moreover, they did not have any rational expectation of jobs in the formal sector.

#### *Work and Technology*

One of the preoccupations of sociologists in the 1950s and 1960s was the relationship between traditional cultural practices and work in the factory. The more recent problems in this context revolve around the role of changing technology and work. The more important ones relate to workers' response to new technology and the impact of technology on women workers. The subject of flexible specialization has drawn some attention.

The impact of technology on work has been dealt with in case studies presented in a book edited by Amiya K. Bagchi (1994). A major feature of this book is that it neither tries to explain the micro-electronic revolution as an anti-worker strategy nor attempts to eulogize it. There are a few significant studies in this book. Bagaram Tulpule and R. C. Dutta (1994) examine the textile industry where air-jet looms have been introduced. The authors found that when compared to the cost of labour, the cost of new technology is higher. In other words, new technology may result in lowering labour costs as it will displace labour but the savings through lower labour costs do not offset the high costs of implementing the new technology. The authors found that it was less expensive to continue with the existing production process rather than using labour-displacing new technology. Another paper by R.C. Datta (1999) on the use of new technology in the textile industry shows that it neither reduces costs substantially nor increases efficiency significantly.

Workers' response to new technology is discussed in a study by Lakshmi Nadkarni (1998). She interviewed workers extensively in a few factories in Pune. She found that in general they were not opposed to the introduction of new technology as they knew that it would improve the products. They demanded that they be given training so that they could cope with the technological change. These responses are different from those of the trade unions which oppose new technology for fear of displacement of labour.

The issue of flexible specialization was first raised by Mark Holmstrom (1993). He argued that the Italian experience of small industries using microelectronic machinery could be the future for India's industries. He studied the electronics industry in Bangalore2 and found that it had the a potential to emerge as the 'high road' to flexible specialization. The small industries used Computerized Numerically Controlled (CNCs) machines and Computer Aided Designs (CADs) to manufacture high-precision equipment. The labour they employed was highly skilled, like in the large industries. In another study Holmstrom (1997) elaborated the concept further and worked out its implications. He noted that flexible specialization happens when clusters of smaller firms cooperate in product development and product marketing. This requires trust and the collective provision of 'real services'. Holmstrom found that though engineers and workers are quality conscious, and though there is use of innovative techniques, the entrepreneurs are often too suspicious to cooperate or share information with other firms. Had there been greater trust, the system would have been much more profitable.

Other studies on this issue (Das and Panayiotopoulis 1996) showed that most small industries use the 'low road' of flexible specialization which comprises low technology and low-skilled, low-paid labour. In fact, it can be seen that in labour surplus countries like India, the choice is always of the low road. Production in the upmarket fashion industry is mainly done in sweatshops. Garments are shaped by women workers who work for long hours for extremely low wages. Similarly, most of the cloth is produced in power looms situated in Bhiwandi in Maharashtra where workers earn around Rs 50–60 a day, working for 10 hours. Even the hightechnology industry of Bangalore, which Holmstrom has studied, could be taken as a form of low road if the wages and working conditions were compared with those of the same industries in developed countries. These employees may be well paid by Indian standards but they earn between one-fifth to one-eighth of what their counterparts in developing countries earn for the same work.

The rapid spread of information technology combined with deregulation and upgrading of telecommunications in virtually all countries has given considerable impetus to the outsourcing or delocalization of work. *Economic and Political Weekly* (2000) brought out a special issue on this subject. Only those articles published in this issue that have relevance to work and technology will be discussed here. Swasti Mitter (2000) in the 'Introduction' notes that the development of teleworking represents a convergence between a number of different trends, many of which have major implications for environmental, social, and economic policies. How the industry and the government respond to these changes would seriously impact on the future of the economy, on employment potential, and on the quality of the work life of the people.

Swasti Mitter and Asish Sen (2000) discuss the manner in which Kolkata is becoming another Bangalore in attracting outsourced software services from abroad and the facilities required to make this possible. It may be mentioned that soon after 2000, the government of West Bengal started a software park in the Salt Lake area of the city. Mitter and Sen (ibid.) suggest that remote processing rather than software services could provide a better entry to the global information economy, especially for the traditionally disadvantaged groups such as women.

Sujata Gothoskar (2000) discusses the issue of teleworking and gender. She attempts to assess the problems arising from these new developments for women in the context of occupational division of labour in Mumbai. Does teleworking afford new opportunities for women? Or is it yet another means of increasing women's double burden in the guise of high technology and relatively better-paid employment? These questions need further investigation.

#### *Labour in the Formal (Organized) Sector*

The formal or organized sector plays an important role in the country's development. As compared to the informal sector, this sector is much smaller in size. The 2001 census showed that around 27 per cent of the population resided in urban areas. The labour force in the country numbered 400 million, that is, 40 per cent of the population. Of this a mere 7 per cent (around 27 million) were engaged in the formal sector while 373 million (93 per cent) were engaged in the informal sector. Women constituted one-third of those engaged in the informal sector and oneseventh of those employed in the formal sector. More than 250 million workers were engaged in the rural informal sector. The urban informal sector comprised around 100 million workers.

The distinction between the formal and informal sectors is crucial for understanding employment relationships. Workers in the formal sector are engaged in factories and in commercial and service establishments. Around 70 per cent of the workers in this sector are employed in government, quasi-government, and public sector enterprises. The private sector provides employment to only 30 per cent of the labour in the formal sector. The wages of formal sector workers are substantially higher than those who are engaged in the urban informal sector. Moreover, a range of labour laws, guaranteeing permanency of employment and provision for retirement benefits, protects their jobs.

 Organized labour came under a lot of pressure after the Industrial Policy Statement of 22 July 1991. This laid the basic blueprint for liberalization. The policy envisioned a greater and more significant role for the private sector. The public sector came under fire and it was expected to withdraw from all areas except the core sectors. The liberalization policy had some important effects on labour in the formal sector. The policies adopted led to the downsizing of large industries by shifting production to out-of-the-urban-industrial centres and by offering voluntary retirement schemes to workers. These new processes led to new dilemmas for the trade union movement which had till then operated almost exclusively in the formal sector. Many of the studies discussed in this section deal with these issues. But before discussing them, a look at other issues that were of interest to researchers.

E. A. Ramaswamy (1988) has made significant contributions to the sociology of industrial relations. An earlier study on labour relations covered four major cities, namely, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, and Chennai (Ramaswamy 1988). He provided case studies of union activities and management responses in some major industrial concerns located in the four cities. His work looked into the specific nature of workers, employers, and government in each of these cities. There are interesting comparisons. It would be expected that in Kolkata the government would be more pro-worker than in the other three cities because, since 1977, the state has had an elected Communist government. However, his study found that unions and employers often colluded and the workers were left out. Similarly in Mumbai, the new form of militant trade unionism started by Dr Datta Samant had wide acceptability among the workers because taking recourse to legal measures meant time-consuming and expensive court cases. The main criticism of Ramaswamy's study is that it is too empirical, with an almost absence of any theoretical formations. Nonetheless, it has encouraged other scholars to take interest in labour and trade union studies.

Ramaswamy's major contribution is in adding the sociological perspective to industrial relations and labour studies, which had largely been seen from the view of labour economics and labour law. Through his articles in business journals, Ramaswamy made practising managers aware of the sociological input in labour and management studies. He contributed a monthly column to the popular magazine *Business India* from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s. A selection of these pieces were published as a book with the title, *A Question of Balance: Labour, Management and Society* (1997). The articles relate mainly to trade unions and labour management relations. Some also deal with the social context and its effect on industrial relations. Besides this, Ramaswamy's book *Managing Human Resources* (2001) remains one of the best sources for teaching the subject.

There are very few studies on the role of caste in the formal sector. G. Karunanithi's (1991) study deals with this aspect. He takes up the study of two industrial units in Madurai—one urban area and the other rural. He studied the pattern of recruitment and promotion of employees, their interaction in the mills and their relations with trade unions. He found that caste is a strong guiding force in rural mills, but not in urban mills.

T.S. Papola, P.P. Ghosh and Alakh Sharma (1993) edited a book*,* which contains papers which were published in the *Indian Journal of Labour Economics*. The papers cover a wide range of topics which include problems of liberalization and open economy, heterogeneity of work and labour markets, conflicts, and problems of productivity and sharing. This collection, although it has a strong affinity to economics, would be useful for students and researchers in the field of industrial sociology.

The 1974 rail workers strike is regarded as a landmark in the labour movement. Unfortunately there is only one significant study on this strike (Sherlock 1996, 2002). Stephen Sherlock's study of the strike takes into account the events that preceded it. There was simmering discontent among rail workers at least two years prior to the strike. On the one hand the workers were getting tired of requesting the government for better pay and facilities. The main sufferers of the railway's anti-worker policies were the loco-running staff who could be regarded as the backbone of the industry. The engine drivers, firemen, and assistants in the Madurai division in Tamil Nadu had adopted a militant approach which spread to other divisions. Alongside, there was the Jai Prakash Narayan (popularly known as JP) Movement that was mobilizing the masses to protest against corruption and misrule. The leaders of the All India Railwaymen's Federation were closely aligned to the JP Movement. The strike was a combination of the two forces, namely, the growing unrest of the rail workers and the attempt to politicize the issue as a protest against the government of Indira Gandhi. Sherlock's book describes and analyses this strike.

C.S. Venkat Ratnam and Anil Varma (1997) have edited a volume on industrial relations in India. Each paper in the volume contains the main features of the industrial relations of different industries. The wide variety of cases makes this an important manual for those interested in industrial relations.

Pravin J. Patel's (1997) study of industrial relations in a manufacturing unit attempts to extrapolate wider theoretical implications regarding two social processes: social polarization and social mobilization. He finds that social legitimacy of the employer gets eroded when workers, spread across different locations of a company, align to articulate their grievances in the framework of relative deprivation. Deepening of social cleavage within the organization helps mobilize workers into collective action. Workers then seek support from macro structures like political parties.

Leela Fernandes (1998) made an attempt to analyse certain forms of cultural politics as a means of demonstrating the varying layers of structural inequalities which prevail in the Indian working class. By examining the linkages between class, gender, and community in the jute mills the author moved away from a focus on the ways in which cultural differences foreclose class politics. She showed how different forms of class-based political practices contest and reproduce the intersecting structural hierarchies in the working class.

A book on industrial labour edited by Jonathan Parry et al. (1999) has some interesting studies on labour. While the title of the book mentions 'industrial labour', many of the studies included in it deal with labour outside the industry. Jan Breman discusses in detail labour in the formal sector in the introductory chapter. He believes that there is no simple dichotomy between the formal and informal sectors. His essay covers issues like the now outdated debate on labour commitment, but he also tries to show that the extended family of the worker was an important factor which helped in his migration to industrial centres at low wages. The paper throws up new insights for studying labour. Breman also argues strongly for the revival of fieldwork, a tradition he finds dwindling in sociological research in India.

Jonathan Parry's (1999) ethnographic study of workers at the Bhilai Steel Plant discusses the work and work groups in the plant. His findings suggest that public sector employment and the company township have encouraged different migrant communities to integrate with the new social setting. New solidarity is created which runs contrary to traditional caste/community-based solidarities. However, he notices the opposite trend in the small manufacturing units in the private sector where recruitment procedures and the composition of the workgroups tend to reproduce primordial loyalties.

Parry also details the negative aspects of labour in the public sector (ibid.). They earn well, have secure jobs, but they somehow avoid doing their tasks. Parry's observations confirm the findings of M. D. Morris (1965) who, in his classic study on the emergence of an industrial work force, noted that in the textile mills workers of similar caste-ranking formed a cohesive group. Even Muslims were included in this group. However, those excluded were the untouchable (*Dalit*) workers.

Debashish Bhattacherjee's (2000) paper on globalization and labour makes interesting reading. The paper discusses industrial relations in a historical and structural context. The author holds the view that the gradual spread of market principles has led to wide inter-regional and inter-sectoral differences in the levels of economic activity resulting, in turn, in considerable variation in the nature of labour-management relations. Consequently, the 'national' industrial relations system has given way to many 'local' industrial relations systems. He concludes that globalization of capital leads to localization of industrial relations.

#### *Changing Role of Trade Unions in the Formal Sector*

The trade union movement had a remarkable impact on the character of Mumbai. Stephen Sherlock (1996), an Australian researcher, notes that the power of organized labour in Mumbai was due to the support it got from a sympathetic government. However, after the reforms of 1991 the attitude of the government changed. It abandoned its pro-labour stand and has instead promotes strong market-oriented policies. As a result, the trade union movement has started losing much of its capacity to influence class formation. Past successes were the result of the determination and sacrifice of the pioneers in the field. The fruits of this struggle were canalized into organizations which depended on an environment created by the state. The changed circumstances should have prompted the trade union movement to change its tactics. Unfortunately, this has not happened as there appears to be some reluctance on the part of the trade unions to recognize the limitations of past achievements and to relate to the new working class.

N.R. Sheth (1993) takes a critical look at the trade union movement. He notes that while conventional trade unions are supposed to organize workers against employers, the employers have begun to see methods of participative management as a means to combine with workers against unions. In fact, many employers think that a participative framework in the company obliterates the need for a union. He further contends that unions and employers often collude against the workers. This is mainly because of the political links of the unions. If the political party supports certain policies that are anti-worker, then its trade union wing takes the same stance.

For a long time the absence of a database on employment and trade union formation in organized industry posed major difficulties for researchers, policy makers, and also the activists. In order to overcome this void the Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, a German foundation, commissioned studies in eight industries to determine the extent of trade unionism and casualization (Davala 1993) in them. These included tea, jute, coal, ports and docks, engineering, power, and chemical and pharmaceutical industries. Researchers collected data by personally visiting the selected industries, enterprises, and trade unions. They studied entire units rather than interviewing a sample population. Some of the industries covered—ports and docks, coal and power—were in the public sector while others were in the private sector. One of the major findings was that casual and contract labour is replacing permanent labour in all these industries.

The influence of the state on trade unions has been discussed by some social scientists and by trade unionists themselves. The earlier works tried to explain that the post-independent government was pro-labour and it had passed laws to protect the working class. This may be correct to some extent if it is compared with the labour policy during the colonial period when the government was hostile to labour and to trade unions. E.A. Ramaswamy, in his earlier work (1996), had pointed out that the state's prolonged interest in protecting labour was actually harming the movement. Instead of challenging the employers, trade unions had become more interested in getting state support for their demands. Sharit K. Bhowmik's (1996, 1998) articles on trade unions and the state brought out similar findings. He found that multi-unionism, regarded as the main problem of the labour movement, is caused, to a large extent, by the laws granting protection to labour. The Trade Unions Act of 1926 has remained unchanged till the present. It allows seven workers to come together to form a union. However the Act only provides guidelines for the registration of trade unions; it does not provide for the recognition as this is left to the employers' discretion. Hence even a union representing a fraction of the total workers can be recognized as the representative union by management. Similarly, the Industrial Disputes Act allows disputes to be raised by unions or individual workers, who can bypass the unions.

An assessment of the trade union movement after liberalization has been done in two anthologies edited by C.S. Vankata Ratnam et al. (1994) and S.T. Sawant and Purnima Rao (1994). Both books include papers which represent different views on the subject. Sawant's introductory chapter gives a broad view of industrial policies in the country since 1948. The publication also has papers representing the employers' point of view as well as that of labour. In general, studies on labour after 1991 try to show the declining conditions of labour.

#### *Worker Cooperatives*

Worker cooperatives are Organizations that are owned and controlled by workers. Though they are not uncommon in the developed counties, they hardly exist in developing countries. Worker cooperatives in India started fairly late. The first such cooperative was started in the tea industry in 1974 with workers of a tea plantation in West Bengal taking over control of the plantation (Bhowmik 1992). In Tripura, after the Left Front government was voted into power in 1978, it encouraged workers of sick or closed plantations to take over and manage them. A few such plantations are still functioning.

Soon after liberalization (1991) the Sick Industries (Special Provisions) Act was amended. The Board of Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) was set up under the Act and its main purpose was to examine sick or closed industries in the private sector and to suggest ways to improve them. One of the provisions in the Act stated that the BIFR could hand over management of the company to its employees if the latter formed a cooperative and expressed willingness to take charge. Kamani Tubes was the first company to be converted into a worker cooperative under the Act. B. Srinivas (1993) conducted a full-fledged study of this experiment. His book describes the break up of the Kamani empire in 1980. It highlights the problems the workers and their families faced after Kamani Tubes closed down. Some workers sold their houses, some withdrew their children from school, others postponed the marriages of their daughters, and some migrated to their villages in search of work. Three workers took the extreme step of committing suicide. The study examines whether worker takeover of a factory could be a possible means of reviving a sick industry by making workers masters of their own destiny.

Unfortunately, the Kamani Tubes cooperative also failed. E. A. Ramaswamy (1999) studied this demise and found that it failed mainly because the leaders had ceased to be democratic and did not consult the workers when making decisions. There were financial problems as well, but failure of participation made the workers wary of the leaders. The old divide between workers and managers was re-created; the main difference was that the workers began regarding the leaders as representatives of the management. As a result, productivity fell and so did the profits. The worker shareholders too lost interest in the functioning of the company.

Kamani Tubes was a sensational case and had attracted the attention of the media throughout the country. However, there are other cases which through not as high profile as Kamani, still continue to function, though not with high profits. Bhowmik (1992) analysed the case of such cooperatives in the tea industry; one in West Bengal and three in Tripura. He found that trade unions played a major role in motivating the workers. The specific features of the tea industry were that workers were isolated in the plantations; their belonging to tribal groups was also important as this added to social solidarity. Besides this, the role of the state was also crucial. The plantations in Tripura succeeded because the state was favourable. But this experiment in West Bengal did not succeed, not because of the failure of the co-operative, but because of opposition by the state government.

Sharit K. Bhowmik and Kanchan Sarker (2002) conducted a study on worker cooperatives in Kolkata. These cooperatives were formed for the factories that were closed in the 1980s. Some of these cooperative them are still in existence. The reasons for their continued existence are the backing of their unions, a high rate of participation in decision-making, and the initial support from the state government. The main difference between these cooperatives and the one in tea is that the trade union in Kolkata was with the CPM-backed CITU, whereas the union of the tea workers was not with CITU. The state government was hostile to the tea cooperative whereas it was supportive of the ventures in Kolkata.

#### *Labour in Plantations*

The plantation industry is the largest employer in the formal sector after the railways. The total number of permanent workers in the tea plantation industry is over one million with another 500,000 temporary workers. Though these workers are in the formal sector in the sense that they get legal protection in their work, their wages are very low and their problems are not widely known because they lie isolated in the plantations away from public gaze. Bhowmik et al. (1996) studied the working class in the tea plantations of West Bengal, Assam, and Tamil Nadu. The conditions of the workers in the south (Tamil Nadu and Kerala) were found to be much better than in Assam and West Bengal, though the bulk of the labour force (75 per cent) is employed in the two latter states. The southern states not only pay better wages, they also adhere to the provisions laid down by the Plantation Labour Act with regard to housing, education, sanitation, and water supply. The plantations in the northern part are woefully lacking in these amenities.

Kanchan Sarker (1994) highlighted the changing patterns of the life of tribal workers in the tea plantations of north Bengal. He found that unions directly or indirectly influence the lives of the workers. Collective bargaining has a direct bearing on their working life while their cultural, religious, and political institutions get indirectly influenced. In another study, Bhowmik (1993) found that nearly all the tea plantation workers in north Bengal are unionized. However, this has had little effect in increasing their wages or living conditions. The poorly paid workers are unable to sustain long-drawn agitations for improving their conditions. But they also feel that in the absence of trade unions their conditions would be worse.

Women play a major role in tea production. In fact, tea is the only industry where women workers form over half the workforce. However, they are marginalized in their work as well as in the trade unions. Shobhita Jain (1988) made an in-depth study of the role of female labour in a plantation in Assam. She concludes that there is greater equality among the sexes in the plantations because of the tribal background of the migrant workers hailing from central India.

Sarker and Bhowmik's (1998) study on women workers in plantations explored the reasons for the low level of participation of female plantation workers in trade unions. They found that though tribal societies have a lower degree of gender discrimination, it is not altogether absent. Workers in the tea plantations of Jalpaiguri district and Assam are mostly tribals from the Chota Nagpur region. Work in the plantation is also very gender-specific and women are rarely promoted to the ranks of supervisors or gang leaders. These posts are invariably occupied by men. The trade unions too reflect the same structure, with office-bearers being mainly males. Moreover, the engagement of women in household work keeps them away from union activities. The trade union leadership (which is mainly drawn from the Bengali middle classes) has also fostered such bias.

A comprehensive study of tea plantations in Darjeeling was done by M.P. Lama and P. Sarkar (1987). Though Darjeeling is well known all over the world for its tea, there are hardly any good studies on labour in that district. Their study shows that though the Darjeeling tea industry produces high quality tea which fetches a good price in international markets, the conditions of labour are the worst. Their wages are lower than of their counterparts in other tea-growing district of West Bengal—Jalpaiguri—though the cost of living is higher in the hills. The quality of life too is poor as many workers are victims of illnesses such as TB.

Plantations all over the world engage migrant labour. Ravindra K. Jain (1993) focused on the continuities and discontinuities between recruitment of labour within Tamil Nadu for export to other countries, especially Malaysia where they are engaged in the rubber plantations. He looks at the process of labour control in both the 'enclaves' (the plantations) and the 'hinterland'. He briefly discusses the articulation theory and the deproletarianization theory to explain the process of labour migration and control between Tamil Nadu and Malaysia. His paper includes an interesting postscript on the ethnography of colonialism.

#### *Studies on Voluntary Retirement*

Many of the large companies have resorted to downsizing in order to reduce labour costs. The workers are forcibly made to retire 'voluntarily'. The earlier methods were subtle but crude. The targeted group of workers were frequently harassed by the management with the threat that they could be transferred to other plants or offices of the company in other areas, etc. All this were done with the idea that the workers would not be able to bear this harassment and would therefore seek a compromise. After the liberalization policy of 1991, the employers' organizations asked government to frame an 'exit policy' which would enable any industry to close down. This was fiercely opposed by trade unions. The government therefore postponed its decision on this policy. At the same time, it allowed companies to reduce their workforce through a process known as the Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS). The companies could offer voluntary retirement to their workers by giving them a better retirement package than they would have got under the law. It was believed this would lure workers to accept and quit. In reality what happened was that companies did offer the VRS but if the response was not as good as expected they would use other tactics to 'convince' their workers to leave. For example, one of the commonest ones was of spreading the rumour that the concerned factory or office would close down within a short while and workers would be transferred to another plant far away. Hence if workers did not accept the time-bound offer of VRS, they would either have to move to the other factory or if they wanted to resign, they would get only the compensation provided by the law and nothing more. Hence, it was found that the first offer of VRS would get a lukewarm response but the second round (after these rumours were spread) would get a much better response.

Myrtle Barse (2001) has studied the impact of this scheme in some large companies in Mumbai. She finds that it has had a marked impact on the nature of employment and in changing the quality of life of the workers. Her paper presents case studies of workers who have taken VRS and how their lives have changed. Most could not find alternative work and their compensation evaporated within a few years. Their living standards reduced drastically and some could find only low paid work in the informal sector. She suggests that the government or other organizations such as their trade unions or NGOs should help workers who accept VRS in investing their money properly and also in providing for health insurance.

Ernesto Noronah (2001) studied the Bombay Dock Labour Board (BDLB) and how globalization has changed its functioning. By setting up the BDLB a modicum of social security was provided to the workers against sudden economic crises and recession, when work was not readily available. The advent of globalization and loading of goods to the ships in containers has reduced the need for labour. The Board offered VRS to the workers in order to reduce their number. This act involved paying lump sums to the workers who opted for the scheme. BDLB suffered a huge loss in meeting the financial needs of the scheme. It faced a financial crunch after this. The retired workers too were not better off though they received lump sum payments. The study found that this tiny sum of money disappeared in a couple of years and they were reduced to penury. This is one case where both employer and employee suffered because of VRS.

Ratan Khasnobis and Sudipti Banerjea (!996) came to similar conclusions while studying VRS in Durgapur in West Bengal. Their study explored the mechanisms behind the workers' acceptance of VRS in the Durgapur Industrial Area of West Bengal. Though there was willingness on the part of some workers to accept the compensation, there were several instances where the management coerced the workers to accept the deal. Moreover, it was found that the amount received under VRS was used for unproductive purposes (marriages, festivals, etc.). They had little left to start self-employment ventures, thus defeating the very purpose of VRS.

#### *Labour in the Informal Sector*

As noted earlier, the bulk of the country's labour force is in the informal sector. The formal sector employs only 7 per cent of the total labour force. A major section of the workers in this sector are engaged in agriculture; even so, at a conservative estimate, there are around 100 million workers in the urban informal sector. Though this sector has been in existence for a long time, it gained formal recognition by the ILO only in the mid-1970s. The term 'informal sector' was coined by Keith Hart, an economist, who was studying the labour market in Accra, Ghana in the early 1970s. He was unable to classify the large number of workers who did not have permanent employment and who floated around, changing their occupations. For lack of a more appropriate term, he called them the 'informal sector' as opposed to the well-regulated and legally protected formal sector.

The informal sector has always been regarded as a residual sector. It was believed in the 1970s and 1980s that, with the expansion of industrialization, this sector would be drawn into the formal sector. This was wishful thinking because far from being absorbed, it grew in size and established its own identity. Unfortunately in India, despite the large numbers involved, this sector remained invisible. All the benefits that were given to labour were, in fact, given only to the organized sector. It was only after 1991, when a large number of companies went in for downsizing and when the labour from the formal sector was forced to join the informal sector, that government started taking notice of this phenomenon. The studies conducted on the informal sector are grouped in three sections. The first covers the dimensions and conditions of work. The second section deals with the attempts at organizing the workers, and the third section covers studies on social security.

**Working in the Informal Sector.** Home-based work is a very important part of the informal sector, though it was neglected for a long time and the trade unions overlooked its existence. In 1996, when the ILO passed a convention on home-based work it began to gain some importance in the national plans. Andrea M. Singh and Anita Kelles-Vitanen (1987) edited a collection of studies on home-based work. Aptly titled, *Invisible Hands*, this volume covers studies mainly from India although there are a couple of papers on Bangladesh.

Jan Breman's contribution to the study of labour in the informal sector has long been recognized. He has studied the condition of non-agricultural labour in south Gujarat for several decades. He wrote a book covering his personal experiences and the first-hand information on the lives of the workers (Breman 1996). The book records Breman's journey among the dispossessed. It is about wage labour in the lower echelons of the non-agrarian economy of south Gujarat. He draws attention to increased labour mobility and migration in recent years, both of which are drastically understated in official statistics. Breman has also written a comprehensive paper (1999a) on the evolution and dimensions of the informal sector in India.

In collaboration with Arvind N. Das, Breman (2000) did another book illustrating the condition of labour in the informal sector. This book is basically a picture album with photographs by Ravi Agrawal and text by Breman and Das. It can be regarded as a unique sociological study on the subject. The lucid text, combined with stark pictures, effectively documents the exploitative conditions of these people.

O. P. Sharma's paper (1997) highlights the issues that arose after the reforms of 1991 concerning unorganized labour. The author is of the view that conditions of labour have become worse after the reforms. Ishita Mukhopadhyay (1998), in her study of the changing pattern of labour use in the informal sector in Kolkata, found that the city has had a high percentage of workers in the informal sector. In some time she argues that despite an increasing trend towards the marginalization and casualization of the labour force in India, the situation in Kolkata is somewhat different, particularly after the Left Front (mainly the CPM) tried to unionize all sections of the labour force, including those in the unorganized sector. Mukhopadhyay feels that this has made labour more conscious of its rights. However, she does not explain why wages in Kolkata remain the lowest compared to other metropolitan cities in the country.

In spite of the growing literature on the informal sector, there are several gaps not only with respect not only to the data on the size of the sector, but also the concept and definition of this sector. Amitabh Kundu and Alakh N. Sharma (2001) have edited a collection of papers which deal with these problems. The other issues are the characteristics of the sector, its contribution to national economy, and the areas for policy and programme implementation. The contribution of women to this sector has also been studied. The editors stress on the importance of support systems for informal units and suggest ways and means of promoting social protection to informal sector workers.

Manjit Singh's (1991) study of the labour process in the garment industry in Delhi notes that in the informal sector it is not capital but labour which is unorganized. He also highlights the difficulties in unionizing workers in this sector.

A. Dharmalingam (1995) explores labour conditions in another section of the informal sector—brick kiln workers in Tamil Nadu. His study shows that brick kiln workers are so underpaid that it becomes difficult for them to reproduce even the labour expended. The industry is expanding rapidly because of the increase in construction activities, but it shows extreme contrasts. Dharmalingam states that the rich brick kiln owners have distorted social relations and widened the social distance between the 'haves' and 'have-nots'. The industry has also had negative effects on the environment, as it fells trees for fuel. The consequences of this are felt more by the poor.

K.G. Agrawal (1988) studied the living and working conditions of casual labour in Kanpur which he reported in a slim volume of a mere 84 pages. The workers covered included those employed as casual labour in the PWD, railways, MES, textile mills and unattached casual labour. He found that the was labour force made up of the uprooted casual labour from the rural areas. Most of them had small landholdings which are insufficient to cover the basic needs of their families. They were mostly seasonal migrants who visit their villages during the monsoon season to work in the fields. A section of them was recruited through the agents of contractors. Others were helped by their kinsfolk in finding employment. One of the striking features of the study is that there is a transition in the social composition of the workers. In the pre-independence era these workers belonged mainly to the untouchable/ex-untouchable castes. Agrawal found that at the time of his study people from the upper castes were also joining the ranks of casual labour.

Nandita Shah and Nandita Gandhi (1998) studied the plastic processing industry in Mumbai. These units are mainly in the small-scale or home-based sector. Their study assessed the impact of the economic reforms of 1991 on this industry. It examined industrial restructuring and the way this affects women workers at their workplace and in their homes.

Jesim Pais (2002) examined the process of the growing casualization of the workforce and its links with the quickened pace of liberalization all through the 1990s. He found that literature on this subject seeks to demonstrate the links between the specific policies of liberalization (such as deregulation of the labour market, export promotion and trade liberalization), and the process of casualization, informalization, and feminization of the labour force. In order to be able to understand these issues, Pais' study sought to examine the changes in patterns of industrial employment.

**Industrial Restructuring and Informal Work.** There are a number of studies on the impact of the closure of the textile industry on the lives of the workers. This industry had played an important role in the growth and development of two major cities in western India, namely, Mumbai and Ahmedabad. The closure of this industry has resulted in a large section of workers in the formal sector being forced to take up low-paying, insecure jobs in the informal sector. It is noticed that there was a rapid decline in Mumbai's textile industry after the long strike of 1981–82 led by the firebrand trade union leader Dr Datta Samant. Many blame him and his union for the subsequent closure of the mills. However, how does one explain the rapid decline of the textile industry in Ahmedabad? There were no strikes there. When work stopped in Mumbai, the industry in Ahmedabad should have improved to take care of the deficit caused by the strike in Mumbai. Instead, production started to fall even in Ahmedabad. It sounds simplistic to blame the workers or trade unionism for the catastrophe.

Darryl D'Monte's (2002) book on the decline of the textile industry is an important study on Mumbai. The book analyses the situation and the actors involved, namely, the government and its policies, the representative union the Rashtriya Mill Mazdur Sangh, the exploitative mill owners who were looking for an opportunity to close their operations as it would be more lucrative for them to sell the mill lands for housing for the affluent, and the underworld which was introduced to the scene by these actors. He notes that the decline of the textile industry occurred due to a host of reasons but none of them were attributed to labour. D'Monte discussed the problem of disposing mill lands in an earlier paper (D'Monte 1998).

Bhowmik and More (2001) examined the socio-economic adjustments of families which have undergone decline in living standards. Their study covers the lives of workers who lost their jobs during and after the long strike of 1981–82. Over 100,000 of the 250,000 millworkers lost their jobs. Even when the mills reopened after the strike the conditions of the workers were no better because most mills shut down again. By 1991 the total workforce had shrunk to 85,000; at present it stands at 30,000. The millworkers who for decades had enjoyed secure and respectable jobs were now forced to seek employment in the informal sector. The study also examines the role of the social institutions that are helping them survive.

The condition of workers in Ahmedabad has attracted more studies. Supriya Roychowdhury (1996) studied the impact of industrial restructuring in the textile industry in Ahmedabad. The decline in the textile industry took place in 1984–94. She found that sections of organized labour were being pushed out of the formal sector in the process of industrial restructuring. The representative trade union (Textile Labour Association, started by Mahatma Gandhi) did nothing to help. Most of these workers were forced to eke out an existence by working in the informal sector. Jan Breman found that over 100,000 jobs were lost resulting in the informalization of a vast majority of the sacked workers. He asserts that Gujarat can thus be understood as an experiment for trying out what will happen to state and society under a policy regime which does not attempt to harness the most brutal consequences of a market-led mode of capitalist protection.

Another study of the textile industry in Ahmedabad was conducted by S. S. Mehta and Dinesh Harode (1998). They found that closure of industrial units in developing economies may lead to serious consequences since their limited investable resources and relatively limited alternative employment opportunities cannot easily absorb the resultant loss of jobs, production, and revenue. Moreover the present legal and institutional framework to deal with the problem of industrial sickness in India has been found to be inadequate, particularly in protecting the interests of the workers. The textile crisis in Gujarat brings out the glaring inadequacies of the present framework.

**Organizing the Unorganized.** It is quite clear from the above discussion that the labour in the informal sector is heterogeneous and also has certain specific features that distinguish it from labour in the formal sector. The labour in the former is poorly paid and jobs are insecure. Both factors make it difficult to organize it into collective organizations like trade unions. However, collectivisation is perhaps the only way these workers can fight for their rights. How do they organize themselves is the main problem. There have been some studies on organising the unorganized workers.

The National Labour Institute (now the V.V. Giri National Labour Institute) at NOIDA (in the outskirts of Delhi, but in UP) has been conducting camps in different parts of the country to raise the consciousness of workers in the informal sector. Vidyut Joshi (1990) has done an evaluative study of these attempts. The study helps in understanding the problems encountered in organizing the informal sector workers. It also suggests feasible organizational strategies.

#### 288 Sharit K. Bhowmik

Rajeshwari Deshpande's (1999) study of the Hamal Panchayat in Pune is another case of organizing the unorganized. The Hamal Panchayat is a successful attempt at mobilizing the labourers in the informal sector. It has been attempting to create a broad-based political alliance of unorganized workers and the urban poor forcing both state and civil society to recognize their specific identities and acknowledge their contribution to the economy and society.

The different experiences and the strategies in organizing labour in the informal sector are discussed in a book edited by Ruddar Dutt (1997). The papers presented cover theoretical issues as well as case studies of organizing these workers through unions, credit societies, and cooperatives. Another such book is edited by Sarath Davala (1995). The papers published are mainly by activists who share their experiences. There are also papers on different strategies for organizing. Both volumes are important contributions towards the understanding of the problems faced by labour in the informal sector and the likely solutions.

#### *Social Security*

One of the ways of providing some relief to labour in the informal sector is through social security. In India, social security and retirement benefits are much sought after and are provided to labour in the formal sector. If social security which would include educational facilities for children and health facilities for all—were to be provided to all citizens would there be such a clamour for jobs in the formal sector? For the poorly paid worker in the informal sector who has neither security of employment nor the resources to cover major illnesses, life is one endless struggle against poverty. However, is it possible to support financially social security? These are some of the questions raised by the studies quoted in this section.

The withdrawal of the welfare state in India has accentuated the problems of workers in the informal sector. Noronah and Sharma (1999) raise this and related issues in their paper on displaced workers. The welfare state had protected common citizens by providing them free medical aid and education. It had also provided work at the time when it was not available elsewhere and distributed food grains at cheap rates when there were food shortages or when food grain prices rose abnormally. The withering away of the welfare state has placed a great burden on the people. To make matters worse, this withdrawal took place at a time when industries, especially the older ones, were closing down, rendering thousands jobless.

The state of Kerala has been successful in promoting social security through welfare boards. Each board represents a trade and is constituted by workers in that trade. The board provides a number of facilities for its members. Funds for the board are collected from workers and employers. In some cases a levy is imposed on the trade/industry concerned. S. Mohana Pillai (1996) has conducted a study on the welfare boards in Kerala. He also examines the functioning of the oldest board, namely, the Kerala Headloaders' Welfare Scheme.

R. C. Datta (1998) finds that the neglect of social opportunities due to the lack of adequate progress and social security has been detrimental to economic and social development. He further states that in order to remedy this situation public action must play a central role in ensuring the expansion and monitoring social security. He focusses on the mathadi (head load) labour markets in Mumbai. He finds that the mathadi boards are a case of public action enabling these manual workers in the informal sector to achieve protective social security benefits.

Renana Jhabvala (1998) is of the view that in the context of the changed world economy and the decline of the welfare state there is considerable debate on the need to provide social security to the informal sector. Her study looks at the possible mechanisms for social security provisions, insurance, security funds, and state-supported childcare. This theme is further explored in an edited volume by Jhabvala and Subramanian (2000). The papers in their collection deal with various social security schemes and the experiences of mass organizations in evolving and implementing some of these schemes.

#### *Women and Work*

It is interesting to note that major work in this category was undertaken by sociologists in the 1990s. One does not find much work in the late 1980s but as one progresses to the 1990s, the volume of studies in this area increases. There are, however, serious gaps in research. For example, a large section of research is concentrated in the informal sector. Undoubtedly women workers form a third of this sector and hence it is natural that it should attract the interest of researchers. However, a similar interest in the formal sector would be rewarding. There is little information on how women in these industries fare, except for the fact that their numbers are dwindling. The information and communication technology sector has attracted a large number of female workers. In most cities where this type of outsourcing is done, females predominate in the labour force. These may be better-paid and skilled jobs, but given the fact that the jobs are insecure, the workers hardly have any rights at their workplace and they are not entitled to any post-retirement benefits. Such jobs are actually in the informal sector. There is a need to study this growing phenomenon.

A question being discussed since the 1970s is how women's employment affects their domestic activities. There is much debate on the issue of women working the 'double shift'. The first shift is in their place of work, where they work for a wage. The second shift starts at home, where women have to do the household work. ISA Baud, a Dutch sociologist, has tried to explore this problem in her study of the gender aspects of industrialization in India and Mexico (Baud 1991). The study takes into account the petty production units employing mainly casual female labour. There are descriptions and discussions of women's employment in the textile and shrimp-processing industries in India and the shoe industry in Mexico. Alongside, the author examines the differential position of women in the household in all three cases. She goes on to discuss the factors that determine the differential bargaining position of women in the household situation in relation to the different forms of production.

Baud (1992) has also examined the effects of industrialization on women workers in developing countries. Her paper on the subject (ibid.) is concerned with the changes occurring in women's employment during the current industrialization process. More specifically, the study deals with how women's employment varies within large, small-scale, and artisanal forms of production and the implications this has for women's bargaining power within the household.

Hilary Standing (1991) explores a similar theme. Her study on women's employment and family in Kolkata focuses on the impact of their intra-household relations and familial ideologies. Standing uses a mixed methodology combining a sample survey of women workers along with detailed structured and unstructured interviews with several members of the household of each of the employed women.

Uma Kalpagam (1994) explores different aspects of labour and gender in her collection of papers. The different papers deal with diverse issues but there is a thematic unity in the sense that most of the studies deal with patriarchy and gender. Examples from the garment industry, electronics, and service and processing sectors show that women get 'crowded' into unskilled, low-wage jobs. Kalpagam finds that the patriarchal role of the state reinforces cultural norms where women are constructed as dependent. It provides the rationale for women's subservience to males in the family, household, property ownership, and other facets of their lives. It further justifies the treatment of women as the labour reserve to be employed at lower wages. Finally, her analyses show that it is only where women have organized themselves to articulate their demands that one finds a ray of hope and, of course, the only option for getting rid of the overall oppressive system.

Cherian Joseph and K.V. Eswara Prasad (1995) discuss the reality of gender at work. Their work focusses on women and the facets of their work in the marine food processing units, on construction workers, on the functioning of an NGO for rural women, and on the study of labour administration and labour law enforcement in Maharashtra. The authors discuss the role of a trade union which became productive with the active participation of women. However, the women within it got marginalized. The book also talks about the NGO Disha which works on the 'gender and development' approach, where women are seen as resources and as full-fledged participants in the development process. The labour administration system in Maharashtra is critiqued for its biased recruitment process. It also exposes the limited employment opportunities for women, the problems they encounter while balancing, the home with their work.

Another study on women in the fish-processing industry is by M.V. Shobhana Warrier (2001). The author has based her findings on an in-depth survey of 60 workers from Kerala and a broader sample of 250 from the different production centres. She discusses the nature of the fish-processing industry in India at a general level and focuses on issues concerning the migrant women workforce. This industry is situated in various parts of the country and its labour force is almost exclusively migrant women. A preponderant majority is from Kerala but of late women from Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka have also joined the industry. The migrants are recruited by agents who not only provide them work but also maintain control over the women's work and life.

P. Tara Kumari's book (1999) provides a comprehensive analysis of the important problems of working women in the urban informal sector. Though the title of the study, *Women in Urban India*, suggests that the book is on urban women, it is in fact on women workers in the urban informal sector. The book attempts to provide an integrated picture of the total women workforce and their economic contribution at the family and societal level. The study indicates that social background is an important indicator influencing the economic participation of women. The lower paid jobs in this sector are dominated by women belonging to backward castes whose family income is low. These features in fact push these women into the labour market, which is dominated by low-paid menial jobs. Level of education is also an important factor. Women with better education can get better paid jobs in this sector.

Leela Fernandes' (1997) monograph on women in the jute mills in Kolkata focusses on the political processes through which categories are constructed. She highlights the tension in India between a 'national' level discourse of a unitary 'working class' and the political fragmentation of workers and trade unionists in the local context. She moves beyond the narrow confines of unionized politics to examine the negotiation of power in the everyday life of the family, neighbourhood, shop floor, and other areas.

The book contributes towards a better understanding of workers' politics and trade union practice and the marginalization of women workers in the organized (formal) sector. It also brings out women's resistance to the ideology of domesticity and the devaluation of their work roles, the restricted scope for independent collective action and the generational transmission of hierarchies among them.

An interesting but important essay on women and work under patriarchy is by Nirmala Banerjee (1999). She dissents from the favoured prescription that greater employment opportunities can give women more independence. Banerjee points out that in East and South East Asia, capitalism has, in fact, drawn women into the labour market rather than binding them down as housewives. She points out that a major cause for women's marginalization is the trade union movement which did not specifically take up gender issues. The trade union movement was used to protect only male workers and, in effect, it turned against women workers. Banerjee does not clarify whether the trade union movement is inherently anti-female or the change in its orientation as it progresses is because of vested interests.

Nirmala Banerjee and Swasti Mitter (1998) have conducted a study on Indian working women's response to technical changes in a globalizing world. The authors examine several instances of women from diverse backgrounds who interact with the changing technologies at their work. Their analyses show that in spite of the many difficulties, the reasons why women have been the greater losers (compared to men) are surprisingly similar.

The rise in the employment of women in the informal sector is discussed in a few studies. Jeemol Unni (2001) provides evidence of the growing informalization of the female labour force in South Asian countries. There are two broad components of the informal economy, i.e. non-wage and wage employment. The share of the first component rose in the 1980s and 1990s. Within non-wage employment, certain invisible groups, such as home-based workers and street vendors, are vulnerable to changes in the global and local economy. The increasing casualization of the workforce is evidence of the increase in the second broad component. Within wage employment, home-workers or outworkers, and informal workers in the formal enterprises are vulnerable. The low quality of employment available to women in the informal economy is evident from the wages and incomes received and the differentials in earning.

While discussing the same phenomenon, M. Vanamala (2001) notes that state-sponsored incentive schemes and exemptions to the small-scale sector have encouraged the increase of the informal industrial sector. These concessions are on capital investment but the state has not taken any step to ensure that industry provides statutory welfare benefits and proper working conditions for its workers. Her study of an engineering unit shows that there is not only a growing casualization of labour with recruitment on contractual basis, but also an increase in the feminization of the workforce as more women are engaged to operate most production processes. This case is somewhat unusual because most studies on small-scale industrial units show that there is little feminization of the workforce. Hence Vanamala's case study could be more of an exception than the rule.

Kuntala Lahiri-Dutt (2001) discusses the marginalization of women workers in the coal mining industry. The mines employed women in coal mines in various stages of production. These women belonged to tribal or lower-caste communities. Their role continued to be significant as long as technology remained labour-intensive and collieries were small and surface-bound. The expansion of the industry and increasing mechanization saw a decline in women's participation. Lahiri-Dutt's research is based in the Ranigunj coal belt in eastern India. She describes how the work of resource extraction becomes gendered. She highlights the growing marginalization of women and their alienation from access to environmental resources and their transformation into illegitimate and invisible beings. While on the subject of marginalization of women in the mining industry it is necessary to note that this occurred with the ban on women working underground before the Second World War. The ILO has a convention to this effect. Such a ban has meant that women can work only on the surface and not inside the mines. The only jobs available to them are those that involve labour-intensive and poorly paid activities, while the better-paid jobs are below the surface. Hence it is not technology but the ban that led to the marginalization of women workers in the mines.

While on the subject of job losses for women in the formal sector, it should be noted that their marginalization came from certain protective legislation such as the ban on underground work in mines and ban on night work in factories. Another important legislation was on maternity benefits. Amrita Chhachi (1998) has discussed this issue in her analysis of the Maternity Benefit Bill of 1929. Her study focusses on the Bombay Legislative Assembly debates over the Bill. She brings to light the various issues raised in these debates. However, her focus is on the main issue the Bill brought to the fore, namely, who should bear the cost of reproduction of labour: the state, capital (employer) or the husband? Though her study is on the Bill that was passed in 1929, the issues raised are very contemporary and relevant even today.

## **Concluding Observations**

The large volume of work published in this area is quite impressive. On further examination, however, there is some imbalance. In some areas a lot of work has been done, while in others a lot more research is needed. One such neglected area is the informal sector. Very little work has been done on labour, or even the employers, in this sector. Whatever work that exists is mainly by economists or statisticians.

Sociologists tend to shy away from the labour market because they think it falls in the realm of economics. However, current researches show that this is not the case. Serious economists have realized that complicated mathematical models on the labour market may seem very sophisticated in print but they cannot explain the reality of the myriad networks of social institutions that influence the market behaviour. Thus, while economists resort to sociology to help them explain complications in the labour market, sociologists unfortunately still seem disinterested.

Where work and technology are concerned, the situation is even more dismal. The present survey found only a few works that were relevant. There was only one book that dealt with this issue but a few articles were also available. However, the bulk of the articles were from a single issue of *Economic and Political Weekly* which had focussed on information technology. Clearly there is a greater need for work in this area. Research in the sector of information and communication technology is growing. The International Labour Organization (ILO) has focussed on this in its report for 2001. This technological revolution has led to greater outsourcing of jobs to the developing world. New managerial strategies are used in these sophisticated industries which need to be studied and analysed. Some new intensive research will emerge in the near future as funding organizations like the Indo-Dutch Programme in Development Alternatives (IDPAD) have encouraged work in this sector. A few other research funding agencies too have backed projects in this area but unfortunately, the major thrust of research funding is still in the conventional areas.

There is a need for ethnographic studies on work in the informal sector; the type of work that Jan Breman has done. Why is it that sociologists, especially the younger ones, are so averse to fieldwork? Is it because it is difficult to rough it out in the field? Have sociologists become soft and cannot stand the rigours of fieldwork? The earlier sociologists drew a lot of their data from their extensive fieldwork. N. R. Sheth and E. A. Ramaswamy lived in the field among workers for months in order to gain an insight into their social life and their attitudes towards work. In more recent times, there are Jan Breman and Jonathan Parry who are engaged in intensive fieldwork. Parry has been studying, as a participant observer, workers in Bhilai since 1993. Mark Holmstrom too did extensive fieldwork in the working class areas of Bangalore before he wrote his highly insightful monograph *South Indian Factory Worker* (1976). It is embarrassing to see senior sociologists/ social anthropologists from Britain and the Netherlands engaging in extensive fieldwork in India, while Indians prefer to settle for secondary data. Even when they handle primary data, it is not based on field observations; they use elaborate questionnaires which are administered to unwilling respondents by young and inexperienced researchers. I always ask my enthusiastic students to first administer the questionnaire and see if they have the patience to answer the long list of questions before expecting their respondents to answer the questions.

The micro-electronic revolution has brought about rapid changes in the production process and, more importantly, in the organization of services. In just a decade the telecom sector has connected the remotest parts of the country. This has given rise to telecom-related services, outsourcing, and new production relations on a global scale. Unfortunately, this area has remained largely unstudied by sociologists. Some of the studies undertaken have been discussed in this chapter but these are not enough. One would have expected sociologists to study the effects of this revolution on the nature of work, social and industrial relations, what effect these changes have had on the youth and their vision of the future, and how women workers have been affected.

Globalization has resulted in two extremes in development in countries like India. It has resulted in the outsourcing of business from the developed countries. At the upper end, there is an educated, Westernized, and technically skilled workforce which is engaged in business process outsourcing (BPOs), and at the lower end is the outsourcing of production. Poorly paid workers, a significant number of whom are women, do this, latter work. These include workers in garment factories, workshops producing leather goods, small-scale industries manufacturing precision instruments, etc. Workers in the production units are not like their sophisticated counterparts engaged in outsourcing in the services sector, mentioned above. It is quite evident that this divide will continue in the future and may, in fact, increase. What are the effects of this type of work on the workers and their families? Naila Kabeer has made a study of garment workers in Bangladesh and she finds that despite the extreme forms of exploitation the large numbers of women engaged in this industry have some independent source of income which they can use to improve their households and educate their children. The other side is that they earn subsistence wages and their savings are nil or low. The women will have nothing to fall back upon if these industries close or move elsewhere. Studies of this type need to be done in India too.

Globalization and liberalization have given rise to many new categories of workers. These workers are not totally unskilled or illiterate. The growing business of courier services, the increasing network of cable TV, the spread of cyber cafes, private security guards, and other such activities have provided employment to many but these are, by and large, poorly paid with no job security and no facilities at work. Studies on work and control over work in such activities are needed.

The new types of work, whether in the BPOs or in the low end of outsourcing, have created employment and increased the choices for the people. However, most of these jobs are not permanent, neither do they provide for any social security or any other benefits.

Another issue that has gripped planners and activists is how to provide social security to workers in the informal sector. The report of the Second National Labour Commission has suggested that government must try and have an umbrella legislation for this sector. How can this happen? What are the growing problems of the informal sector and how do the workers perceive them? How can we move towards solutions? These are issues sociologists could have raised; unfortunately the reaction of sociologists to the informal sector has been lukewarm and issues of social security are hardly researched.

Finally, one can say that industrial sociology has matured over the years in India. In the coming years, a good deal of research in this field will be needed to respond to the newer demands, and also to monitor the changing profile of the Indian industrial scene.

notes

- 1. We have tried to cover the main researches in the field of industrial sociology. Both the field and the time period are quite vast and it is possible that some of the works published in the period under survey might have been inadvertently left out. Any such omissions are due to oversight and should not be seen as a deliberate attempt to ignore them.
- 2. Which came to be known as India's Silicone Valley.