- Schumacher, R., Kamphorst, E., Morojele, S., Raditalope, M., & Motleleng, N. (1990). *Sexually transmitted diseases, family planning and condoms*. Mokhotlong, Lesotho. Mokhotlong Health Service Area.
- Schwager, D. (1986). *Lesotho*. Maseru, Lesotho: Schwager Publications. Sechefo, J. (nd). *Customs and superstitions in Basutoland*. Unpublished manuscript.
- Sheddick, V. G. J. (1953). *The Southern Sotho.* London: International African Institute.
- United Nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF). (2002). UNICEF Statistics. Available online at, wysiwyg://35/http://www.unicef.org/statis/ Country\_1page101.html
- World Health Organization. (2001). Legal status of traditional medicine and complementary/alternative medicine: A worldwide review. Author. Available online at, http://www.who.int/medicines/library/ trm/who-edm-trm-2001-2/legalstatus.shtml
- World Health Organization. (2002). Lesotho. Available online at, http://www.who.int/country/lso/en/

# **Sudanese**

### **Rogaia Mustafa Abusharaf**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

None.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Sudan, Africa's largest country in area, is a territory of incredible historical and political importance. It covers an area of about 2.5 million km<sup>2</sup> or almost one tenth of the total area of Africa. The country is located in the northeastern part of Africa and extends from latitude 3 to 23 north and from latitude 22 to 39 east. The Sudan shares borders with nine countries: Egypt, Libya, Central African Republic, Chad, Zaire, Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, and Eritrea. The country is on the whole a mammoth plain, divided by mountain ranges such as Jebel Marra in western Sudan and Mount Kinyeti Imatong, bordering Uganda. The Blue and White Niles come together in Khartoum forming the River Nile, which flows northwards through Egypt to the Mediterranean Sea.

The Sudanese land and its location at the crossroads of Africa have influenced the course of its politics and history, and the Sudanese people have ardently developed multifaceted identities across it. The characteristics of the land have influenced the life and social organization of its inhabitants, defining in a dramatic way the socioeconomic and political organization of people across this vast territory. As a result of the geographical and historical heritage of the land, the Sudan straddles Africa and the Middle East, thus consolidating its place in history as a meeting point of Arab and sub-Saharan worlds.

The Sudan is the place of birth of more than five hundred cultural and linguistic groups, all with distinctive outlooks on life, culture, cosmology, faith traditions, and experiential knowledge. Arabic is the lingua franca in addition to English, which is the main language of instruction in southern Sudan. A northern Sudanese Christian minority, the Copts, also speaks Arabic. In addition, numerous linguistic groups and dialects are spoken throughout the country.

Diversity rather than conformity remains a distinguishing quality of cultural and religious Sudanese life. For example, Arabized Sudanese cultures predominate in regions where Islam is the major religion (70% of the entire population). The branch of Islam practiced by Sudanese Muslims is known as Sunni. This tradition is distinguished by the pervasiveness of religious orders or brotherhoods, each placing its unique demands on its followers. What they have in common with the Muslim population worldwide, however, are the Five Pillars, which are constitutive of universal Islam. These pillars include the profession of the faith, daily prayer, almsgiving, fasting in the holy month of Ramadan, and fulfilling the pilgrimage to Mecca. In communities where Islam is the major religion, it is noticeable that it has adapted itself to preexisting beliefs and local cultural understandings. northern Sudan is, to a great extent, arabized in cultural

#### **The Context of Health 965**

traits, identity, and political alignment. Historians of the Sudan attribute the twin processes of Arabization and Islamization to immigrants coming to the Sudan from the Arabian Peninsula across the Red Sea, Egypt, and the Maghreb. A complex mix of conquest, migration, religious conversion, and miscegenation define the identity of the northern Sudanese as Arab. According to Ali Mazrui two parallel processes of social transformation swept the country in the course of Arab expansionism, "one linguistic and cultural, by which the people of the land acquired Arabic as their language and certain Islamic cultural conceptions and became connected with the Arab tribal system; and the other racial, by which the incoming Arab stock was absorbed in varying degrees, so that today a modicum of Arab blood flows in their veins" (Mazrui, 1973, p. 47).

According to Mudathir Abdel Rahim: "(Arab immigrants') readiness to mix, coupled with the matriarchal system of the Nubians on the one hand, and the Arabian patriarchal organization of the family and the tribe on the other, had the effect not only of facilitating the assimilation of the immigrants and the spreading of their culture and religion, but also of giving them the reins of power and political leadership in the host society" (Abdel Rahim, 1973, p. 31).

Southern Sudan, conversely, is home to countless ethnic groups, ranging from the Niolitics such as the Nuer, the Dinka, and the Shilluk; the Nilo-Hamites such as the Latuka; and the Sudanic comprising the Jur, Moru, and Azande. The Christian people of the Sudan's south and the Nuba Mountains are predominantly Roman Catholic and Anglican. In addition to Islam and Christianity, indigenous beliefs and religions are followed with equal devoutness and fervor. Indigenous beliefs are specific to particular ethnic groups. According to the Sudan country study report "the beliefs and practices of indigenous religions in Sudan are not systematized, in that the people do not generally attempt to put together in coherent fashion, the doctrines that they hold and the rituals they practice."

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

In spite of the cultural complexity of the Sudan, the people of the Sudan are frequently classified into binary social categories on the basis of geography (north versus south), ethnicity (Arabs versus Africans), and religion (Muslim versus Christian). Nevertheless, an impressive array of ethno-linguistic and religious groups inhabits this vast territory, and they do not necessarily fall into this opposition. They are *Hadandwa*, *Mahas*, *Nuer*, *Danagla*, *Dinka*, *Shiluk*, *Nuba*, *Rubatab*, *Rikabia*, *Shayqia*, *Murle*, *Kababish*, *Manasir*, *Azande*, *Jaleen*, *Bori*, *Shuli*, *Joar*, *Anwak*, *Latuka*, and *Beja*, among other groups.

The variety of Sudanese cultural life has been imaginatively portrayed in the ethnographic literature. From the southern part of the country, Evans Pritchard brought the lives of the Nuer and the Azande peoples to international attention. In the Nuba Mountains in the west, James Faris enriched our knowledge about the intersections of politics and aesthetics in this region through his ingenious analysis of the Nuba personal art. Here, we learn a great deal of how bodily adornment, is employed as an effective means for articulating important social relations and selfexpression in Nuba society (Faris, 1972).

The extraordinary variation in Sudanese cultural life, notwithstanding, some commonalities exist in some fundamental aspects pertaining to social organization. On the whole, patriarchal authority, patrilineal descent, and patrilocal residence distinguish the Sudan. Territorial endogamy remains the preferred type of marriage unions. Invariably, all Sudanese peoples accord considerable deference and loyalties to extended families and collectivities.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Health care delivery systems throughout the Sudan are acutely under pressure. The high occurrence of devastating diseases has increased considerably in recent years as a result of economic, social, and environmental factors. Moreover, the pervasive political and economic volatility in the country had weighed heavily on the health and security of individuals and communities. Life expectancy is 53 years; infant mortality rate is estimated at 7.8% while literacy rate is 43%. The civil war, which has been raging since 1955, has taken an enormous toll on the population, which struggles against the effects of chronic malnutrition and contagious diseases. Health care in the Southern States is severely lacking. Exceptionally susceptible are the 1.25 million children and adolescents that constitute part of the Sudan's internally displaced people. According to United Nations Humanitarian Operations in Sudan, food shortage affected the health of war victims considerably. The report stated "Food insecurity in the Sudan in 2000 has been a result of continued general insecurity; population displacements, drought and floods, as well as the high prevalence of disease due to poor health and sanitation. In some areas where rainfall patterns were ideal for cultivation, insecurity drove people from their homes and fields" (2000, p. 14). In addition to the deleterious impact of the civil war, during 1984/85 the Sudan experienced one of the most devastating environmental disasters. Severe drought and desertification and crop failure in western Sudan led to a mass exodus to the capital city of Khartoum as well as to other parts of the country. Today, massive numbers of farmers and their families find their way to Khartoum's camps for the internally displaced persons along with their southern counterparts.

To remedy these serious problems, some measures such as consolidation of efficient health coordination structure, rehabilitation of all health facilities, provision of drugs and equipment, and staff training, particularly in the area of child and maternal health were recommended (UN Report, 2000, p. 16).

# **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Medical practitioners in the Sudan include physicians, physician assistants, midwives, nurses, traditional birth attendants, traditional healers, *zar sheiks* and *sheikhas* (the Sheikhas are the women who officiate in *zar* or spirit possession ceremonies), and diviners among others. Modern medicine in the Sudan was officially introduced by the Anglo-Egyptian regime (1898–1956), a process that was thoroughly chronicled by historian Heather Bell (1999). During the colonial period, different sectors of Sudan's health care were developed including the introduction of modern midwifery training. Reliance on biomedical versus traditional healers varies vastly by education, residence, and gender differences. For instance urban dwellers are more likely to go to hospitals as opposed to rural populations who rely heavily on traditional or folk cures. Also significant are gender differences, where women seek the advice of religious leaders or *zar sheikhas* more than their male counterparts who often dismiss the importance of folk healing.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Illness, physical or psychological, is subject to scrupulous theorization. Consequently, ways of dealing with illness are not confined to biomedicine. Instead, reliance on traditional healing is especially obvious. In fact, throughout Sudanese provinces and villages, traditional healing is the single mode of curing that is readily available for the community. According to Sudanese gynecologist Osman Modawi, modern medicine is commonly thought of as the last resort (1982). The term "traditional medicine" encompasses a variety of methods of protecting and restoring health that existed before the appearance of modern medicine. On the whole, traditional medicine refers to acupuncture, traditional birth attendants, mental healers, and herbal medicine (WHO Fact Sheet, 1999).

In the Sudan, one of the most important theories of illness is derived from the overwhelming belief in the power of the evil spirits. The spirits are thought to inflict injury as well as undermine one's health through the notion of *Ammal*, or the foul act. *Ammal* is typically inflicted through witchcraft causing substantial impairment and damage. Treatment is at all times sought through the counsel of shamans or witch doctors who alone have the God-given gift of counteracting the callous act. The shaman, who listens carefully to the symptoms of illness, performs a series of steps to identify types of spirits and methods for the cure. The Azande for instance, believe that witchcraft can be inherited and that a person can be a witch, causing others impairment, without realizing his/her power. Because of this threat, effective resources of diagnosing witchcraft are very important. One method is through the use by oracles, of *benge*, a poison, which is fed to little chickens. The chicken's death or survival provides the oracle's answer. Azande also use *benge* as proof to substantiate one's guilt before a court of law (Evans Pritchard, 1976). Notwithstanding the changing cultural life of Azande people and their forced displacement as a result of war, their beliefs on illness and adversity continue to hold witchcraft as the most important threat to someone's health and well-being. In an interview I conducted with Thomas, a 43-year-old Azande, who resides in ElSalam camp for the internally displaced, he stressed that "Kuguor still run rampant. People cannot forget everything about their lives at home before they came to this place."

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 967**

Diseases, which are attributed to evil spirits in many Sudanese communities, are classified as *zar* or spirit possession. In the words of British anthropologist Susan Kenyon: "Zar is both category of spirit and the cult associated with possession by those spirits. Such possession can cause problems or illness, usually a form of mental illness, marud nufsi as the Sudanese describe it, and these are referred to as zar" (1991, p. 185). *Zar* spirits are generally appeased and kept at bay through ritual ceremonials including animal sacrifice, drumming, and dancing. The types of healers who officiate in these ceremonies are called shaikhas, generally women who are well-versed in the world of the spirits and can act as interlocutors between the spirits and the patient whom they possess.

Another powerful branch of traditional healing is known as *El-tibb*, *El-nabawi*, or "prophetic medicine". In Khartoum today large numbers of clinics are scattered all over the capital city. In May 2002 I interviewed Hajj Hassan, a man whose knowledge in this field is superb. In the words of Hajj Hassan, human beings should realize the complicated link between mind and body. Prophetic medicine does not target physical ill health as an isolated phenomenon. Instead through Quranic verses, the patient receives considerable mental consolation and calmness. He articulates the underlying principle of the proliferation of Prophetic medicine as follows: It is well known that the belief of people in God plays a greater role in their recovery, regardless of the seriousness of the disease. So, the religion of Islam inspires the person who is ill to make his way through the verses of the Quran and the instructions of the Prophet. For example Prophet Mohammad described to his followers the necessity of taking honey everyday for various illnesses. He, peace be upon him, described for those suffering from high blood pressure (*elfisada*) to let blood out of their veins. He emphasized the benefits of herbs like ginger and peppercorns etc. In addition, there are a number of verses that when read regularly can bring serenity and peace of mind for patients. That is why people believe that the Quran can provide ways of dealing with their anxieties, not readily available in modern medicine.

The connection of mind and body in Sudanese theories of illness is made with crystal clarity in situations where patients seek the opinion of modern medicine and traditional healing simultaneously. This procedure is not at all infrequent or rare. The mother of a 37-year-old woman who suffered from clinical depression told me, that the psychiatrist who treated her daughter used a combination of modern procedures with elements from prophetic medicine with impressive results.

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

### **Sexuality**

Attitudes toward sexuality and reproduction are positioned at the heart of significant cultural and religious beliefs amongst the Sudanese. Open discussion of matters pertaining to sexuality is extremely proscribed by these beliefs. To a great extent, this interdiction is intimately linked to how society views sexuality in the first place. Largely seen as an ominous threat that looms largely over one's purity and morality if left unchecked, social and physical regulation is aggressively pursued. This view is of special relevance to female sexuality. One of the most important vehicles for dulling women's sexuality is achieved through female circumcision.

The origins of this practice are very mystifying and obscure. In exploring its ideology, we find varied oral accounts describing mythological rather than documented origins. Although the majority attributed the diffusion of the practice to pharaonic Egypt, some analysts argued that the custom might have originated from the Red Sea People who introduced it to neighboring peoples. Writers such as Abdalla Eltayeb (1964), a noted Sudanese linguist, see female circumcision as a legacy of the Arabization of the Sudanese people. What is important to remember is that female circumcision is not a universal practice in the Sudan, which is not surprising because the peoples and cultures of the country are very heterogeneous. According to Sudan Demographic & Health Survey the prevalence of the practice is as follows: northern Sudan, 98.7%, eastern Sudan, 86.5%, western Sudan, 95.5%. Because of the important link between female circumcision and sexuality, it is necessary to elaborate its ideological underpinnings. Understanding ideology is a step toward understanding strategies for its eradication. Indeed, Habermas (1971) argues that the only knowledge that can orient action is knowledge that frees itself from mere human interests and is based on ideas. The reasons for female circumcision and the age at which it is performed differ across Sudan by regional, ethnic, and class differences. As far as the operations among northerners are concerned, they have been practiced for a variety of cosmetic, religious, medical, and

social reasons. For instance, people justify their support of the practice by arguing that it preserves virginity, enhances femininity, and increases purity and cleanliness. There is also variation in its prevalence, in the exact types of the practice, and in the rituals associated with it. The practice includes the following types: clitoridectomy, excision, and infibulation.

In spite of the cultural importance of this practice, it has been met with strong opposition since British colonial rule (1898–1956). In fact the practice became illegal in 1946, when the British colonial administration passed a law making female circumcision a crime punishable by imprisonment and fines. From the time of independence in 1956 until the end of the 1970s, new plans were formulated to stop the practice. Attention now focused on those social and cultural aspects of the practice that accounted for its endurance in the Sudan. More recently, several organizations, including the Sudan National Committee for Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children, The Red Crescent, and the Mutawinat Group have identified the practice as an act of violence, and have devised research strategies, and adopted a variety of approaches to eradicate female circumcision. The most notable of these plans, include community outreach through the use of mass media, audio-visual aids, and publications. Another approach aims to incorporate efforts to end the practice into existing programs concerned with public health, family planning, anti-violence programs, maternal and childcare, midwifery training, and nutrition.

## **Fertility**

Fertility and fecundity figure prominently in the cultural constructions of gender identities and conceptions of womanhood and manhood amongst the Sudanese. Conversely, fear of infertility prompts individuals and communities to invent effective measures to counteract the prospects of childlessness. In the Nuba Mountains, Modawi (1982, p. 81) described the effort of one community of dealing with infertility: "In the Nuba Mountains there is a small hill which looks like the male genital organs. Infertile women visit this hill to perform certain rituals to treat their infertility. In some of the other rituals a toy boy with prominent genitalia and made of hina is thrown into water. It is also thought that eating the male genitals of animals corrects infertility. The scarcer the animal, such as crocodile, the more potent the cure."

### **968 Sudanese**

In other parts of the country, important rituals are fervently pursued to guarantee that a woman who enters into a marriage union is able to contribute to the productiveness of the community as a whole. One of the most joyous occasions for the public recognition of fertility is the *jirtig* ceremony. It is believed that this rite prevents evil spirits from undercutting the woman's ability to bear children, thus acquiring a quasi-religious quality and significance. A bride who does not take part in the *jirtig*, Sudanese say, will become infertile, for her reproductive organs are filled with evil spirits. The *jirtig* is redolent with symbolism and cultural meaning, and the values it celebrates are deemed essential to the life of the married couple, whether at home or abroad. During this ceremony, the *jirtig* bed is placed in the middle of the front yard of the house where tens of people gather to witness the ceremony. The bed is covered with a red velvet bedspread, which symbolizes fertility. The bride is also dressed in red, while the groom wears the traditional robe-like outfit, with a red band tied around his forehead. The ritual concludes with a procession to the Nile for blessing and good fortune. These rituals however are overwhelmingly female-oriented. In fact in several cases, it is almost impossible for a man to acknowledge infertility, which is more often than not equated with lack of virility and masculinity.

Apart from cultural notions about fertility and reproduction, fertility levels have declined sharply in the Sudan from an average of six children per woman to five children (Sudan Demographic & Health Survey, 1991). There is a great variation in fertility levels in light of educational attainment, socioeconomic backgrounds, and residential patterns. The great majority of Sudanese women are well aware of the various methods of family planning and contraception use (Swar Eldahab, 1996). Significant hurdles that mitigate against their involvement in family planning, however, loom large. In Dar Elsalam, Khartoum, I interviewed a group of women about their views on birth control. There was a significant consensus about the impact of their own economic situation on their ability to limit family size "Contraceptives are very expensive. We came here from Dar Fur when we used to have our farming land and we lost it because of the drought. We attended the talk of a group of health workers about birth control. They told us about pills and condoms. These items are very expensive. We cannot afford birth control pills. So, even if we want to have a small family, we cannot because of our financial situation." This sentiment

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 969**

echoes those of thousands of women who are constrained by poverty and inability to secure better lives for themselves and for their offspring.

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Cultural understandings about conception and birth are shaped by the notion that giving birth is not purely a result of sexual intercourse between men and women. One of the most compelling explanations of this view was discussed in Francis Deng's ethnography the Dinka of the Sudan in which he argues: "(Conception) is the creation of God and the blessing of the ancestral spirits. The cooperation of the father, the mother, and the spirits in the venture is verbally conceptualized. The word ahieth means, 'to beget' and 'give birth'. Dinka view of conception does not distinguish between the role of man and woman. They copulate to 'beget' jointly and 'give birth' while God intercedes to 'create' and the ancestors assist in protecting the creation from malevolent powers of destruction"(1972, p. 30). In other parts of Sudan children are considered to be wealth in and of themselves. To secure the health of the pregnant mother and her unborn child, Sudanese prescribe a variety of foods and herbs believed to be beneficial for the blood and for breast-feeding after delivery. In the Sudan many practices associated with breast-feeding are considered very beneficial. According to Shazali "Most mothers especially in rural areas, believe that mother's milk is best for the infant and are psychologically prepared to breast-feed" (1982, p. 103). In some situations however, local beliefs interfere with feeding such as the notions that boys should not be fed at sunset, because it is considered to be a bad omen and a threat to their intelligence (Shazali, 1982).

### **Infancy**

In the Sudan infants are most warmly welcomed through an exciting assortment of rituals and rites celebrating their arrival in the world. One of these celebratory occasions is the *Simaya*, or the naming ceremony. In northern Sudan, and elsewhere this ritual has attracted the attention of anthropologists for its zestfully symbolic content. The symbolism of this ceremony is brilliantly captured by Fadwa El-Guindi, who argued, "A function of such a ritual is to emphasize and impress beyond the shadow of a doubt that one-passé of the life-cycle has been left behind and to announce and stress that henceforth he or she is in another phase. Another aspect is to make sure that the individual has received communion with the deepest cultural ideals"(1996, p. 3). The *simaya* solemnizes the naming of the child as an important rite of passage and a source of blessings (*baraka*) and good omens. Generally, anywhere from one to two weeks after the birth of a child, a sacrificial lamb is slaughtered for the ritual naming of the newborn. It is celebrated with feasts, drumming, remembrance ceremonies, and concerts and marks the rite of passage from birth to initiation into the wider community. Equally emblematic, are occasions celebrated all over southern Sudan where names signify important aspects of social organization (Deng, 1972). Infants are cared for by parents, grandparents, family members, neighbors, and hired help, who also provide invaluable help with the daily household tasks. Most infants are breast-fed for at least two years, a factor that seems to mitigate some of the problems of malnutrition and childhood diseases.

Mothers and infants are often believed to be the most vulnerable people to health problems and to the attacks of evil spirits. To deal with their inbuilt vulnerability, mother and child are obliged to remain indoors for 40 days. A Sudanese woman told the unusual story of her being visited by a ghost-like creature three days after giving birth "I will never forget the incident that happened to me shortly after the birth of my first son, who is now 41 years old. I was lying down, sleeping in the middle of the night when I was awakened by an unusual noise, almost like very heavy breathing. I opened my eyes and saw a Caucasian woman dressed in a nurse's uniform sitting in a chair across from me. I was horrified. I started to call my cousin who was sleeping outside in the hosh: "Fathia, Fathia, come quickly." The woman started to call Fathia with a masculine, hoarse voice. Fathia came running and she turned on the light; the women disappeared. But Fathia said she had heard the strange voice calling her name. "From that moment on, we had to read the Quran and put amulets on my son's arm to protect him. My neighbors told me that this woman wanted to steal my infant and put another deformed one in his place but Allah protected both of us." To a large extent these complex beliefs have a significant role to play in attitudes toward the health and sickness of infants. Official reports however, demonstrated that lack of safe water,

undernourishment, insufficient sanitation, and poor hygiene are considered the most significant causes of high infant mortality and morbidity in Sudan.

## **Childhood**

Children are seen as a source of security and spiritual immortality (Deng, 1972). Childhood is also a phase in which intensive efforts at gender bending and conditioning gets underway. For example, in many parts of the Sudan Sudanese boys and girls are circumcised during this period. Rites of passages that signify the acquisition of new identities are also observed during this time. However, children, like the rest of the Sudanese population are experiencing insurmountable problems relating to health, political conflict, economic insecurity, and social unrest. This situation is particularly clear in a UNICEF report (2001) on the situation of children in Sudan. The report provides detailed analysis of the impact of the civil war, internal displacement, landmines, economic exploitation, and abductions, on children. Contagious diseases and illnesses that infringe upon children's health in the Sudan are wide-ranging, including malaria, diarrheal and acute respiratory infections. Lack of drugs and inadequate medical care combine to affect the health of Sudanese children dramatically.

### **Adolescence**

In the Sudan, the onset of adolescence is managed through culturally proscribed means and strategies. In fact, the socioeconomic circumstances prompt many parents and caregivers to entrust adolescents with responsibilities and obligations that are far beyond their years. Hence, social maturity is not measured by one's age as such, but by their productivity and contribution to the family's economics.

### **Adulthood**

Achieving an adult status in the Sudan is contingent upon fulfillment of crucial steps in the social ladder such as marriage, attainment of employment, and property ownership. Adulthood, however, does not presuppose total individuality or independence from extended family networks. It is very common for adult children married or unmarried—to continue to reside with their parents.

## **The Aged**

Compassion and empathy toward the elderly population is one of the most important values for Sudanese people irrespective of region, ethnicity, or religion. Children and grandchildren view their relationship to aging parents as one of obligation and debt. Hardly ever do aging family members get sent to nursing homes.

Aging does not only mean a longed-for release from physical work, but it also means greater authority especially for post-menopausal women. Age frees women considerably from some of the most arduous tasks and societal expectations that they had had to adhere to during their reproductive years. It follows that menopause is looked at as a phase in life that is increasingly empowering, and is rarely discussed as a medical problem. A woman in her fifties recalled that when her mother was experiencing menopause and had all the symptoms associated with the condition such as hot flashes, her physician never explained to her that she was experiencing menopause. She added that in the Sudan "women never talk about menopause." This observation is corroborated by the fact that literature on fertility in the Sudan has rarely touched on attitudes toward menopause.

## **Dying and Death**

The miscellany of Sudanese cultural worldviews and ideologies are manifestly reflected in how they deal with the question of death and dying. In the Sudan beliefs about death and dying are to a great extent molded by the deeply entrenched faith in *El-qaddaa' wa El-Qaddar* (God's will and fate). Death presents an opportunity for communities to come together to express their support and solidarity for the deceased person's surviving kin. In most parts of the Sudan, mourning rituals extend to 40 days during which the family of the deceased continue to receive tens of mourners a day.

# **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

AIDS rates have escalated in the past few years due to a number of factors ranging from use of unsterilized syringes, unprotected sex, poor health in general. There is no comprehensive governmental policy regarding the mitigation of the escalating rate of the disease.

#### **Overview of the Culture 971**

# **REFERENCES**

- Abdel Rahim, M. (1973). "Arabism, Africanism, and self-identification in the Sudan." In D. Wai (Ed.), *The Southern Sudan: The problem of national integration* (pp. 29–47). London: Frank Cass.
- Bell, H. (1999). *Frontiers of Medicine in the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan 1899–1940.* Oxford: Clarendon.
- Deng, F. (1972). *The Dinka of the Sudan*. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Eltayeb, A. (1964). The changing customs of the Riverain Sudan. *Sudan Notes & Records, 45*, 12–27.
- Evans-Pritchard, E. (1976). *Witchcraft, oracles, and magic among the Azande.* Oxford: Clarendon.
- Faris, J. (1972). *Nuba personal art.* London: Duckworth.
- Habermas, J. (1971). *Knowledge and human interest.* Boston: Beacon Press.
- Inter Press Service. (1997). *Sudan health: UN issues call for emergency aid.* Feb. 18th. (Doc. No. 970218)
- Kenyon, S. (1991). *Five women of Sennar: Culture and change in central Sudan.* Oxford: Clarendon.
- El-Guindi, F. (1996). *El Soubu: Egyptian celebration of life. Film Study Guide*. Los Angeles: El Nil Research.

- Mazrui, A. (1973). "The Black Arabs in comparative perspective: The political sociology of race mixture." In D. Wai (Ed.), *The Southern Sudan: The problem of national integration* (pp. 47–83). London: Frank Cass.
- Modawi, O. (1982). Traditional practices in childbirth in Sudan. In Taha Baasher (Ed.) *Traditional practices affecting the health of women and children.* Alexandria: WHO Technical Publication No.2.
- Shazali, H. (1982). Nutritional taboos and traditional practices in pregnancy and lactation including breast-feeding. In Taha Baasher (Ed.). *Traditional practices affecting the health of women and children.* Alexandria: WHO Technical Publication No.2.
- Sudan Country Study. Available online at http:// LCWEB2.loc.gov/ cgi-bin/query/frd/CStudy
- Sudan Demographic & Health Survey. (1991). Maryland: Micro International Institute.
- Swar Eldahab, A. (1996). "Contraceptive use and fertility of women in Urban Sudan." *The Ahfad Journal 13*(2), 12–31.
- United Nations Children Fund (UNICEF). (2001). *The situation of children and women in the Sudan.* Khartoum: United Nations.
- World Health Organization (WHO). (1999). Fact Sheet. Geneva.

# **Thai**

### **Chris Lyttleton**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Siamese, replaced in 1939.

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Thai live within the Southeast Asian nation-state of the Kingdom of Thailand which consists of five regions characterized by distinct landforms: the northern ranges and plateaus, the central fertile plains, the southeast coastal seaboard, the arid northeast plateau, and the Southern humid plateau. The Thai live in all regions but predominately in the central plains. The Thai are one of many *Tai*-speaking peoples inhabiting mainland southeast Asia. Thai is the official national language (often called Central Thai) and is gradually replacing other *Tai* dialects in regional parts of Thailand.

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The *Tai* peoples moved down from Southern China roughly a thousand years ago to populate most of the central portion of the Indochinese peninsula. Over many centuries, a Thai culture, civilization, and identity has emerged as a product of interaction between the *Tai* and prior inhabitants such as the Mons and Khmers.

The population of Thailand was 62.31 million in 2001. The Thai (Siamese) are the majority population living within the Thai borders and number more than 30 million. Other *Tai* ethnic groups also live within the Kingdom of Thailand, the most prominent being the ethnic Lao (*Isan)* with just over 20 million, however due to the impact of national administrative and development policies, ethnic differences are slowly being dissolved and Thai culture is becoming dominant throughout the country. Although the following summary of social, cultural, and economic