# **The Line**

1912 was a year of upheaval and change throughout Asia. World War I had not yet broken out, but other forces were stirring throughout the continent. On the first day of the year, Asia's first republic was proclaimed, the Republic of China. After years of simmering discontent and local uprisings in various parts of China, a military revolt at Wuchang in Hubei province had broken out on 10 October 1911. 'Double Ten Day', as it became known among republican nationalists, served as the catalyst for a wider uprising against the ruling but increasingly inept Qing Dynasty.

The leader of the anti-Qing movement, Dr Sun Yat-sen, was not in the country at the time. He had been living in exile in for several years, organizing resistance among overseas Chinese in Hawaii, southeast Asia, and Japan. Accompanied by an American adventurer called Homer Lea, Dr Sun returned home on 21 December 1911 to oversee some of the most dramatic events in modern Chinese history. Eight days later, a gathering of delegates representing anti-Qing groups from all over the country elected Dr Sun the 'provisional president' of the republic, a role he assumed on New Year's Day. On 12 February 1912, the last emperor, six-year-old Pu Yi, was forced to abdicate.

But the end of more than two thousand years of imperial rule did not, as the revolutionaries and reformers had envisaged, usher in an era of modernity and prosperity in this vast and desperately poor country. Power struggles and intrigues led to chaos and instability. Dr Sun resigned after less than seven weeks in office and was succeeded by Yuan Shikai, a military officer and hardly a democratic reformer. In December 1915, Yuan even proclaimed himself emperor, a title he held for 83 days. Amidst several rebellions in his realm, Yuan had to relinquish his imperial title and

died from a blood disease at the age of 56 in June 1916. Dr Sun was forced into exile in Japan, returning to China in 1917 when a republican form of government had been restored. By then the country had been plunged into even deeper chaos, with a weak central government and local warlords who were often little more than bandit-chieftains controlling their own fiefdoms in the provinces. Dr Sun tried in vain to reunify the fractured country. He died of liver cancer in March 1925 when he was only 58.

Lea, Dr Sun's American companion, who he wanted to make the chief of staff of the army of the Republic of China, had suffered a stroke in February 1912 and returned to the United States where he died in November. Dr Sun's revolutionary companions considered Lea an interloper, and strongly objected to the idea of having a foreigner as their army chief. Although China, as a country, was never colonized, European powers exerted their influence over the country from their colonial enclaves on the coast and that contributed to a deeply felt resentment of outsiders.

Hong Kong was British, the Portuguese were in Macau, and until the end of World War I the Germans had Qingdao. China was ruthlessly exploited by Western and Japanese commercial interests and the foreigners treated the Chinese as second-class citizens in their own country. It was hardly surprising that a Communist party was formed in 1921, and quickly gained support among urban intellectuals as well as from downtrodden peasants in the countryside.

Changes, albeit of a more peaceful nature, were also taking place in India in 1912. In June, the parliament in London promulgated the Government of India Act. Bengal, which had been divided in 1905 into a western part and the new province of Eastern Bengal and Assam, was reconstituted into three provinces—Bengal, corresponding to present-day West Bengal and Bangladesh, Bihar and Orissa, and Assam. Rather than being a centrally-ruled 'presidency' as before, reunited Bengal became a province under a governor. The creation of Assam as a separate province, which later got its own legislative assembly, meant that its borders had to be more clearly defined.

At that time, Assam included the present Indian states of Nagaland, Mizoram, Meghalaya, and Arunachal Pradesh. The two other northeastern Indian states of today, Tripura and Manipur, were princely states ruled by their own maharajas and never part of Assam. A centrally controlled Naga

Hills District had been created as early as 1866 and gradually expanded to include more areas in the easternmost mountains. In 1912, the Naga Hills District was formally incorporated into the new province of Assam. The Lushai Hills, now Mizoram, were 'pacified'—colonial parlance for occupied—in the latter half of the nineteenth century and became part of British India in 1895. Today's Meghalaya consists of the Khasi, Jaintia, and Garo Hills, highlands south of the Brahmaputra Valley. Its present state capital Shillong served as headquarters for the entire province of Assam because the colonial administrators preferred to stay in the cool climate in the hills, rather than in the hot and humid tropical plains of the Brahmaputra. Shillong remained the capital of Assam from independence in 1947 until 1972, when Meghalaya became a separate state.

To the north of the plain around the Brahmaputra, there were other hill districts, not as firmly controlled as the Naga, Lushai, Khasi, Jaintia, and Garo, but nevertheless considered part of Assam and British India. Following several British military raids into the hills north of the Brahmaputra in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, in 1912, Major General Hamilton Bower, the leader of one of those expeditions, recommended that those frontier areas should be divided into three tribaldominated sections—western, central, and eastern. That led in 1914 to the formation of the North-East Frontier Tracts under the government of Assam.<sup>1</sup> Five years later, the central and eastern sections became the Sadiya Frontier Tract, and the western section was renamed the Balipara Frontier Tract.

While Assam and its outlying hill areas were being consolidated, administrative changes were taking place in other parts of British India as well. In 1911, King George V had visited India and he conveyed his impressions in a speech before the British Parliament on 12 February 1912. India was the jewel in the crown of the British Empire and, at the same time as the 1912 Government of India Act was passed, it was decided to move the capital from Calcutta (now Kolkata) in the east to a more central location at Delhi.

The foundation stone of a new city, called New Delhi, had actually been laid during King George V's visit, and the task of designing it was assigned to two prominent British architects, Edward Lutyens and Herbert Baker. However, because of the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the construction

was delayed by several years. It was not until 15 February 1931 that the new grand capital of British India was officially inaugurated.

1912 was also a year of change in Japan. On 30 July, the Meiji Emperor died. He had ascended the throne in 1867 and his reign had seen the transformation of Japan from a feudal society to an industrialized world power. His funeral was described by the *Japan Advertiser* on 17 September as 'a fairy tale of lights' with old-fashioned 'frock-coated and silk-hatted gentlemen', and sacred oxen in front of the funeral car, and 'hundreds of men in peaked hats and gold laced uniforms' from the navy and army behind. 'The contrast between that which preceded the funeral car and that which followed it was striking indeed. Before it went old Japan; after it came new Japan,' the newspaper reported.<sup>2</sup>

The powerful Meiji Emperor was succeeded by his son Yoshihito, who assumed the imperial name Taisho. In sharp contrast to his father, the Taisho Emperor was weak and suffered from various neurological ailments, making it impossible for him to carry out his duties. Real power shifted to a group of older statesmen who ran the country without much interference from the emperor. Taisho's reign, from 1912 to his death in 1926, has therefore become known as the 'Taisho democracy'. There was room for political manoeuvre outside the imperial palace, but it did not amount to democracy in the western sense.

During World War I, Japan sided with the Allied powers, declared war on Germany, occupying the former German colonies in the Asia-Pacific, Qingdao on the Chinese coast, and the Carolines, the Marianas, and the Marshall Islands in the Pacific. Qingdao had to be returned to China in 1922, but, taking advantage of the weakened Republic, the Japanese expanded their influence over other parts of the Chinese mainland and adjoining areas. The Korean peninsula had already been annexed in 1910, now Japan took over German commercial holdings in Manchuria and Inner Mongolia.

When the Taisho Emperor died at the age of 47 in 1926, he was succeeded by his eldest son Hirohito, who became the Showa Emperor. Under Taisho's rather weak reign, the Japanese military had become the most powerful force in the country—and that would lead to more wars with China in the 1930s and 1940s. Japan was emerging as a military and political superpower in Asia.

The collapse of the Chinese empire, and the disintegration of the country that followed in its wake, provided non-Chinese vassals in the outlying areas with an opportunity to reassert the autonomy or de facto independence several of them had enjoyed even under the emperors. The Mongol tribes, which, under rulers such as Ghengis Khan and Kublai Khan, had conquered much of Asia in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, had gradually been subdued by the Chinese emperors. Under the Qing Dynasty, the land of the Mongols was divided into a more directly controlled 'inner' section and an 'outer' part on the steppes and highlands north of the Gobi desert, which was self-governing and corresponds to the modern state of Mongolia.

As early as 29 December 1911, only two-and-a-half months after the outbreak of the republican revolution in China, Mongolia declared its independence. The Mongols practised the same kind of Buddhism as in Tibet, with a clergyman titled 'Bogd Gegeen', or 'the Holy Enlightened One', as the highest religious authority in the country. He now assumed the title of 'Bogd Khan', 'Holy Ruler', of the new theocratic Mongolian state. Although governed by supposedly peaceful Buddhist clerics, the Mongols felt they had to build up an army to defend their newly won independence. Shortly after the declaration of independence, they launched a military campaign to 'liberate' Inner Mongolia also from the Chinese.

The Mongols turned to Russia to buy weapons for their fledgling armed forces, but Tsar Nicholas II was not interested in supporting a war against the newly proclaimed Republic of China. Unknown to the Mongols, the Russians had in the same year, 1912, concluded a secret agreement with the Japanese, delineating their respective spheres of influence in China's northern periphery. Southern Manchuria and Inner Mongolia came within Japan's sphere, while Japan recognized Russia's right to exert its influence over northern Manchuria and Outer Mongolia.<sup>3</sup>

Thus, no Russian weapons were ever sent to Mongolia, nor were the Russians prepared to annex any part of Mongolia despite the secret pact with Japan. But, on 3 November 1912 (21 October, according to the Russian calendar), Russia and Mongolia signed a treaty by which the Russians recognized Outer Mongolia's autonomy within the then newly constituted Republic of China. The Mongolian version of the treaty, however, said 'independence', which was interpreted by the Mongols as

recognition of an independent 'Great Mongolian State'. In return, the Mongols granted the Russians commercial privileges in their country.

To add to the confusion regarding Mongolia's international status, a Sino-Russian treaty that was concluded shortly afterwards stated that Mongolia was 'under the suzerainty' of China, but with internal autonomy. <sup>4</sup> Under yet another treaty, signed by Russia, China, and Mongolia at Kyakhta in Buratiya in Russia on 25 May 1915, Mongolia was forced to recognize that suzerainty and agree not to conclude international treaties with foreign countries.<sup>5</sup>

Before the Treaty of Kyakhta was concluded, Mongolia had tried hard to gain formal recognition of its declaration of independence. A delegation was sent to St Petersburg, but it was prevented by the Russians from seeking further European contacts. An attempt to send a delegation to Tokyo was aborted when the Japanese consul in Harbin, Manchuria, refused to provide any assistance to the Mongols.

The only diplomatic success that the Mongols had was with their religious brethren in Tibet. On 11 January 1913 (29 December 1912, according to the Russian calendar), the Treaty of Friendship and Alliance was signed at Urga, now Ulaanbaatar, between Mongolia and Tibet. Mongolia was represented by its foreign minister, Da Lama Rabdan, and the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, Manlaibaatar Damdinsüren. Rabdan signed the agreement with Agvan Dorzhiev as a representative of Tibet's Dalai Lama. But the problem was that Dorzhiev hailed from Buryatia, a Mongol-speaking part of eastern Siberia, and was thus technically a Russian citizen. The validity of the treaty, therefore, has been questioned.<sup>6</sup>

Tibet also declared its independence during the turbulent first years of the Republic of China—although there is some confusion as to when, exactly, that declaration was made. In early 1910, the Qing had sent an expeditionary force to invade Tibet in a last attempt to assert authority over the territories they claimed to be within the boundaries of their empire. The Chinese marched into the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, on 12 February 1910 and deposed the thirteenth Dalai Lama. He fled to India and was invited to Kolkata by the then Viceroy, Lord Minto.

The Dalai Lama's flight to India helped restore his relations with Britain: Britain had, in December 1903, sent a force led by Francis

Younghusband, a British India-born, Sandhurst-trained officer, into Tibet. Younghusband's brief but brutal occupation ended with a treaty signed in Lhasa in September 1904, which gave the British considerable privileges in Tibet.<sup>7</sup> The Dalai Lama had fled and then spent the years 1904–9 in exile in China and Mongolia to escape the British. Now, the Tibetans and the British were allies against the Chinese.

The Chinese occupation of Tibet was brief, and the troops had to withdraw after the fall of the Qing Dynasty in early 1912. It was during this occupation that Chinese troops for the first time in history crossed the watershed of the Himalayas and entered Walong, now in the northeasternmost corner of Arunachal Pradesh. After having erected a few border markers south of Walong, the Chinese left, never attempting to establish any administration in the area. The final withdrawal of the Chinese troops from the areas of Tibet they had occupied took place, somewhat ironically, through Kolkata. From there, they were sent by ship back to Chinese ports, as all overland routes from Tibet to China were blocked by Tibetan warriors.

With the Chinese gone from Tibet and the Dalai Lama back in Lhasa, it was time for the Tibetans to follow the example of the Mongols. On 13 February 1913, about a month after Avgan Dorzhiev had signed an agreement with Da Lama Ravdan and Manlaibaatar Damdinsüren at Urga, the thirteenth Dalai Lama issued a statement that amounted to a declaration of independence.

First, the Dalai Lama explained:

A few years ago, the Chinese authorities in Szechuan [Sichuan] and Yunnan endeavoured to colonise our territory. They brought large numbers of troops into central Tibet on the pretext of policing the trade marts. I, therefore, left Lhasa with my ministers for the Indo-Tibetan border, hoping to clarify to the Manchu [Qing] Emperor by wire that the existing relationship between Tibet and China had been that of patron and priest and had not been based on the subordination of one to the other. There was no other choice for me but to cross the border, because Chinese troops were following with the intention of taking me alive or dead.8

#### Then came the clarification of Tibet's international status,

Tibet is a country with rich natural resources; but it is not scientifically advanced like other lands. We are a small, religious, and independent nation. To keep up with the rest of the world, we must defend our country. In view of past invasions by foreigners, our people may have to face certain difficulties, which they must disregard. To safeguard and maintain the independence of our country, one and all should voluntarily work hard. Our subject citizens residing near the borders should be alert and keep

the government informed by special messenger of any suspicious developments. Our subjects must not create major clashes between two nations because of minor incidents.9

But, as was the case with Mongolia's declaration of independence, Tibet's was also ignored by outside powers. Britain and other countries continued to recognize Chinese suzerainty over Tibet as well as Mongolia. But suzerainty does not amount to sovereignty. Originally a term used to define to the relationship between the Ottoman Empire and its surrounding areas, it simply means that a certain area recognizes the overlordship of a suzerain to whom it is supposed to be paying tribute. But, in reality, it often refrains from doing so. It means, in effect, internal autonomy with the suzerain power in charge of little more than foreign relations and, perhaps, defence. In the context of the chaos that reigned in China in the 1910s, it was a formal designation with no meaning. Both Mongolia and Tibet were if not de jure, at least de facto, independent nations.

In order to regulate the status of Tibet and to define its borders, British India's foreign office on 23 May 1913 sent an invitation to the Chinese government to a joint conference where representatives from the Tibetan government would also participate. The three parties eventually met at Shimla (then Simla), the summer capital of India in the foothills of the Himalayas, on 13 October 1913.

British India's chief negotiator, Henry McMahon, a Shimla-born colonial official, also served as the chairman of the conference. He was assisted by Archibald Rose, a former consul to China, and Charles Bell, the then British Political Representative to Sikkim on issues concerning Tibet. On the British side was also a remarkable man whose full name was Sonam Wangdel Laden La, or Laden La for short. He was an ethnic Bhutia from Sikkim and among the many languages he spoke were Tibetan and English. Laden La had accompanied Francis Younghusband during his military expedition to Lhasa in 1903–4, and was now a high-ranking police officer with security-related duties. Laden La had just returned from a trip to Britain when he was sent to Shimla to act as an interpreter for the Tibetan delegation during the final days of the conference. He arrived on 21 June 1914 and stayed until 21 July. 10

Tibet sent Prime Minister Lama Lönchen Shatra to represent the Dalai Lama. The chief Tibetan negotiator was assisted by a delegation consisting of Trimon Norbu Wangyal and Khenchung Tenpa Dhargyal, two other

high-ranking government officials. According to Tibetan sources, the conference was an opportunity the Tibetan government did not want to miss. They wanted recognition for their declaration of independence, and Lönchen Shatra and his men had collected documents in support of their case, which they presented before the British and Chinese representatives.<sup>11</sup>

China's main delegate was Chen Yifan, or Ivan Chen, a widely travelled diplomat who was fluent in English and had served for nine years in the Chinese Legation in London as counsellor. Designated as commissioner for Tibet, Chen was assisted by deputy commissioner Wang Haiping. But the power behind Chen and Wang was Lu Xingqi (Lu Hsing-chi), a more powerful officer who had played a crucial role in fostering divisions between the Dalai Lama and the second-most important lama in Tibet, the Panchen Lama, after the former had returned to Lhasa in 1912.<sup>12</sup>

In April 1913, the Chinese government had appointed Lu commissioner for Tibet. He was then ordered to leave for Tibet by sea via Kolkata. Lu was unable to proceed from there to Tibet and had to remain in the Indian city, which he knew quite well. At some time in the late nineteenth century, he had gone to Kolkata to study at a local Chinese school and later started a company called Tianyi Gongsi. Located in Tiretta Bazar in the city's Chinatown, it did business in fur imported from Tibet.<sup>13</sup>

Apart from being a successful businessman, Lu was all along an intelligence operative charged with Indian and Tibetan affairs.<sup>14</sup> Chen became the new, official face of the Chinese government for Tibetan affairs, although Chinese sources do not state when the post was shifted to him from Lu, if that happened at all officially. <sup>15</sup> Lu stayed in constant contact with Chen and the Chinese government throughout the proceedings in Shimla.

The conference ran into serious problems from the very beginning, as the Chinese wanted Tibet to be referred to as an integral part of China. Lönchen Shatra had hardly ever left his native land, but surprised the British and Chinese delegates with his grasp of political affairs as he presented his claims—and contradicted Chen's version or Tibet's status. Lönchen Shatra outlined the Chinese excesses during the 1910–12 occupation and, not surprisingly, continued to press for recognition of an independent Tibet:

Tibet and China have never been under each other and will never associate with each other in the future. It is decided that Tibet is an independent State and that the Precious Protector, the Dalai Lama, is the ruler of Tibet, in all Temporal as well as spiritual affairs. Tibet repudiates the 1906 Anglo-Chinese Convention concluded at Peking on the 27th April 1906…as she did not send a representative for this Convention, nor did she affix her seal on it. It is therefore decided that this is not binding on the three governments.16

The 1906 Anglo-Chinese Convention stated that 'the Government of Great Britain engages not to annex Tibetan territory or to interfere in the administration of Tibet. The Government of China also undertakes not to permit any other foreign State to interfere with the territory or internal administration of Tibet.'<sup>17</sup> But Britain was entitled to lay down telegraph lines connecting Tibet with India. Tibet's communications with the outside world continued to be mainly via British India, not China.

The 1906 Anglo-Chinese Convention could be interpreted as British recognition of Chinese suzerainty over Tibet, but it was meant mainly to confirm Tibet's status as a neutral buffer zone between British India and the Russian empire. Therefore, the British could not agree to Lönchen Shatra's demand to repudiate the 1906 Anglo-Chinese Convention and recognize Tibet as a fully independent nation. Furthermore, a recognition of Tibet's independence would also be in violation of the 1907 Anglo-Russian Convention, which was concluded to settle disputes between Britain and Russia over spheres of influence in Persia, Afghanistan, and Tibet.<sup>18</sup> Under the terms of that Convention, both sides had pledged not to enter into any agreement with Tibet unless done through Chinese mediation. And China would not be willing to discuss the issue of Tibetan independence.

According to Charles Bell, there were also other reasons why the British were unwilling to concede to Lönchen Shatra's demands: the danger that an independent Tibet 'might be driven to seek assistance from Mongolia, and through Mongolia from Russia'.<sup>19</sup> As Pradip Phanjoubam, the editor of the *Imphal Free Press*, a newspaper in the northeastern Indian state of Manipur, has pointed out: 'British Tibet policy at the time was determined not by any fear of the Chinese, but of the Russians, in what was referred to as the Great Game.'<sup>20</sup>

The Chinese were actually not seen as important players in the Great Game, the struggle between Russia and Britain for hegemony over Central Asia, and they were invited to Shimla mainly because of the terms of the Anglo-Russian Convention signed in 1907, which, according to

Phanjoubam, had been 'literally forced by the British on the Russians, weakened by a humiliating defeat at the hands of the Japanese'<sup>21</sup> in a war that ended in 1905. Russia had to promise to stay out of Tibet, but the rules of that Convention also applied to the British. Tibet, and also Afghanistan and Persia, were to remain neutral buffer zones between the Russian Empire and British India.<sup>22</sup>

Dutch scholar W.F. Van Eekelen opines that John Jordan, the British minister in Beijing, 'was primarily concerned with the danger of Tibet gravitating towards Russia, but British freedom of manoeuvre was also limited by the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907'.<sup>23</sup> Jordan recommended that Britain should not become party to any final treaty reached at Shimla, as that would involve the conclusion of a new agreement with Russia. He recommended McMahon, 'to take an attitude of benevolent assistance and act as an honest broker'.<sup>24</sup>

The Russians had to be dealt with delicately. They were kept informed and the British went ahead with their plans to hold a conference at Shimla after the Russians had made it clear that they had no objection to it, and 'a more formal communication to Russia would only be required if the wellrecognised frontier were rectified'.<sup>25</sup>

The main point of contention during the nine months of negotiations was where the border between China and Tibet should be, as many ethnic Tibetans lived in areas outside of Lhasa's political control. Technically, those areas were part of China, a country where central authorities at that time had difficulty controlling even less remote parts of the new republic. Perhaps influenced by the new arrangement for Mongolia, McMahon suggested that the Tibetan-inhabited areas should also be divided into 'inner' and 'outer' sections. Outer Tibet would be the part of Tibet traditionally under Lhasa's control and remain a self-governing entity. Inner Tibet, an integral part of China, would serve as a buffer between Tibet ruled by Lhasa and Russian-dominated Outer Mongolia.<sup>26</sup> Outer Tibet would correspond roughly to the central and western parts of Tibet, whereas Inner Tibet, bordering on China, would consist of Amdo and part of Kham.<sup>27</sup>

After nine months of strenuous and sometimes heated deliberations, a convention was signed by the British and the Tibetans on 3 July 1914. It stipulated that 'the Governments of Great Britain and China recognising

that Tibet is under the suzerainty of China, and recognising also the autonomy of Outer Tibet engage to respect the territorial integrity of the country, and to abstain from interference in the administration of Outer Tibet (including the selection and installation of the Dalai Lama), which shall remain in the hands of the Tibetan Government at Lhasa'. <sup>28</sup> The text also states that 'the Government of China engages not to convert Tibet into a Chinese province. The Government of Great Britain engages not to annex Tibet or any portion of it.'<sup>29</sup>

The Tibetans did not get what they wanted, a full recognition of their independence, but China had to pledge to send only a 'high official' with 'suitable escort' that should 'in no circumstances exceed 300 men,' and 'it is also understood that the selection and appointment of all officers in Outer Tibet will rest with the Tibetan Government'.<sup>30</sup>

Chen had initialled the draft text of the Convention, but, in the end, refused to ratify it. According to historian John Rowland, his and his government's 'main reason for rejecting the Simla [Shimla] Convention stems from China's basic and traditional unwillingness to relinquish rights to territory which it considers to be eternally part of the "celestial" realm'.<sup>31</sup>

Although the question of the creation of an Inner and Outer Tibet and the demarcation of the boundary between the two areas were the main topics of debate at Shimla, the Indo-Tibetan border was also discussed. Among the articles in the Convention that Chen had initialled was the ninth article, which states that, 'For the purpose of the present Convention the borders of Tibet, and the boundary between Outer and Inner Tibet, shall be shown in red and blue respectively on the map attached hereto.'<sup>32</sup> The red line was the McMahon Line, which separated Tibet from British India, the blue one was the boundary between Inner and Outer Tibet. Thus, Rowland argues, 'it is unreasonable for China now to allege that the India-Tibet border was not taken up at Simla [Shimla]',<sup>33</sup> or that Chen did not approve of the red and blue lines on the map.

Nothing was negotiated behind the backs of Chen and his delegation, as the Chinese later claimed. But it could be argued that the Chinese were not party to discussions about the details of the demarcation of the Indo-Tibetan border, which was considered by the British and the Tibetans as a bilateral issue, and therefore not a Chinese concern.

#### According to Van Eekelen,

Before the final drafts of the texts had been agreed the British and Tibetan delegates completed discussions on the north-eastern border of India, later to be known as the McMahon Line. The Chinese were not invited to take part and their specific acceptance was never sought. They were informed later when the line was embodied in the map annexed to the Convention drawing the borders of Tibet and the boundary between Outer and Inner Tibet.34

But if the Chinese and their supporters are to believed, the McMahon Line was indeed the outcome of a conspiracy by McMahon. Chen and his men were kept in the dark, as the British pressured the Tibetans into accepting a new border with British India. Without consulting the Chinese, the border was moved from the foot of the mountains, north of the Brahmaputra, to the crest of the Himalayas. Then, for some unknown reason—perhaps so as to not upset the Chinese—the agreement between the British and the Tibetans was kept secret, or maybe even forgotten, for decades, as Neville Maxwell and Alastair Lamb, among others, allege.

The 1914 Shimla Agreement and the separate Anglo-Tibetan Declaration, which stipulated the McMahon Line, were not mentioned in the 1929 edition of *Aitchison's Treaties*, a collection of 'treaties, engagements and sanads relating to India and neighbouring countries' that was published in a series of volumes beginning in 1862. But, according to Maxwell and Lamb, when the records from the Shimla Conference and the Anglo-Tibetan border agreement were included in a 1938 reissue of the 1929 edition, it also had a 1929 publication date. The original 1929 edition was allegedly withdrawn from circulation.<sup>35</sup> In other words, it was an outright deceit, according to Maxwell and Lamb.

In 1962, the Chinese communist government presented their version of the Shimla conference and its aftermath in a book titled *The Sino-Indian Boundary Question*.

It was outside the Conference and behind the back of the representatives of the Chinese Central Government that the British representative drew the notorious 'McMahon Line' through a secret exchange of letters with the representative of the Tibet local authorities, attempting thereby to annex 90,000 square kilometres of China's territory to British India. The Chinese Government refused to recognise this illegal McMahon Line. So have all Chinese Governments since then. That is why even the British Government dared not publicly draw this Line on its maps before 1936 [sic]. The illegal McMahon Line was wholly imposed on the Chinese people by British imperialism.36

Maxwell asserts that Henry McMahon was transferred out of India after the Shimla conference with the implication that it was because of what he

had 'done' in 1914.<sup>37</sup> In fact, McMahon, who spoke not only Hindustani and Persian but also Arabic, was awarded the post of High Commissioner for Egypt in 1915. This was hardly a punishment or even a demotion. From his base in Cairo, McMahon helped organize Arab leaders against the Ottoman Empire, which became a success when they rose up to fight for independence in 1916–17.

Maxwell also writes that, 'nothing more was done, or indeed heard, about the "McMahon Line" until 1935, when an official in Delhi, Olaf Caroe, happened upon the agreement with the Tibetans in old files and began to agitate within the government for making the Line the effective north-east boundary of India'.<sup>38</sup>

Caroe, also according to Maxwell, 'succeeded, with difficulty, in getting it [the McMahon Line] on to some official maps; and he arranged for the falsification of the published record of the Simla Conference of 1914 in *Aitchison's Treaties* so as to make it appear that there had been agreement there among all parties on the new "McMahon" alignment"'. It was only then, Maxwell asserts, that 'the British in India began slowly to move their administration forward, up towards the crest along which McMahon had drawn his line'.<sup>39</sup>

Lamb is more thorough and scholarly in his approach to the boundary issue than Maxwell, but he also blames Caroe for 'falsifying' documents and changing the border on his own accord. It was not easy for Caroe, Lamb states, 'to convince politicians that there really was a serious situation involving the security of territory which was technically British but about which the rulers of the British Empire had somehow managed to forget for more than two decades. If it was so important, how was it that it had slipped the official memory?'<sup>40</sup>

However, other scholars disagree with Lamb, and his interpretation of events is weak and debatable, to say the least. It is undeniable that a border agreement was indeed reached between the British and the Tibetans at Shimla, as documented by Leo E. Rose, a professor at Berkeley, and many others. And apart from criticizing Lamb for espousing overly pro-Chinese views, Rose also points at several more precise weaknesses in the British academic's writings on the McMahon Line. Rose takes Lamb to task on two major issues. Lamb asserts that the Tibetan government was not

## independent and could not enter into such an agreement without Chinese approval. He argues that Lamb

ignores the fact that the Tibetan government had formally declared its independence from China in 1913, and had established effective authority throughout the state prior to the Simla Conference… The question whether the British and Tibetan governments were competent to conclude an agreement delineating the Indian-Tibet border…is dismissed [by Lamb] in short paragraph. Yet it is certainly legitimate to argue that the British and Tibetan governments were acting within the limits of their competence, and that the failure of the Chinese to ratify the convention is of no *legal* significance as far as the McMahon Line is concerned.41

## And, besides, Chen had put his initials on the map accompanying the border agreement.

### Lamb's argument, in a footnote in his book, that Tibet acknowledged Chinese 'suzerainty' in the Shimla Convention is, according to Rose,

indeed curious given his general line of analysis, as apparently he would recognise the competence of the Tibetan government to make at least this kind of commitment for the Tibetan people. But he fails to note that this clause of the Convention would [according to the text] come into effect *only* after Chinese ratification. As the Chinese did not ratify the agreement, the whole argument is superfluous.42

Rose's other point is that Lamb's arguments are based on conventions signed by Britain and China and Britain and Russia, which would limit the capacity of the British to act in Tibet. According to Rose, 'While it may be argued that the British violated both those conventions [with Russia and China] in reaching an agreement with Tibet, it is indeed astonishing to conclude that a treaty signed under radically different circumstances is itself invalid under international law. The precedents against such an interpretation are overwhelming.'<sup>43</sup>

Reality is also much less convoluted and dramatic than the accounts of those who have accepted the Chinese version of events during and after the Shimla Conference. While Chen and his Chinese delegates were preoccupied with Tibet's status and the demarcation of the boundary between Tibet and China proper, it is evident from the records of the Shimla Convention that they had little or no idea where the Indo-Tibetan border was or should be. Chen deplored the absence of any 'accurate and detailed maps of the region on the various frontiers of Tibet'.<sup>44</sup> According to Pradip Phanjoubam, Chen 'was not sure where the Indian boundary was

when McMahon asked him, and could only come up with an answer the following day and that too using French maps as evidence'.<sup>45</sup>

Furthermore, caution and then neglect on the part of the British rather than 'fear', as the Chinese claim, or secrecy and trickery, according to Maxwell and Lamb, should be seen the reasons why details about the Shimla Convention and the McMahon Line were not released immediately. World War I broke out shortly after the Convention was concluded and Britain obviously had other priorities and was preoccupied with more pressing issues than the demarcation of a border in a remote corner of India.

The fact that Britain did have an agreement with Russia on Tibet should also not be overlooked. It was an important consideration in the corridors of the Foreign Office in London.<sup>46</sup> However, it changed after the Bolshevik revolution in Russia in 1917 and the subsequent establishment of the Soviet Union. The 1907 Anglo-Russian Convention was now definitely dead and buried.

But it is at the same time incorrect to state, as Maxwell, Lamb, and the Chinese have done, that a border along the crest of the Himalayas was not shown on any British or other maps until the 1930s. Watersheds, mountains and rivers divided nations and states long before detailed maps with defined borders became a reality, and the crest of the Himalayas, rather than its southern foothills, has long been a natural dividing line between the Tibetan High Plateau and the Indian subcontinent.

When Charles Bell, the British officer in Sikkim who later took up the post as Britain's envoy to Lhasa, wrote his classic, *Tibet: Past and Present* in 1924, the accompanying fold-out map shows the Indo-Tibetan border at the heights of the Himalayas, or roughly along the McMahon Line.<sup>47</sup> The map of Tibet in *Atlas of the Chinese Empire*, published by the China Inland Mission in 1908, five years before the Shimla Conference, shows the border along the watershed of the Himalayas as well, and so does the map in the March 1912 issue of the *Geographical Journal*, published by the Royal Geographical Society in London. Even some maps printed in China place the border along the crest of the Himalayas. Among them are the official postal map which was used by the government of China in 1917 and a map of Tibet in the *New Atlas and Commercial Gazetteer of China*, published in Shanghai in the same year. 48

Border demarcation in the west is even hazier than in the east, mainly because of the scarcity of people in the area and the absence of any significant trade across the mountains. Ladakh, though, was an independent kingdom inhabited by ethnic Tibetan tribes who practised the Tibetan form of Buddhism, maintained relations with Tibet as well as Bhutan. But in 1834, forces from the Sikh Empire of the Punjab plains annexed Ladakh, which finally lost its independence six years later. In 1846, Ladakh was incorporated into Jammu and Kashmir, a new princely state which under a treaty signed in Amritsar acknowledged British paramountcy within the Indian empire.49 High mountain ranges and what was described as 'natural elements' became the frontier separating the Ladakh area from those to the north still under Tibetan or Chinese influence—but there were different views on exactly which 'elements' these should be.

According to the 1846 Treaty of Amritsar, the northern frontier with Tibet was to be defined by commissioners appointed by the British East India Company and Gulab Singh Dogra, the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir. William H. Johnson, a British surveyor, became the governor of Ladakh under the Maharaja, and, in 1865, he proposed a boundary through Aksai Chin that would touch the Kunlun range, the highest mountains in the area. This boundary was formally proposed to the government of British India in 1897 by the chief of British military intelligence in London, Major General Sir John Ardagh. Subsequently, it became known as the Ardagh-Johnson Line.<sup>50</sup>

The Chinese never recognized the Ardagh-Johnson Line, and, in 1892, one of their patrols erected some border markers at the Karakoram Pass, where there was an ancient caravan route between Xinjiang and Ladakh. Since then, the Chinese have continued to claim that the greater part of Ladakh's Aksai Chin region should be inside the territory claimed by them. The British did not pay much attention to the Chinese moves in this remote and inhospitable area, and, in order to create yet another buffer zone between the expanding Russian Empire and Tibet, a new boundary was drawn in 1893. It became known as the MacCartney-MacDonald Line and placed most of Aksai Chin on the Chinese side of the boundary. The new line was named after George MacCartney, the British consul in Xinjiang's main town Kashgar, and Sir Claude MacDonald, a British minister to the Qing rulers of China. MacDonald came to be better known as the man who negotiated and secured from China the 99-year lease of the New Territories

to the colony of Hong Kong in 1898. It was when that lease expired in 1997 that the whole of Hong Kong reverted to Chinese rule.

According to Indian sources, by the end of World War I, the British Government had accepted the Ardagh-Johnson Line rather than MacCartney-MacDonald Line as the official boundary. <sup>51</sup> That is also the outer border of India on all its maps today, while China's claim follows roughly the MacCartney-MacDonald Line. Maps from the British colonial era are more ambiguous here than in the eastern sector, but those produced immediately before the partition of the British India into the independent nations of India and Pakistan in 1947 definitely show Aksai Chin, and today's Arunachal Pradesh in the east, as Indian territory. <sup>52</sup> But, contrastingly, the Ladakh boundary is shown on several older colonial maps as 'undefined'. Between 1921 and 1927, the government of British India made several representations to the authorities in Tibet, asking them to delimit the boundary between Ladakh and Tibet, but without any result.<sup>53</sup> Thus, that border was marked, at least until 1943, as no more than a dotted line on the map.

On the other hand, the outer boundaries of China are not accurate in any of the Chinese maps. The most imaginative one is the official map of the Republic of China, which is still in use in Taiwan. Although the old republic lives on only in Taiwan and some smaller nearby islands, the map that is still being used shows the boundaries of the Republic of China when it was proclaimed on 1 January 1912. The map's only amendment is from 1945, to include Taiwan, which had been under Japanese rule from 1895 until the end of World War II.

Tibet, of course, is part of the Republic of China on its official maps. So are Mongolia, the Republic of Tuva in Russia, Aksai Chin, Arunachal Pradesh, the northernmost part of Myanmar above Sumprabum in Kachin State, the islands in the South China Sea, and Diaoyudao Islands, which the Japanese also claim and call Senkaku, in the East China Sea.

The Republic of China never recognized Mongolia's independence, which was the reason why it could not, for many years, join the United Nations (UN). Mongolia became a UN member in 1961 only after the Soviet Union threatened to veto the admission of all of the newly decolonized states of Africa if the Republic of China used its veto, as it had done before. The Republic of China represented China in the UN, and

served as one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, until the People's Republic of China occupied China's seat in 1971.

Mongolia had undergone some important changes since the declaration of independence in 1911. The old clerical state ceased to exist when the Russian Red Army occupied the country in 1921. The invasion had been prompted by the reign of terror that a former major-general in the Tsar's army had unleashed in the Russian Far East and adjoining areas. His name was Roman Fyodorovich von Ungern-Sternberg and he would today have been certified as a psychopath and locked up. Known as 'the Mad Baron', he had adopted Lamaistic Buddhism from Mongol horsemen in his cavalry unit. His Buddhist teachers had taught him about reincarnation, and he firmly believed that in killing feeble people he only did them good, as they would be stronger in their next life.

In the autumn of 1920, von Ungern-Sternberg led a motley force of 6,000 former members of the Tsar's cavalry, local Cossacks, and Mongol horsemen into Mongolia. When they invaded Urga in January 1921, 'innumerable children of all ages, races and creeds were hacked to bits and bayoneted and shot and strangled and hung, and crucified and buried alive'.<sup>54</sup>

In Mongolia, von Ungern-Sternberg proclaimed himself 'Emperor of all Russia' and vowed to plant ' an avenue of gallows' stretching from Urga to Moscow, from which would swing 'Bolshevik and Jew alike'.<sup>55</sup> He also declared that he would lead his men all the way to Tibet, where, he believed, his 'empire' would forge a pact with the Dalai Lama.

The new Bolshevik government in Moscow clearly viewed the Mad Baron as a threat, and not only because of the atrocities he committed. Von Ungern-Sternberg's main benefactors were the Japanese, who saw him as a useful tool to expand their influence in north-central Asia, especially after their victory in the 1904–5 war against Tsarist Russia. The Japanese openly backed von Ungern-Sternberg's plans for a 'Greater Mongolia', which they had already earmarked as their own protectorate. It is uncertain whether a conquest of Tibet was also part of the plan, but von Ungern-Sternberg's Japanese-backed rampage in the region was cause for concern in New Delhi and London, emphasizing the need to secure the northern borders of British India.

In the end, it was the Russian Bolsheviks, not the British or any other foreign power, that put an end to von Ungern-Sternberg's reign of terror. In July 1921, 10,000 Red Army soldiers marched into Urga, and von Ungern-Sternberg was captured and executed. Mongolia became a vassal of Moscow, though, unlike some Bolshevik-run parts of Central Asia, it was not turned into one of the republics of the Soviet Union when it was proclaimed on 30 December 1922. The Soviet Union had, at that time, friendly relations with the Republic of China, and an annexation of Mongolia would have upset those. The Soviet solution was what it considered a compromise. Mongolia became a separate 'people's republic', the first communist-led country after the Soviet Union itself. But all the maps of the Republic of China continued to include Mongolia within its borders.

Today's Tuvan Republic, now part of the Russian Federation, was another area ruled by the Bolsheviks and claimed by China. Like Mongolia, it also became a formally independent state. Then known as the People's Republic of Tannu Tuva, it came into existence in August 1921, only to vanish from the map in 1944. Being smaller and not as strategically important as Mongolia, it was annexed by the Soviet Union. But, like Mongolia, it remains part of the Republic of China on its maps.

The official map of the Republic of China may be dismissed as being grossly out of touch with the realities on the ground, but the authorities in Taipei keep it because, if Mongolia were to be recognized as an independent country, what about Taiwan? There are strong forces on the island to shed the old name the Republic of China in favour of Republic of Taiwan. And if that happens, China has threatened to invade. Although Taiwan was ruled from the Chinese mainland for only four years since 1895—from the end of Japanese rule and reunification with China in 1945 until the communist victory in 1949 and the flight of the nationalist KMT government to the island—the People's Republic of China considers it part of its territory. The KMT also considers Taiwan part of China, but of the Republic of China. This view is not shared by the Taiwan-nationalist Democratic Progressive Party, the ruling party since May 2016, which wants to see an independent Taiwan separate from the mainland.

Maps printed by the People's Republic of China have fewer anachronistic anomalies than those produced by the Republic of China. But they nevertheless include areas which were never part of China or which

have been occupied since the proclamation of the People's Republic on 1 October 1949. While the People's Republic of China does not claim Mongolia and the Tuvan Republic, Tibet and Aksai Chin were taken over by China's new communist government in the early 1950s. And the maps of the People's Republic of China also include Taiwan, today's Arunachal Pradesh, and the Spratlys in the South China Sea as well as the Diaoyudao Islands.

The communist government of China, on taking power, declared that it would 're-examine treaties concluded by its predecessors with foreign powers, and either recognize, abrogate, revise or renegotiate them'.<sup>56</sup> Between 1960 and 1963 new border agreements were concluded by China with Myanmar, Nepal, Mongolia, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, but not with India or the Soviet Union. Territorial disputes with the Soviet Union were not settled until agreements were reached in 1991, 2003, and, finally, in 2008.

In an accord signed on 1 October 1960, the People's Republic of China gave up old claims on the northern tip of Myanmar's Kachin State, which in any case had never been ruled by any Chinese authority. The 1960 border agreement went on to stipulate that in exchange for this 'concession', and for Myanmar's sovereignty over a 220-square-kilometre area on the Kachin-Shan state border called the Namwan Assigned Tract, which the British originally leased from China in 1897, China would get the three Kachin villages of Hpimaw, Gawlam, and Kamfang on the Sino-Myanmar border, and the Panhung-Panglao area in Myanmar's northeastern Wa Hills. The village tract in Kachin State encompasses 152 square kilometres and the Wa area that was ceded to China was 189 square kilometres in area.<sup>57</sup>

The deal was not unfair by international standards, but rumours soon spread across Kachin State, an ethnic minority area in Myanmar, to the effect that vast tracts of Kachin territory had been ceded to China, and, in 1961, a revolt broke out among the Kachins that continues to this day. Apart from the border agreement with China, the Myanmar government's decision in 1960 to make Buddhism the state religion also prompted widespread dissatisfaction among the predominantly Christian Kachin tribesmen, who began to fight for an independent, or at least a truly autonomous, state for themselves.

In a regional sense, the 1960 agreement between China and Myanmar was relevant to the conflict with India, as the border that was demarcated between those two countries follows the McMahon concept, i.e., the watershed principle. Myanmar's northern border is, in effect, a continuation of the McMahon Line, which China, evidently, does not see as an outcome of some old, colonial 'unequal treaty' or 'imperialist policies', the usual jargon that the Chinese government resorts to when the Sino-Indian border and other territorial disputes are mentioned.

The borders of Myanmar may have another bearing on India, and on the moves by the British in the 1930s to secure the McMahon Line. Myanmar, then known as Burma, had become a province of British India after the colonial conquest in the three Anglo-Burmese wars in the nineteenth century. But under the terms of the Government of India Act of 1935, Burma would become a separate colony. This happened in 1937, and according to Pradip Phanjoubam, this could have been 'one of the reasons why Olaf Caroe was in a hurry to publish the McMahon Line in *Aitchison's Treaties*—which he ultimately did in 1938 under controversial circumstances—[because of] this imminent separation' of Myanmar from India.<sup>58</sup>

British rule in northernmost Myanmar, albeit comparatively light compared to other parts of the colony, did extend to the northern watersheds, so it would make sense to secure the actual McMahon Line as well. A declassified 1959 US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) document states that 'despite the drawing of the McMahon Line in 1914, almost nothing was done thereafter to extend administrative control into the hills.'<sup>59</sup> While the hills north of the Brahmaputra were neglected by the British, it is not entirely true that nothing was done. The same CIA intelligence brief says that although the area was largely unadministered, 'before 1900, the British had made pacts with various hill tribes designed from keeping them from raiding the plains dwellers'.<sup>60</sup>

Those contacts were not insignificant. Expeditions were sent into the mountains north of the Brahmaputra, and tribesmen from there would not only raid the lowlands but also go there to buy certain daily necessities not available in the highlands. With the exception of the Tawang area in the northwestern corner of today's Arunachal Pradesh and Walong in the far east, which traded mainly with Tibet, any contacts between the tribals of the hills and the outside world were down to the plains in the south and not

in a northerly direction over the highest mountain range in the world. And, as noted earlier, if those tribals spoke any foreign language, it would have been broken Assamese rather than Tibetan—and definitely not Chinese.

But there is some confusion and obvious contradictions not only in the writings of Maxwell and Lamb, but also in those of many other Western scholars with regard to an Inner and an Outer Line, which they claim existed beside and below the McMahon Line. Some of what is written is true, but much is fiction and not only misunderstandings but also distortions of the actual situation along India's northern frontiers. Maxwell claims that there was a 'de facto borderline' where the 'broad plains of the Brahmaputra River begins to rise into the foothills of the Himalayas…The Raj called this accepted limit to its rule "the Outer Line" and prohibited unauthorised ingress or egress across it'.<sup>61</sup>

This is utter nonsense. In 1873, as a by-product of the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, a law was implemented that created what was termed an Inner Line between the plains of Assam and its surrounding hill areas. However, the administration made it clear that 'this line does not necessarily indicate the territorial frontier but only the limits of the administered area…it does not in any way decide sovereignty of the territory beyond'.<sup>62</sup>

As Phanjoubam points out, 1873 was the time the cultivation of tea was expanding rapidly throughout Assam 'and speculators in tea were hungering for more land'.<sup>63</sup> Those speculators were encroaching into the hills and the lack of control over the communication between them and the rent-paying population meant that 'the government was losing out on substantial amounts of revenue'.<sup>64</sup> On the other hand, the Inner Line was deemed necessary to prevent what the colonial authorities called 'the wild tribes' from raiding the lowlands. Territories outside the Inner Line were under the 1919 Government of India Act categorized as 'excluded areas', 'partially excluded areas', and 'backward tracts'. But they were considered parts of British India, not some alien land.

The Inner Line Regulation is still in force in parts of northeastern India, and it also prevents people from the lowlands settling permanently north of the line. Indian citizens who are not from the northeastern hill states need special permits to enter Nagaland, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, and Sikkim. Non-Indian citizens have to register with the authorities when

entering Nagaland and Mizoram, as well as Manipur, and apply for special permits for Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim.

The Inner Line is clear, but there was never any official Outer Line. That is a figment of the imagination of several Western scholars. Lamb, in his *The China-India Border: The Origins of the Disputed Boundaries*, even has a map where a demarcated 'pre-1914 Outer Line' is marked.<sup>65</sup> Some old books and accounts do mention an outer line, but, as Phanjoubam points out, 'the British India government denied there was ever an official Outer Line, and that the implied Outer Line was always roughly where the McMahon Line was drawn in 1913–14'.66 If there ever were an Outer Line, it would have been the crest of the Himalayas, as there would be no reason to have a third line between the Inner Line and the McMahon Line.

On Lamb's map, his Outer Line follows the foot of the hills, or some kilometres north of where the Inner Line is. It would hardly make sense to have two parallel lines that close to each other. Maxwell goes a step further and claims in his *India's China War* that, in 1910, 'the retiring Viceroy, Lord Minto was less tentative [than the Lieutenant-Governor of Bengal], proposing that the Outer Line should be extended to include all of the tribal territory…[and the new Viceroy] Hardinge took up Minto's proposal that the Outer Line should be pushed north'.<sup>67</sup>

Here, again, the implication is that there was an official Outer Line. The problem with Maxwell's account is that his footnote says 'Hardinge to Crewe', giving the impression that this was quoted from a direct communication Viceroy Charles Hardinge had with Lord Robert Crewe-Milnes, British Secretary of State for India in 1911, but the source, from where he got the quote, does not say that exactly.

According to the footnote in *India's China War*, the quote is reproduced from *History of the Frontier Areas Bordering Assam From 1883–1941* by Sir Robert Reid, the governor of Assam from 1937–41, and it says that

we do not propose to have a third or intermediate line between the existing Inner Line and the new external boundary, but it will probably be necessary during the course of the contemplated operations in tribal territory, to erect cairns at suitable points, such as trade routes leading into Tibet, to indicate the limits of our control, and to explain to the tribesmen the object of such marks.68

Hardinge refers in his dispatch to an 'outer line', but dismisses it as unnecessary, as a new, more precise boundary was being discussed. But in Lamb's and Maxwell's version of history, this imprecise 'outer line'

becomes the official Outer Line. According to Phanjoubam, the territory between the Inner Line, which did exist, and the crest of the Himalayas 'was, for all practical purposes, treated as wild "no-man's" land till it was claimed officially and, in this case, by the McMahon Line'.<sup>69</sup>

Maxwell also gives the impression that the land beyond Assam was China and he refers to perceived threats in India by 'an active Chinese presence on the frontier of India', and that was the reason why the British wanted to expand north.<sup>70</sup> But apart from erecting a few border markers in a remote area in the vicinity of Walong during the brief occupation of Tibet during 1910–12, there were no Chinese officials or soldiers anywhere near India's northern frontier. Maxell also refers to Tawang as being 'unchallengeably Tibetan/Chinese', as if the Tibetans and the Chinese were happily administering the area together. <sup>71</sup> It is not inconceivable that some Chinese merchants did venture into or through Tawang in the early twentieth century, but no government officials from China were ever in that area. Equally misleading is Maxwell's reference to 'the sudden collapse of Chinese power in Tibet in 1911–12'.<sup>72</sup> He is, in fact, referring to the brief and failed Chinese occupation of Tibet during those years.

The colonial move into today's Arunachal Pradesh was prompted by other, more immediate concerns such as tribal raids into the lowlands of Assam, and planters wishing to extend their tea gardens into the hills north of the Brahmaputra. Several of the tribal chiefs north of the Inner Line were paid handsomely by the British Indian government to refrain from raiding the plains, resulting in a mutual dependence between them and the colonial power. The chieftains needed the British to keep outsiders away, and the British ensured themselves of a reasonable loyalty from the tribals by paying them annual subsidies.

Tibet, on the other side of the Himalayas, managed to maintain its de facto independence for decades after the 1913 proclamation by the thirteenth Dalai Lama, and even before that, as Tibet specialist Warren W. Smith points out, 'the nature of the [imperial] Qing relationship with Tibet was one between states, or between an empire and a semiautonomous state, not a relationship between a central government and an outlying province'.<sup>73</sup>

With the end of the limited influence the Chinese had enjoyed in Tibet, the Tibetans were now able to build a more truly independent nation. The

## border with British India was clear, as the Tibetan delegate at Shimla, Lönchen Shatra, had stated in a message to Henry McMahon,

As it was feared that there might be friction in future unless the boundary between India and Tibet is clearly defined, I submitted the map, which you sent me in February last, to Lhasa for orders. I have now received orders from Lhasa, and I accordingly agree to the boundary as marked in red in the two

copies of the maps signed by you subject to conditions, mentioned in your letter dated 24th March, sent to me through Mr. Bell. I have signed and sealed the two copies of the maps. I have kept one copy here and return herewith the other. 74

The 'boundary marked in red', of course, was the McMahon Line and 'Mr. Bell' was Charles Bell.

Thus, even the Tibetans would find it preposterous to claim that the McMahon Line was 'secret', and it is equally misleading to say that documents relating to it were 'discovered' by Caroe in the 1930s. Not much may have been done to establish any actual administration in the area between the plains of Assam and the McMahon Line, but in 1928, Captain Nevill, a political officer in the Balipara Frontier Tract, north of the Inner Line, informed the Indian government that in the event of a Chinese attempt to gain control over Tibet, Tawang would provide a 'secret and easy entrance into India'.<sup>75</sup>

Tawang was one of those areas where it was difficult to determine whether it was north or south of the McMahon Line. Henry McMahon's red line on the map puts the border roughly at Sela Pass, 78 kilometres south of Tawang. But according to the principle on which the McMahon Line was based—that it should be drawn along the highest peaks in the Himalayas and linked by watersheds—the border would be at Bumla Pass, northeast of Tawang. In his final memorandum at the Shimla Conference, McMahon discovered this, and briefly discussed the inclusion of Tawang in Indian territory, 'This secures to us a natural watershed frontier, access to the shortest trade route into Tibet, and control of the monastery of Tawang, which has blocked the trade by this route in the past by undue exaction and oppression.'<sup>76</sup>

The 'discovery' not of the McMahon Line as such, but of the ambiguity of some of its parts, should be credited not to Caroe, but to the British botanist and explorer Frank Kingdon-Ward, who made it to Monyul, or the Tawang area, in 1934–5. He noted that the Indian government had for a long time

been paying an annual subsidy to the de facto rulers of Monyul (Tawang) under the impression that they were independent chiefs. Possibly they were at the beginning. But it has lately come to light that most of the subsidy went into the purses of the power at Tsona-Dzong (in Tibet) and hence to Lhasa…this practice dilutes the Indian claim to Monyul…a deal was effected in 1914; Monyul was to become part of the Balipara Frontier Tract.77

Kingdon-Ward held the Indian government responsible for this neglect. 'Had India been able to take up possession in 1914 no more could have been heard about the matter.'<sup>78</sup> Kingdon-Ward had a solution to the problem: 'effective occupation by 1939 or at the latest 1940'.<sup>79</sup> But World War II came in between, and it was not until the early 1950s that Tawang was eventually brought under the control of the central Indian government.

Kingdon-Ward's foray into Tawang caused some problems in relations between British India and Tibet. He was arrested by the local authorities, and the Tibetans protested to the British officer Derrick Williamson, then on a tour to Lhasa. After some negotiations with the Tibetans, Kingdon-Ward was sent back to the lowlands. It was after this incident that Olaf Caroe decided to make the Shimla agreements available to a wider public. Until then, they were known only to a limited number of frontier officials.<sup>80</sup>

Despite the Kingdon-Ward incident, relations between Tibet and the British in India remained cordial throughout the 1920s and the 1930s. Younghusband's foray into Tibet in 1903–4, the flight of the Dalai Lama, and the brutal humiliation of the Tibetans, were forgotten. In 1922, Laden La (the Bhutia Sikkimese officer, who had taken part in Younghusband's 'expedition' and later been an interpreter at the Shimla Conference) was sent by the British to Lhasa to establish a Tibetan police force. His efforts were extremely successful, and Colonel Frederick Bailey, a British intelligence officer, was able to report from a visit to Lhasa in 1924 that, 'Sardar Bahadur Laden La has organised a very credible police force for Lhasa city. The men are smart and dressed in thick khaki serge in winter, and blue with yellow piping in summer.'<sup>81</sup> Led by Laden La, the Tibetan Police Band entertained Bailey with the swirl of bagpipes and the beating of drums.

Those instruments, which would be considered exotic in a Tibetan context, had been brought in from India, along with most other foreign goods. The main trade route led south from Lhasa over Jelep La Pass on the Sikkim border, and on to Kalimpong and Laden La's hometown

Darjeeling. From there, communications with Kolkata were excellent, and even included a railway that wound its way up the mountains from the plains of northern Bengal. Telegraph lines connected Tibet with India, Tibetan postage stamps and bank notes were printed, and coins were minted in the Tibetan currency. The currency included *srang*, which was divided into 10 *sho*, and, a lower denomination, the skar. There was also a *tangka*, divided into 15 *skar*. Monetary policies were the responsibility of the *kashag*, or Tibetan government. Electricity was introduced, though on a very small scale, and the first telephones and motorcars could be seen in Lhasa. Tibet also had its own national flag.

Chinese influence was basically non-existent in Tibet throughout the 1920s and 1930s. But China had not given up its claims to Tibet. In fact, one of the primary aims of Chiang Kai-shek was the 'reunification of China', and, according to him, both Mongolia and Tibet were part of the Republic of China. In 1928, Chiang established a Commission for Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs. But any attempts to seize Tibet by military means would have been disastrous given the fragmentation of China as a whole at that time. The Commission became what in modern terms could be called a government think-tank. After the Shimla Conference, nothing more was heard of Chen Yifan, perhaps because he had initialled the documents and thereby, in a sense, agreed to the British demands. But the wily Lu Xingqi is known to have continued to be working behind the scenes on Tibetan and Mongolian affairs well into the 1930s.<sup>82</sup>

But the thirteenth Dalai Lama's disenchantment with Tsarong Dzasa, the secretary of state and his pro-British military officers, did not go unnoticed in China. Intrigues began, and in late 1929, contacts with the Tibetans were established through the abbot of the Yunggün monastery in Beijing. Liu Man-ching, a young woman from the Commission for Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs, was sent to Lhasa, where she met the Dalai Lama. She conveyed Chiang's 'deep concern…over the prevailing conditions in Tibet and his eager wish to see Tibet rejoin the family of the Republic as brothers'.<sup>83</sup>

The Dalai Lama's response was essentially the same as the position taken by the Tibetans at Shimla, but still somewhat conciliatory towards China. Tibet was an independent nation, but it was willing to accept some kind of nominal subordination to China as long as the Tibetans were able to

run their own affairs. No agreement was reached, but for the first time since 1913, some official relations with China were restored.

If there were any friendly feelings between the Chinese and the Tibetans, these did not last long. Only two years later, in 1932, war broke out between China and Tibet when Tibetan forces tried to seize territory in Qinghai and Xikang, or the Kham region in Inner Tibet. The Tibetan army was defeated, and the Tibetans were warned not to cross the Jinsha River, the border between Inner and Outer Tibet, again.

Then, the following year, the thirteenth Dalai Lama died. Tibet scholar Melvyn Goldstein stated that 'the death of the strong-willed, autocratic and fiercely independent 13th Dalai Lama created new conditions that to the Chinese seemed promising for the restoration of what China considered its traditional superordination over Tibet'.<sup>84</sup> A mission, headed by General Huang Mu-sung of China's National Military Council, was sent to Lhasa to pay respects to the late Dalai Lama, but, more precisely, to try to reassert Chinese authority over Tibet. Among other stratagems, Huang emphasized the commonalities between China in contrast to the alien British.

No firm agreement was reached, but the Chinese were allowed to station an official and keep a wireless set in Lhasa, though only for the possibility of further dialogue. According to Goldstein, '[t]his decision again reflects the paradox of Tibet's China policy: a refusal to relinquish its de facto independence, but at the same time a refusal to make a complete break with China. China dangled the hope of a satisfactory settlement while refusing to yield on key issues.'<sup>85</sup>

China's attempts to lure the Tibetans into some kind of settlement continued as the search for a new Dalai Lama began shortly after the death of the thirteenth in 1933. There were indications that the exiled Panchen Lama, the second-most important lama in Tibet, was becoming a tool of the government of the Republic of China, now headquartered at Nanjing. The possibility of his return to Tibet was problematic for the British, but they made it clear that he was welcome back and, if necessary, they said they were even willing to mediate between him and the authorities in Lhasa. But, as the Chinese scholar Lin Hsiao-ting says, 'the British government would never agree to any Chinese troops entering Tibet…regarding it as a violation of the 1914 Simla Treaty, and their concerns were explicitly conveyed to the Chinese through diplomatic channels'.<sup>86</sup> Evidently, there

was no 'fear' of referring to the Shimla agreements, as a couple of years before Caroe had supposedly 'discovered' those documents.

A new Dalai Lama, the fourteenth, was eventually found in 1937, a twoyear-old boy whose birth name was Tenzin Gyatso. In 1939, when he was four years old, the new Dalai Lama was taken in a procession of lamas to Lhasa, where he was to spend his childhood in the Potala palace and the summer residence at Norbulingka. As the Dalai Lama was just a child, he was represented by a regent, Renting Rimpoche, the abbot of a monastery, who, together with the kashag, continued to rule the country. But lamas and officials in high positions in the clerical state were worried about the future, as they remembered the prophecy of the late thirteenth Dalai Lama. Before his passing, he is said to have uttered this ominous prediction for Tibet's future:

Very soon in this land [with a harmonious blend of religion and politics] deceptive acts may occur from without and within. At that time, if we do not dare to protect our territory, our spiritual personalities including the Victorious Father and Son [Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama] may be exterminated without trace, the property and authority of our Lakangs [residences of reincarnated lamas] and monks may be taken away. Moreover, our political system, developed by the Three Great Dharma Kings [Tri Songtsen Gampo, Tri Songdetsen, and Tri Ralpachen] will vanish without anything remaining. The property of all people, high and low, will be seized and the people forced to become slaves. All living beings will have to endure endless days of suffering and will be stricken with fear. Such a time will come.87

The Chinese spectre was hanging over Tibet and the thirteenth Dalai Lama knew it. Latter-day Chinese accounts of the installation of the fourteenth Dalai Lama state that the KMT government, represented by General Wu Zhongxin, the acting director of the Commission for Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs, presided over the ceremony and ratified the nomination at a ceremony in Lhasa on 22 February 1940. This, as many other Chinese claims concerning Tibet, its status and its borders, is utter nonsense. The British representative, Sir Basil Gould, who was also present at the same ceremony, asserts that Wu was just one guest among many and

he did no more than present a ceremonial scarf, as was done by the others, including the British Representative. But the Chinese have the ear of the world, and can later refer to their Press records and present an account of historical events that is wholly untrue. Tibet has no newspapers, either in English or Tibetan, and has therefore no means of exposing these falsehoods.88

The fourteenth Dalai Lama was still an infant when World War II broke out and could not possibly have been aware of the changes it was going to

bring to the region. Tibet's delicate status as a de facto independent buffer state between India and China was being challenged. For the first time in history, an alliance between China and British India was forged as they fought together against a common enemy—Japan. The Imperial Japanese Army had seized large tracts of territory in eastern China and, later, in December 1941, the British colony of Hong Kong was occupied as well.

Tens of thousands of Chinese troops retreated from China's inland through northern Myanmar into northeastern India. Many were cantoned at Ramgarh in Bihar, now in the state of Jharkhand. Britain and the United States were firmly behind Chiang Kai-shek's forces, and preparations were underway for them to be equipped and sent back to China to fight the Japanese. Sending supplies into China was another major task, as the Japanese had severed traditional routes through Myanmar and other neighbours.

Chiang Kai-shek and his allies saw the need to develop alternative supply routes, and those would have to be from India. After discussions between the Chiang's government and the British ambassador in the wartime Chinese capital of Chongqing, Chiang issued orders in February 1941 to build a new highway from Sichuan, where Chongqing is located, through the trading town of Rima in south eastern Tibet and on to Walong on the Indian side. From there, the road would continue to Assam, where high airfields were being constructed to support the war effort. The British ambassador, Horace James Seymour, supported Chiang's plan and recommended that 'in this matter we should not allow outmoded political conceptions to stand in the way of progress'.<sup>89</sup> Or Britain should not let its pledges to uphold Tibet's internal autonomy interfere with this strategically important highway project.

But the British Government of India opposed the plan because it would not substantially help the war effort and, besides, Tibet's position as a de facto independent buffer state with close ties to Britain and India would be affected. After the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong in December, Britain became willing to support the plan to build a supply road to China —but it would have to go through northern Myanmar, not Tibet. That eventually became the Stilwell or Ledo Road, named after the American General Joseph Stilwell, who led the campaign, or Ledo, the small town in north eastern Assam, the starting point for the new military supply route to China through Myanmar.

Although no road was built from Sichuan to Walong, the pressure was on from China's allies to assist the Allies by allowing supplies to be sent through Tibet as well. The British sent Norbhu Döndup, the assistant political officer in Sikkim, to Lhasa to try to persuade the Tibetan government to help Britain and China in the war against Japan.

The Tibetans were caught in a dilemma. On the one hand, they wanted to maintain their friendship with India and Britain, and, on the other, siding with China in the war would set a dangerous precedent. In the end, the National Assembly in Lhasa stated that Tibetan territory could not be used to transport supplies to China. The kashag also informed the British that Tibet wanted to remain neutral in the war. 90

However, the war and the arrival of the Americans on the scene meant that Tibet's international status, and its hitherto isolation from the rest of the world, was being challenged. Stilwell was the chief military adviser to Chiang Kai-shek, who was determined to bring Tibet under Chinese rule. In 1942, the canny Chiang ordered one of his commanders, a Muslim called Ma Bufang, to prepare for an invasion of Tibet. Chiang also threatened to use his air force to bomb Tibet, if they, as he said, 'worked with the Japanese'.<sup>91</sup>

There is no evidence to support Chiang's suspicions of some collusion between the Tibetans and the Japanese. It was not until 1943 that the Japanese spy Hisao Kimura set out for Tibet disguised as a Mongolian monk, using the name 'Dawa Sangpo'. He did not reach Lhasa until September 1945, by which time the war was over. 92

In July 1942, Tibet finally agreed to allow non-military goods to be transported through Tibet to China. But the issue was so sensitive that the kashag asked one of its representatives to sign the agreement without asking the National Assembly for approval. The route that was used also bypassed Lhasa. Supplies were to be sent through Tibetan trading companies on existing pack-animal trails via central Tibet. The Chinese, for their part, declared that they planned to station 'technicians' along the route through Tibet to 'facilitate transport'.<sup>93</sup>

The Tibetans refused. The Chinese government then tried another ruse. A representative of its Ministry of Communications would negotiate arrangements directly with Tibetan trading companies in Kalimpong in northern Bengal. The British agreed to this, but the Tibetans, once again,

saw a hidden agenda behind the Chinese proposal and declared that no Tibetan trading companies would be allowed to enter into such agreements without the approval of the authorities in Lhasa.

Meanwhile, the Americans, through their Office of Strategic Services (OSS), proposed to send intelligence officers to Tibet to survey the terrain. The idea of constructing a motorable road from India and through Tibet to China had not been totally discarded. After some initial difficulties, two Americans, Ilia Tolstoy and Brooke Dolan, were granted entry to Tibet. The American position was to support the Republic of China and its territorial claims, but Tolstoy made promises to the Tibetans that probably went beyond official policy. He said that he would recommend to his government that Tibet should be represented at a peace conference, which was going to be held after the war. The kashag was excited, and saw it as the first opportunity since the Shimla Conference to push for international recognition of its independence.

The British, on the other hand, were watching China's manoeuvres with increasing concern. On 29 April 1943, the Foreign Office in London sent a proposal to the India Office that Britain should withdraw its previous recognition of Chinese suzerainty over Tibet. The Foreign Office stated in its letter that such a withdrawal would be in Britain's and India's interest, as it would then be easier to settle once and for all the question of the border between India and Tibet.<sup>94</sup>

In the end, Britain decided that altering its policy on the status of Tibet might provoke the Chinese to attack and even occupy Tibet. The Republic of China would probably have tried to invade Tibet anyway once World War II was over, but the civil war with the communists kept the KMT occupied on other, more crucial fronts. The communist victory and the proclamation of the People's Republic of China on 1 October 1949 changed all that—and that was when Mao Zedong made his famous pledge before the huge crowds who had gathered outside Tiananmen, the Gate of Heavenly Peace, about the never allowing the people of China to be slaves again.

China under the iron-fisted, communist rule of Mao Zedong was never a truly free nation but he did manage to unify the country in a way Chiang Kai-shek had never been able to. While China's new rulers recognized the independence of communist-ruled Mongolia, the clerical state of Tibet had to be brought under the control of the Chinese central government.

Though the United States may never formally have recognized Tibet as part of the Republic of China, as was claimed by successive Chinese governments, Washington treated it as such so as not to upset its relations with Chiang Kai-shek. But the American attitude was to change dramatically as the Communists were gaining ground in China. Already in January 1949, when it was becoming obvious that the days of Chiang's KMT government were over, the American ambassador to India suggested to the State Department in Washington that a review of its Tibet policy would be appropriate. In particular, the ambassador proposed that if Mao Zedong and his communists succeeded in taking control of China, the United States should be prepared to treat Tibet as independent, 'If the Communists gain control of China proper, Tibet will be one of the few remaining non-Communist bastions in Continental Asia. Outer Mongolia is already detached. Communist influence is strong in Burma and Communists are infiltrating Sinkiang [Xinjiang] and Inner Mongolia. Tibet will accordingly assume both ideological and strategic importance.'<sup>95</sup>

On 17 November 1950, the fourteenth Dalai Lama, then 15 years old, was formally enthroned as the ruler of Tibet—but his reign was not going to be a peaceful one. Prior to his enthronement, on 7 October, communist troops had crossed the River Jinsha and fought their first and perhaps most decisive battle with the tiny, ill-equipped Tibetan army. About 5,000 Tibetan soldiers are believed to have died in the fighting, which amounted to wholesale slaughter.

Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme, a governor who had been captured by the Chinese, was sent to Lhasa to negotiate with the Dalai Lama. After several months of deliberations, on 23 May 1951, Jigme signed the 17-point agreement for 'the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet' in Beijing. It was the first time, and long before Hong Kong reverted to Chinese rule in 1997, that China promised a model based on 'one country, two systems'. The agreement affirmed China's sovereignty over Tibet, but according to point four, '[t]he central authorities will not alter the existing political system in Tibet. The central authorities also will not alter the established status, functions and powers of the Dalai Lama. Officials of various ranks shall hold office as usual.'<sup>96</sup>

Rather ominously, however, in late 1951, the PLA set up a base in Lhasa. The Chinese occupation of Tibet proper had begun. And there were not going to be two systems under this arrangement. The official Chinese

history also had to be altered. A Chinese propaganda book, published later in the 1950s, had no references to maintaining 'the existing political system in Tibet'. But it reproduced an editorial from the *Renmin Ribao* ('people's daily'), stating that,

To protect the unification of the country and national unity, Premier of the State Council Chou En-lai [Zhou Enlai] has ordered the dissolution of the local government in Tibet, which organized the rebellion…actively assisted by the Tibetan people, both ecclesiastical and secular, the People's Liberation Army had swiftly stamped out the rebellion in the Lhasa area and is mopping up rebel bandits in some other places in Tibet.97

Almost immediately after the Chinese invasion, bands of Tibetans had taken up arms against the new rulers. Among the rebels were Khampa tribesmen, as well as the remnants of the Tibetan Army that had been crushed after the Chinese invasion. The Chinese retaliation was swift and harsh. Suspected resistance fighters were rounded up and shot, and monasteries were ransacked as the Chinese unleashed a reign of terror and repression all over Tibet.

Tibet was now under direct Chinese rule and, in the early 1950s, China became an immediate and, as it turned out, permanent neighbour of India, which it had never been before. The French researcher Bérénice Guyot-Réchard writes in her study *Shadow States: India, China and the Himalayas, 1910-1962* that, 'The PLA had appeared north of the McMahon Line in the last month of 1951. Dzayül, which had not seen Chinese soldiers since the 1910s, soon had a network of military camps, headquarters, and garrisons, including two near the Indian border. Around the same time, troops began to arrive north of Tawang.'<sup>98</sup>

But from the very beginning, the United States, then the main enemy of the newly proclaimed People's Republic of China, had to tread carefully because the old Republic of China lived on in the island of Taiwan, where Chiang Kai-shek sought refuge after his inevitable defeat. His government continued to represent China in the UN, including its Security Council, and remained a close American ally, now against the Chinese communists. And the KMT government in Taiwan, like the People's Republic, considered Tibet an inalienable part of China.

The intrigues that followed the Chinese invasion of Tibet, and the characters who were involved, put even the old Great Game to shame. As the Chinese were moving into Kham in the east and beginning to

consolidate their grip on Tibet, the Americans began to take more interest in the Tibetan issue. In the spring of 1951, Larry Dalley, a young CIA officer at the US consulate general in Kolkata seeking information about China's designs for Tibet, contacted two young ladies in the city's diplomatic circuit. One of them was Pema Tseudeun, the older sister of the crown prince of Sikkim, Palden Thondup. She was a stunningly beautiful Himalayan lady who was married to a Tibetan nobleman and was more commonly known in her social circles as Coocoola. During World War II, while still a teenager, she had befriended Tolstoy and Dolan, the two OSS reconnaissance specialist officers then stationed in Lhasa. She and her husband owned considerable property in Lhasa, but the Chinese incursions had forced them to return to Sikkim, from where they then moved to Kolkata.<sup>99</sup>

Dalley's other contact was Coocoola's younger sister, the equally attractive Pema Choki, 'Kula' to her friends. She was also married to a Tibetan and her father-in law had been a high-ranking official at the Tibetan trade office in Kalimpong. Dalley asked the sisters if they thought the Tibetans would need any assistance from the United States, and a channel to the resistance on the other side of the Himalayas was opened.

According to American researchers Kenneth Conboy and James Morrison,

In June 1952, Kukula [Coocoola] approached the consulate with an oral message from the Dalai Lama. She had just returned from a visit to her in-laws in Lhasa, and although she had not personally met the Dalai Lama, she had been given information from Kula's father-in-law, Yurok Dazza, who had been in Lhasa at the same time, circulating among senior government circles. Kukula quoted the Dalai Lama as saying that when the time was propitious for liberation, he hoped the United States would give material aid and support.100

Discontent with the Chinese occupation was brewing throughout Tibet, and the young Dalai Lama was invited to Beijing in September 1954, ostensibly to lead a Tibetan delegation to an event to celebrate the inauguration of the first constitution of the People's Republic of China. Only 19 years old, he met all the important Chinese leaders of the time: Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai, and Deng Xiaoping. Pictures of a smiling Dalai Lama with his seemingly friendly Chinese hosts were published in the official media, but Mao insulted the spiritual leader by telling him that religion was poison. Mao also told him that an entirely new body, the Preparatory Committee for the Autonomous Region of Tibet, was being

created, effectively undermining the promises made under 17-point agreement of 1951. The Tibetans could forget about managing their own affairs.

When the Dalai Lama returned home to Lhasa, he found that the Chinese had built new roads into Tibet, including highways down to towns close to the Indian border. There were more PLA soldiers in the country than when he had left for Beijing. The Dalai Lama was distraught, realizing that whatever autonomy his beloved Tibet had enjoyed since the Chinese first entered Tibet would soon be gone. The Chinese were the new overlords. And the Communists would be much less tolerant of religious practices than their predecessors, Imperial China and the KMT, could ever have been had they extended their rule over Tibet.

There was an opening when, in late 1956, the Dalai Lama went on a pilgrimage to India. It was Buddha Jayanti, the birthday of the Buddha, and he received an official invitation from Jawaharlal Nehru to attend the celebrations at Bodh Gaya, where the Mahabodhi temple had been renovated for the event. The Dalai Lama and a 55-man strong Tibetan delegation entered India through Sikkim. But, to their astonishment, they found that Zhou Enlai was also in India on an official visit.

The Tibet issue was discussed and Nehru summoned the Dalai Lama to New Delhi. There would be no asylum for him in India, should he decide to escape from Chinese-dominated Tibet. India's new-won friendship with China was far more important and vital to the political stability of the entire region, the Indian prime minister had concluded. The Dalai Lama returned to Tibet, advised to do so by his two official soothsayers.<sup>101</sup>

It is not clear how much the Dalai Lama knew about the anti-Chinese resistance that was being formed or whether even Nehru was aware of what the CIA agents in Kolkata and their two royal Sikkimese lady friends were up to. In September 1952, the US consul general in Kolkata, Gary Soulen, had been on a trek in Sikkim with Princess Coocoola to survey the terrain. On his return to India, he contacted India's then spymaster, Bhola Nath Mullik, who was more steeped in the old colonial tradition than Nehru, a progressive politician. Contacts were made with two of the Dalai Lama's brothers then living in exile. The elder of the two, Thubten Norbu, already had CIA contacts through an obscure outfit called the Committee for a Free Asia. The younger, Gyalo Thondup, had settled in Darjeeling. Kalimpong, which was nearby, and on the main line of communication between India

and Tibet, became a hub of covert activity, from where agents were sent across the border to collect intelligence on 'enemy troops movements' and local guerrillas resisting the Chinese occupation of Tibet were armed.<sup>102</sup>

By 1956, the Khampa rebellion was sweeping across eastern Tibet, and a group of warlike Khampas had congregated in Kalimpong. Getting them out of India posed a major problem, as Nehru and his government would have to be kept in the dark. But there was a way: across the narrow neck of Indian territory between Bhutan and East Pakistan. By the mid-1950s, Pakistan had become a close ally of the United States and would be more welcoming than neutral India to secret proposals from Washington. In 1954, Pakistan had joined an anti-communist defence organization called the Southeast Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO), which included Australia, New Zealand, France, Thailand, and the Philippines, apart from the United States. In 1955, a parallel alliance had been formed in West Asia: the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO), which brought together Britain, Iran, Iraq, Turkey—and Pakistan.

Then, in March 1959, an uprising broke out in Lhasa against Chinese occupation. The Dalai Lama had been invited by the Chinese to attend a theatrical performance at the PLA's military headquarters on the outskirts of Lhasa. He was advised not to bring his traditional armed escort, which made him and his men deeply suspicious. They suspected that the Chinese intended to abduct the Dalai Lama, and words to that effect spread throughout Lhasa. Thousands of people surrounded the Dalai Lama's palace to prevent him from leaving or being taken away by the Chinese.

On 12 March, people appeared on the streets of Lhasa, re-declaring Tibet's independence and fighting broke out between the PLA and Tibetan resistance forces. The PLA responded by deploying artillery pieces within range of Norbulingka, the Dalai Lama's summer palace. On 17 March, two shells were fired at the palace and that prompted the people around the Dalai Lama to prepare for his escape from Lhasa.

The uprising was brutally crushed by the PLA—but the Dalai Lama, escorted by resistance fighters, managed to slip out of the city under the cover of darkness at three o'clock in the morning. Their goal was to reach the Indian border. To what extent the CIA actually helped the Dalai Lama flee is still an open question, but they were certainly aware that he was heading for India in disguise within days of his escape from the Tibetan capital. Up in the mountains, the Dalai Lama's party caught up with the

CIA's Tibetan resistance fighters inside Tibet, who were equipped with radios. They keyed a message to Okinawa, the US base on the Ryukyu Islands, which had not yet been handed back to Japan since their occupation during the final stages of World War II. The CIA also knew that the Dalai Lama, while on his way to the Indian border, had repudiated the 17-point agreement for 'the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet'.<sup>103</sup>

These messages from the CIA-trained Tibetan radio operators prompted the agency to ask India to grant the Dalai Lama asylum before he had reached the Indian border. The CIA's station chief in New Delhi went straight to Nehru with the request. After long deliberations about the possible negative impact of refusal on India's relations with the United States, the prime minister finally agreed, cutting layers of red tape to facilitate the process. Melinda Liu wrote in *Newsweek* in April 1999, 'A CIA-trained Tibetan even managed to film the odyssey with a 16-mm camera; it showed the spiritual leader, astride on a brown horse with richly embroidered saddlebags, and his retinue picking their way across Tibet's bleak hillsides, with the People's Liberation Army breathing down their necks.'<sup>104</sup>

On 30 March 1959, the Dalai Lama and his men crossed the last mountain pass on the border between Khenzemane and Zeimithang, northwest of Tawang. From there, weak from dysentery, the Dalai Lama rode into the salient Tawang, a green area in the rugged mountains, where he was met by Indian government officials and army personnel. He was safe. He and his entourage continued down to Tezpur in the Assam plains, where a media frenzy awaited him. The 24-year-old God King of Tibet had fled from communist China, and that was world news.

At Tezpur, the Dalai Lama boarded a train to Dehra Dun and continued by car to the hill station of Mussoorie on the western foothills of the Himalayas, where he met Nehru and other Indian dignitaries. A new place was chosen for the Tibetan leader, the much smaller hill station of McLeodganj in today's Himachal Pradesh, which has since 1960 also been the site for the Tibetan government in exile.

With the Dalai Lama and his entourage settled in India, the CIA could step up its support for the Tibetan resistance. The abandoned airstrip at Kurmitola north of Dhaka, which was built by the British during World War II, became the forward base for airdrops into Tibet and the place from which Tibetan resistance fighters were flown out to Okinawa, Clark

Airbase in the Philippines, and the Pacific island of Saipan, the secret headquarters of the CIA's covert operations in the Asia-Pacific region. Nationalist Chinese, Korean, Lao, and Vietnamese commandos were already being trained there.

The secret Tibetan operation was codenamed ST CIRCUS and its aerial portion ST BARNUM. According to Conboy and Morison, because the planes would need to fly over Indian territory without permission, they had to factor in the radar at Kolkata. But the CIA had done their homework

… and knew that the Indian system had no compensation feature and could be defeated if the B-17 used the Himalayan massif as a radar screen. Flying north over Sikkim, the crew would go as far as the Brahmaputra [in Tibet] for the first drop, cut east across the Tibetan plateau to Kham for the second drop, then veer southwest through Indian territory back to East Pakistan.105

To conceal American participation in the scheme, in case one of the planes was detected or shot down, the pilots were all anti-communist Poles who had been given asylum in the United States.

Muslim guerrillas in Xinjiang also benefited from the CIA's largesse, as did the Nationalist Communist soldiers in secret camps in northern Myanmar. A covert war on China was being launched, but, as Conboy and Morrison point out, 'the agency had taken great pains to exclude ROC [the Republic of China] from its Tibetan operations'.<sup>106</sup> And it is doubtful whether the USA was actually in favour of Tibetan independence; the limited scope of the operation seems to indicate that the main purpose was to annoy the Chinese and keep their armed forces occupied.

Whatever the case may be, when the special training facility was established at Camp Hale not far from Leadville in Colorado, a group of tightly knit CIA officers were in charge of the Tibetan programme, and they developed a fondness for the Tibetans which was rather unique. They would later reminisce how the staunchly Buddhist Tibetans would carefully rescue flies that had fallen in their teacups even as they expressed a deadly desire to kill as many Chinese as possible. At Camp Hale, the Tibetans were trained in guerrilla warfare as well as covert operations such as spy photography, Morse code, and mine laying.

Details about the training were not revealed until the 1990s, when it was all over. According to Melinda Liu's 1999 cover story for *Newsweek*,

The training took place in utmost secrecy. US officers made up stories about a top-secret nuclear research-project at Fort Hale, and guards deterred intruders with shoot-to-kill orders. In 1961, four

dozen American civilians were temporarily detained at gunpoint when they inadvertently witnessed 15 Asians wearing camouflage fatigues being escorted onto a C-124 Globemaster with blacked-out windows. Defence secretary Robert McNamara personally intervened to persuade the *New York Times* to spike the story. 107

The American agents who were sent to train the Tibetans were all very young for the formidable task that lay before them, which was to destabilize the most populous nation on earth. Some of them were smokejumpers from Montana, daring youth looking for adventure. After Tibet, many of them went on to take part in the CIA's secret war against the communist resistance in Laos. Among them was Thomas Fosmire, a former US army sergeant in his late 20s who had also served as an adviser to the border police in Thailand and, after Laos, remained in Vietnam until the communists marched into Saigon in April 1975. Another CIA operative, a Chinese linguist, and philosophy major at Stanford University, John 'Ken' Knaus later wrote a book about his experiences with the Tibetan guerrillas who underwent training in Colorado. He felt remorse in the end, for letting the Tibetans down. He felt guilt 'over our participation in these efforts, which cost others their lives, but which were the prime adventure of our own'.<sup>108</sup>

There was also the colourful Anthony Poshepny, better known by the short version of his name, Tony Poe. A former US marine who was wounded in Iwo Jima during the last battles against the Japanese during World War II, he joined the CIA as a paramilitary officer in 1951. He fought behind enemy lines in Korea and, in the late 1950s, tried and failed to foment an uprising in Sumatra against the Indonesian president Sukarno. Outgunned and trapped on the island, he and one of his companions fled on a fishing trawler that took them away to a waiting American submarine. At Camp Hale, Poe trained Tibetan guerrillas and even accompanied them to the airfield in East Pakistan from where they were flown and parachuted into Tibet.<sup>109</sup>

After Tibet, Poe went straight to Laos to train anti-communist guerrillas, a secret army of tribesmen raised by him and the other CIA operatives. In the mountains of northern Laos, he ran his own fiefdom, and soon became infamous for his brutality. He paid rewards for bringing in enemy ears, and higher remuneration if these were accompanied by a communist cap with a red star. He was also reported to have decapitated his enemies and put their heads on spikes to boost the morale of his own soldiers. Mentally unsound,

Poe became the model for the renegade Green Beret Colonel Kurtz in the 1979 Hollywood movie *Apocalypse Now*, and as far as one could possibly get from the spiritual ideas of the Dalai Lama.

The Indians, meanwhile, were busy consolidating their territories after the partition of the former British possession into the secular but Hindumajority Union of India and the Islamic state of Pakistan. The rulers of the princely states of the former British India could decide to which country they wanted to belong. The Hindu maharaja of Muslim-majority Jammu and Kashmir chose India, which marked the beginning of a conflict between Pakistan and India that continues to this day. The Muslim Nizam of Hyderabad, though, decided that he wanted to join Pakistan. This was unthinkable, as Hyderabad is located in southern India, far from any Pakistani territory. India's Home Minister Vallabhbhai Patel, who was in charge of integrating the princely states, sent the police to make sure no attempt to break away from India was made. The 'police action' lasted for five days. Hyderabad did not become part of Pakistan. Yet another Muslim ruler, the Nawab of Junagadh in Gujarat, chose to accede to Pakistan. Indian troops intervened, the Nawab fled to Pakistan and Junagadh joined the rest of India after a vast majority of the population voted to do so in a plebiscite in February 1948.

There was also the question of other, non-British possessions in India. The French had Chandannagar (then known as Chandernagore) on the banks of River Hooghly north of Kolkata, Mahe (Mayyazhi) on the Malabar coast in the south, and Puducherry (Pondicherry), Karaikal (Karikal), and Yanam on India's eastern coast. The French had no desire to remain in possession of those enclaves after India's independence and, especially after French Indochina became the independent states of Laos and Cambodia in 1953, and Vietnam in 1954. Chandannagar was merged with India in 1951, and the other four French possessions were transferred to Indian rule in 1954 and finally made part of India as a union territory in 1962.

The Portuguese, who ruled Goa, Daman, Diu, and Dadra and Nagar Haveli on the Indian west coast, proved to be more stubborn. The inland enclaves of Dadra and Nagar Haveli joined India in 1954 following requests from the local population. But the Portuguese refused to leave Goa, Daman and Diu. India decided to send in its army, and, in December 1961, launched Operation Vijay ('victory'). The 45,000 Indian troops who

had been mobilized for the campaign had no difficulty defeating the Portuguese army of 4,000 and naval personnel in the territories. Those three former Portuguese colonies also became an Indian union territory, but on 30 May 1987, Goa was made India's 25th state, with Daman and Diu remaining a union territory.

The tribal rebellion in the Naga Hills showed no sign of subsiding. From cross-border sanctuaries in Myanmar and bases in the Chittagong Hill Tracts of East Pakistan, they carried on their quixotic armed struggle against the Indian Army and for an independent Nagaland. Even if the rebellion had no chance of success, it kept India's security forces busy in a remote and hostile terrain.

New Delhi's efforts to integrate all parts of the vast and ethnically and geographically diverse country, and to secure its borders, also included the area that is now known as Arunachal Pradesh. The British had at last, in 1943, decided to integrate the mountainous areas between the Inner Line and the Himalayas, and the North-East Frontier Tract was created. After independence, laws were introduced to regulate the administration of the Abor and Mishmi Hills Districts. Roads and civil administration began to reach villages and communities that previously had only limited contact with the outside world, which in this case would be the plains of Assam.

Tawang proved to be a problem. Nari Rustomji, an Indian administrative officer who spent years in the Himalayan region, wrote in his *Enchanted Frontiers: Sikkim, Bhutan and India's North-Eastern Borderlands* that

The region that caused us special anxiety was the region of Tawang in the extreme north-west corner of Kameng Frontier Division and across the 14,000 foot Se La Pass [Sela]. Although Tawang was undoubtedly south of the McMahon Line and therefore within the territory of India, the Tibetans had, for generations, felt a strong sentimental attachment to the area, partly as the birth-place of the sixth Dalai Lama. The office-bearers of the great Buddhist monastery at Tawang were sometimes selected from among the Tibetan lamas of the famous Drepung monastery near Lhasa and the culture of the region had affinities with Tibet as much as with India.110

Rustomji and his border officials decided it was time to make clear to which country Tawang belonged—something which had become especially important since the Chinese occupation of Tibet in 1950. In 1938, the British had sent a military expedition led by Captain Gordon Lightfoot to plant the flag at Tawang, though little had happened since then. But the Indians remembered Captain Nevill's warning from as early as 1928 that

should the Chinese gain control over Tibet, which they now had, Tawang would provide a 'secret and easy entrance into India'.<sup>111</sup>

The local population in Tawang are known as Monpas and speak a language related to Tibetan, but they do not consider themselves ethnic Tibetans. In a confidential report, compiled by the secretariat of the Governor of Assam after Lightfoot's expedition, it was stated that the Monpas 'live in a state of virtual slavery… [and] that brutal punishments are inflicted on the British Monpas by irregular Tibetan courts…His Excellency is satisfied that inhabitants of the British area are from time to time murdered…under the orders of officials of the Tibetan Government.'<sup>112</sup> Apart from meting out harsh sentences against the local population, the Tibetan officials in the area did little more than collect money from the locals and send it to the Tsona (Cona) monastery in Tibet. Thus, it came hardly as a surprise to Lightfoot that the Monpas supported him against their Tibetan overlords when he entered the area.

The report from the Assam Secretariat suggested that the Tibetan Government should withdraw their officials from Tawang, and that the British should establish a more permanent presence in the district. That, however, did not happen because of the outbreak of World War II in 1939. It was not until February 1951, three and a half years after India's independence, that a detachment of the paramilitary Assam Rifles marched over Sela Pass and into the salient Tawang. It was commanded by Major Ralengnao 'Bob' Khathing, a Tangkhul Naga from Manipur, and, according to Rustomji, 'Bob's entry into Tawang was, for them [the Monpas], a true liberation as they could no longer be bossed about and pressurized to sell their produce at anybody's dictation'.<sup>113</sup>

But, ironically, when the new Indian administration in Tawang did not collect any taxes at all, the local people were confused and, in the end, Khathing had to levy an annual house tax of five rupees on each Monpa household to convince them that they were indeed citizens of India, and not under Tibetan domination.<sup>114</sup>

Across the border in Tibet, although the first advance party from the PLA had entered Lhasa in November 1950, the Chinese did not take full control over the city until September 1951. So, the kashag was still in power in the Tibetan capital when Khathing took over Tawang. The Tibetans protested to the Indian diplomatic mission in Lhasa, but to no

avail. Instead, New Delhi began to tighten its grip on all areas up to the McMahon Line. Apart from introducing government offices in previously unadministered areas, the Assam Rifles were reorganized to carry out patrols and surveillance work; intelligence units were deployed along the border; civil armed police forces were raised; and checkpoints set up along major roads and trails.

In January 1954, the North-East Frontier Tract became the North-East Frontier Area (NEFA), and Indian control had finally been secured all the way up to the McMahon Line, four decades after it had been drawn at the historic meetings at Shimla.