# Chapter 4

# Tribes and Citizenship: Making Sense of Citizenship Rights

The broad assumption underlying the concept of tribes in India is that these are groups and communities located on the fringes of Indian civilization. They are seen as having been drawn and absorbed into Indian civilization throughout history through a variety of social and political processes. Yet the process of incorporation was far from complete when India became independent in 1947. In the post-independence period, the position of the intelligentsia in general and that of the Indian state in particular with respect to tribes has been one of integrating them into the larger Indian society. This was intended to enable tribes, in the phraseology of citizenship rights, to share in full in the social heritage and life of a civilized society. To this end, tribes, like other sections of the Indian population, were given citizenship rights after India declared itself a sovereign democratic republic. This chapter examines the tribes in India in the light of citizenship rights. What have citizenship rights so far meant to tribal people? To what extent have they been able to take advantage of such rights? Have these rights made any difference to their lives? Has there been any substantive contribution to efforts aimed at increasing the tribes' share in the social heritage and life of a civilized society?

#### Citizenship Rights

Citizenship entitles an individual to full membership of a community. It confers an array of rights and obligations upon them. In this sense, the status of an individual as a citizen is contrary to the general notion of status, which is invariably associated with the notion of hierarchy and inequality (Béteille 1996). Citizenship rights are the hallmark of a democratic political

system. Citizenship has three components:—civil, political, and social rights.

Civil rights guarantee individual freedom, such as the right to individual liberty, right to freedom of speech, thought, and faith, right to own and transfer property, and right to justice. The right to justice guarantees equal treatment before the law in defending and asserting one's rights and the right to be subjected to the same processes of law as everyone else.

Political rights consist of the right to stand for election to a representative body vested with political authority, such as the parliament and its counterparts at the regional and local levels, as well as the right to elect one's political representatives.

Social rights consist of the right to economic welfare and security, the right to participate to the fullest in the social heritage, which means the right to live the life of a civilized being, according to the standards prevailing in the society (Marshall 1977: 78–91). Heater describes the nature of this citizenship right as emerging from 'the Liberal tradition' as against the other tradition, which he calls 'the Civic Republican tradition'. The former places emphasis on rights, the latter on duties (Heater 1999: 4).

# Situating Citizenship Rights in the Indian Context

Until India gained independence, people had no citizenship status. They had no civil rights for they did not have the right to personal freedom. They could not take up the occupation of their choice nor were they subject to the same process of law. They also did not have the right to freedom of speech, expression, and faith. Nor did they have political rights in the sense of the right to the exercise of political authority and the right to elect their political representatives. However, they did enjoy a modicum of social rights in the sense of social security. This came from the social arrangement of caste. They enjoyed security within the overall framework of caste hierarchy and inequality. This meant that social rights derived from status, the hallmarks of which were class and hierarchy. Further, the security so enjoyed was localized. Under the British, some rights were granted to the people at large not so much as a part of the entitlement to rights but more so as a corollary or end product of colonial administration. For example, the British

introduced uniform civil law and administration. In the process, people irrespective of their caste and creed came to be governed and administered by the same law, unlike the situation in traditional Indian society, which was governed by laws contingent on the individual's caste position. This was the origin of the right to justice in Indian society.

Indeed, many aspects of citizenship rights that people came to enjoy, albeit in a very limited sense, came not as part of the drive to equality, as was the case in Europe, but as part of the general process of societal development under the colonial regime. The processes of industrialization and urbanization and the introduction of modern education loosened the fetters of traditional Indian society and widened the scope for social mobility. Social mobility posed a challenge to the lack of freedom and inequality inherent in the whole notion of birth-based status. It permitted freedom to some degree, and to that extent it was a move towards equality, but of a certain kind. People also came to enjoy some other rights, but these were won through struggle during the course of the national movement. The right to freedom of speech and expression, although limited, was one among them. The rights so won were more in the civil domain rather than in the political and social domains. Some political rights were won during the colonial period, but they were limited in scope. These rights were restricted only to people of certain social and economic standing. For instance, property owners could acquire political rights during the colonial period.

The scene changed dramatically after independence. India adopted a Constitution that committed itself to extending not only civil and political rights but also social rights to all it people. The spirit underlying these rights was based on an ideology of social justice, liberty, equality, and fraternity. In doing so, the framers of the Constitution made a radical departure from the tradition based on an ideology of inequality and hierarchy, on the one hand, and lack of freedom and social justice, on the other hand. To use Béteille's formulation, India moved from a harmonic to a disharmonic system with the adoption of the Indian Constitution. That is, India committed itself to the ideology of equality, but the social system was characterized by hierarchy, inequality, and non-egalitarianism both in terms of ideology and practice (Béteille 1974). For millions of people living under

hierarchy, inequality, and lack of freedom, this was indeed a landmark development in Indian history.

However, even more interesting is that all these rights, namely civil, political, and social rights, came at the same time in the case of India. In Europe, these rights came, or rather were won, at different times. The origins of civil rights can be traced to the eighteenth, those of political rights to the nineteenth, and those of social rights to the twentieth centuries. The granting of these rights was built successively on the foundation laid by the previous rights (Marshall 1977: 78–91). This was not the case in India. The preamble to the Constitution of India, for example, promises to secure to all citizens justice—social, economic, and political— liberty of thought, expression, faith, and worship, equality of status and opportunity, and fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation (Bakshi 2000: 1). It is important to note that the Indian Constitution talks of the nation. It is doubtful if political scientists and sociologists would talk in the same vein. At the same time, it is also important to note that the rights enshrined in the Constitution had not emerged out of strong movements and mass mobilizations against the iniquitous caste system. The freedom movement, against the backdrop of which the role and importance of citizenship rights in post-independence India should be understood, did not produce very strong movements of mass mobilization against social inequality in general, and against caste hierarchy in particular. This is not to deny the long history of protest movements against the iniquity of the caste system.These had taken the form of either reforms initiated by enlightened upper-caste social reformers or, more specifically, movements and social mobilizations launched by people placed lower on the caste hierarchy.

#### Citizenship Rights and Tribes

Indian society is marked by plurality. The major pluralities are those of language, caste, religion, and tribe. The status of citizenship does not make a distinction on the basis of these pluralities. The status bestowed assumes crucial importance in the context of marginalized groups and communities. What significance do they attach to such a development? How have they made sense of it? Do these rights mean the same thing for people belonging to different castes and classes? Do they hold the same importance for them all? These seem to me interesting questions. It is equally important to examine the extent to which citizens have been able to exercise the rights conferred on them. After all, marginalized groups are far from homogeneous. They are situated in different contexts and have varying experiences, interests, and aspirations. Hence, it is not possible to examine the issue of citizenship in the context of marginalized groups as such. This chapter attempts to examine citizenship rights in the context of tribes in India. Tribes, as we all know, have had experiences quite different from those of groups in caste society and those on its fringes.

It may be kept in mind that citizenship rights are individual rights. Tribes are communities. Individuals have, at the same time, no social existence outside of their community or society. Rather they can only be understood in and through the society in which they live. In a pluralistic society like India, individuals are invariably members of a given community. Not only that but also individuals as citizens have the right to work for the welfare and development of their community as well as for safeguarding and protecting its identity. This is how dominant communities, whether linguistic or religious or other, have consolidated their position in Indian society. All these rights are, of course, subject to the rights of other individuals as citizens. In reading tribes as citizens, therefore, I am treating tribes both as citizens and as members of the tribal community.

Tribal people, unlike people living in a caste-based society, had no history of struggles for equality. But they did have a history of struggles for autonomy and independence. This being the case, the constitutional provision granting citizenship rights has been a major breakthrough for scheduled castes and other lower-caste groups. Such has not been the case for the tribes. After all, as observed earlier, citizenship rights, at least in the liberal tradition, have stemmed primarily from the struggle for equality. Tribes were not part of the social system built on the principles of inequality and hierarchy. Hence, they did not have to go through the experience of discrimination—social, political, and cultural—that lowercaste groups, especially the scheduled castes, suffered. Correspondingly, the civil and political rights extended by the Constitution to all citizens were not of great consequence for the tribes, as was the case with the castes

ranked lower in the caste hierarchy. The problems of the tribes stemmed not so much from within as from the outside. If at all they were constrained in their enjoyment of freedom and equality, this limitation came more from the outside in the form of an alien state structure, in the form of British rule to begin with and the post-independence Indian state later on. That is, whereas the tribes enjoyed traditional rights in their own society, these rights were curtailed after the incorporation of the tribes into the larger Indian society. Not only were their existing rights curtailed but even as members of the larger Indian society, they had little rights. Rather, they now came to suffer disadvantages similar to those suffered by the groups ranked low in the caste hierarchy. The tribes as collectivities did not aspire or desire to be members of the larger Indian society. That explains why the struggles of tribes have always been for greater control over their land, forests, and other resources through the articulation of a demand for political autonomy rather than a demand for greater participation in and control over state structures and institutions. What they aspired to was space for determining their own way of living, which, of course, also meant exercising ownership and control over resources in the regions where they lived.

The socio-political and economic forces at work in the country have been too strong for the tribes to resist. The result has been the incorporation of the tribes into the larger political and economic system in which they have been given the same rights and status accorded to other citizens, especially after the adoption of the Indian Constitution. It was an achievement only insofar as the larger society made the tribes an integral part and gave them the same rights as those enjoyed by other members. However, the securing of citizenship status hardly mattered to the tribes, for they already enjoyed these rights in their traditional social settings. They already enjoyed the benefits of equal citizenship, including civil, political, and social rights. Of course, it is doubtful if these could be conceived of as citizenship rights since these rights have invariably been local. Citizenship, on the other hand, is by definition national. In other words, the principle of citizenship works in societies based on territory rather than on kinship.

Tribes enjoyed rights not so much in their capacity as members of a political community but in their capacity as members of a society. The political dimension of rights was embedded in the general structure of the social relationships of tribal societies. Political institutions had yet to emerge as distinct and differentiated institutions in tribal societies. Rights in the context of traditional social settings had certain limitations, both in terms of reach and scope. There were also serious limitations in terms of reach and scope on the civil and political dimensions of rights more than on the social and economic dimensions. Certain sections of tribal society, such as women, did not enjoy some of the rights associated with citizenship. Although women enjoyed some of the same rights as men in areas such as the freedom to marry and divorce and the freedom to engage in free movement outside their home and workplace, they also faced many limitations. Customary law and tradition in tribal societies put women at a disadvantage, especially with respect to property and inheritance. To couch it in terms of citizenship rights, women did enjoy the right to personal liberty, the right to freedom of speech and faith, the right to justice, etc. If at all there were limitations in the visibility of these rights in tribal society, it had more to do with the relatively undifferentiated structure of society than rights per se. Women suffered the most serious and glaring disadvantages in the public domain. They did not have a say in the decision-making process affecting the public domain, nor could they hold public office. In other words, women in traditional social settings were denied political rights.

In addition to women, those identified as commoners were also denied such rights. It is interesting that tribal societies, although relatively egalitarian, are not altogether devoid of inequality, especially of rank and status. In many tribal societies, people were divided into chiefs, nobility, commoners, etc. This was the case, for example, among the Lushais of Mizoram, the Kukis of Manipur, the Khasis and the Jaintias of Meghalaya, the Semas and the Konyaks of Nagaland, and the Akas and the Khamptis of Arunachal Pradesh (Misra 1979). These examples are not exhaustive but illustrative. In some tribes, there existed even slaves. The position of commoners in some ways was similar to that of women. There were yet other problems. In many tribal communities, the office of the village chief or head, or even that of the religious head, was confined to members of a particular lineage or clan. Members of other clans and lineages were denied access to these offices, although they were allowed to participate in the decision-making process affecting the village and the community. In this

context, citizenship rights conferred by the state have expanded the scope of the rights in tribal societies.

## Civil Rights

It is interesting to examine the way and the extent to which tribes have tried to make sense of citizenship rights. This may be discussed with respect to each of the components of citizenship rights. Of civil rights, that is, freedom of thought, expression, faith, occupation, and right to property and justice, the most vulnerable has been the right to property. Many tribal groups in India have been dependent mainly on agriculture for their livelihood. They enjoyed proprietary rights, either individually or communally, over their land. In addition, they also held usufructuary rights over forests and other forms of common property resources. It was in this connection that tribes enjoyed rights of social and economic security, or social and economic rights. In traditional social settings, the right to property was not only an element of the civil domain but also of the social domain. However, the history of the last 200 years, including the post-independence period, has been marked by widespread alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes, especially in regions other than north-eastern India. In the postindependence period, land alienation has been justified on the grounds of the right to property and the right to settlement anywhere in the country. The right to property of one has meant the right to the dispossession of property of another. However, the reality is that this dispossession has invariably been that of tribes. The enjoyment of civil rights on the part of some sections of society has been the root cause of the loss of both civil and social rights by other sections. Of course, tribes have been provided with security in terms of legislation against alienation of land from tribes to nontribes, which was first introduced during the colonial period. In the postindependence period, characterized by the adoption of policies aimed at bringing about economic development and social justice, such legislation has been enacted in almost all states where tribal groups and communities live. Yet the violation of such rights through legal and illegal means has continued unabated. Tribes, of course, could seek legal redress. But this is a long-drawn-out process and one that requires resources and assistance, which the state did not make available to them Indeed, the right to justice in

terms of the restoration of rights was left to the goodwill of a small number of committed bureaucrats and administrators. The right to justice was thus closed off to tribes in the absence of legal and social support from the state. The tribes could not enjoy civil rights as they had little social and economic rights at their disposal.

The other area where tribes have been vulnerable in terms of the exercise and enjoyment of civil rights has been in the domain of freedom of religion. Tribes have their own distinct religions, which in the absence of any specific name have been described as tribal religions. Earlier in the census, tribes were described as animists. They have been drawn to other religions, and have in the course of time become Hindus or Christians or adopted other religions. This process continues even today. However, the conversion of tribes to Christianity has come under severe attack on the ground that conversion invariably takes place under coercion, enticement, fraud, etc. Even if one were to convert of one's own free will, it is said that the act has taken place under the means referred to above, that is, the tribes have supposedly converted because they have been intimidated, coerced, or attacked. A number of states have enacted a freedom of religion law with a view to preventing conversion among tribes. In a sense, then, this is an attack on the civil rights of the tribes as citizens. The question here is not one of conversion alone. Rather, larger issues related to citizenship are involved. It should be remembered that tribes have their own traditional religions. However, they are not being given the right to express and maintain their religious identities. Ever since the adoption of the Indian Constitution, they have either been constrained or coerced into not declaring their traditional religions or into declaring themselves as Hindus. There may be some similarity between the traditional religious practices of the tribes and Hinduism, but that does not make them Hindus. Similarly, there may be some similarity between the traditional religious faith of the tribes and Christianity, but that does not make them Christians. However, Hindutva social and political activists have been exerting pressure, working out strategies, and manipulating situations to ensure that tribes enumerate themselves as Hindus and not as animists or as followers of tribal religions in the census enumeration (Xaxa 2000). Pamphlets were distributed recently in Jharkhand calling for the wiping out the Santhals, the Mundas,

and the Oraons for their refusal to enumerate and declare themselves as Hindus.

The other important component of civil rights consistently violated in the case of tribes falls in the realm of language and culture. Article 19(5) of the Indian Constitution grants cultural or linguistic minorities the right to conserve their language and culture. This right is a part of the general right to freedom of speech, expression, and faith. This means that tribes have the right to use their own language, practice their own religion, study their own history, culture, tradition, heritage, etc. Yet tribes have been unable to safeguard and promote their language and culture. The state cannot by law force upon the tribes any other language or culture. Now the state may not have enacted any legislation to this effect, but in actual practice this is what it is doing. There are two main strategies through which this goal is being accomplished. The first strategy is opening schools and imparting instruction through the language and culture of the dominant community. The second strategy is not taking any worthwhile positive steps to meet the constitutional provisions meant for the welfare and benefit of the tribes. It was—and still is—surely asking too much of the tribes to take initiatives for protecting and safeguarding their language and culture on there own. They are economically, socially, and educationally too weak to take any concrete steps in this regard. This explains why there has been so much erosion of tribal languages and cultures in western, northern, and southern India in comparison to the eastern and north-eastern parts of the country. The promotion of language and culture has been left to the tribals. However, because of the lack of control over human, organizational, and financial resources, they have not been able to take effective measures in this direction. It is only when such support has been made available that the tribes have been able to protect and safeguard their cultures and languages (Xaxa 2001).

# Political Rights

The exercise of citizenship rights by tribes is the most pronounced in the domain of politics. This is evident in respect of both the right to vote and, more importantly, the right to be elected. However, the moot question is whether tribes would have been in a position to represent themselves as

citizens if there were no special provisions for them. The answer is emphatically negative. They undoubtedly would have participated as voters and electors, but certainly not as the elected, capable of exercising political authority. Rather, they would have been represented by non-tribes. Thus, it is not so much the right to be elected as the provision of reservation that has been the most crucial in this context. In the absence of reservation, the citizenship right to be elected would have been meaningless. At least this would have been the case in the early phase of electoral politics, if not today. This can be inferred from the composition of the political parties of all ideological persuasions at the time of independence. In fact, tribes had either no place or a negligible place in the structure of most political parties during this period. There had been little participation of tribes in national political parties, and hence the question of their representation in the absence of reservation would hardly have been possible.

Access to the political decision-making process, which in a democratic set-up is made possible only through election, requires resources (physical and human) that the tribes can-ill afford. Hence, had there been no reservations, there would have hardly been any serious and systematic efforts by political parties to recruit tribes to their cadres. The fact that most political parties were constrained to build cadres from among the tribes was the result of the constitutional provision of reservation for them in Parliament and the state legislatures. Even after cadres have been built from among the tribes, they have, on the whole, been deprived of positions of importance in political parties. Such an attitude or policy cuts across political parties of all persuasions. This is the case not only with political parties but also with organizations like trade unions. The labour force in the tea gardens of West Bengal and Assam consists primarily of tribes. It is another matter that scheduled tribe status has not been accorded to them in Assam. Many trade unions affiliated to different political parties have been working among tea garden workers. Yet the leadership of trade unions has always been in the hands of people from outside the tribes and from outside the labour force. It is only in recent years that one can see a shift in the social composition of the trade union leadership in the tea gardens of Assam and West Bengal. This is a clear pointer to the fact that if there as no

obligation of political reservation, the tribes would have been represented largely by non-tribal rather than tribal leaders.

While the provision of political participation helped expand the scope of tribal leadership, and many gained materially and non-materially in the process, such benefits have been limited on scope. After all, in terms of providing space for the protection and welfare of tribes through control over land, forest, and other resources, it has made little contribution. In view of the exercise of political rights from time to time at different levels, there has been, however, heightened political awareness, greater articulation of interests, and increased aspirations among tribal people. Indeed, politics and political mobilization are seen as the only option left for tribes for the protection and promotion of their interests. Hence, it is through political mobilization and political articulation that tribes are attempting to safeguard and promote their social and economic rights today.

#### Social Rights

It is in respect of social rights that tribes have been the most vulnerable. They enjoyed social security and protection as a result of the control they had over land and other resources. Control over resources was based on either ownership rights or usufructuary rights. These traditional rights are being eroded. The incorporation of tribes into the colonial state structure through annexation also led to their incorporation into the larger system through means of modern systems of transport and communication and the penetration of the forces of capital, market, wage labour, and credit. These processes drastically altered the traditional relationship of the tribes with land, forest, and other resources. Traditionally, these resources were either individually or collectively owned. Even if the tribes had no ownership rights, they had at least usufructuary rights. But the forces unleashed by both the colonial and the postcolonial states led to the steady erosion of the traditional rights of tribes to control and use these resources. This process has taken place in the following ways. The incorporation of tribes into the larger social system opened up tribal areas to people from outside the region as never before. This led to large-scale migration of non-tribal people into tribal areas. This development was not confined to physical movements of people in search of employment, trade, and commerce. It also led to greed,

fraud, coercion, and manipulation, and the tribes found themselves increasingly uprooted from their land and being cheated of their resources on an unprecedented scale. The process of land alienation through such means that began during the period of British rule continued unabated in the post-independence period. In order to deal with the problem of land alienation, laws have been enacted in almost all states with tribal populations. In some areas, such acts have been in existence since the British period, such as the Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 and the Santhal Parganas Tenancy Act, 1940. In the post-independence period, all states with tribal populations have enacted legislation not only for the prevention of land alienation but also for its restoration. Land protection has also been ensured in certain areas through arrangements such as the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution. Despite such acts, tribal lands have continued to pass from tribes to non-tribes. This means that legislative and constitutional provisions alone are not adequate in ensuring the social and economic rights of tribal people. Rather, these provisions need to be complemented and supplemented by effective administrative, infrastructural, and financial support. With of provisions for which certain support systems were made available, for example, the provision of protective discrimination, such arrangements did lead to some results, however inadequate they may have been. But where such measures were non-existent or largely ineffective, legal and constitutional provisions have not led to any desirable results in favour of tribes.

It is not only that effective social and economic rights were not evolved and extended to the tribes, but also that the rights that they already enjoyed, such as those over land and forest, were taken away from them by the colonial state to begin with and by the post-independent Indian state later on. This dispossession has been compounded by official development policies, especially in the post-independence period. Indeed, the major cause of tribal uprooting and displacement has been the state itself. Largescale industrialization, exploitation of mineral resources, and construction of irrigation dams and power projects have made more tribal people landless, jobless, and homeless than the transfer of land from tribes to nontribes. During the first three Five Year Plans, more than 50,000 scheduled tribe and 10,000 scheduled caste families were uprooted from the Jharkhand area alone to make land available for the construction of public sector projects. The total number of displaced families would be much higher if one were to take private sector enterprises such as coal mines into consideration (Sengupta 1979). The state projects for national development —whether industry, irrigation, power, or mining—may have benefited the country as a whole and contributed to the general good, but they certainly did not contribute to the good of tribal people. Of course, the state has been sponsoring projects of tribal development but most of these projects are of little consequence if the tribes lack resources.

## Conclusion

Tribes in terms of citizenship rights hold the same status as that accorded to members of other communities. Yet in terms of enjoying these rights, the position of tribes in comparison to that of others has been highly vulnerable. As citizens, they have suffered the most mainly because of a legacy of disadvantages, which has been cumulative. The disadvantages have been demographic and historical, on the one hand, and ethnic and structural, on the other hand. Structural disadvantages have economic, political, social, and cultural dimensions, resulting from the subordination of tribes after their incorporation into the larger social system. However, the disadvantages have been far from even in the different components of citizenship rights. In retrospect, one can see some positive developments on the civil and political fronts, especially on the latter front. Yet even these positive developments have not been due solely to civil and political rights per se, but rather due to social rights in the form of reservation and other policy measures meant for the welfare and protection of tribes. At the same time, the provision of such social rights in itself is meaningless if the people who are the intended beneficiaries either lack the required resources or if effective institutional support is not made available to them. Where such support has been made available, tribes have at least made sense of the citizenship rights enshrined in the Constitution. Even here the achievements have, on the whole, been far from satisfactory, especially in regard to civil rights. Results have been most inadequate on the social and economic fronts. Hence, tribes today are increasingly taking recourse to civil and

political rights, especially the latter, with a view to promoting, protecting, and safeguarding their social and economic rights and interests.

#### References

- Bakshi, P. M. 2000. *The Constitution of India*. Delhi: Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd. (reprint edition).
- Béteille, André. 1974. *Studies in Agrarian Social Structure*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

———. 1996. 'The Mismatch between Class and Status.' *British Journal of Sociology* 47 (3): 513– 25.

Heater, Derek. 1999. *What is Citizenship?* Cambridge: Polity Press.

Marshall, T. H. 1977. *Class, Citizenship and Social Development*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Misra, B. P. 1979. 'Kirata Karyokiness: Modes of Production in Tribal Societies in North-East India', in *Agrarian Relations in India*, edited by A. Das and V. Nilkant. New Delhi: Manohar, pp. 51–82.

Sengupta, Nirmal. 1979. 'Class Structure in Jharkhand', *National Labour Institute Bulletin* 5: 7–8.

Xaxa, Virginius. 2000. 'Tribes, Conversion and Sangh Parivar.' *Jnanadeepa* 3 (1): 23–35.

———. 2001. 'Tribes and Their Legal Entitlements', in *Human Rights Education in Schools and Colleges*, edited by Herman Castelino. Anand: Gujarat Sahitya Prakash.