26

# **Social Structure and Democratic Process: Perspectives, Problems, and Trends**

*Satish Kumar Jha* 

# ❑❑ **Backdrop**

Democracy is a political arrangement in which the people and the government together create a civil society and build a common future. It is nothing but a 'tryst with destiny'. Hence, democracy is predicated on the essential equality of fellow citizens. When India started its political journey after the attainment of the independence, the biggest challenge which stared in its face was to find a form that could fit between its social diversity, characterized by structural hierarchies, and democratic processes and institutions. The founding fathers took up this challenge with optimism and hoped that the institutions of democratic government would exert a dissolving influence on the hierarchical social structure and would lay the foundation for democratic governance. This assumption was not implausible. The logic of industrial development and democratic citizenship, which India had adopted, were both to work as a combined logic of individuation, dissolving primordial identities like caste, and religion. The powerful discourse of modern citizenship enshrined in our constitution, while creating a tie between individual and state, was to break down all intermediate affiliations of identity and loyalty.<sup>1</sup> Over and above this, a particular type of democratic strategy, which implies treatment of each individual as individual citizen and not as a community, was given a place of prominence in Indian constitution.

Thus, the long and the short of political agenda adopted at the time of independence was to create a civil society. The goals permeating the entire discuss on social and economic development testify it. This is, however, not surprising as democratic system, conceived in Western liberal sense, definitely demands a civil society in which interpersonal relationships are informed not by primary communitarian ties but by secondary associations and impersonal rule of law based on secular principles. As noted by Austin, several members of the Constituent Assembly affirmed optimistically that the values and institutions of liberal democracy would transform India's tradition bound social structure. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan said that modern parliamentary democracy would bring about a socio-economic revolution or, in other words; a fundamental change in the structure of Indian society. Another member of the Constituent Assembly, K. Santharam, wrote that new constitution was meant to help India get out of medievalism based on birth, religion, custom and community, etc., and reconstruct her social structure on modern foundations of law, individual merit, and secular education.<sup>2</sup> Such a vision about future Indian society and polity was anchored in a democratic theory, which believed in a functional reciprocity between democracy and liberal outlook and its social order, i.e., capitalism. Alexis de Tocqueville, in his celebrated *Democracy in America,* also argues at length that democratic institutions and values have to take root, there must be social and material equality, something found in capitalist American society.<sup>3</sup> An essential part of this theory of historical change is the belief that capitalist growth fosters democracy. And these in turn, it is assumed, reinforce secularization and conversion of identities based on primacy of communities to those based on primacy of individuals. However, there were some strands of thought in the Constituent Assembly which were not in favour of replicating Western democratic institutions and the premises on which they are based. It was frequently argued that these institutions and ideas could not be separated from the societies which they had originally evolved.<sup>4</sup> "India, it was argued, had an entirely different social order not suited for parliamentary institutions and would do better to search for its own traditions for institutions more in consonance with its culture."<sup>5</sup> But these arguments were largely ignored in the Constituent Assembly; the persons who mattered were wedded to the ideal of democracy as understood and practised in Western countries.<sup>6</sup>

#### **Structure and Process**

The Indian democratic process was inaugurated in an ironical situation. Democracy was being sought to be institutionalized and was to be practised in a highly unequal society, compelling Ambedkar to remark that "we are going to enter into a life of contradictions. In politics we will have equality and in social and economic rights we will have inequality. We must remove this contradiction at the earliest possible moment or else those who suffer from inequality will blow up the structure of political democracy."<sup>7</sup> The situation under which we started, i.e., democracy being put into practice despite having widespread poverty and inequality, was then likely to become the central contradiction of the society. It was not realized that the lack of economic-cultural content could become an impediment in the realization of its potential. Further, as it is well known that institutions of liberal democracy are premised on the existence of a highly individuated society; on the assumption that when people act in their political world, they would see their interests as individuals; and group interests would be merely the transient combinations of such individual interests. But, contrary to this, the ordinary people in Indian society lived according to the social principles which were fundamentally opposed to individualism. Contextually, they acted according to the membership of their groups like castes, religion, language, etc. Hence, when the bourgeois segments of Indian society coexisting with semi-feudal class relations, amidst abject poverty and illiteracy while surviving on communitarian culture, adopted modern liberal democratic process, it came both as surprise to the political observers all over the world. It was quite logical to believe, at that time, that either the logic of modern politics would disaggregate social communities or the strength of community existence would disrupt the functioning of modern democracy.<sup>8</sup> The political scientists, though mostly Western, were initially quite skeptical about the fate of Indian democracy. There was a tone of finality in their assessment that liberal democratic institutions, transplanted on a traditional social structure, would collapse like a house of cards.

In the early and mid-fifties, Western scholars of politics were wondering about the future of Indian political system. In 1961, Norman Palmer wrote that the Indian political structure is still in process of becoming and its final shape is still not clear as one might first assume. The Indianization of politics is still going on. Morris-Jones, on the other hand, advised Western students to be on guard while studying Indian political institutions.<sup>9</sup> But very soon it became apparent that some fundamental transformation was occurring in the actual functioning of democratic institutions and practices in which adjustments were being made which reflected indigenous cultural and behavioural patterns without any conscious modelling of the traditions.<sup>10</sup> Since these democratic models and institutions were located in a different kind of historically constituted social structure, it was discovered that their trajectories were bearing only faint resemblance to the tracks of Western history. Further, the success story of Indian democracy started not only exploding the 'development-democracy reciprocity' thesis, but also started questioning the rationale behind the 'tradition-modernity' dichotomy, compelling Morris-Jones, who had once alerted Western observers to be on guard while analysing the Indian experiment, to write that the Western parliamentary institutions were quite compatible with the traditional Indian social structure. Thus, came a new shift in the approach of political scientists analysing Indian democratic process. According to this new approach, the entire 'tradition-modernity' dichotomy was reconciled under the rubric of 'modernization of tradition' or 'traditionalization of modernity.'<sup>11</sup>

L. Rudolph and S.H. Rudolph, Rajni Kothari and few others were pioneers in heralding a new perspective in analysing the functioning of Indian democracy in a traditional social structure.<sup>12</sup> Their thesis went like this: Since there was no well-developed interest group, pressure group, and other supportive agencies of democratic institutions in a traditional, underdeveloped society like India, the traditional structure of caste, through its caste associations, played crucial role in inducting/bringing the people in the network of democratic process. This way, India's traditional socio-cultural sphere, instead of being hindrance to, served as a suitable under-structure of democratic political institutions. Rajni Kothari also pointed out a paradoxical and, at the same time, a puzzling fact that electoral politics, instead of diluting caste, seemed to reinforce it thereby changing the electoral practices; the caste altered the functioning of the democratic system reflecting an interesting process of the adaptability of tradition to modernity.<sup>13</sup> Apart from the existence of compatibility between caste structure and democratic process, there were other cleavages emanating from the social structure in India, *viz.,* religion, ethnicity, tribal identity, etc., which made adjustments in the new setting to the extent that it appeared that norms of democratic politics had acquired a semblance of acceptability among people, and this novel Indian experiment was alive and kicking.<sup>14</sup>

For the first twenty years after independence, political events seemed to follow obediently this framework. But after Nehru's death, particularly after 1967 general election, there started a reversal of relationship between the state and the civil society, on the one side, and the social structure and the structure of traditional ideology, on the other.<sup>15</sup> According to Kothari, this threw the balance between the traditional civil society and the modern state into jeopardy, moving away from the earlier 'fit' between social diversity and democratic institutions to a growing lack of fit between the two.<sup>16</sup> Consequently, the poorer and the socially marginalized sections, according to Kothari, including the ethnic and religious minorities, started seeking out their future on the basis of their identities and their numbers. This led to a mobilization based on caste, sub-caste tribe, ethno-regional, and other such identities.<sup>17</sup> Kaviraj, however, calls it the birth of a 'democratic society'. Using the Tocquevillian distinction, he pithily observes that "in the first two decades after independence, India seemed to operate a 'democratic government' in the absence of a 'democratic society'."<sup>18</sup> Commenting further on the unfolding scenario, Kaviraj writes: *"*As long as popular pressure on politics did not break the mould of a highly formal, restrained, 'civilized', elite politics, as long as the ordinary and the poor were content to address their grievances through the format of the system rather than alter that format itself, democratic civilities were maintained with impeccable form: elections were punctual, peaceful, orderly. Parliamentary procedures, despite their legal awareness, were understood and maintained. The courts ruled meticulously. Ministers resigned assuming responsibility for mistakes committed by their bureaucracies."<sup>19</sup> But interestingly, as soon as the masses started coming at the centre-stage and began questioning the existing terms of democratic discourse, the Indian state and its democratic institutions ran into series of crises, leading to a whole host of undemocratic measures like centralism, authoritarianism, populism, etc. These undemocratic thrusts of Indian state, however, were soon countered and challenged by series of democratic upsurges emanating from civil society, viz., farmers movements, women's movements, ecological movements, movements for regional and cultural autonomy, etc.

But this so called new democratic upsurge which originated from the fledgling democratic society basically came as a result of disenchantment with both institutional democratic process as well as its governing ideology. Rajni Kothari explains this disillusionment in these words: "The long held assumption was that as the project of nation-building sets under way, the democratic rights are extended to the people, as the development process also gets under way and more and more people and communities benefit from it and all the sources of poverty, unemployment, and human misery are eliminated…. people will enter into new relationship of a more secular and political kind. These assumptions have been belied."<sup>20</sup> According to Kothari, there are two reasons for this: (1) the very agenda of democratic nation-building and social transformation has not been carried through, and (2) the Indian reality is proving too complex and ridden with deep divisions and paradoxes which are proving unamenable to traditional analysis and ideological interpretation.<sup>21</sup> He further adds that after showing a lot of patience and forbearance, the people are losing faith in the existing set-up and are coming to the conclusion that they might have to fend for themselves. This however, according to Kothari, is not to be regretted for the essence of the democratic process is that people come into their own and not wait endlessly for the state or the political parties to make things better for them.<sup>22</sup>

## **Problems and Trends**

Thus, as discontent and disillusionment have grown, the epicentre of the democratic process has moved from an almost exclusive preoccupation with parties and elections to deeper currents at work in the civil society. The period of erosion of parliamentary parties, federal institutions decline of the authority of state and of national political leadership, has also seen the rise of new actors on the stage along with new forms of political expression and new definition of the politics.<sup>23</sup>

 In other words, one can say that the articulation of new found consciousness within the civil society has started getting channelized through a new politics, popularly called the New Social Movements. These new social movements should be seen as further and fuller extension of democratic process, though their means seem to be different from that of the preceding period. According to Kothari precisely at a time when the party system is losing credibility and party leaders are themselves closing and contracting political spaces, new institutional spaces are opening up by way of regional upsurges and movements for cultural autonomy, ecological movement, women's movement, etc.<sup>24</sup> For Kothari, it is from this comprehensive response, to a situation of shrinking spaces and closed options, launched from the variety of vantage points of an 'alternative movement' that the democratic process is likely to find its new bearings and new springs of sustenance over time.<sup>25</sup> Nonetheless, as Kothari himself observes: "Nearly all new social movements have emerged as corrective to new maladies environmental degradation, violation of the status of women, destruction of tribal cultures, and the undermining of human rights—none of which are by themselves transformative of the social order."<sup>26</sup> Further, one should not lose sight of the fact that these vibrant democratic waves, unleashed in recent years in form of new social movements, are also riddled with problems and contradictions. Interestingly, some of the problems which are arising these days are from the same structural base which is also responsible for the birth of these alternative movements. Kothari too is sometimes not so optimistic about the trends in the social movements. He calls them as "being too fragmented, reactive, *adhocism*, providing no comprehensive framework of basic social change." He writes that "their being anti-this orthat (anti-West, anti-capitalist, anti-development, etc.) does not make them any more coherent, any more relevant to the oppressed and peripheralized communities."<sup>27</sup> In his opinion, it is against this growing irrelevance of various grassroots movements that 'New Dalit Movement' is emerging.<sup>28</sup> But when Kothari talks of New Dalit Movement as something which can plug holes in the democratic politics of new social movements, he seems, once again, to be pinning hope on caste system for secularizing and democratizing the society and the politics. Though, this time, it is true, he anchors his argument on altogether different premise. In his opinion, at present juncture, social justice in form of Dalit upsurge is becoming the primary agenda of the democratic process in India. But Kothari wonders whether "a more equal and just society creating a democratic polity or democratization of larger sections of the people (will}… proceed to create a more just and egalitarian society?" In his opinion, this issue, first raised in the preindependence discourse on social reform and political rights, has now been revived in the course of the Dalit movement.<sup>29</sup>

But one has to be careful in stating the democratic potential of this upsurge. It is true that these movements are releasing new untapped democratic possibilities of the civil society. But there is a limit beyond which the democratizing capacity of these movements cannot be stretched. As one should not forget that in contemporary India, communalism, fundamentalism, and casteism, which constitute a danger to democratic polity, emanate from the same structural base which is being relied upon to rekindle new democratic hope. Thus, it ultimately boils down to a question, which reminds one of a puzzle with which both Toequeville and Mill had once to grapple with, i.e., how can a democratic society defend itself from its own democratic process.<sup>30</sup> But in any case, it is not certain which way the new democratic discourse will move. But there can be no two opinions about the fact that the 'mass society' has dawned in India which, apart from other things has eroded the Nehruvian statecraft considerably which was designed to accommodate the elites and not the masses of the society. The chances of realization of the goals of 'liberation discourse' prevalent during the national movement would depend on how much the recent democratic upsurge succeed in democratizing the Nehruvian statecraft and transcending it.

## **Notes and References**

- 1. Sudipta Kaviraj (ed.), *Politics in India,* Delhi, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 8.
- 2. Thomas Pantharn, *Political Theories and Social Reconstruction,* New Delhi, Sage Publications, 1995, p. 27.
- 3. There is a general consensus among the political theorists of the West that democratic institutions can be fully functional only in capitalist society, C.B. Macpherson traces the origin of liberal democracy with the rise of capitalism in the West. See his, *Life and Times of Liberal Democracy.*
- 4. S. Kaviraj, *op. cit.,* p. 14. Recent researches, however, question the compatibility between capitalism and democracy. It is argued that capitalism could develop in its early stages precisely because of the absence of universal suffrage. In Indian context, Ashutosh Varshney feels that democracy predated industrialization, which has provided the rural rich with an electoral veto to obstruct agrarian reforms, which were meant to support capitalist growth. Recently, N. Palkhivata's remark, that India is the only democracy which started with universal adult franchise and hence is suffering with endless problems, only supports this apprehension.
- 5. Paul R. Brass, *The Politics of India since Independence,* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992, p. 13. Gandhi and Gandhians along with J.P. were quite vehement about indigenous democratic institutions.
- 6. Chetakar Jha, *Indian Government and Politics: A Political Commentary,* Patna: Novelty & Co., 1960, p. 6.
- 7. A.S. Narang, *Indian Government and Politics,* New Delhi, Gitanjali Publishing House, 1996, p. 7S.
- 8. S. Kaviraj, *op. cit.,* p. 39.
- 9. S. K. Chaube, "Studies on the Constitution and Government of India: A Methodological Survey" in *Teaching Politics,* Vol. 1 & 2, 1978, p. 4.
- 10. P.R. Brass, *op. cit.,* p. 14.
- 11. S. K. Chaube, *op. cit.,* p. 12.
- 12. L.I. Rudolph and S.H. Rudolph, *The Modernity of Tradition: Political Development in India,* Delhi: Orient Longman, 1987; Rajni Kothari, *Politics in India,* New Delhi, Orient Longman, 1970.
- 13. Kaviraj, *op. cit.,* p. 31. M.N. Srinivas, a leading Indian sociologist, had long argued that with dawn of electoral politics caste would get new lease of life.
- 14. It is not to deny that there was no ethnic, tribal, and communal problems in India. But what is being stated is that they were not going outside the purview of democratic politics. Secessionist politics of north-eastern region was only an aberrant case.