- Kim, J. Y., Millen, J. V., Irwin, A., & Gershaman, J. (Eds.). (2000). *Dying for growth: Global inequality and the health of the poor*. Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press.
- Kleinman, A. (1999). Moral experience and ethical reflection: Can ethnography reconcile them? A quandary for "The new bioethics." *Daedalus*, *128*, 69–98.
- Kleinman, A., Das, V., & Lock, M. (Eds.). (1997). *Social suffering*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Klinenberg, E. (1999). Denaturalizing disaster: A social autopsy of the 1995 Chicago heat wave. *Theory and Society*, *28*, 239–295.
- Klinenberg, E. (2002). Heat wave: A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Kubler-Ross, E. (1969). *On death and dying*. New York: Macmillan.
- LeVine, R. (1982). Gusii funerals: Meaning of life and death in an African community. *Ethos*, *10*, 26–65.
- Lock, M. (2000). On dying twice: Culture, technology and the determination of death. In M. Lock, A. Young, & A. Cambrosio (Eds.), *Living and working with the new medical technologies* (pp. 233–262). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Lock, M. (2002). Twice dead: Organ transplants and the reinvention of death. Berkeley: University of Calfornia Press.
- Metcalf, P. (1982). *A Borneo journey into death*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Muller, J., & Koenig, B. (1988). On the boundary of life and death. In M. Lock & D. Gordon (Eds.), *Biomedicine examined* (pp. 351–374). Boston, MA: Kluwer.
- Myerhoff, B. (1978). *Number our days*. New York: Dutton.
- Nagengast, C. (1994). Violence, terror, and the crisis of the state. *Annual Review of Anthropology*, *23*, 109–136.
- Palgi, P., & Abramovitch, H. (1984). Death: A cross-cultural perspective. *Annual Review of Anthropology*, *13*, 385–417.
- Quesada, J. (1998). Suffering child: An embodiment of war and its aftermath in post-Sandinista Nicaragua. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly*, *12*, 51–73.
- Robben, A., & Nordstrom, C. (1995). Introduction: The anthropology and ethnography of violence and sociopolitical conflict.

In C. Nordstrom & A. Robben (Eds.), *Fieldwork under fire: Contemporary studies of violence and survival* (pp. 1–24). Berkeley: University of California Press.

- Rosaldo, R. (1989a). Death in the ethnographic present. In P. Hernadi (Ed.), *The rhetoric of interpretation and the interpretation of rhetoric* (pp. 173–182). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Rosaldo, R. (1989b). *Culture and truth*. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
- Rosenblatt, P. C., Walsh, R. P., & Jackson, D. A. (1976). *Grief and mourning in cross-cultural perspective*. New Haven, CT: HRAF Press.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. (1992). *Death without weeping*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. (1996). Small wars and invisible genocides. *Social Science & Medicine*, *43*, 889–900.
- Scheper-Hughes, N. (2000). The global traffic in human organs. *Current Anthropology*, *41*, 191–211.
- Seale, C. (1998). *Constructing death*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Seremetakis, C. N. (1991). *The last word*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
- Sharp, L. A. (1995). Organ transplantation as a transformative experience. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly*, *9*, 357–389.
- Singer, M. (Ed.). (1998). *The political economy of AIDS*. Amityville, NY: Baywood.
- Taussig, M. (1984). Culture of terror—space of death. *Comparative Studies in Society and History*, *26*, 467–497.
- Taussig, M. (1987). *Shamanism, colonialism and the wildman*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
- Timmermans, S. (1999). *Sudden death and the myth of CPR*. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
- Virchow, R. (1848). *Die medizinische reform* (No. 1, p. 182). Berlin: Druck und Verlag von G. Reimer.
- Walter, T. (1994). *The revival of death*. London: Routledge.

# **Female Genital Cutting**

### **Social and Cultural Dimensions of the Practice and the Debates**<sup>1</sup>

#### **Bettina Shell-Duncan and Ylva Hernlund**

## **INTRODUCTION**

Having little parallel in its ability to arouse an emotional response, the practice of female genital cutting (FGC) has come under increasingly intense international scrutiny from news media, feminist and human rights organizations, health practitioners, and legislators. A reclassification has taken place: the local has become a global concern, "female circumcision" has become "female genital mutilation," and a "traditional practice" has become a "human rights violation." Under the gaze of international attention, this issue has come to constitute a

#### **The Trivialization of Culture 253**

site for a number of emotionally charged debates around cultural relativism, international human rights, racism and Western imperialism, medicalization, sexuality, and patriarchal oppression of women, resulting in an onslaught of discussion and writing on the topic. Yet misunderstanding, confusion, and controversy over the complex dimensions of this issue have not been resolved.

The intervention of outsiders has been sharply criticized by both African and Western scholars. It has been argued that African people affected by this practice ought to be allowed to "argue this one out for themselves" (Scheper-Hughes, 1991, p. 26). Yet, it is important to bear in mind that many people in Africa are already aware that their "traditions" have come under intense scrutiny. The debate over FGC has throughout much of Africa become impossible to escape and is not likely to fade away, but only continue to increase in intensity. Knowing that African "traditions" have fallen under attack, many Africans have a growing awareness that the practice of female "circumcision" will—for better or worse—be talked about worldwide.

Just as the debate over female "circumcision" will not simply go away, the increasing pressures being put on African governments, communities, and individuals to eliminate what has come to be perceived as a "harmful tradition" are not likely to be reversed. In many African countries local initiatives opposing the practice are well established and often inextricably linked with international projects. Such intervention efforts have not, however, been received in unequivocally positive ways. A number of researchers report instances of "backlash" reactions on the ground (e.g., Hernlund, 2000, p. 243; Johnson, 2000, p. 231; Leigh, 1997), as communities respond to anti-FGM campaigns with an increase in genital cutting. In the literature, as well, opinions diverge. Fuambai Ahmadu, Sierra Leonean/American anthropologist and herself an initiate into Bundu secret society, argues that although protecting the rights of a "minority of women who oppose the practice is a legitimate and noble cause … mounting an international campaign to coerce 80 million adult African women to give up their tradition is unjustified" (Abusharaf, 1995, p. 45). Others do not object to such campaigns per se, but stress that any action taken to prevent female "circumcision" must originate with the women and communities among whom it is practiced and be grounded in an understanding of the cultural and political contexts in which the practice is situated.

On the levels of both action and discourse, practices of FGC are currently undergoing rapid and dramatic change. This change, we argue, is irreversible. As one of us was once told in an interview about attitudes to the international campaigns against "FGM": "It is like when you mix water and sand and you get mud. You can never separate them into sand and water again." On the level of practice there remains a diminishing amount of choice for communities and individuals whose "traditions" have become irrevocably situated in the public arena. On the level of discourse, silence on the topic seems no longer to be an option and the choice that remains is between informed and non-informed discussion.

## **THE TRIVIALIZATION OF CULTURE**<sup>2</sup>

Discussions of the cultural context of FGC, in both the academic and activist literatures, as well as in popular media, often describe the practice as an "entrenched" and "deeply-rooted" tradition, practiced for thousands of years in parts of Africa. Much of the existing literature conveniently overlooks the dynamic cultural, political, and historical contexts of the various types of genital cutting performed by different actors in widely varying contexts. As Leonard (2000, p. 161) notes, these narratives contribute to the idea that FGC is "a relatively fixed and static practice firmly anchored in social institutions and relationships both difficult and slow to change." Empirical evidence, however, does not support assumptions about the immutability of FGC practices. Scattered reports indicate that in some areas in which female "circumcision" was formerly universally practiced, it is gradually falling from favor (e.g., Caldwell, Orubuloye, & Caldwell, 1997). In other groups, where FGC has not historically been practiced or had been abandoned, it is being introduced or revived. Some of these cases involve the constantly evolving borrowing and influence from one ethnic group to another (see, e.g., Hernlund, 2000; Leonard, 2000; Lightfoot-Klein, 1989), others the resurgence of previously discarded traditions (see, for e.g., Nypan's, 1991, article discussing "neo-traditionalism" among the Meru of Tanzania).

In societies that do, indeed, have a long-standing tradition of practicing FGC, descriptions of a "deepseated" practice imply that the meanings and nature of the custom are locked in place by convention. Some scholars, however, maintain that the conditions that led to the initial adoption of female "circumcision" are not static, nor are they required for understanding the perpetuation of the practice. For instance, Janice Boddy has argued that knowledge of this "custom's remote historical origins [does not]…contribute to our understanding of its present significance" (Boddy, 1982, p. 685). Gruenbaum (2000, pp. 50–51) adds that "views of outsiders fail to recognize the dynamic nature of cultural patterns, imagining 'the other' perhaps as frozen in time … and as 'prisoners of ritual' "(Lightfoot-Klein, 1989). An increasing body of work by anthropologists highlights the fact that female "circumcision" is a response to complex social concerns; yet social conditions are dynamic, and so is the nature and meaning of the practice.<sup>3</sup> "Culture is always dynamic," argues Gruenbaum, "and that is even more the case when the issue at hand is the subject of international controversy, health education, and political discord" (Gruenbaum, 2000, p. 51).

Nonetheless, in the voluminous literature on female "circumcision" there can be found a recurring narrative surrounding meaning, often appearing as a generalized list of "reasons for the practice." Gosselin argues that the repeated recitation of this list contributes to the "trivialization of culture in the political literature" (Gosselin, 2000, p. 48). While we do not wish to recreate here such a "laundry list" of rationales, we hope instead to highlight a wide range of local discourses and assumptions surrounding practices of FGC that, as James notes, "must be revisited and revised within the specifics of cultural context" (James, 1998, p. 1043). With Ahmadu, we caution that although each of the "explanations" for practicing FGC are discussed distinctly, they are in fact "interconnected and mutually reinforcing and, taken together, form overwhelming unconscious and conscious motivations" for its continuation (Ahmadu, 2000, p. 295).

A wide continuum of approaches to the question of "meaning" can be found. At one extreme, Mackie (2000) argues that all FGC ultimately stems from a concern with pre-marital female chastity, paternity assurance, and marriageability, although this association may no longer be explicit in all practicing societies. On the other extreme, Leonard found among the Sara of Chad—who have only recently adopted the practice, much in the manner of a "fad"—that their "narratives force us to ask not what it means, but, rather, whether it means anything at all." After repeated probing about the "meaning" of female "circumcision" among Sara today, Leonard was finally told by one impatient informant: "You are looking too hard—there is nothing!" (Leonard, 2000, p. 190).

Between these two poles, of a singular universal meta-theory and the dearth of any meaning at all beyond the desire to be fashionable, lies a multiplicity of reported local understandings of female "circumcision." The Special Report issued by the UN Sub-Commission for the Prevention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities (henceforth Special Report) found that, in a compilation of studies of attitudes to FGC, over 54% of respondents stated that "tradition" was their primary reason for performing female "circumcision" (United Nations, 1986, p. 13) and Carr, analyzing Demographic and Health Survey data on FGC, concurs that the vast majority of women state that they favor the continuation of the practice because it is "custom" and "tradition" (Carr, 1997). Hernlund, as well, found in the Gambia that respect for what was "found from the grandmothers" was the most strongly and commonly stated reason for performing FGC (Hernlund, 2000, p. 237; see also Skramstad, 1990). Mackie discusses this sort of response which "perplexes outsiders who suspect that the appeal to custom is merely obscurantist" but goes on to argue that "the respondents are absolutely correct: FGC is a certain type of convention, involving reciprocal expectations about an interdependent choice, and that is exactly why it continues" (Mackie, 2000, p. 265). Leonard's comparison of two communities at different stages of adoption of FGC, demonstrates how quickly such significance can accrue (p. 190).

A number of observers have commented on the often powerful nature of peer convention in perpetuating FGC, as girls and young women pressure each other to "join" in the practice (see, e.g., Ahmadu, 2000; Hernlund, 2000; Leonard, 2000). A particularly powerful account provided by Thomas (2000), describes the "*Ngaitana*" movement during which Kenyan girls defied a 1956 ban on excision, and took it upon themselves to circumcize themselves and each other. Such conventions, Mackie argues further, often come to be seen, as well, as ethnic markers, but this is, he argues, "a consequence, not a cause, of the practice" (Mackie, 2000, p. 266). As pointed out by Hernlund, however, these often become over time mutually reinforcing (Hernlund, 2000, p. 239). This is demonstrated, for example, in Johnson's discussion of Guinea-Bissau where the practice of female "circumcision" has come to be perceived as intrinsically linked to the construction of Mandingka identity (Johnson, 2000).

#### **The Trivialization of Culture 255**

According to Mackie (1996, 2000) the main force perpetuating the custom is the link between genital cutting and marriageability (but for a critique of the marriageability perspective, see Obiora, 1997, p. 318). He argues that even if the originating conditions change, "as soon as women believed that men would not marry an unmutilated woman, and men believed that an unmutilated woman would not be a faithful partner in marriage, the convention was locked in place" (Mackie, 2000, p. 264). While many scholars describe an association between FGC and marriageability, others emphasize that the significance of "circumcision" extends well beyond conferring marriageability, but also to the legitimization of reproduction, as is the case in the Kono women's societies described by Ahmadu (2000); see also Shell-Duncan, Obiero, & Muruli, 2000).

Boddy, as well, has noted that in the Sudan the procedure not only renders a girl marriagable, but that undergoing it is "a necessary condition of becoming a woman, of being enabled to use her one great gift, fertility" (Boddy, 1982, p. 683). Boddy argues that infibulation is used to symbolically and physically enclose the womb, thus emphasizing the protection and sacredness of a woman's reproductive center. Moreover, Boddy articulates what many anthropologists have identified as the distinction between sexuality as procreation versus recreation. Infibulation, Boddy argues, is to many Sudanese women an "assertive, highly meaningful act that emphasizes female fertility by de-emphasizing female sexuality" (Boddy, 1982, p. 682).

A complete polarization of the sexes permeates Sudanese society, Boddy has argued, and genital cutting reinforces this polarity by making women *less* like men physically, sexually, and socially. Women are not so much preventing their own sexual pleasure, she argues, as "enhancing their femininity" (Boddy, 1982, p. 687). Boddy's analysis mirrors the work of anthropologists Nancy Lutkehaus and Marilyn Strathern who, although they do not write specifically about female "circumcision," have done extensive research on female initiations in New Guinea. Lutkehaus, with Strathern, argues that these rites are concerned with promoting the transition of boys and girls from an androgynous state of childhood to the genderized, and hence sexually differentiated, state of masculine or feminine adulthood (Lutkehaus & Roscoe, 1995, p. 196). Support for this theory has been drawn, as well, from widespread ethnographic reports of male and female "circumcision" (see, for example, Griaule, 1965; Hansen, 1972–73; Meinardus, 1967).<sup>4</sup> Similarly, Ahmadu maintains that Kono women of Sierra Leone "equate the female clitoris with the male penis, and hence, promiscuity, sexual aggressiveness, instability … Removing the clitoris is ultimately what symbolizes the separation of women from men physically, psychologically, and spiritually" (Ahmadu, 1995, p. 44). Moreover, she argues that excision is "the negation of the masculine in feminine creative potential" (Ahmadu, 2000, p. 285).

The broad range of responses to the alteration of female genitalia reflects the widely differing views of meanings associated with women's bodies and women's sexuality. While the procedure of genital cutting is seen by many as essential to the creation of femininity and full adult status, others view it as the obliteration of these very principles. For many Western feminists, the clitoris has become a powerful symbol of women's emancipation. In the wake of Shere Hite's influential *Hite Report* (Hite, 1976) and the fight for the right to clitoral orgasms and sexual satisfaction, "female genital mutilation" became for many Western feminists the symbol *par excellence* of patriarchal control over women and their sexuality (Gosselin, 2000; Obiora, 1997). Through rhetoric such as Mary Daly's essay "African Genital Mutilation: The Unspeakable Atrocities" (Daly, 1978), FGC was cast as a violent cruel act of patriarchal oppression. It is an undeniable fact, however, that in many cultures the practice is carried out by and remains firmly within the control of other women, and is often integral to and evidence of the power relations amongst women. Fuambai Ahmadu (2000), who herself underwent excision in the context of her initiation into a secret women's society in Sierra Leone, argues that female initiation, including genital cutting, is an event which can be highly empowering to women and is in many contexts wholly unrelated to Western feminist ideas about patriarchal oppression (see also Hernlund, 2000, who reports a similar assertion regarding initiation in the Gambia). Ahmadu argues against the standard anthropological view of "ritual officials as colluding with patriarchy in order to maintain the subordination of women in society," and asserts that "what Bundu teaches first and foremost is the subordination of young girls and women to female elders" (Ahmadu, 2000, p. 299). Similarly, Thomas (2000) points to the importance of initiation events in bolstering the power of elder women over those from younger age groups (see also Lutkehaus & Roscoe, 1995).

A Western feminist approach has been sharply criticized by some African feminists who argue that by letting sexuality become "assumed as an a priori issue around which 'all women' should organize … the specificity of women's experience is conveniently overlooked" (Abusharaf, 1996, pp. 5–6). According to Abusharaf, "some Western feminist representational discourses on female 'circumcision' as a signifier for sexual oppression have come under considerable critical reflection for their ethnocentrism and reductionism" (Abusharaf, 2000, p. 160). She cautions that "by overemphasizing the effects of female 'circumcision' on sexual pleasure" much of the Western anti-circumcision literature has distanced itself from the socioeconomic contexts of broader violations of women's rights (p. 161).

Other anthropologists have pointed, as well, to the way in which ideas on female sexual pleasure are culturally constructed and historically situated. Hansen, in 1972, wrote: "The most accepted view today is that sensitivity is concentrated in the clitoris. This contrasts with the older view, maintained by Freud and his pupils, that the erogenous zone is confined to the clitoris in the child and the young girl, while sensitivity in the adult woman is and should be vaginal" (Hansen, 1972–73, p. 22). Leonard (2000) offers an extensive analysis of such psychoanalytic theories regarding the effect of FGC on female sexuality. Interestingly, a similar view on the immaturity of clitoral and maturity of vaginal orgasms appears, as well, in Ahmadu's (2000) discussion of Kono women's thoughts on excision.

Several scholars (e.g., Abusharaf, 2000; Ahmadu, 2000; Gosselin, 2000; Leonard, 2000; Obermeyer, 1999; Skramstad, 1990) discuss the Western preoccupation with the clitoris as the primary site of female sexual pleasure, which has become incorporated into much of the "anti-FGM" literature. Inevitably, Western feminist discourses on sexuality are becoming incorporated into local anti-FGC campaigns throughout Africa, thus giving rise to new debates. Researchers often find, however, that perceptions vary widely, with supporters and opponents of the practice claiming alternately that FGC has no effect on sexuality; that it decreases or even annihilates a woman's ability to feel pleasure; or that it in fact causes more uncontrolled sexual behavior (see, e.g., Johnson, 2000). One anthropologist points, as well, to the contents of sexual education often accompanying "circumcision," arguing that "if any linkage exists between control of female sexuality and female 'circumcision' this linkage seems to be stronger within the transmission of knowledge about proper gendered behavior rather than through the removal of the clitoris" (Skramstad, 1990, p. 18).

Just as female genital cutting cannot, then, be linked in any simplistic, causal way to female sexual desire or pleasure, a similar ambivalence characterizes its perceived association with religious practice. Female "circumcision" is in particular often seen as somehow associated with Islam. This is perhaps not surprising, considering Islam's compulsory circumcision of males and the frequency with which FGC is practiced among Muslim groups. It is important to note, however, that the Qur'a–n does not require female "circumcision," that not all Islamic groups practice FGC, and that many non-Islamic ones do (see also Abusharaf, 2000; Assaad, 1980). Attention, however, has been drawn to the wide range of variation in the extent to which the practice of FGC corresponds with adherence to Islam. At one end of the continuum, Shell-Duncan et al. (2000), Leonard (2000), and Thomas (2000), among others, describe the practice of FGC among non-Islamic groups. At the other extreme, Johnson (2000) points to the near complete correspondence between female "circumcision" and Islamic identity formation among Mandingkas in Guinea-Bissau, where the practice has come to be seen as a prerequisite for the ritual purity necessary to pray as well as a marker of belonging to an Islamic community.

In between these two extremes lie many specific contexts in which Islam is to various degrees invoked as associated with the continuance of the practice. It has been suggested that "religion" is often offered, "almost reflexively," as a reason for performing FGC (see Gordon, 1991, p. 9). In response, Boddy argues that "the question of what is meant by 'religion' remains obscure" and she points out that for many women "religion is nothing less than their entire way of life; religion and tradition are not merely intertwined, they are one and the same" (Boddy, 1991, p. 15; see also Coleman, 1998). A great deal of effort by scholars and activists has been concentrated on demonstrating the lack of scriptural support for enforcing FGC (see in particular Abu-Sahlieh, 1994). It must, however, be emphasized that the "absence of clear textual dictates … does not automatically undermine the religious motivation" (Lewis, 1995, p. 22) of those who practice FGC.

Clearly, meanings and importance associated with FGC vary not only across time and cultural contexts, but also within societies whose members have diverse motives for preserving the practice. Writing on rural Sudan, Gruenbaum (2000, p. 49) "found the interests in preservation or change in the practices vary starkly depending on gender, age, education, status, ethnicity and religious background."

## **STRATEGIES TOWARD THE ELIMINATION OF FGC: DOES MEANING MATTER?**

Identifying the most effective and appropriate strategies for eliminating FGC is among the most bitterly contested issues surrounding this practice, and the choice of approach determines the importance of understanding the cultural construction of "meaning." Two established paradigms for combating FGC are the *moral* model and the *disease* model. In the moral model, FGC is condemned and often criminalized, while motives and meanings of the practice are deemed irrelevant. This approach can be traced back to the early 20th century when, as discussed by Thomas (Thomas, 1996, 2000), missionaries and early colonial administrators identified FGC as a moral shortfall, framing the practice as uncivilized, barbaric, and unacceptable in the eyes of Christianity. Such campaigns have reappeared several times throughout the last century, each time with a slightly different focus. In a series of conferences honoring the United Nations Decade for Women (1975–1985), the practice increasingly became attacked as a violation of women's rights. A decade later, at the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, "FGM" was classified as a form of violence against women along with battering, rape, sexual abuse, and prostitution.

Adopting a universalist stance, some activists argued that "FGM" should be subject to condemnation, and, in certain instances, punishment through legislative force. Legal scholar Bashir, for example, argues that criminalization will assist in deterring the practice by "fostering an environment … that is clearly intolerant to FGM" (Bashir, 1996, p. 13). This view is receiving increasing support from Western nations, whose influence through economic means is perceived to threaten countries that do not outlaw or formally denounce all forms of genital cutting. There have been rumors, both on the ground in Africa and in U.S. media, of U.S. legislation tying international aid conditionally to a nation's steps to criminalize and combat "FGM," much as with conditions tied to, for example, drug trafficking, terrorism, or forced abortions.5 Although a 1996 Treasury Department Bill requires the United States to oppose loans to countries that have not "taken steps to implement educational programs designed to prevent the practice" of FGM, this bill has, as far as we know, never resulted in denial of funds to any African country. Nonetheless, it clearly shows evidence of the U.S. government's opposition to FGC in an economic context and clarifies the rationale of countries that pass legislation to "please American sensitivities" (*The Economist*, February 13, 1999).

Formal legislation has proven, however, to be a poor instrument of cultural change. The few attempts to outlaw clitoridectomy or infibulation in Africa have been largely unenforceable (Thomas, 1996). For example, the 1946 law criminalizing infibulation in the Sudan caused public uprisings, and following its enactment the prevalence has actually increased (Gruenbaum, 1982; van der Kwaak, 1992). Moreover, such efforts have triggered unexpected incidents of backlash, both in anticipation of and in response to legislation. When the British in 1945 made it known that infibulation would soon become illegal in the Sudan, "parents rushed to have their daughters infibulated, resulting in what one British observer reported as an unprecedented orgy of bloodletting" (Boddy, 1991, p. 16). Similarly, communities in varied locales that have been targeted by anti-circumcision campaigns following film and media exposure have feared the enactment of legislation, and have responded by performing excisions on all uncut females, including newborn infants (Eliah, 1996; Hernlund, 2000; Johnson, 2000). Mackie (2000) emphasizes the limited utility of legislative action: "You simply can't outlaw cultural practices … It is not possible to criminalize the entirety of a population, or the entirety of a discrete and insular minority of the population, without methods of mass terror. People have to decide to stop on their own" (*The Economist*, February 13, 1999).

Problematic, as well, is defining the legal stance for opposing and criminalizing FGC. The practice of female "circumcision" is not universally recognized as a violation of basic human rights (see, e.g., Brennan, 1989). Hence, debate has centered on the challenge of balancing cultural values and autonomy against international standards of human rights. As outlined in an article by U.S. legal scholar Kay Boulware-Miller (1985), the human rights approach can be broken down into claims based on: (1) the rights of the child; (2) the rights of women; (3) freedom from torture; and (4) the right to health and bodily integrity. As Boulware-Miller and

others point out, however, each of these approaches carries with it potential problems.

A number of scholars and activists have come to the conclusion that the most reasonable angle from which to argue for the elimination of genital cutting is that of health. Boulware-Miller concludes that the right-tohealth argument "integrates the issues of physical, mental, and sexual health as well as child development," and that it may be seen as less exclusive and more politically acceptable than any other approach (Boulware-Miller, 1985, p. 177). This is the same conclusion that was reached by the UN Working Group on Traditional Practices in 1986 (United Nations, 1986). The UN Working Group did not, in the end, conclude that the practice of FGC constitutes a human rights violation. Instead, the sub-commission chose to frame the issue in terms of weighing the health consequences of the practice against its "cultural functions" (United Nations, 1986). This conclusion is, in essence, the replacement of a universalist stance with a cultural relativist position, and consequently, meaning does indeed matter.

Arguing that FGC has become "obsolete" due to changing economic and social conditions, the Special Report concluded that the health risks can be deemed unwarranted (United Nations, 1986). Two issues are problematic with this conclusion. First, numerous cases exist in which the practice is not "obsolete" for the persons involved. Second, as Obermeyer (1999) and Shell-Duncan (2001) have pointed out, reliable information on the health risks of different types of FGC is limited, making it difficult to weigh health consequences against "cultural function." The a priori assumption of cultural irrelevance of FGC means, however, that no true weighing need ever occur. Nonetheless, trade-offs involved in choosing to cut—or not cut—are central in individual and family decision-making processes.

It has long been assumed that as people are made aware of the potential health risks they will abandon the practice. Anthropologist Carolyn Sargent, however, points out that health hazards are often recognized by women themselves and that basing a public health program on informing women about the risks of FGC would not alter their perceptions of its relevance (Sargent, 1989, 1995; see also Obiora, 1997, p. 359). Toubia asserts that the cultural pressures on a girl to be circumcized in order to obtain the status of an adult—and thus marriageable—woman leads to a situation in which the "loss of a woman's genitalia is not too high a price to pay" (Toubia, 1988, p. 102). Shell-Duncan et al., writing on the Rendille of Kenya, concur: "Awareness of the fact that female circumcision is associated with adverse health consequences is widespread, yet the Rendille view the risks as worth taking in light of the implications for marriageability" (Shell-Duncan et al., 2000, p. 126).

Nonetheless, a medical argument has come to form the cornerstone of opposition in many anti-circumcision campaigns, framing the issue through a disease model. In the 1970s and early 1980s, when anti-circumcision activists identified female genital cutting as "female genital mutilation," the practice was described as an "epidemic," and was singled out to be "treated as a public health problem and an impediment to development that can be prevented" (Hosken, 1978, p. 155). Consequently, in a disease model, the practice was targeted to be "eradicated much like any disease" (Hosken, 1978, p. 155).

In the early 1980s, anthropologist Ellen Gruenbaum warned that the adoption of the medical view "implies not only that the practice is 'pathological,' but that its solution might lie in a sort of campaign-style attack on the problem. Social customs, however, are not 'pathologies'; and such a view is a poor starting point for change, since it is not one necessarily shared by the people whose customs are under attack" (Gruenbaum, 1982, p. 6). Nahid Toubia has argued, as well, that female "circumcision" is not a medical problem, but "essentially a social phenomenon reflecting the position of women" (Toubia, 1988, p. 102). Toubia adds that "to argue against this practice on the grounds of physical damage and to attempt to eradicate it through health awareness and education are futile" (Toubia, 1988, p. 102).

Simple education campaigns designed to improve knowledge of the potential adverse health outcomes of genital cutting can, in fact, be problematic. When communities practicing clitoridectomy and excision become targeted by anti-FGM campaigns, medical "facts" derived from reports on infibulation are often not supported by the experience of community members, and the incongruity between propaganda and lived experience has the potential to undermine the credibility of campaigns. Shell-Duncan's (2001) review of the literature on the medical aspects of FGC points to the limited quality of empirical evidence of serious harm from non-infibulating types of genital cutting, and concurs with Obermeyer's (1999, p. 92) conclusion that "evidence on complications is very scarce." We are concerned, however, that a recent trend in writing goes to unwarranted extremes in trivializing the potential health effects of FGC, interpreting the lack of data as evidence of no harm (Shweder, 2000).

Despite these challenges, a number of innovative educational campaigns have been met with some degree of success. Mackie (2000) stresses the importance of educational campaigns being non-directive, and describes the process by which Senegalese women involved in the Tostan project themselves came to identify FGC as an issue needing to be addressed. He describes the process by which villagers first look at what they and others are doing now and understand why they are doing it, next receive new, relevant, and often technical information, before finally working as a group to discuss the information and decide whether it is useful. "People are *never told what to do*," he emphasizes (Mackie, 2000, p. 259).

Although many scholars do argue that the right-tohealth approach is the most tenable human rights approach for opposing FGC, practical application is faced by contradictions as well. One of the most contested areas of the debate over efforts to eliminate FGC concerns its potential medicalization (Shell-Duncan, 2001). Opposition to all forms of medicalization has been central in efforts to eliminate FGC, a stance supported by the World Health Organization as well as numerous medical associations, and upheld by policy or legislation in many countries. This staunch opposition to medical intervention rests on one central assumption: that medicalization will counteract efforts to eliminate FGC. Shell-Duncan (2001) has argued that this assumption is not based on empirical evidence, and deserves critical examination. This need is underscored by the fact that, regardless of legislation or international opinion, FGC is, and will likely continue to become, increasingly medicalized throughout Africa. Shell-Duncan (2001) has suggested that an alternative to moral and disease models is a *harm reduction* model. "Harm reduction" is a new paradigm in the field of public health that seeks to minimize the health hazards of risky behaviors, such as intravenous drug use, high-risk sexual behaviors, and smoking, by encouraging safer alternatives including, but not limited to, abstinence (Marlatt, 1998). Harm reduction considers a wide range of alternatives and promotes the alternative that is culturally acceptable and bears the least amount of harm. In the case of FGC, abstinence is clearly the most harm-reductive solution. However, when abstinence is not attainable, a harm reduction approach would promote reduced cutting and/or other forms of medicalization as an interim strategy to reduce adverse health outcomes (Shell-Duncan, 2001).

Toubia and Izett (1998, p. 33) argue against medicalization since the cause of harm is "human behavior, which can be changed." What is not emphasized in this statement is the inherent difficulty in changing this human behavior. FGC is often connected with complex and dynamic meanings, and it is well recognized that change efforts must take into account the broader social meanings, and may take decades to take hold (see, e.g., Boddy, 1982; Gruenbaum, 1982).

Mackie (1996, 2000) has argued that marriageability is the key factor promoting the practice of FGC in intramarrying groups, and that the abandonment of the practice rests upon altering this mutually supported convention. He suggests that if a critical mass of people publicly pledges to abandon FGC, then the convention shifts, and uncircumcized girls are not excluded from future marriageability and group support. Consequently, Mackie argues that when FGC ends, it will do so quickly. Recent events in Senegal support this theory. Through a non-directive education program designed and implemented by Tostan, Senegalese women identified FGC as an area of improvement, and resulted in 1998 in 31 villages publicly pledging to end the practice of female "circumcision" (Mackie, 2000). While this event is one of the most promising initiatives for eliminating FGC, it does not indicate that rapid abandonment of FGC is imminent across Africa. The amount of time required to "set the stage" for convention shifts will likely vary considerably in different settings. Consequently, we must consider a crucial question: What is the fate of women in societies not yet willing to abandon the practice of FGC?

Shell-Duncan (2001) has argued that the medicalization of FGC, if guided by harm reduction principles, may have the potential to reduce harm and serve as an engine of change in societies not yet willing to abandon the practice. However, several important questions about harm reduction and the medicalization of FGC remain. First, are communities in which FGC is practiced less likely to abandon the practice if harm reduction policies are implemented? Clearly, the elimination of any form of cutting is the most harm reductive of all. Would the existence and support of medicalization slow the process of changing attitudes of supporters of FGC, or might it act as an engine of change? Second, would implementing medicalization as harm reduction encourage others to adopt the practice? And finally, would pursuing a policy of harm reduction overburden health care systems and spread resources for research, education, and intervention too thinly? The answers to these questions are, however, empirical, and studies examining these issues are within the scope and capacity of social scientific and public health research. Defining and promoting a range of culturally acceptable means of protecting women's health may, in the end, be a sound and compassionate approach, underscoring, once again, that meaning does, in fact, matter.

## **IN LIEU OF CONCLUSIONS**

The practices of FGC appear to—more than just about any other issue—capture the popular imagination, trigger emotional responses, and reduce the complex to the unnegotiably absolute. Regardless of one's stance on the appropriate level of the West's involvement with the practice of FGC, encounters are becoming increasingly common in which a completely hands-off approach is untenable. On a legal and political level, the recent granting of political asylum to a Togolese woman on the basis of her fear of returning to Africa and being forced to undergo FGC has established a legal precedent which at least in theory—could apply to millions of women (but see Bashir, 1996, for an argument against the fear of opening "the floodgates" of immigration). In the context of Western biomedicine, the recent influx of immigrants from communities that practice female "circumcision" has forced health practitioners, when confronted with the practice, to come face to face with issues of autonomy and multiculturalism (Schwartz, 1994, p. 431). Ethics committees are facing newly articulated "rights and wrongs" as they seek to adopt policies toward a procedure which has alternatively been described as a barbaric practice, an extreme act of misogyny, and an "affirmation of the value of women in traditional society" (Schwartz, 1994, p. 431).

While many scholars correctly argue that the issue of determining the future of FGC is best resolved by members of the communities in which the practice is found, the undeniable reality is that this has already—irreversibly become a global political issue. Western governments have reclassified female "circumcision" as a "human rights violation," and the implied threat of withholding economic assistance to countries where the practice persists must be perceived as coercion for countries already reeling from structural adjustment programs. Morsy has offered a scathing critique of such global "rescue missions" and warns that "Western compassion can be nothing less than the kiss of death" (Morsy, 1991, p. 22).

Clearly, it is an inescapable reality that the choice whether to continue or to eliminate the practice of FGC is no longer solely in the hands of those who currently engage in this practice. Consequently, any resolution of debated issues and the development of culturally sensitive approaches to eliminating FGC require that we do not focus on this practice in isolation, but rather that we consider the lives and opinions of the people affected by it, and the local and global domain of discourse and domination in which they are embedded.

## **NOTES**

- 1. A longer version of this paper previously appeared as the introduction to *Female "Circumcision" in Africa: Culture, controversy, and change*, edited by Shell-Duncan and Hernlund (2000).
- 2. The expression "the trivialization of culture" was coined by Canadian anthropologist Claudie Gosselin (Gosselin, 2000).
- 3. For instance, Shell-Duncan et al. (2000) report that among Rendille pastoralists in northern Kenya, excision was, in the past, performed at the time of marriage, legitimizing reproduction. Within the past 20 years, it has become increasingly common for girls to attend school, and a rising number of girls have eloped without being excised. A solution to avoid illegitimate childbearing has been to uncouple excision and marriage, circumcizing girls instead before attending secondary school.
- 4. Accounts in the literature refer to ancient Egyptian beliefs about the bisexuality of the gods, which possibly merged with pre-existing African ideas that identify the feminine "soul" of a man as located in the foreskin and the male "soul" of a woman in the clitoris (Meinardus, 1967). Although such a discussion is beyond the scope of this entry, interesting parallels can also be drawn to the welldocumented Western discomfort with gender ambiguity that has resulted in routinely performing surgery on "hermaphroditic" infants.
- 5. For example, *The Economist* (February 13, 1999, p. 45) reported that the U.S. State Department's Human Rights report "lists those African governments that have banned female circumcision, and is used as a guide to allocating American aid."

## **REFERENCES**

- Abu-Sahlieh, S. A. A. (1994). To mutilate in the name of Allah and Jehova: Legitimization of male and female circumcision. *Medicine and Law, 13*,575–622.
- Abusharaf, R. M. (1995). Rethinking feminist discourses on female genital mutilation: The case of Sudan. *Canadian Woman Studies, 15*(2–3),52–54.
- Abusharaf, R. M. (1996). *Revisiting feminist discourses on female circumcision: Responses from Sudanese indigenous feminists*.