### **REFERENCES**

- Barkey, N. L., Campbell, B. C., & Leslie, P. W. (2001). A comparison of health complaints of settled and nomadic Turkana men. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 15*(3), 391–408.
- Bonfiglioli, A. M. (1988) *DuDal: Histoire de famille et historique de troupeaux chez un groupe WoDaaBe du Niger*. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press / Edition de la Maison des Sciences de l'Homme.
- Burnham, P. (1996). *The politics of cultural difference in Northern Cameroon*. Edinburgh, U.K.: Edinburgh University Press.
- David. N., & Voas, D. (1981). Societal causes of infertility and population decline among the settled Fulani of north Cameroon. *Man, 16*(4), 644–664.
- De Bruijn, M., & Van Dijk, H. (1995). *Arid ways*. Amsterdam: Thesis.
- Dupire, M. (1963). The position of women in a pastoral society. In D. Paulme (Ed.), *Women of tropical Africa* (pp. 47–92). London: Routledge.

Dupire, M. (1970). *Organisation sociale des Peul*. Paris: Edition Plon.

- Foggin, P. M., Farhas, O., Shiirev-Adiya, S., & Chinabat, B. (1997). Health status and risk factors of seminomadic pastoralists in Mongolia: A geographical approach. *Social Science & Medicine, 44*(11), 1623–1647.
- Hampshire, K. R. (1998). Fulani mobility: Causes, constraints and consequences of population movements in northern Burkina Faso. Unpublished PhD thesis, University College London.
- Hampshire, K. R. (2001). The impact of male migration of fertility decisions and outcomes in northern burkina faso. In S. Tremayne (Ed.). *Managing Reproductive Life*, pp: 107–126. Oxford: Berghahn.
- Hampshire, K. R. (2002a). Networks of nomads: negotiating access to health services among pastoralist women in chad. *Social Sciences and Medicine*, 54, 1025–37.
- Hampshire, K. R. (2002b). Fulani on the move: Seasonal economic migration in the Sahel as a social process. *Journal of Development Studies, 38*(5), 15–36.
- Hampshire, K. R. (2003, in press). What is "safe motherhood"? Insiders' and outsiders' preceptions of maternal health among chadian pastoralists. *Genus*.
- Hampshire, K. R., & Randall, S. C. (1995). The single round demographic survey (Technical Report No.1, Land use, household viability and migration in the Sahel). Unpublished manuscript.
- Hampshire, K. R., & Randall, S. C. (1999). Seasonal labour migration strategies in the Sahel: Coping with poverty or optimising

security? *International Journal of Population Geography, 5*, 367–385.

- Hampshire, K. R., & Randall, S. C. (2000). Pastoralists, agropastoralists and migrants: Interactions between fertility and mobility in northern Burkina Faso. *Population Studies, 54*(3), 247–262.
- Hopen, C. (1958). *The pastoral FulBe family in Gwandu*. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- Loutan, L. (1989). Les problèmes de santé dans les zones nomades. In A. Rougement & J. Brunet-Jailly (Eds.), *La santé en pays tropicaux* (pp. 219–253). Paris: Doin Editeurs.
- Maliki, A. B., White, C., Loutan, L., & Swift, J. J. (1984) The Wodaabe. In J.J. Swift (Ed.), *Pastoral development in central Niger: Report of the Niger Range and Livestock Project*. Niamey, Niger: Ministère du Développement Rural & USAID.
- Meir, A. (1987). Nomads, development and health: Delivering public health services to the Bedouin in Israel. *Geografiska Annaler, 69B*(2), 115–126.
- Raynault, C. (1997). *Societies and nature in the Sahel*. London: Routledge.
- Riesman, P. (1977). *Freedom in Fulani social life*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Riesman, P. (1992). *First find your child a good mother: The construction of self in two African communities*. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Sandford, S. (1978). Welfare and wanderers: The organisation of social services for pastoralists. *ODI Review, 1*, 70–87.
- Shell-Duncan, B., & Obiero, W. O. (2000). Child nutrition in the transition from nomadic pastoralism to settled lifestyles: Individual, household, and community-level factors. *American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 113*(2), 183–200.
- Stenning, D. (1958). Household viability among the pastoral Fulani. In J. Goody (Ed.), *The development cycle of domestic groups*. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Stenning, D. (1959). *Savannah nomads*. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
- Swift, J., Toulmin, C., & Chatting, S. (1990). *Providing services for nomadic people*. (UNICEF Staff Working Papers No. 8.) New York: UNICEF.
- Zinsstag, J., Bidjeh, K., & Idriss, A. (1998). L'interface entre la santé humaine et animale chez les nomades en Afrique: vers "une médicine unie." In M. Wiese & K. Wyss (Eds.), *Les populations nomades et la santé humaine et animale en Afrique et notamment au Tchad*. APT-Reports, *9*, 53–64.

# **Garhwali**

#### **Satish Kedia**

### **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

The current name of Garhwal is of relatively recent origin. Etymologically, *Garhwal* means a region formed by the integration of *Garhs* (fortresses) and their territories, an act that took place in the 16th century when King Ajaypal consolidated 52 small princely states and their forts to expand his empire over the whole Garhwal

#### **The Context of Health 665**

(Rawat, 1989, p. 20). The original inhabitants of the Garhwal hills are known as *Garhwali*. They are also called *Pahari*, meaning "people of the mountain," by the neighboring communities in the plains.

### **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Garhwali live in the North Indian Himalayas in the western part of the State of Uttaranchal. Uttaranchal comprises 13 districts and was part of the State of Uttar Pradesh until 2000, when it was given autonomous status. The Garhwal region is in the middle zone of the Himalayas, which have a varying width of about 60–90 km and an elevation ranging between 1,000 m and 3,000 m above sea level. The region is full of peaks and valleys and is marked by rivers flowing through the deep gorges.

Most Garhwali people speak Garhwali and some Hindi, both in the Indo-Aryan linguistic group. Prior to the 19th century, Persian with Arabic script was used for administrative purposes, but Garhwali with Devanagari script remained the language of the commoners. Many inscriptions and state orders were written in Garhwali. In some regions of Garhwal, such as Rawain, Jaunpur, and Juansar-Bawar, dialects of Garhwali called Rawalti, Jaunpuri, and Jaunsari respectively are spoken.

It would not be prudent to generalize this commentary to all regions of Garhwal. This narrative is primarily based on the author's fieldwork among a peasant community near Tehri in the western part of Uttaranchal during the mid-1990s. However, a concerted effort was made to incorporate pertinent information from the writings of other researchers who have worked in various parts of Garhwal.

### **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Garhwali are predominantly peasants and have approximately 8.5 million people living in Uttaranchal. The initial archeological evidence in Garhwal includes inscriptions and artifacts from the time of King Ashoka (269–232 BC) and suggests that the region was inhabited long before this period. The mythical Hindu texts, *Puranas, Mahabharata*, and *Ramayana*, contain numerous indications that a society existed in this region. At that time, the people were variously known as *Kedarkhand, Uttarkuru, Kurujangal*, and *Uttarakhand*. However, it remains a matter of debate among historians as to who were the original inhabitants.

The economy in the Garhwal region is primarily agrarian with approximately 85% of the adult population practicing intensive agriculture. The other economic activities include horticulture, animal husbandry, forestry, and some cottage industries. The crop cycle and harvest determine the work and festivities in these villages. In addition, a sizable portion of adult males have either permanently or temporarily migrated to nearby cities to pursue wage-labor in factories, hotels, restaurants, and offices or to serve in the military.

While there are four major caste groups in India, Garhwali society is stratified in a tripartite caste system comprising priests (*brahmin*), warriors and landlords (*kshatriya/rajput*), and low occupation groups (*sudra*) (Berreman, 1997). Caste is a system of social hierarchy among Hindus where individuals are ascribed to a particular group by virtue of being born into it. The merchant caste is absent among Garhwali society because of the lack of trade at any significant level in the mountains. Social mobility has been largely upward among Garhwali. The non-caste local groups (*khas*) emulated the caste-like features to get into the fold of the caste system. Once in the caste system, attempts were made to move up to even higher categories of actual caste groups (*asal*) through marriage or by changing religious practices. Garhwali society is patrilineal with an emphasis on joint family structures consisting of parents, married sons and their families, and unmarried children.

The Garhwal region has a long tradition of Hinduism and is a hub of some of the most sacred pilgrimage sites. The Garhwali practice a syncretic form of orthodox Hinduism and animistic religion. The ritual practices differ among castes based on their past affiliation with primitive religion. Garhwali worship various forms of the Hindu trinity (*Brahma*, *Vishnu*, and *Shiva*) as well as different local deities such as *Narsing*, *Nagraj*, and *Bhairon*. Garhwali have ardent beliefs in the power of spirits and regularly worship them. Most villagers worship their village deity and each family has family deities (*kula devata*). The rituals and other religious practices involve magic, animistic beliefs, spirits, dancing of spirits and gods, and nature worship.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Approximately 78% of the people in Uttaranchal live in the rural areas with fewer resources to maintain a balanced diet and healthy lifestyle. Fifty-three percent of the households have electricity, 44% have access to piped drinking water, and 39% have toilets in their houses (International Institute for Population Sciences & ORC Macro, 2000, p. 2). The environmental conditions limit the productivity of the land; even though the majority of the population work on the farm, there is always a food deficit. Local agricultural production fails to sustain the population, and the demand for additional food is met by importing food grains from the plains. The healthcare resources are abysmal in the region. Few biomedical doctors are available in urban areas, and those who use these doctors frequently complain about the poor quality of service. Government officials have found it difficult to provide healthcare services in the isolated villages of Garhwal. Many of these villages require hours of walking on steep, narrow, and winding mountain paths from the nearest road (Kumar, 1991). The state officials of the newly formed Uttaranchal are now paying closer attention to enhancing the healthcare services in this region.

### **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Garhwali use an eclectic mix of medical healers; biomedical practitioners are just one of the available options. Biomedical practitioners with a medical degree are rare in the Garhwal hills; most have only an associate's degree with a couple of years of medical training or apprenticeship and are in private practice. The district headquarters or towns have a local hospital with doctors that have a medical degree and, in some cases, other specialists. The fees and traveling distance to the biomedical healers make them unavailable to much of the population. There are health centers with a health worker and a nurse for every five or six villages.

Herbalists (*deshi vaidhya*) are available and found throughout the Garhwal region. They use herbs and medicinal plants indigenous to the Himalayas and are consulted for prolonged and serious illnesses. Along with the herbalists are the Ayurvedic doctors (*Ayurvedic vaidhya*) who have formal training in practicing medicine. An Ayurvedic doctor uses many natural substances and food in addition to herbs and medicinal plants to cure illnesses. In Garhwal villages, it is difficult to make distinctions between a herbalist and an Ayurvedic doctor; they are both synonymously called *vaidhya*.

A variety of religio-magical healers in this region specialize in warding off the malign effects of supernatural agencies. These healers are mostly part-time specialists and inherit or learn their skills from experienced healers. Garhwali have tremendous faith in these specialists. Priests ( *pandit*) conduct worship, give sermons, perform rites of passage, and neutralize the effect of evil eye or evil spirits. They advise people to perform rituals, to worship deities, and to offer homage to their ancestors. They also perform *hawan* for clients and, on a larger scale, *yagya* can be arranged for the whole community. A trained priest chants sacred verses (*mantra*) and blows consecrated ash on their clients to get rid of some illnesses, particularly those believed to be caused by supernatural agencies.

Exorcists, another religio-magical specialist, chant *mantra* to cure illnesses. They make charms or talismans (*tabeez*) to prevent illnesses. They can give the patient consecrated water or sugar to consume or give a consecrated piece of stone for the patient to wear. In addition, special rituals are performed under the supervision of an experienced exorcist, such as placing consecrated vermilion, hair, salt, chili, and lemon on the road intersection (*chauraha*) for specific desired outcomes. Shamans (*baki*) are believed to have supernatural powers and mystical contacts with spirits. They invoke tutelary spirits to diagnose illness and prescribe treatment. The shaman's knowledge and power are mostly inherited or learned from someone who has had extraordinary life experiences. The traditional healers serve all segments of the Garhwali population, but people with less education, women, and the elderly appear to consult these healers more frequently.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

The Garhwali explanatory scheme divides causes of illnesses into two sources: natural (*bhautik*) and supernatural (*daivik*). Natural sources include the weather, hygiene, food, pathogens, and physical and emotional imbalances. Supernatural sources incorporate spirit and ghost intrusion, ancestral neglect, wrath of deities, evil eye, witchcraft, sorcery, breach of a taboo, totem violations, community sin, fate, ominous sensations, and contagion. An illness can be caused either by one factor or a combination of factors. Among Garhwali, the confines of health beliefs are stretched to accommodate the demands of their emotional and psychosocial state. Generally, the more serious and chronic the illness, the more likely the perceived causes will include supernatural agents.

#### **Natural Causes**

Garhwali perceive factors in the surrounding environment as potential causes of illness, such as poor drinking water, air quality, and changes in the weather. Poor hygiene is an issue in some places of Garhwal, particularly due to overcrowding and poor sanitation. Hygiene problems cause and exacerbate the spread of diseases, especially those carried by mosquitoes and parasitic worms (Rizvi, 1991). While the lay Garhwali person has little knowledge of specific pathogens, there is an awareness that mosquitoes can spread malaria and that worms ( *pillu*) cause stomach upsets and diarrhea. The balance of the body humors can be disturbed by rain, cold, wind, heat, and changes in weather conditions, such as from hot or cold. Garhwali believe that hot weather can cause fever, malaria, headache, joint pain, stomach ache, backache, and diarrhea, while cold weather can cause cold, cough, fever, pneumonia, and body and joint pain. The rainy season is said to cause fever and skin diseases, among other illnesses, while the cold east wind, called *purvia*, is believed to cause fever and other minor illnesses.

Garhwali consider food to be a major factor in the maintenance of good health. Most food has been classified according to its hot and cold properties. In the local humoral classification, most spicy and oily foods are considered hot and can imbalance the body fluids, resulting in indigestion and diarrhea. Heat-producing foods lead to headache, joint pain, backache, stomach ache, indigestion, diarrhea, and high blood pressure. Smoking *hukka* (a form of pipe tobacco) and cigarettes leads to coughing and other respiratory illnesses.

### **Supernatural Causes**

Garhwali divide supernatural causes into three categories: animistic, magical, and mystic. Spirit intrusion (*opra, chhaya lagna, bhuta-pret lagna*) is the hostile or punitive act of a malevolent supernatural spirit possessing a person and causing dramatic symptoms of illness in the process. Garhwali believe that spirits and ghosts are invisible, intangible, and free-floating divine forces. However, they do make a distinction between spirits and ghosts: spirits belong to local deities, whereas ghosts belong to ancestors or other deceased human beings. The common feature of spirit or ghost intrusion is a general illness of the person. The illness caused by ghost intrusion has a number of symptoms, including the widening of the eyes and discoloration of the face, meaningless babbling, unconsciousness, dementia, excessive weeping or laughing, and convulsive movements or locking of the jaw (Rizvi, 1991). If someone suddenly gets sick with fever, headache, or backache and feels dizzy, then people diagnose the person with spirit intrusion, especially if the ill person is a young child, newlywed woman, or expectant mother. The symptoms tend to vary with the age of the afflicted person (Rizvi, 1991). Illnesses caused by the spirit influence are considered debilitating and are mostly chronic, prolonged, and recurrent.

Similar to spirit intrusion are illnesses believed to be caused by the wrath of deities (*devi-devata ka kop hona*). Deities are angered if they are not revered and cause illnesses and destruction. The most frequently mentioned disease believed to be caused by the wrath of a deity in this region is measles (*khasara*) among children. Leprosy is another disease that is supposed to be caused by the wrath of a particular deity, if she is propitiated improperly. The illnesses that are commonly attributed to the wrath of deities are insanity, babbling, extreme weakness, and any illness that is incurable by any other therapy.

Garhwali believe that all people have some supernatural power that can affect the well-being of others through the evil eye, witchcraft, and sorcery. They believe that compliments of any sort, especially those that have a sense of envy or jealousy, can trigger the evil eye (*najar lagna*). Extraneous objects such as fancy dress, jewelry, or food that evoke jealousy can make the person possessing them afflicted with illness. This means that anyone with anything admirable is susceptible to the evil eye. Young children and pregnant women are particularly vulnerable. Common symptoms of the evil eye include fever, loss of control, weeping, irritation, closed eye, sleeplessness, weakness, children's loss of appetite for milk, and loss of appetite in general (Kedia, 1997).

In addition to potentially casting an evil eye, Garhwali believe that certain individuals possess evil power or may control certain spirits and use their malevolent power to harm a person. Witchcraft can be defined as the intentional or unintentional act of a person possessing supernatural power that causes illness in a targeted person. The victims of witchcraft suffer losses and misfortune. Many different kinds of individuals are identified in the community as having these powers. Sometimes people in the community think a young widow cursed her husband and has the potential to harm other people. There is also a belief that if someone is born on the darkest midnight of *Bhando*, a specific month during the rainy season in the Hindi calendar, then he or she would possess this power naturally. Some people believe that the power is hereditary. For exam-

Again, people believe that a female with malevolent power may be more dangerous than a male with similar power. Sorcery differs from witchcraft in that it is a learned magical skill that is used primarily to harm others. A sorcerer employs an aggressive magical procedure to cast a spell that potentially can cause an illness. The practice of sorcery takes various forms such as spells, curses, magic performed over hairs, nails, excreta, or clothing, object intrusion, administration of presumptive poisons, or dispatch of an alien spirit to possess the victim's body. Many times Garhwali attribute sudden serious illness to sorcery, especially if they have a dispute with a family who believes in sorcery or has contact with a sorcerer.

ple, a woman may acquire evil power from her mother.

Garhwali believe that illnesses can be caused by a violation of some taboo or moral injunction. These taboos consist of prohibitions on the consumption of certain foods, contact with people in certain ritual states, breach of appropriate behavior toward kinsmen, trespass or theft, use of forbidden words, urination on a religious site, incest, or pre- or extra-marital sex, and so forth. When a taboo is violated, the person may or may not be aware of it. For example, if someone urinates unknowingly over a site where a person was buried, it is an unintentional violation of a taboo. The consequences of unintentional taboo violations are milder than violations that are committed willfully, but illnesses still may occur. Intentional violations of a taboo result in guilt, which in turn can consume a person until he or she physically falls sick. Garhwali believe that violation of a taboo results in chronic and incurable illnesses such as skin infections or cancer. Illnesses are seen as a warning from punishing supernatural agents against breaking taboos.

One of the taboos prohibits killing certain animals, such as cows, peacocks, snakes, and monkeys, which are considered totemic. In the Hindu tradition, these animals are supposed to have mystic ties with the deities, and their death and consumption would incite supernatural anger and endanger entire communities with epidemics and other communicable diseases. In the event of a totem's death, it should be ceremonially cremated or buried to protect the person and the community from the wrath of a deity.

In the Hindu scheme of life, every human being has the responsibility to follow right conduct. Any act or even the mere thought of something that is detrimental to other living beings, including humans or divinities, is considered sinful ( *pap karna*). Most sins accumulate until the death of the person and result in a divine justice in the "other world" or in the next life, which might include being born as an animal or other non-human life. Some sins, especially those committed against the deities, ancestors, or human beings, may receive a punishment in the current life in the form of illness. Most Garhwali believe that if one commits sins, he or she has to pay the price in this life only. Those who get dreaded diseases such as leprosy do so because of some sin they committed against mankind. Some of the commonly cited illnesses that result from committing sins are mental illness, barrenness, congenital malformation, and blindness. Garhwali attribute a number of illnesses to what can best be termed as fate (*bhagya*) and ascribe a number of illnesses to astrological influences or bad luck.

### **Treatment**

Garhwali practice a pluralistic system of medicine with an emphasis on herbal and religio-magical healing with increasing use of biomedicine. In response to the onset of an illness that does not appear to be serious or lifethreatening, Garhwali frequently opt for self-treatment (*gharelu ilaz*) at home. A number of therapeutic subcultures exist in the realm of self-treatment, such as herbal and food therapy, massage, and over-the-counter Ayurvedic and biomedicine. The strategies used in selftreatment are passed down within a family and are sometimes shared by the whole community. Self-treatment is less expensive and does not require consulting a biomedical practitioner or folk healer, saving time, money, and energy. Self-treatment also means either self-care or care provided by the family, who ensures that the patient gets appropriate food and proper rest. Restrictions may be imposed on the patient to avoid exposure to the wind or consumption of certain kinds of food. Another form of self-treatment involves doing simple rituals to ward off the effects of the evil eye or worshiping deities or ancestors for their blessings to cure an illness.

On many occasions, people buy over-the-counter medicines based on the recommendations of friends, relatives, and even strangers as most medicines can be bought from a pharmacy without a prescription from a doctor. People remember the name of the medicine recommended by a doctor for use in future illness. This practice saves them both the consultation time and the hassle of going to a doctor. Another mode of procuring medical advice is through a pharmacist. If a villager has an illness, then the person simply goes to the pharmacist and describes his/her condition, and the pharmacist prescribes and sells the medicine without any consultation fee.

Many Garhwali prefer to consult an indigenous herbalist or Ayurvedic doctor before going to a biomedical practitioner. However, for any illness presumed to be caused by a supernatural agent, they go to religio-magical healers. When Garhwali perceive an illness to be caused by a supernatural agent, but are uncertain as to the specific cause, they often try to find out the exact nature of the problem by consulting a shaman (*baki*). The shaman may identify the family with whom the patient might have had an altercation in connection with land, houses, cattle, or even chickens and hold their ancestral spirits or family deities responsible for the current situation. An exorcism is performed if evil eye, sorcery, or witchcraft is deemed the cause. If someone suddenly becomes very sick in the family, then people prefer to call a specialist who goes into a trance, a practice called *ghadiyala* (deities'dance ritual), to get rid of the invasive spirit. Family members and the people in the community gather and perform the ritual, and in the process these specialists or family members go into a trance. Once they achieve a trance, they challenge the spirit to leave the person. Depending on who the believed spirit is, the specialists sometimes severely beat the sick person in order to rid him or her of the spirit, frequently to the point of unconsciousness. The specialist also suggests remedies to cure mental ailments. However, not all Garhwali believe in these remedies. Those with more education say, "take the sick person to the hospital rather than wasting the time in making these deities dance."

### **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Garhwali avoid any overt expression of sexuality. Adolescent girls and women are encouraged to cover their bodies with *duppatta* or *sari*. Chastity is highly valued in this society and one rarely indulges in premarital sexual relations. If a premarital relation results in pregnancy, the fetus is aborted in the most secretive way. Among Garhwali, premarital relations or pregnancy bring dishonor to the family and make it very difficult for a woman to find a husband. Sexual and gynecological issues are matters of shame and embarrassment; women rarely discuss gynecological or pregnancy concerns with the family or a doctor. This results in poor reproductive health and outcomes for many of these women. The median age of marriage for women in Uttaranchal is 18 years, four years younger than men (International Institute for Population Sciences & ORC Macro, 2000, p. 3). Homosexuality is not acknowledged as an option. Such practices are considered abnormal and immoral; people indulging in homosexuality are reprimanded by the family members.

The idea of maternity is stronger than the idea of sexuality. Fertility is important evidence of a woman's femininity. Infertile women are stigmatized and are not invited by the community on auspicious occasions. Women usually conceive within two years of marriage and continue to conceive until they reach a desired family size that, on average, in this society is three children. However, due to the joint family structure, most households have 9 to 11 members in the family. Families desire to have at least one son. Garhwali are patrilineal, not having a son endangers the continuity of the family and family heritage. Families with only daughters continue trying for a son, even if it means insufficient nutritional resources for the mother and children already born. Many women with one or two sons begin using some form of contraceptive. Men rarely participate in birth control measures; the use of condoms is resisted by men with the notion that it results in the reduction of pleasure. Some women use intra-uterine devices (IUDs), but it is discouraged because of a fear of tampering with the uterus and obstructing vaginal and menstrual fluid. According to a survey of 320 housewives in Garhwal, about 40% used some form of contraceptive. Those using contraceptives practiced the following: 59% tubectomy, 7% vasectomy (by their husbands), 7% IUDs, 10% pills, 10% condoms, and 7% other methods (Srivastava, 1997).

### **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Getting pregnant is a major transition for a married woman that dramatically enhances her status in the family. Now she is the bearer of potential sons who will continue the family lineage and provide economic security to their parents and grandparents. Pregnancy is a complex event that is influenced by cultural rules, supernatural beliefs, economic situations, and healthcare resources. Women work extremely hard (up to 16 hours a day) until very late in the pregnancy, causing health complications, poor pregnancy outcomes, and even miscarriage. Pregnancy does not alleviate the burden of the day-to-day household chores until the final weeks (Rao, 1995).

A pregnant woman is supposed to avoid any polluting agents and places, such as lonely, dark, haunted places, and cremation grounds. Women avoid heat- and wind-producing foods. Milk and milk products are avoided, especially in the second trimester, because they are believed to spoil the fallopian tubes and might increase the size of the fetus. A pregnant woman is not supposed to attend any rites of passage ceremonies, including birth, marriage, and death in the community. A pregnant woman is vulnerable to all kinds of evil forces. A pregnant woman avoids throwing clippings of her hair and nails because of the fear that a jealous person can perform sympathetic magic using these items.

The fetuses are rarely aborted. However, those who decide to abort use certain mechanical practices or local herbs to induce abortions for unwanted pregnancies. Garhwali believe that a pregnant woman can be invaded by the spirit of an unmarried woman, preventing a baby from settling in the womb. If a woman has multiple miscarriages, they perform a ritual called *aunja pujna*. This ritual is conducted on the darkest night of the month when the mother, two or three males, and a healer visit a water source in the natal village of the mother. The ceremony takes about an hour. The ritual paraphernalia include an animal for sacrifice (lamb, goat, or chicken), seven kinds of grains (*satmaju*), black glass bangles, a black quilt, and black thread. The animal is sacrificed and eaten raw with a pinch of salt and pepper by the members of the ritual team. The healer wraps black thread around the woman's wrist. She takes off all her clothes and discards them at the ritual site, covers herself with the black quilt brought by the group, and proceeds to her in-law's village. In her in-law's home, she remains confined in a completely dark room for two or three days.

Babies are usually delivered lying flat on the back, which can adversely affect the mother's blood pressure and pulmonary ventilation, decrease the normal intensity of contractions, inhibit efforts to push the baby with contractions, increasing the need for forceps, and inhibit the spontaneous expulsion of the placenta. Access to healthcare services is fairly restricted. According to one survey of 320 housewives, 88.9% of deliveries took place at home assisted by family members or midwives. The majority of deliveries were performed by midwives (Srivastava, 1997). The usual practice of applying force on the abdomen has led to traumatic rupture of the uterus in some cases. Sometimes more than one person applies force, even using their feet. A razor, household knife, or sickle is used to cut the umbilical cord. None of the instruments are sterilized, and boiled water is not used in all cases. The outer tip of the umbilical cord is burned, turmeric and castor oil are applied, and the placenta is buried in an isolated place. Roughly one or two women out of every 100 die from birth-related complications. A majority of these maternal deaths are due to anemia, hemorrhage, toxemia, sepsis, induced abortion, and miscarriage.

#### **Infancy**

The birth of a baby in the family brings mixed emotions among people. While it is a time of celebration, the process of the birth itself is considered unclean. Special care is taken to ensure that all ancestral worship is performed, especially on the patrilineal side. Spirits and other people can be a threat to both mother and baby, who are vulnerable to spirit intrusion and evil eye. Visitors are regulated and need to wait outside before they can get in. Any kind of visible birth defect is considered an act of a deity or spirit or an outcome of sins previously committed by one of the parents. After the baby's birth, the mother is not brought into the sun for five days and is not exposed to even an oil lamp lit in the same room. On the fifth day, the village priest mixes cow urine with cow milk, puts a copper coin in it, and chants verses. This liquid is then given to the mother and all family members to consume as ambrosia, which is supposed to have purifying effects for the whole family.

Midwives or a sister-in-law usually takes over the responsibility of maintaining the physical well-being of the new mother. Sometimes women return to their natal home for deliveries to be taken care of and to avoid daily chores in their homes. Women are given a semi-solid diet for 21 days after delivery. These 21 days, called *sujan*, are considered polluting for the entire family; the family limits their participation in community celebrations and exchange of food with others. On the twenty-first day, the family performs rituals, prepares special food, and thereafter returns

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 671**

to mainstream life in the community. According to the NFHS-2 survey, only 44% of the mothers with children born in the preceding three years received an antenatal check-up (International Institute for Population Sciences & ORC Macro, 2000, p. 7).

In Garhwal, children are gently rubbed with warm oil twice a day until they are two years old. Most mothers squeeze their first milk before feeding the baby and may not breast-feed the new baby until the second or third day after delivery. On average, children are breast-fed for two years, which also helps prevent conception for these women. Since many infants are taken care of by grandmothers during the day, some infants suckle on their grandmothers' breasts as well, even though there is no milk. Children co-sleep with their mothers until 8 to 10 years of age. Sometimes sons get preferential treatment in terms of food and healthcare because they are considered essential for continuation of family life and potential support for parents and grandparents.

#### **Childhood**

Childhood is considered to last until 12 years of age. Since mothers are busy with household chores, children are taken care of by grandparents or older siblings. Only about 69% of children get immunizations. The children in Garhwal suffer from a variety of communicable diseases. Common diseases among children are pneumonia, upper respiratory infections, diarrhea, and fever. Approximately 4% of the children experience disability, with hearing loss being the most common. Child mortality in Uttaranchal is 56 per 1,000 (International Institute for Population Sciences & ORC Macro, 2000, p. 6). Malnutrition is commonplace due to inadequate and imbalanced nutrition because of a higher dependence on the carbohydratebased diet as opposed to the traditionally diverse diet. According to NFHS-2, more than half of the children under the age of three are underweight and, between 6 and 35 months, 77% are anemic.

#### **Adolescence**

When girls reach the age of puberty, they are expected to take the role of adult women—increasing participation in the household chores, restricting lifestyle, and avoiding mixing with boys. Menstruation for a teenage girl is a traumatic event and is considered unclean and a matter of shame. Menstruating girls are not allowed in the kitchen or in any religious place. Family members will not even drink water brought by her. She is considered untouchable and is not supposed to touch green and fruiting trees. After the fifth day, she can be reintegrated with the family and community after a purifying bath. The boys also reach adolescence at the age of 12 and begin to notice changes in their physical appearance. They are expected to help their fathers in the field with the agricultural work and take care of the animals. Neither girls nor boys go through any specific rites of passage during this transition, and there is no cultural practice of genital operation either for the girls or boys. Many of the health issues of childhood continue through adolescence.

#### **Adulthood**

Women in Garhwal have to work extraordinarily hard compared with men. Many men work in the cities or are in the military. Even those who are home do not assist the women with the household work. Women complain of general weakness, body aches, and anemia and are prone to accidents in the fields and forests. Women report respiratory infections, chronic bronchitis, gall bladder and urinary stones, and gynecological problems. Many married women have limited access to healthcare and suffer from reproductive health problems. According to one survey, 67.7% women reported abnormal vaginal discharge but 87.6% had not received treatment for it. Many others suffer from urinary tract infections, pain, and bleeding. Sometimes men bring sexually transmitted diseases. Adult men suffer the health consequences of drinking country liquor, which many Garhwali men do. As described in the disease causation section, mental illnesses, presumably caused by the animistic, magical, and mystical agents, are common among Garhwali adults.

### **The Aged**

The life stage of the elderly starts at roughly 60 years of age. The elderly continue to live in joint family households and contribute significantly by watching fields and taking care of children. Women sometimes help prepare meals, and both men and women help feed the animals. The elderly hold considerable power within the family and community and play important roles in village and regional politics.

With age and inadequate and imbalanced nutrition, the majority of the elderly suffer from chronic diseases, including body aches, stomach ailments, respiratory illnesses (due to prolonged use of cigarettes or pipe tobacco), diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, blood pressure, and hearing and vision loss. Women also suffer from back problems stemming from lifting heavy loads and gynecological problems. Owing to poor dental hygiene, both older men and women have very poor oral health. As much as half of the elderly are chronically ill. The elderly are taken care of by family members. Their generation relies primarily on religio-medical healing and herbal treatment.

### **Dying and Death**

Death is distressing for most Garhwali. The entire lineage, and sometimes the whole village, is in a state of mourning. High levels of emotion are expressed in private and in public. The body is taken to the cremation site in a procession. Family members take the clothes off the body and apply purified butter and sandalwood paste to the body. The body is then cremated in the presence of male members of the family, relatives, and community. The bone remains and the ashes are thrown into the river. After the cremation, an elaborate ritual ceremony lasts for more than 11 days. During these days, the family and the lineage of the dead are considered polluted and do not attend any celebrations. On the last day, relatives and members of the community are invited for a feast. Because Garhwali believe in ancestral worship, the dead are treated with special reverence. They also believe that the dead could be reincarnated in human or animal form.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

Like anywhere else in the world, changes are taking place in the Garhwal region. While there is an increased use of biomedicine, there is a gradual loss of traditional healing practices and resources. Owing to exposure to the outside world, the Garhwali beliefs about disease causation are consistently changing from supernatural to natural causes. Women are becoming more aware of their health problems and seeking more healthcare services. With increasing contact with outsiders, Garhwali are also contracting new infectious diseases including sexually transmitted diseases. At this time, there is not much knowledge and awareness among Garhwali about the threats of HIV/AIDS.

### **REFERENCES**

- Berreman, G. D. (1997). *Hindus of the Himalayas: Ethnography and change*. Delhi, India: Oxford India Paperbacks.
- International Institute for Population Sciences & ORC Macro (2000). *National Family Health Survey (NFHS-2), 1998–99: India*. Mumbai: International Institute for Population Sciences (IIPS).
- Kedia, S. K. (1997). *Impacts of involuntary resettlement on ethnomedical systems: A case study from North India*. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Kentucky.
- Kumar, K. T. (1991). Health and culture in rural Garhwal. *American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 7*(10), 63–64.
- Rao, B. (1995). *"Is she ill or is she not": Female sexuality, gender ideologies and women's health in Tehri Garhwal, North India*. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Syracuse University.
- Rawat, A. S. (1989). *History of Garhwal, 1358*–*1947: An erstwhile kingdom in the Himalayas*. New Delhi: Indus.
- Rizvi, S. N. H. (1991). *Medical anthropology of the Jaunsaris*. New Delhi: Northern Book Centre.
- Srivastava, S. K. (1997). *Women and health, as reported from a community health need assessment survey in 1997*. Retrieved August 4, 2002, from http://www.education.vsnl.com/phalguni/health.html

# **Garifuna**

#### **Nancie L. González and Gloria Castillo**

### **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

*Garifuna*, which is actually an adjective, is the term now preferred by the people themselves, and most widely used, but until the 1970s they were more often known in anthropological and travel literature as *Black Caribs*, and as *Morenos* (*Dark Ones*) to their compatriots of other ethnicities. When speaking their own language, however, the