# The Nature of the State

## Rajesh K. Singh

he centrality of the state in today's life cannot be over-emphasized. From birth to death an individual lives under the constant shadow of its imposing and overwhelming structure. The omnipotent character of the state has been beautifully summarized by Ralph Miliband in the opening lines of one of his celebrated books:

'More than ever before men now live in the shadow of the state. What they want to achieve, individually or in groups, now mainly depends on the state's sanction and support... It is for the state's attention, or for its control, that men compete; and it is against the state that beat the waves of social conflict. It is to an ever greater degree the state which men encounter as they confront other men. This is why, as social beings, they are also political beings, whether they know it or not. It is possible not to be interested in what the state does; but it is not possible to be unaffected by it.<sup> $1$ </sup>

Needless to say that from time immemorial, such an important structure of our society has drawn the attention of a whole lot of thinkers. Traditionally systematic and rigorous study of the state belonged to political philosophy. More recently, it has been taken up as a subject by social sciences. The philosophers of the Renaissance and Enlightenment, as well as Hegel, shaped the thinking of the state, before social scientists took up the subject in the nineteenth century, particularly the political economists and German historical sociologists, whose great figures were Marx, Weber, and Otto Hintze.

But, unfortunately, this intellectual tradition did not continue for long, and until the Second World War the study of the state was totally done from legal and constitutional approaches. An empirical study of the state was not positively considered because the concept was said to be too broad.

In Western Europe and the United States, the concept of state fell into disuse of academic circles in the twentieth century, especially during the behavioural revolution. Thus, in this context, it is correct to say that the state is now being slowly rediscovered by political and sociological theorists, or to put it in Theda Skocpol's terminology, the debate is on "Bringing the State Back In."<sup>2</sup>

Theda Skocpol believes that the state as an area of study has suddenly become quite important since the last decade. The omnipresent nature of the state has become one of the unavoidable facts of today's life, not only for the industrialized countries (both capitalist and socialist), but also for the developing ones. "For most (if not all) of the Third World countries, state building is the *sine qua non* for independence and development."<sup>3</sup>

The post-colonial states have been studied and analyzed both within the liberal and the Marxist paradigms. In this context interpretations have ranged from the liberal to the neo-liberal, on the one hand, and from the Marxist, to the neo-Marxist, on the other. In this essay, we would be discussing both the liberal and the Marxist viewpoints on the Indian state.

# ❑❑ **Liberal Interpretation of the Indian State**

Surveying the literature on the post-colonial state in India one encounters a sort of loss of surveyability due to the divergence of ideological proclivities and conceptual frameworks underlying the major academic works on the topic. These diverse perspectives have ranged from the liberal and neoliberal to the Marxist and neo-Marxist. First, we propose to survey major theories and paradigms of the state within the liberal and neo-liberal traditions of research.

The first thing noticeable in the early liberal discourse on Indian politics is the virtual conceptual absence of the category of "state". The preferred category was the "government". This may perhaps reflect the political scientific traditions in Anglo-American countries that essentially on the study of government in contrast to the continental European traditions in law and political science that have always preferred the term "state" to the government. But, since the late 1970s, there has been a conceptual shift in the Anglo-American political science to the state. This shift is also reflected in the more recent works emanating from the liberal perspective on the Indian state. A close, look at the state and its internal structural dynamics is noticed for the first time in the libral discourse of Indian politics in the works of Rajni Kothari,<sup>4</sup> Lloyd, and Susanne Rudolph,<sup>5</sup> and M.P. Singh.<sup>6</sup> A precursor was the work of Norman D. Palmer.<sup>7</sup> An early study of the secular nature of the Indian state was carried out by Donald Eugene Smith.<sup>8</sup>

### **State and Society**

Reminiscent of, though not replicative of, the state-civil society dichotomy in Hegel and Marx, the state-society relations in the context of the study of the Indian state have been highlighted in some more recent works of Atul Kohli and Francine Frankel. In a sense, this perspective is a "primitive" point of theoretical departure to analyze significant dimensions of Indian politics by juxtaposing the twin amorphous concepts of the *State* and *Society* and patterns of interaction between the two.

Kohli's main problem is to comprehend and explain the paradox of the growth of centralization and powerlessness at the centre. This problem is sought to be X-rayed both at the district and the state levels. The crux of the problem is identified as the following: "Political turmoil not only threatens the prospect for establishing legitimate and coherent authority, but also undermines the government's ability to facilitate socio-economic development."<sup>9</sup>

Kohli defines the crisis of governability in the Indian context with reference to the following dimensions: "(1) the absence of enduring coalitions, (2) policy ineffectiveness, and (3) an incapacity to accommodate political conflict without violence".<sup>10</sup>Kohli goes on saying, "A government whose power rests on fluctuating coalitions and whose leaders repeatedly fail to fulfil their stated goals and to control politically directed violence will be deemed to be a government with low capacity to govern".<sup>11</sup>His findings underline the growing disjuncture between centralization and development in the post-Nehru era. Centralization may temporarily aggrandize the personal powers of leaders but it seriously erodes the legitimacy of the state and its developmental power.<sup>12</sup>

A major weakness of Kohli's study is that even though it probes into the crucial factor of the role of political parties and their declining standards of performance and institutionalization in explaining the crisis of governability, he almost completely blacks out a focussed treatment of governmental organs, like the legislature, the executive, and judiciary. This omission appears strange in a book that purports to study the crisis of governability!

A more sophisticated theoretical framework for analyzing state-society relationship is offered by Francine R. Frankel in the introductory and concluding essays in Francine R. Frankel and M.S.A. Rao (eds.), *Dominance and State Power in Modern India: Decline of a Social Order.*<sup>13</sup>Both the editors as well as authors have been more successful in analyzing the contemporary dialectics between the state and social structures than their historical dynamics and evolution that often appear to be elliptical and vulnerable to abstracted empiricism.

This theoretical approach sets up a dichotomy between the state and the civil society, but does not take this separation to a complete logical dissention that may become too unrealistic and reified. Instead, the two categories are kept sufficiently porous for osmotic interpretation. Domination is neither exclusively associated with the state nor is social domination solely regarded as traditional and state domination solely modern. It is a very promising and empirically more valid theoretical approach to analyze state-society relations.

#### **State and Party System**

In liberal theory and ideology, political party is the most vital link between the civil society and the state. This is in contrast to the Marxist ideology and theory in which the party is absolutely appropriated by the state apparatus: indeed it subjugates both the state and the civil society, jettisoning the autonomy of both. In the early, post-independence liberal political science literature on Indian politics, studies of parties and party systems were conducted in relation to society and government. One does not really find any self-conscious attempt to theorize the party/party system variable within the framework of any theory of the state. Works of W.H. Morris-Jones<sup>14</sup> and early writings of Rajni Kothar<sup>15</sup> illustrate this point. In Kothari's classic *Politics in India*<sup>16</sup>there is hardly any discussion of the Indian state as such, except for a passing but precocious comment:

To no small degree, the state has become the arbiter of society. This is not to deny the autonomy of social and economic factors in the development process; indeed, it seems likely that with increasing diversification of centres of power, this autonomy will increase.<sup>17</sup>

A similar tendency is evident in Morris-Jones' writings. Even though he made such seminal remarks as "The character of the political system of any modern state is substantially dictated by the manner in which political forces are organized in a party system,"<sup>18</sup> he did not ever seek to theorize about the Indian state, except for studying such vital institutions of the state as the Parliament and the party system. Rajni Kothari, in his later writings, concerned himself with condensed analytical focus on the Indian state. But, this happened in a period when the theoretical ideologue of the "Congress system" had become disillusioned with the Indian model of development, mainly during the ascendancy of the Indira Gandhi government and, subsequently, the Emergency regime which she imposed. Reflecting on this period in particular, Kothari<sup>19</sup> found fault with the distortions in the Indian model of democratic nation-building in which "horizontal aggregation" at the top came to be juxtaposed by "a deliberate strategy of vertical *disaggregation.* Politicization and challenges from the bottom met with a response from the top that was essentially premised on the politics of populism from the top."<sup>20</sup> A crisis of institutions and a crisis of values together produced the proclivity for personalized power on the part of those in government and for the cult of "oppositionalism" or "the tendency of the opposition to subordinate other goals to the simple aim of displacing those who happen to be in power."<sup>21</sup>

Some more contemporary studies of some formal and informal institutions of the state and government continue to lament the phenomenon of "deinstitutionalization", but they are not as pessimistic as Kothari's conclusions (the Rudolphs<sup>22</sup>, Myron Weiner<sup>23</sup>, James Manor<sup>24</sup> and M.P. Singh<sup>25</sup>).

#### **State, Economy and Society**

Perhaps the most comprehensive and internally differentiated theoretical framework for analyzing Indian politics in which the state, in relation to the economy and society, receives a fuller treatment has been put forward by the Rudolphs in their more recent work *In Pursuit of Lakshmi: The Political Economy of the Indian State.*<sup>26</sup>In this theoretical perspective, the Indian state is depicted as embedded in group and class pluralism and its expanding role in the mixed economy is attributed to the historical legacies of the strong sub-continental state traditions of Mughal and British India as also to the strategy of economic development devised by the post-colonial modernizing elites. But, as the state was expanding in the economy, the society was undergoing a parallel process of the gathering momentum of politicization and the emergence of the typically Indian phenomenon of "demand groups" and organized interests also typical of Western liberal democracies.

As all this was happening, the political institutions were themselves declining in their efficacy: the Congress party, the parliament, the judiciary, the federal structures, and so on. All these developments had serious consequences for the autonomy of the state. In the Indian context they identify two major sources of threat to the autonomy of the state, namely, from the social forces, and from the state elites themselves which they call the phenomenon of "state for itself'.<sup>27</sup>In their estimation, the Indian state has oscillated between autonomous and constrained patterns. To quote the Rudolphs:

'Over the four decades since independence, state capacity and autonomy declined. The decline encompassed both authoritarian and democratic regimes. The long-run deterioration in state capacity and autonomy was associated with the deinstitutionalization of both political parties and state institutions.'<sup>28</sup>

The Rudolphs conclude this study with the following perceptive, but contingent observation:

Like Hindu conceptions of the divine, the state in India is polymorphous, a creature of manifold forms and orientations. One is the third actor (between the capitalist and working classes) whose scale and power contribute to the marginality of class politics. Another is a liberal or citizens' state, a juridical body whose legislative reach is limited by a written constitution, judicial review, and fundamental rights. Still another is a capitalist state that guards the boundaries of the mixed economy by protecting the rights and promoting the interests of property in agriculture, commerce, and industry. Finally, a socialist state is concerned to use public power to eradicate poverty and privilege and tame private power. Which combination prevails in a particular historical setting is a matter of inquiry.<sup>29</sup>

# ❑❑ **The Marxist View of the Indian State**

The uniqueness of the Marxian analysis of the state lies in the fact that it is not only a political, but also a social analysis. The Marxian theory views the state not as a result of some abstract idea of political will or sovereignty, but as an embodiment of the social dynamics resulting from either the constant change or relative stability of a mode or modes of production and the consequent class configuration.

Although the idea of a relatively autonomous state as such was present in Marx's own writing, he "himself did not attempt to set out a comprehensive and systematic theory."<sup>30</sup> He has given, what can be said, at best an outline of a theory of state which contained both the "instrumentalist" as well as the "structuralist" arguments.

The instrumentalist argument of Marx was readily endorsed by the orthodox Marxists who believed that "the executive of the modern state is, but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie". Regarding this, Miliband opines that "this is a more complex statement than appears at the first sight, but it is a summary and lends itself to over-simplification. However, it does represent the core position of Marxism on the subject of the state."<sup>31</sup> But, there is a strong evidence to show that after the disappointments of the revolutions of 1848, Marx himself increasingly abandoned this view. In the *Eighteenth Brumaire* Marx put forward a more complex theory which tells that the bourgeoisie on its own keeps itself away from power because they are shrewd enough to perceive that in this way their interests may be better served. "This is the origin of the neo-Marxist idea of the state being 'relatively autonomous' of the dominant economic class even though it acts on behalf of the latter and safeguards its interests."<sup>32</sup>

The Miliband<sup>33</sup>-Poulantzas<sup>34</sup> debate, which is also known as the 'instrumentalist' *vs.* 'structuralist' debate, revolved around the concept of the 'relative autonomy' of the state and not only created the ground work for the neo-Maxist school, but also made rich contributions towards its literature. Over the years, the thinkers of this school widened their scope to take up the case of the developing societies which were earlier denied their legitimate place. To use Poulantzas' terminology, the "specificity of political" in these developing societies has forced these neo-Marxist thinkers to see the whole reality in a new light. "Marxism primarily fashioned in and for a *burgeoisl* capitalist context has, to say the least, to be adapted to the very different circumstances subsumed under the notion of underdevelopment."<sup>35</sup>

All these factors have forced some neo-Marxists in the recent years to study these developing societies in their own right and improvise the theory applied to advanced capitalist states to suit an entirely different environment. Thinkers, like Hamza Alavi, Anupam Sen, and Pranab Bardhan, all neo-Marxists, have done the same and quite efficiently so. In the coming pages, while analyzing the Indian state, we would be discussing them is some detail. But first, we will start with the classical orthodox Marxist interpretation.

The viewpoints of this interpretation would conceptualize of a ruling-class coalition and see the state as an instrument in the hands of that coalition. With different interpretations the members of the coalition as well as its leader would vary, but the framework would remain the same. The Communist Party of India (CPI), for instance, characterized the Indian state as a national bourgeoisie state. The class of nationalist bourgeoisie does not include the monopolists who tend to compromise with feudalism and imperialism. The CPI ideologues believe that due to their participation in the anti-imperialist struggle, certain sections of the bourgeoisie have become progressive in their outlook. It is because of this class that the Indian state has been able to take up progressive steps. The CPI believes that the Indian state can take up any anti-monopolistic measures, provided that it has a political will to do so.<sup>36</sup>

The Communist Party of India (Marxist) views the Indian state as "an organ of the rule of the bourgeoisie and landlords led by the big bourgeoisie who are increasingly collaborating with foreign finance capital in pursuit of the capitalist path of development."<sup>37</sup> Similarly, with a slight variation, the Communist Party of India (Marxist-Leninist) views the Indian state as a semi-colonial and semi-feudal state. The CPI (ML) theoreticians observe' that "the characteristic features of new government in the name of independent India was a continuity of the old regime, of the social and economic order, the same administrative machinery of imperialism, the same bureaucracy, and the police."<sup>38</sup> Hence, they conclude that the reforms brought by the subsequent governments "have not changed the foundations of the Indian society in general and the ruling classes in particular. There is no change in their foundations of power."<sup>39</sup> They view that the comprador bourgeoisie has mortgaged India into the hands of the foreign capitalists.

Other Marxist theoreticians, like A.R. Desai, Moin Shakir, and Ajit Roy also formulated, though in a more sophisticated way, similar instrumentalist view regarding the state. A.R. Desai, for example, seeks to demonstrate that despite contrary appearances, the state in India is a capitalist state. Similarly, Ajit Roy observes the Indian state as essentially the organ of the dictatorship of the Indian monopoly bourgeoisie and the rural bourgeoisie.<sup>40</sup> The neo-Marxists, on the contrast provide us with an interpretation which shrugs off the instrumentalist orthodoxy and throws a refreshing light on the concerned subject.

Thanks to a belated discovery of Gramsci, there is a greater willingness now to recognize the "relative autonomy" of the Indian state. Ironically enough the recognition carne at a time when the state was rapidly losing its autonomous character. Nevertheless, the autonomous character of the state remains an important quality of the post-colonial Indian state. The aforesaid recognition came with its accessory which is a realization that there are multiple ways to build capitalism, including the passive revolution. Hamza Alavi was one of the first neo-Marxists to argue that a post-colonial state, like India has a relative autonomy vis-a-vis the civil society.

The predominance of dependency theory of the late 1960's was epitomized in Hamza Alavi's work on the "overdeveloped" post-colonial state. He gave an important insight into the analysis of the state in the postcolonial societies. He gives proper emphasis on the historical specificity of post-colonial societies, "a specificity which arises from structural changes brought about by the colonial experience and alignment of classes and by the superstructures of political and administrative institutions which were established in that context and secondly from radical realignments of class forces which have been brought about in the post-colonial situation."<sup>41</sup>

To take up the first point, Alavi observes that the post-colonial state dispenses with the mediation of politics because the state is overdeveloped. It denotes a superstructure which is capable of dominating all the indigenous social classes. According to Alavi, the colonial state:

... had to create a state apparatus through which it can exercise domination over all the indigenous social classes in the colony. It might be said that the superstructure in the colony is, therefore, over-developed in relation to the structure in the colony, for its basis lies in the metropolitan structure itself from which it is later separated at the time of independence.<sup>42</sup>

The state which is inherited by the post-colonial society, consequently remains so powerful that Alavi wonders that "the excessive enlargement of powers of control and regulation that the state acquires extends far beyond the logic of what is necessary in the interests of the orderly functioning of the peripheral capitalist economies over which the state presides, and specific needs of each of the dominant classes."<sup>43</sup>

Apart from the colonial legacy, the structure of the society obviously helps the state to maintain its autonomy. The peculiar class structure within the peripheral capitalist system seems to provide the answer. "In peripheral capitalist societies, we are presented with a pattern of class formation and class alignment that is different both from that of the advanced capitalist countries and that of Lenin's picture of non-colonized Russia awaiting in bourgeois revolution."<sup>44</sup>Alavi finds a plurality of "fundamental classes" in peripheral capitalist societies and observes that none of them can be designated unambiguously, as the "ruling class". Thus, there is no single class potent enough to dominate over the affairs of the state.

Hamza Alavi comes as the forerunner among the neo-Marxist thinkers who have specifically theorized about the peripheral capitalist societies of the Indian subcontinent. Although his main concerns are Pakistan and Bangladesh, he has several important things to say about India. The common past of all these countries begets them several qualities which run across the present political boundaries. While certain formulations of Alavi, like when he talks about a military-bureaucratic ruling class alliance, are appropriate for Pakistan and Bangladesh only and cannot be applied to India with ease, his other formulations can be generalized. His thesis focuses on mainly two factors: (1) the overdeveloped state apparatus; and (2) the relatively weak societal forces, which gives rise to the relative autonomy of state in these societies has been widely accepted as a reality by the other neo-Marxists.

Bardhan follows the footprints, but showing an alert mind goes beyond Alavi in the sense that he discovers that not only the colonial-state, but even the pre-colonial state was overdeveloped in India. To quote Bardhan:

Some Marxist scholars have traced the extraordinary powers of control and regulation vested in the state to the colonial administration ruling an alien land. But *this overdeveloped state actually goes back* to *pre-colonial days and was certainly evident during the peak of the Mughal rule* in *India*. 45

The centrality of the state is an established fact for Bardhan too. He thinks that the state in the developing society is even more important than they are in the west.

In the countries of delayed industrialization, the state has usually played a more active role, as the history of south, central and eastern parts of Europe, as contrasted with the western, clearly shows.<sup>46</sup>

At the time of independence, Bardhan opines, the Indian state acted "neither at the behest of nor on behalf of the proprietary classes."<sup>47</sup> But, over the years, the autonomy of the state has declined owing to various constraints and "as a consequence, today the autonomy of the Indian state is reflected more often in its regulatory than developmental role."<sup>48</sup>

Anupam Sen comes next in the line. His work deals more specifically with the nature of the state and the social formation in India.<sup>49</sup> Through a historical study, he has tried to argue that it is "because of the nature of the evolution of its social formation", that the Indian state has been able to play an independent role vis-a-vis the civil society. The post-colonial state in India is still autonomous because of the multiplicity of modes of production. The Indian society is at the same time partly feudal, partly capitalist, and partly Asiatic. This puts obstacles in the way of any class emerging as the dominant class. This ensures the state's autonomy. The multiplicity of "fundamental classes" in these societies is present in Anupam Sen as well as in all other neo-Marxists working on India. The most controversial point in Sen's work is that it still finds the 'Asiatic Mode of Production' (AMP) valid in India. The insufficiency of the AMP as a tool for analyzing the Asiatic societies has long been recognized and today no serious Marxist scholars apply it to study these societies. However, Sen has retained it and quite explicitly so.

Achin Vanaik, accepting almost all the formulations of his fellow neo-Marxists, goes a step further when he analyzes the relationship between the Indian state vis-a-vis foreign capital and declares that the Indian state is autonomous not only internally (vis-a-vis the civil society), but externally (vis-a-vis the foreign capital) also. He has firm belief in the indigenous economic infrastructure which sustains the pressures from abroad. So much so that he thinks that even the ongoing economic liberalization is not going to alter the situation as "it is from a relatively stronger position than in the past and in a careful and cautions manner" that the Indian economy is approaching it. However, this is a field in which, there is a need for a considerable amount of study. At present, the Indian economy is in a flux and nothing definite can be predicted about it.

Although Vanaik does not include the Indian middle classes in this ruling class alliance, he recognizes the pivotal role they play in the Indian politics and economy, and rightly so. He observes:

There is not enough recognition of the fact that this demographic uniqueness has played a significant role in enabling the Indian economy to pursue an internally oriented path of growth with considerable insulation from the world economy, thus reinforcing the state's autonomy.<sup>50</sup>

From the foregoing analysis, we see that it is the neo-Marxists who have the most profound grasp of the nature of the state in India and its autonomous character, quite interestingly, the liberals who seem to be most persuasive and logical in their argument, are, precisely speaking, not the liberals in its classical sense, but actually the neo-liberals, a school which finds itself in close vicinity of the neo-Marxists.

Today, we encounter a situation where the liberals seem to be more radical and the Marxists more liberal—the former represented by the neoliberals, like Rudolphs, and the latter by neo-Marxists, like Alavi, Bardhan, and Anupam Sen. A sort of convergence of perspectives is taking place.<sup>51</sup> While the liberals are increasingly using the vocabulary of the neo-Marxists, the latter are gradually recognizing the "specificity of political" (*a la* Paulantzas). Both the views today give the state the position which it deserves. The Rudolphs, for example, recognized the utmost centrality of the state in India when they talked about the phenomenon of "state for itself". They observe that between the capital and the labour, the state in India has emerged as the "third actor". The "state for itself", on various occasions, jealously guards its own interests to the detriment of the other two actors. The Rudolphs also recognize that the autonomy of the Indian State has declined over the decades since the independence. But the reasons, for them, are quite different from the ones provided by the neo-Marxists.

For the Rudolphs, it is mainly because of the "deinstitutionalization of both political parties and state institutions"<sup>52</sup> that the autonomy of the Indian state has declined. The neo-Marxists bring in a much more sophisticated approach to define the autonomy and its decline. The rich tradition of the Marxist theorizations about the state comes very handy here.

The neo-Marxists reviewed here have shed the deterministic fallacy of the orthodox Marxists who are prone to *reducing* the state to the class, but they are yet a long way from recognizing the areas of choice, of indeterminacy, and of unintended consequences in much of social, economic, and political relationships. They also fall prey to a tendency of using the conceptual blinders of class such that they fail to come to terms with the complexity of the Indian social formation. For example, they tend to take a rather dismissive view of caste, ethnicity, religion, etc., as well as the forces of nationalism in India and the contemporary world.

But, it would be unjust to say that the neo-Marxists are just following a trodden path. No, they are not. They have opened the windows and doors of the fortress created by the orthodox Marxists and have let in fresh air and light. As shown in the introduction of this chapter, they have tried to adapt themselves to the new situations which they confront in the peripheral capitalist societies like India. At least they are trying, and in the right direction.

The state in India still retains its autonomous character, though it has much less than the amount of autonomy that it had inherited from the colonial state. Over the decades, constraints have increased but the state still manages to have a relatively autonomous arena of operation. As one observer concludes: "In post-colonial societies, the hegemonic position by a single dominant social class has not yet been achieved due to their transitional nature and this hegemonic position must be created for capitalism to grow on native soil."<sup>53</sup>

Ever since the independence, capitalism has been growing gradually in India with the state as the biggest capitalist around. The scenario has changed drastically now. The economic liberalization has created the conditions for a rapid growth of capitalism in India. Whether or not a single class emerges in the process to dominate the state apparatus is open for debate. But there are factors which would still impede the process. To name a few, these are divisive forces of ethnicity, language, religion, caste, region, urban-rural divide, etc. In India, these factors show amazing resilience and longevity. And even if, in a long drawn process, a dominant class emerges, as the neo-Marxist debate has shown, it is in the interest of the dominant class coalition itself that the state retains its autonomy.

#### **Notes and References**

- 1. Ralph Miliband, *The State in the Capitalist Society.* London: Quarlet Books, 1973, p. 31.
- 2*.* Theda Skocpol, "Bringing the State Back in: "Strategies of Analysis in Current Research". Peter Evans, *et. al.*(eds). *Bringing the State Back in*, Cambridge University Press, 1985.
- 3. Kola Olugbade, 'State in the Third World', Foreign Affairs Reports, Vol. XXXII, Nos. 7-8, July-Aug 1998,p.46
- 4. Rajni Kothari, "The Crisis of the Moderate State and the Decline of Democracy", Peter Lyon & James Manor, (Eds.) *Transfer and Transformation: Political Institutions in the New Commonwealth.* Leicester University Press, 1983.