# **PERSONAL LAWS**

## FLAVIA AGNES

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

WITH its rich and diverse cultural heritage, religious beliefs, and customary practices, India provides a vast, complex, and at times contradictory field of personal laws where the traditional coexists with the modern and the scriptural intermingles with the statutory. 'Personal laws' are a unique and distinct feature of the Indian legal structure. A study of these laws necessarily entails debates spanning precolonial, colonial, and post-colonial periods, and involves an intersectional reading of the customary, scriptural, and statutory. It also must involve an examination of the jurisprudential negotiations between community and State and between codified laws and fluid customs, within the framework of constitutionalism and legal pluralism.

This chapter is divided into three parts. First, it traces the legal architecture within which the realm of personal laws is located; it then examines the manner in which the courts have dealt with the challenges to the constitutionality of personal laws; finally, the chapter examines post-colonial legislative reforms, re-examines Article 44, and suggests ways of breaking the present stalemate while ensuring gender justice.

#### **II. THE LEGAL ARCHITECTURE OF PERSONAL LAWS**

### **1. Colonial Interventions**

While examining the realm of personal laws, one needs to be familiar with the legal system introduced during the early part of the colonial rule when the diverse customary traditions followed by various sects and castes were transformed into a regime of religion-based personal laws.

The term 'personal laws' was first introduced in the Presidencies of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras during the late eighteenth century, when the pre-colonial, non-State arbitration forums were transformed into State-regulated adjudicative systems. The transformation was at two levels: (i) through the introduction of a legal structure modelled on English courts, which were adversarial in nature (Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence); and (ii) through principles of substantive law which were evolved and administered in these courts (Anglo-Hindu and Anglo-Mohammedan laws).

The Charter of George I in 1726 authorised the establishment of mayor's courts (courts of the King of England) at Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras. The Warren Hastings Plan of 1772 provided for the establishment of civil and criminal courts in each district (*mofussil* courts) and explicitly saved the right of Hindus and Muslims to apply their own personal laws in civil matters. <sup>1</sup> Article XXIII of the

Plan stipulated that the laws of the Quran would apply with respect to the Mohammedans and those of *Shastra*s with respect to the *Gentoos*. <sup>2</sup> At this juncture, it became imperative to categorise the pluralistic communities along their religious beliefs in order to apply to them 'their' personal laws. This set in motion a gradual process of homogenising the local customs, which could be regulated through the State machinery. The religious identities of various communities became rigid in the course of litigation over property disputes.<sup>3</sup>

The practice of saving personal laws of the natives, which started at this juncture, continued through all subsequent British Regulations. But the Charters were not clear whether the 'native laws' of Hindus and Muslims referred to their religious laws or customary usages. When the Company officers stepped in to arbitrate in civil and criminal disputes, due to their limited understanding of local customs, they relied on Hindu pandits and Muslim *qazis* to ascertain their respective laws. This set in motion the process of Brahminisation and Islamisation of laws.

In 1774, the mayor's court of Calcutta was converted into a Supreme Court and in 1781, it was granted original civil jurisdiction over 'natives'. It was laid down that in matters of inheritance, succession, land rent, goods, and all matters of contract, their respective 'personal' laws should be applied. $\frac{4}{3}$  It was believed that the source of Hindu and Muslim laws were their religious texts. Hence, a wide range of customs that had no scriptural authority met with the disapproval of the administrators. The plurality of customs often led to the pandits expressing contradictory opinions, which resulted in a distrust of their opinions. The administrators were of the view that if the 'original' texts were made available, they could adjudicate directly, without the help of partisan and corrupt pandits and *qazis*, who were referred to as the 'native officers of the court'.

Since scriptures were unequivocally accepted as the 'source' of both Hindu and Muslim laws (in the mould of the Roman Canon law), translation of scriptures became the first priority for the political scheme of English administrators. The task of translating the ancient texts was viewed as an essential precondition to good governance. The process initiated by Hastings in the eighteenth century was carried forward by Jones, Halhed, Colebrooke, and Macnaghten. These translated texts became the basis of Anglo-Hindu and Anglo-Mohammedan laws in India.

The administrators of Bengal, in their fervour to trace the correct and original sources, totally disregarded local customs. But the Bombay Presidency Regulations of the same period, especially the 1799 Regulation (under John Duncan), did not follow the legal scheme devised by Hastings in Bengal. Here, the English distinction between 'King's Law' and 'Common Law' was applied instead of the Roman categorisation of 'Canon Law' (church law) and 'Civil Law', and custom was granted due recognition as an important source of law. $\frac{5}{2}$ 

All disputes between Hindus and Muslims were decided by the courts under civil law by applying to them their own 'personal' laws or the laws of the defendant in case of dispute. The term 'personal law', at this stage, was broader than 'family law', and included matters concerning caste, religious institutions, land rent, contract, etc, which were decided under the category 'civil law'. However, there was no mention as to how matrimonial disputes of other communities—for example, Parsis and Jews—would be decided. Hence, sometime in 1850, when a Parsi lady sued her husband for a decree of restitution of conjugal rights before the Supreme Court at Bombay, the case was heard on the ecclesiastical side of the Supreme Court. The Privy Council overruled this decision and held that it was impossible to apply the law of the diocese of London, a Christian law, to persons professing the Zoroastrian religion and the Supreme Court, in the exercise of its ecclesiastical jurisdiction, could not entertain a suit between Parsis for restitution of conjugal rights.<sup>6</sup>

To clear the ambiguity, in 1862, when the High Courts of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras were set up, the Letters Patent were issued, which entrusted the courts with the widest of civil powers. Clause 35 of the Letters Patent awarded the High Court matrimonial jurisdiction, but this was confined to Christian marriages. The jurisdiction to adjudicate over matrimonial disputes of other communities was awarded under Clause 12—civil jurisdiction that provided the scope to adjudicate over matrimonial disputes of all communities.

After the political upheaval of 1857, the administration of India shifted from the Company to the British Crown. The legal structure underwent a major change. The Supreme Courts in the Presidency towns of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras, which operated with relative autonomy, were replaced by integrated High Courts, with the Privy Council as the final court of appeal. The Presidencies lost their autonomy and were joined into a unified imperial rule. The scheme of administration as developed in Bengal was made the basis for the unified administration of all the three Presidencies. The Bombay Presidency's treatment of self-governing groups and its acceptance of customary law gave way to the Bengal practice of viewing all groups as part of a unified Hindu and Muslim legal entity.

The new legal structure, based on the model of the English courts, necessitated the enactment of statutes. But the realm of the 'personal' was spared from the process of codification as per the assurance given in the Queen's Proclamation. Despite this, the Hindu and Muslim family laws went through great transformation during this period. The establishment of courts based on rules and procedures of English courts, with a clear hierarchy of courts, was meant to make the arbitration forums along the model of English courts. While at the initial stage scriptural law was awarded judicial recognition, later on, the British interpretations of the ancient texts became binding legal principles. Cohn argues that the process of publishing authoritative decisions in English transformed 'Hindu law' into a form of 'English case law' and brought colonial supremacy into the Indian legal field. $<sup>7</sup>$ </sup>

#### **2. The Rights of Women**

With the introduction of matrimonial statutes for Christians and Parsis<sup>8</sup> and certain statutes of common application, <sup>9</sup> English legal principles were introduced within Indian matrimonial jurisprudence. In addition, English principles of justice, equity, and good conscience were used as direct channels for introducing English laws and practices into areas reserved as 'personal laws'. In 1887, in *Waghela Rajsanji v Shekh Masluddin*, <sup>10</sup> while deciding an issue of guardianship, the Privy Council held that if there was no rule of Indian law which could be applied to a particular case, then it should be 'decided by equity and good conscience  $\dots$ <sup>'11</sup> 'Equity and good conscience' were interpreted to mean the rules of English law, if found applicable to Indian circumstances. Later, this principle was used as a direct conduit for introducing English legal principles into Indian laws. This principle, along with the principle of 'public morality', was relied upon while curtailing the rights of women in various situations.

While examining these developments through the prism of women's rights, the manner in which women lost out many of their customary or scriptural rights becomes evident. One important arena where women lost their rights was the realm of *stridhan* property, a traditional concept under Hindu law, recognised by both customary and scriptural law. The decisions of various High Courts as well as the Privy Council granted women limited rights over their *stridhan* property and reverted the property back to the male heirs of their husbands, in contrast to scriptural dictates, which awarded a line of succession to *stridhan* property through the female line of descendants. The British administrators, familiar with the system of denial of property rights to married women in England, could not grasp the complex system of *stridhan* property and caused great harm to women's rights. 12 To undo the harm caused by these adverse rulings of the Privy Council, in 1937, the Hindu Women's Rights to Property Act was enacted, which awarded a limited right of inheritance to Hindu widows. Around this time other important statutes which were enacted were the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act 1937, presumably to protect the property rights of women enshrined in the Quran, the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act 1939, which granted Muslim women the right of statutory divorce, and the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936, a re-enactment of the earlier statute enacted in 1865 to widen the grounds of divorce.

It is interesting to observe how women negotiated their agency in matters of sexual choice, exploiting the legal loopholes and the implications of exercising this choice within the new legal structure. Bound by the stringent laws of their own religious communities, many women resorted to conversion to get away from their oppressive marriages and to contract marriages of choice. There were many instances of Hindu, Parsi, Christian, and Jewish women converting to Islam and marrying Muslim men, under the mistaken notion that conversion dissolves their earlier marriage. But applying the principle of justice, equity, and good conscience, the women were convicted for bigamy.<sup>13</sup> In *Robasa Khanum v Khodadad Bomanji Irani*, <sup>14</sup> where a Parsi wife who had converted to Islam was convicted, it was held that since there was no law which could be applied to her, the case must be decided on principles of justice and right or equity and good conscience.

Another way in which women negotiated their rights was to claim a non-*shastric* status. In order to protect their rights, several women from various Dravidian communities claimed a *shudra* status and pleaded that they were outside the pale of the Brahminical *smriti* code. In *Subbaratna Mudali v* Balakrishnaswami Naidu, <sup>15</sup> the Madras High Court held that dancing girls were *shudras* and hence *smriti* law cannot be applied to them. As per their custom, daughters were entitled to inherit in preference to sons. The Court also recognised the right of women to adopt girls. But in several other cases decided by the Bombay and Calcutta High Courts, it was ruled that the custom of adopting daughters by dancing girls was immoral and against public policy.<sup>16</sup> Contrary to popular perception, the process of modernisation and introduction of English legal principles into Indian law did not always benefit women.

#### **3. Post-Independence Hindu Law Reforms**

After the coming into force of the Indian Constitution in 1950, the first laws to be enacted along a religious identity were the Hindu law reforms of the 1950s. While this can be construed as violations of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution (equality and non-discrimination on the basis of religion), the reforms need to be viewed in the context of the pressing need for granting rights to Hindu women, who were lagging behind women of other religious groups. Hence the social reformers galvanised the campaign in the decade immediately preceding Independence and sustained the pressure until the reforms were brought about in the mid- $1950s$ .<sup>17</sup>

The main focus of the reforms were to transform sacramental Hindu marriages into contractual

obligations by introducing divorce and other matrimonial remedies along the lines of the English matrimonial laws, and to grant women equal inheritance rights. The reforms met with severe opposition from conservative nationalist leaders, who opposed the notion of divorce as well as the concept of granting property rights to women, but the reforms were pushed ahead, foregrounding the liberation of women as its primary plank. $\frac{18}{10}$  However, the codified laws continued to reflect patriarchal ideology and validated Hindu rituals. The reforms privileged modernisation, codification, and unification as key elements of progress and development. Hence, several pro-women customary practices were discarded for the sake of uniformity. $\frac{19}{12}$  The reforms did not introduce any principle which had not already existed somewhere in India. Despite this, they were projected as a vehicle for ushering in western modernity.<sup>20</sup>

Since the political impediment to reform the Hindu law was grave, several balancing acts had to be performed by the State. Crucial provisions empowering women had to be constantly diluted to reach the level of minimum consensus. While projecting the reforms as pro-women, male privileges had to be protected. While introducing modernity, archaic Brahminical rituals had to be retained.<sup>21</sup> While claiming uniformity, diverse customary laws had to be validated. While usurping the power exercised by religious heads, the needs of emerging capitalism had to be secured. Only by adopting such manoeuvring tactics could the State reach its goal of enacting the statutes. The Acts were neither Hindu in character nor based on modern principles of equality, but reflected the worst tendencies of both. As Menski, a leading scholar of Hindu law, argues:

In social reality, all that happened was that the official Indian law changed, while more and more of Hindu law went underground, populating the realm of the unofficial law … The conceptual framework and ideologies underpinning multiple ways of life, and hence the entire customary social edifice of Hindu culture, remained largely immune to the powerful wonder drug of legal modernization which had been administered in measured doses before and after 1947.<sup>22</sup>

Menski further argues that Hindu law has always been a people's  $law.^{23}$  Hence, something as complex as Hindu personal law could not be reformed away and abolished by a statute, nor could its influence as a legal normative order that permeates Indian social life be legislated into oblivion. As Hunt and Wickham suggest, law is not, in contrast to typical perceptions in legal theory, a unitary phenomenon.<sup>24</sup>

### **III. THE CONSTITUTIONALITYOF PERSONAL LAWS**

The tension between plurality of legal norms and the desire to impose unity comes to the foreground when we examine the constitutional challenges to the diverse personal laws during the post-Independence period. The interface between provisions of equality and non-discrimination enshrined in the Constitution and the prevalence of gender-discriminatory personal laws has led to a contestation between individual claims to equality, and the right of religious communities as collective units of a democracy.

The validity of laws is contingent upon them meeting the criteria prescribed under Article 13(1) of the Constitution, which stipulates that all laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of the Constitution, insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of <u>Part III</u>, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void. As per Article 13(3)(a), 'law' includes custom or usage having the force of law. This stipulation must be read along with Article 372(1), which mandates that all laws in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution shall continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by a competent legislature or authority. The phrase 'laws in force' is clarified in Explanation 1 to this Article and means a law made by a competent authority and has practically the same meaning as the expression 'existing law', as defined in Article 366(10) of the Constitution. As per this formulation, any law that is in conflict with fundamental rights can be declared as void. Hence, if any law or legal provision violates the mandate of equality (Article 14), non-discrimination (Article 15), or the right to life and personal liberty (Article 21), courts have the power to strike it down.

However, this straitjacket formula does not take into account the complex phenomenon of personal laws, which exist within the realm of pluralistic traditions and a multicultural ethos, where the people's law coexists alongside the written Constitution and becomes a source of law. Part III of the Constitution itself validates these pluralistic traditions, safeguards diversity, and protects minority cultures (Articles 25–30). Group rights are awarded equal legitimacy and recognition as individual rights. This renders the task of judicial review extremely daunting and warrants a cautious approach. While grappling with this complexity, Indian courts have adopted various approaches. Initially, courts adopted an approach of non-interference, holding that personal laws are not amenable to the test of Part III of the Constitution and hence cannot be tested against the grain of fundamental rights. There appears to have been an apprehension that the judicial verdict might encroach upon legislative prerogatives or impinge upon group rights. Conversely, in later years, a newer trend has evolved, and courts have tested personal laws on the touchstone of fundamental rights and have attempted to reconcile them, by reading them down or interpreting them so as to render them consistent with fundamental rights, or have struck down the offending provisions as violative of fundamental rights. These distinct approaches are examined below.

## **1. The Non-Interventionist Approach**

The fountainhead for the judicial premise that personal laws are not 'laws in force' and that they cannot be tested against the touchstone of fundamental rights is a judgment of the Bombay High Court delivered in 1952, by an illustrious bench of Chagla CJ and Gajendragadkar J, in *State of Bombay v Narasu Appa Mali*. 25

This judgment was of the pre-Hindu law reform period. The petitioner had challenged the norm of monogamy brought about by the Bombay Prohibition of Bigamous Marriages Act 1946, which prohibited bigamy among Hindus while permitting the same among Muslims, and pleaded that it violated the provisions of equality and non-discrimination under the newly enacted Constitution. While upholding the validity of this social legislation, the Bombay High Court ruled that personal laws are not 'laws in force' under Article 13 of the Constitution as they are based on religious precepts, hence the principles enshrined in <u>Part III</u> of the Constitution cannot be applied to them.

The judgment made no distinction between statutory and non-statutory personal laws and took a categorical position that all 'personal laws' are not 'laws' within the scope of Article 13. Though this ruling is of a High Court, and not of the Supreme Court, which would be binding on all lower courts, it seems to have dominated all subsequent judicial discourse on the constitutional validity of personal laws, either to concur or to distinguish from it. For several decades, it became a stumbling block to test the constitutionality of personal laws, as several courts followed the principle laid down by this ruling, even while examining discriminatory provisions in statutory personal laws. Several legal scholars have been critical of this judgment, arguing that the Bombay High Court shirked from its responsibility of examining the discriminatory provisions of personal laws against the touchstone of the newly enacted Constitution.<sup>26</sup>

In a departure from this ruling, Krishna Iyer J provided clarity on the question of constitutionality in *Assan Rawther v Ammu Umma*, <sup>27</sup> by holding that:

Personal law ... is law by virtue of the sanction of the sovereign behind it and is, for that very reason, enforceable through court. Not Manu nor Mohammed but the monarch for the time makes 'personal law' enforceable … Hindu and Mohammedan laws are applied in courts because of old regulations and Acts charging the courts with the duty to administer the personal laws and not because the ancient law-givers obligate the courts to enforce the texts. $28$ 

In 1983, in an important ruling, *T Sareetha v T Venkata Subbaiah*, 29 the Andhra Pradesh High Court struck down Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955, which dealt with restitution of conjugal rights as unconstitutional. While the wording of the section did not discriminate against women, and the provision applied equally to men and women, PA Choudary J emphasised the social context of its operation and held that the provision violates the right to privacy and human dignity guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. It has the impact of denying a woman her free choice whether, when, and how her body is to become the vehicle for the procreation of another human being. But in 1984, the Delhi High Court, in *Harvender Kaur v Harmander Singh Choudhry*, <sup>30</sup> upheld this provision, invoking the legal dictum that personal laws are immune to the test of  $Part III$  of the Constitution:

Introduction of constitutional law in the home is most inappropriate. It is like introducing a bull in a china shop. It will prove to be a ruthless destroyer of the marriage institution and all that it stands for. In the privacy of the home and the married life, neither Article 21 nor Article 14 have any place.<sup>31</sup>

Later in the same year, the Supreme Court, in *Saroj Rani v Sudarshan Kumar Chadha*, <sup>32</sup> affirmed the ruling of the Delhi High Court and overruled the more progressive verdict of the Andhra Pradesh High Court.

Another important judgment in this realm, while not directly relating to gender justice but implicating broader questions of social justice, is *Shri Krishna Singh v Mathura Ahir*. <sup>33</sup> Here the Supreme Court was faced with the question of whether a *shudra* could become a *sanyasi*. Giving primacy to custom and usage over scriptural law, the Court ruled that if custom and usage permitted, he could become a *sanyasi*, but in the absence of such usage, he could not be ordained. The High Court had held that any handicap suffered by a *shudra* according to personal law would be in violation of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution and would amount to discrimination on the basis of caste. The Supreme Court overruled this decision with the following comments:

In our opinion, the learned judge failed to appreciate that **Part III** of the Constitution does not touch upon the personal laws of the parties. In applying the personal laws of the parties, he could not introduce his own concepts of modern times but should have enforced the law as derived from recognised and authoritative sources of Hindu law … as interpreted in the judgments of various High Courts, except, where such law is altered by any usage or custom or abrogated by a statute.<sup>34</sup>

In a case nearly two decades later, *Madhu Kishwar v State of Bihar*, 35 the constitutionality of certain provisions of the Chhota Nagpur Tenancy Act 1908, which disentitled tribal women from inheritance rights, was challenged. The Supreme Court was unwilling to declare that the custom of inheritance, which disinherited the daughter, offended Articles 14, 15, and 21 of the Constitution, on the ground that customs differ from tribe to tribe and region to region and the tribal community may not as yet be

ready for reform. However, granting limited relief, it was held that a destitute woman could assert her right of occupation against the male inheritors. While the Court refused to declare tribal customs en masse as offending fundamental rights, it kept the doors open for future challenges by holding that the issue can be examined on a case-by-case basis as and when it comes for review.<sup>36</sup> Similar reluctance was visible when the Supreme Court declined to engage the question of constitutionality upon the filing of a public interest petition by the Ahmedabad Women's Action Group. $\frac{37}{10}$  The petitioners had challenged various discriminatory aspects of Muslim law, including polygamy and triple talaq. While dismissing it without examining its merits, the three-judge bench ruled that it was not within the jurisdiction of the courts to make laws for social change and that State policy was the function of the legislature.

#### **2. The Scrutinising Approach**

When we examine rulings of later decades, we can clearly see the influence of *Narasu Appa Mali* gradually wearing out, with courts increasingly testing personal laws against the touchstone of fundamental rights. The approach adopted has been to either 'read down' a statutory provision, to reinterpret it in harmony with **Part III** of the Constitution, or to strike down the offending section.

In *Mary Roy v State of Kerala*, 38 the Travancore Christian Succession Act 1916 was challenged on the ground of discrimination against women. Under the Travancore Christian Succession Act 1916, the share of the daughter was limited to one-fourth share of the son or Rs 5,000, whichever was less. Adopting the harmonising approach, the Supreme Court struck down the discriminatory provisions, based on a technical ground that after Independence, the laws enacted by the erstwhile Princely States, which were not expressly saved, had been repealed.<sup>39</sup>

Challenges also took place with regard to marriage and divorce. Section 10 of the Indian Divorce Act 1869 stipulated that while a husband could obtain divorce only on the ground of adultery, the wife had to prove additional grounds such as cruelty or desertion. Adultery, though a mandatory ground, was considered not to be a sufficient ground of divorce. Under other matrimonial laws, the parties could obtain divorce by pleading the sole grounds of cruelty, desertion, or adultery. Since adultery is extremely difficult to prove, and not all husbands who treat their wives with cruelty or desertion also commit adultery, Christian women faced great hardships. The discrimination was at two levels, a gender-based discrimination between men and women, and also the discrimination based on an unreasonable classification of treating Christian women as a separate category as compared with women from other communities.

One of the first instances when this discriminatory provision was challenged was in 1953, in *Dr Dwaraka Bai v Professor Nainam Mathews*. <sup>40</sup> The petitioner pleaded before the Madras High Court that the stipulation violated the constitutional guarantee of equality under Article 14. However, the Court ruled that the discrimination was based on reasonable classification as it took into consideration the ability of men and women and the results of their acts of adultery, and was not merely based on sex. It held that the consequences of adultery by a husband were different from the consequences of adultery by a wife: A husband 'does not bear a child … and make it a legitimate child of his wife's to be maintained by the wife … But if the wife commits adultery, she may bear a child as a result of such adultery, and the husband will ... be liable to maintain that child  $\dots$ <sup>41</sup>
In 1995, however, in a landmark judgment, *Ammini EJ v Union of India*, 42 the full bench of the Kerala High Court struck down the offending provisions as arbitrary and violative of Article 21 of the Constitution. The Court held:

The legal effect of the above provisions in s. 10 [of the Indian Divorce Act] ... is to compel the wife who is deserted or cruelly treated, to continue a life subject to a relationship which she hates … [Such a life] will be a sub human life without dignity and personal liberty. It will be a humiliating and oppressed life without the freedom to remarry and enjoy life in the normal course … such a life can legitimately be treated only as a life imposed by a tyrannical or authoritarian law on a helpless deserted or cruelly treated Christian wife quite against her will… the impugned provisions in Section 10 in so far as it obliges … Christian wives to prove adultery along with desertion and cruelty is violative of Art. 21 of the Constitution of India ...<sup>43</sup>

Later, the Bombay,  $\frac{44}{5}$  Delhi,  $\frac{45}{5}$  and Karnataka  $\frac{46}{5}$  High Courts also struck down this discriminatory provision. In 2001, the archaic Act itself was amended, in keeping with contemporary developments.  $\frac{47}{5}$ 

The right of Hindu women to execute a will in respect of the property acquired or possessed by them, under section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act 1956, was at issue in *C Masilamani Mudaliar v Idol of Sri Swaminathaswami Thirukoil*. <sup>48</sup> Adopting a liberal-rights-based approach, the apex court ruled that the right of women to eliminate all kinds of gender-based discrimination, particularly in respect of property, is implicit in Articles 14, 15, and 21 of the Constitution. These provisions constituted 'the trinity of justice, equality, liberty and dignity'.<sup>49</sup> The Supreme Court further stated:

The personal laws conferring inferior status on women is anathema to equality. Personal laws are derived not from the Constitution but from the religious scriptures. The laws thus derived must be consistent with the Constitution lest they become void under Article 13 if they violate fundamental rights.<sup>50</sup>

The stipulation under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act 1955 that the father is the natural guardian of the child was challenged in *Githa Hariharan v Reserve Bank of India. <sup>51</sup>* Rather than delivering a finding of unconstitutionality, the Supreme Court used the interpretive tool of 'reading down' the law to include the mother also as the 'natural guardian' of a child.

Another significant ruling in this realm, though not within the scope of gender justice, is *John Vallamattom v Union of India*, <sup>52</sup> where a three-judge bench headed by VN Khare CJ struck down Section 118 of the Indian Succession Act 1925, a pre-constitutional personal law applicable to Christians.<sup>53</sup> The case concerned a Christian priest's personal freedom to make a bequest of a religious-charitable nature, which was curtailed by the offending section. The apex court struck down the provision as being arbitrary and discriminatory, and therefore violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The Court also relied on the Declaration on the Right to Development, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights, to which India is a signatory, and on Article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1966 which stipulates:

1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching … 3. Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health, or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.

#### The Court proceeded to note that:

[E]ven if a provision was not unconstitutional on the day on which it was enacted or the Constitution came into force, by reason of facts emerging out thereafter, the same may be rendered unconstitutional... The right of equality of women vis-à-vis their male counterparts is accepted worldwide. It will be immoral to discriminate a woman on the ground of sex … It is no matter of doubt that marriage, succession and the like matters of a secular character cannot be brought within the guarantee enshrined under Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution. Any legislation which brings succession and the like matters of secular character within the ambit of Articles 25 and 26 is a suspect legislation  $\dots$ <sup>54</sup>

A major issue of controversy within personal laws has been the rights of divorced Muslim women to claim maintenance. The constitutional validity of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1986 was challenged in *Danial Latifi v Union of India*. <sup>55</sup> This law was passed after the controversial ruling in the *Shah Bano* case, <sup>56</sup> where the Supreme Court had upheld the right of a divorced Muslim woman for post-divorce maintenance under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Some adverse comments against Islam and the Prophet led to a backlash within the orthodox Muslim community and, under pressure, the then ruling Congress government enacted a law to exempt divorced Muslim women from the purview of the secular provision of maintenance. This move was perceived as retrograde by human rights groups, who challenged its constitutional validity. In the intervening years, several High Courts had given a positive interpretation to its provisions, to secure the rights of divorced Muslim women, against which aggrieved husbands had filed appeals in the Supreme Court. These appeals, as well as the petitions challenging the constitutional validity of the enactment, were heard together and the apex court upheld the enactment by inscribing it with a gender-sensitive interpretation and dismissed the appeals filed by the aggrieved husbands. According to the Court, the new Act had substituted the earlier right of recurrent maintenance under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, with a new right to claim a lump sum amount as a divorce settlement. If the husband failed to make such a settlement, a divorced Muslim wife had the right to approach the court for enforcement of the right under Section 3 of the Act. This ruling thus recognised the rights of divorced Muslim women.

Another important intervention in the realm of Muslim law has been the Supreme Court ruling in *Shamim Ara*,<sup>57</sup> which invalidated arbitrary divorce and laid out clear guidelines as per Quranic injunctions for pronouncing talaq, so that Muslim women are not deprived of their right of maintenance while proceedings are pending in court. This ruling outlawed the fraudulent tactics adopted by lawyers, of sending a *talaqnama* (divorce deed) along with their reply to the maintenance application, under a misconceived notion that a divorced Muslim woman is not entitled to maintenance or economic settlement. Here the Supreme Court upheld the Quranic stipulation and overruled the interpretations of various legal texts of Muslim law, as well as the rulings of colonial courts, in defence of gender justice. The judgment relied upon the much-acclaimed judgment of Krishna Iyer J in *A Yousuf Rawther v Sowramma*, <sup>58</sup> which had held that:

The interpretation of a legislation, obviously intended to protect a weaker section of the community, like women, must be informed by the social perspective and purpose and, within its grammatical flexibility, must further the beneficent object … The view that the Muslim husband enjoys an arbitrary, unilateral power to inflict instant divorce does not accord with Islamic injunctions …<sup>59</sup>

The recent Supreme Court ruling in *Vishwa Lochan Madan v Union of India, <sup>60</sup>* which, while not invalidating *fatwas* and rulings of *Sharia* courts, has held that their decisions are not binding even upon the persons seeking them. This is another instance of reinterpreting Muslim law to weave in gender justice by invalidating anti-women *fatwas*, while not negating the rights of the community to manage its cultural and religious affairs as per Articles 25–28 of the Constitution.

# **IV. THE UNIFORM CIVIL CODE DEBATE**

# **1. Post-Independence Reforms within Personal Laws**

Legislative initiatives to engage with the challenging task of reforming the existing personal laws or enacting newer ones, in consonance with **Part III** of the Constitution, have been few and far between. Within a multicultural and pluralistic society, legislative interventions have been initiated largely due to the demands from within the concerned communities. The major legislative reforms have been the Hindu law reforms of the 1950s, which was a long-drawn-out and extremely contentious process spanning over fifteen years, and was spearheaded by social reformers. Though the enactments codified the Hindu laws, they did not bring in equality, gender justice, or uniformity and provided a statutory recognition for the diverse customs and usages followed by various sects, communities, and regions.

For instance, under Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, which stipulates conditions for contracting a Hindu marriage, and under Section 7, which prescribes the ceremonies for performing a valid Hindu marriage, customs and usages have been awarded due recognition, even while prescribing the Brahminical rituals such as *vivaha homa* (the sacrificial fire), *saptapadi* (seven steps round the fire), and *kanyadan* (offering the bride to the groom) as essential ceremonies (this ritual reinforces the notion that women are a property to be handed over from fathers to husbands).

While Section 13 of the Act provides for a judicial divorce, Section 29(2) validates customary divorces. The provision for registering a marriage under Section 8 is optional. Hence, despite the law being codified, a Hindu need not approach any State authority, either for solemnising the marriage or for dissolving it, a position not very different from that existing under the uncodified Muslim law. Only through retaining the fluidity of customs of the pluralistic Hindu society could the reforms be pushed through.

The law of inheritance also contained several discriminatory provisions. Under the Hindu Succession Act 1956, the notion of Hindu Undivided Family (HUF) property was retained due to severe opposition to its removal from conservative segments on the basis that it would result in fragmentation of landholdings. The advantage of this arrangement was to the Hindu male, as women were excluded from inheritance of ancestral property. After a sustained struggle, in 2005 the Act was finally amended granting women the status of a coparcener. While this is an important right, it is more cosmetic, as property continues to be consolidated in the hands of male relatives. The tax benefits awarded to HUF property (a concept unique to Hindu law) have been retained, despite the privileged position it awards exclusively to Hindus.

Reforms within laws governing minority communities have been even more difficult to come by. As discussed above, the Muslim Women's Act was enacted due to the pressure from the Muslim orthodoxy, to undo the verdict in the *Shah Bano* case, despite opposition to it from progressive sections within the Muslim community. Due to this, the pro-women interpretation of this statute providing divorced Muslim women lump sum post-divorce settlements by various High Courts was overlooked, both by the media and the human rights groups. However, the final seal of approval by the Supreme Court in *Danial Latifi* upholding its constitutional validity has laid to rest this controversy.

The Christian law reforms were spearheaded by Christian women, united across various Christian

denominations, which negotiated with the State as well as the religious leaders, over a span of two decades to bring about much-needed reforms within the archaic Indian Divorce Act of 1869. Finally, in 2001, the law was amended and egalitarian grounds of divorce were introduced. The Parsi law reforms, which were introduced in 1988, were spearheaded by legal scholars from the community, as well as community leaders from the Parsi *panchayat*. While the provisions of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936 have been brought on par with the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act, the system of a Parsi matrimonial court, where members of the community are invited to be on the jury, a system abolished in all other courts, still prevails. Some archaic provisions such as that allowing the property of an adulterous wife to be settled in favour of her children have been retained (Section 50 of the Act).

The much-needed provisions regarding women's rights to matrimonial property or division of matrimonial assets at the time of divorce, which have become part of family laws in many countries, have not been introduced in India. The only place where they exist is in the Goan Civil Code, introduced by the Portuguese.

### **2. The Challenges for Enacting a Uniform Civil Code**

It is within this background of the difficulties encountered while bringing legislative reforms to reconcile personal laws with **Part III** of the Constitution that we must approach the controversy surrounding the Uniform Civil Code (UCC), incorporated in Article 44 of the Constitution as a Directive Principle of State Policy.

The genesis of the demand for a uniform family law is situated within the nationalist women's groups of the pre-Independence era, who raised this issue in the context of gender justice within the larger political debates of the Indian National Congress. At the time, the UCC was perceived to be an optional code, which could gradually replace the various personal laws. A decade later, within the Constituent Assembly debates, the focus shifted to the concerns of nation building. At this historical juncture of India's freedom, the overarching concern of the founding fathers was the formation of the new nation-state and its smooth governance. Within this paradigm, the provision of a UCC was debated primarily in the context of the authority of the State to regulate civil life and family relationships of the majority and the right of minorities to their cultural identity. Within the political turmoil surrounding the partition of the country and the bloodbath that followed, an insecure Muslim minority had to be reassured of their right to religious and cultural freedom.

What emerges is a duality of concerns for the newly evolving Indian State. At one end, it was deemed necessary that the various sects, castes, and tribes—from the erstwhile Princely States, tribal kingdoms, and the British Raj—were to be integrated by enacting a uniform set of family laws by introducing a concept of 'legal Hinduism'.  $\frac{61}{2}$  The flip side of this objective of smooth governance was an assurance to minorities (not just Muslims, but also Christians, Parsis, Jews, and tribal communities) of their right to their separate religious and cultural identity, symbolised by the continuance of their personal laws or customary practices, by incorporating Articles 25–28 as fundamental rights. In the years immediately following Independence, the issue of enacting a UCC did not figure in any important national debate. While enacting a code for Hindus, the attempt was not to abandon ancient scriptural law or established community customs but to assimilate them within a Code along with principles of English law and, while doing so, establish the law-making authority of

the newly independent nation, which was, until then, vested with the heads of various religious sects. $\frac{62}{5}$ 

Despite this, the misconception that Hindus have forsaken their personal laws and have embraced a secular, egalitarian, and gender-just code—which must now be extended to minority communities to liberate 'their' women—persists. Adverse comments in some Supreme Court rulings have added fuel to this tension. For instance, in *Sarla Mudgal*, <sup>63</sup> while examining the issue of polygamy by Hindu men converting to Islam, the Supreme Court endorsed this view and noted that the oneness of the nation, as well as loyalty to it, would be at stake if different minority groups followed different family laws. It is a matter of debate whether a UCC will ensure national integration and communal harmony. However, such comments are often sensationalised in the media and pose unsurmountable obstacles in the path of family law reforms from the perspective of gender justice.

Within the complex constitutional scheme, a UCC also faces other challenges. The legislative power to enact family laws is placed in the Concurrent List (Entry 5, List III of the Seventh Schedule). Therefore, both Parliament and State legislatures are vested with this power. Since the Constitution provides for a federal structure, depriving the States of this power through the enactment of one set of rigid and uniform family laws might invite concerns about the dominance of the Centre over the States. In addition, it could impact relations with the North-Eastern States, which are further protected through specific constitutional guarantees of protection of customary laws under Article 244(2) and the Sixth Schedule. A specific protection is also awarded to customary rights of tribal communities under Article 244(1) and the Fifth Schedule. In addition, Article 371 grants special status to various North-Eastern States, through which special protection is awarded to customary laws and the tribal councils, which are autonomous bodies empowered to administer civil and criminal laws, as per the customs of the tribe.

There is great diversity in the customs and practices of tribes. However, most tribal councils function from patriarchal assumptions and forbid women from participating in decision making in the public sphere, despite the relatively higher status enjoyed by women within the domestic sphere. This also applies to traditionally matrilineal tribes, such as Khasis, Garos, and Jaintias. The State policies of development have resulted in the concentration of economic power in the hands of male elites, which has led to an economic imbalance affecting the rights of women. The situation is complex, and women are staking their claim for better political participation. However, they do not view the UCC as a solution to their problems, as it will further complicate matters and render access to justice even more challenging. The choice before them is to navigate between the tribal customary laws and the formal judicial system.<sup>64</sup>

Finally, the State of Goa, which has a UCC introduced by the erstwhile Portuguese regime, also follows a unique system of community of property, which has its own challenges but may not be amenable to the idea of a UCC enacted by the Centre.

#### **V. CONCLUSION: THE WAY FORWARD**

An incremental approach towards uniform rights appears to be the most effective strategy to break away from the communally vitiated identity politics within which the controversy over the enactment of a UCC appears to be entrapped. The Special Marriage Act 1954, which is an optional law of marriage, suffers from disuse due to its stringent procedure for registering a marriage. No effort has

been made to make this law relevant to those venturing into inter-religious marriages, which have now been given a communally tinted term—*love jihad*. Thus, despite the existence of this Act, conversion and hasty marriages seem to be the only option for those venturing into marriages of choice against the wishes of their parents, since within a communal atmosphere, the one-month notice period stipulated under the Act may pose a threat to life to the couple. There is consequently an urgent need to modernise and popularise this statute.

Another strategy to break the stalemate is to enact specific legislation, which will apply to women uniformly across communities. The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 is an example of such a law. This legislation has reframed women's rights within the family by introducing the statutory right to shelter and to a violence-free life. Women in various situations—married women, divorcees, widows, those in 'marriage-like' relationships, and in natal families—can access its provisions. The statute adopts an inclusive, rights-based approach. The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006 is another statute which prescribes a uniform age of marriage. It does not invalidate marriages, but provides for their dissolution within two years of their solemnisation and protects the rights of women and children. It is a prudent measure, as it will not render the marriages of minor girls invalid, nor deprive women of their right of maintenance and legitimacy. The provisions under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Domestic Violence Act and the Muslim Women's Act, have helped to secure the maintenance rights of women across communities. The outlawing of triple talaq in the *Shamim Ara* ruling has proved to be an additional armour for the protection of Muslim women's rights. With these developments there appears to be a gradual but definitive move towards uniformity of rights.

One major area of disgruntlement, as evidenced in *Narasu Appa Mali*, continues to the present, namely the perceived 'appeasement' of Muslims by privileging them with the option of bigamy/polygamy and the resulting disentitlement caused to Hindus through the imposition of monogamy.<sup>65</sup> This discontentment gets projected in public discourse as a concern for the pitiable plight of Muslim women, who need to be liberated from their barbaric laws through the enforcement of a UCC. However, outlawing polygamy by enacting a UCC or codifying Muslim law does not appear to be an effective solution to the problem, as evidenced by the prevalence of bigamy among Hindus. Official reports reveal that despite the statutory restraint, incidents of bigamy are more common among Hindus (a term which includes Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs and other reform sects) than Muslims.<sup>66</sup> Ironically, the worst sufferers of this trend have been Hindu women, who are denied their basic right of maintenance and sustenance, when the husband pleads that the woman is his second wife.<sup>67</sup> In comparison, a Muslim woman in a bigamous marriage fares better than her Hindu counterpart, since she is entitled to rights of maintenance, shelter, dignity, and equal status. The Hindu second wife is not only disentitled of her rights, but is also divested from her status as 'wife' and humiliated as 'mistress', 'keep', or 'concubine' in judicial discourse. The adverse comments by Katju J in *D Velusamy* are an example of such an attitude.<sup>68</sup> Contrary to the feeling of perceived disentitlement, it is the Hindu husband who enjoys the privileged position of denying maintenance to a woman with whom he has cohabited, and who may even have given birth to children, merely by pleading during court proceedings that he has violated the mandate of monogamy without any criminal consequences visiting him. A Muslim husband in a polygamous relationship cannot similarly escape from his legal obligation of providing maintenance to each of his wives, since the option of pleading that he has divorced her and hence he is not obligated to maintain her has been removed through the *Danial Latifi* and *Shamim Ara* rulings.

In 2005, in *Rameshchandra Ramparatapji Daga v Rameshwari Rameshchandra Daga*, 69 the Supreme Court, while trying to grapple with this problem and awarding maintenance to a woman whose husband had challenged the validity of their marriage on the ground of a previous subsisting marriage, conceded that despite codification and introduction of monogamy, the ground reality had not significantly changed and that Hindu marriages, like Muslim marriages, continue to be bigamous. The Court further observed that though such marriages are illegal as per the provisions of the codified Hindu law, they are not 'immoral', and hence a financially dependent woman cannot be denied maintenance on this ground.<sup>70</sup>

Recently, in *Badshah v Urmila Badshah Godse*, 71 the Supreme Court upheld the right of a Hindu woman who had been duped into a bigamous marriage and thwarted the attempt of her husband to subsequently deny her maintenance. The judgment emphasised that:

While dealing with the application of a destitute wife [under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973] … the Court is dealing with the marginalised sections of the society. The purpose is to achieve 'social justice' which is the Constitutional vision, enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution of India … Therefore, it becomes the bounden duty of the Courts to advance the cause of the social justice. $\frac{72}{2}$ 

If Hindu women, like Muslim women, become entitled to rights, the destitution and humiliation that they suffer will be greatly reduced. This brings me to the concluding point of this chapter. The enforcement of a UCC cannot be viewed in a simplistic manner as outlawing 'polygamy and triple talaq' among the Muslims. The issue is far more complex and would require a detailed analysis of the gaps within existing laws of all communities, from the perspective of women's empowerment. Women need to be empowered to negotiate the local and informal systems as well as the formal courts for enforcement of their rights. To extricate rights from informal customary practices, and locate them exclusively within the domain of courts and statutes, may not be a viable option for a hierarchal and multicultural society. The woman's agency and autonomy to negotiate rights from multiple locations is the relevant factor. More than uniformity, what women need is an accessible and affordable justice delivery system and inclusive models of development which will help to eliminate their poverty and build an egalitarian world.

<sup>1</sup> Upendra Baxi, *Towards a Sociology of Indian law* (Satvahan 1986).

<sup>2</sup> *Gentoos* was the Portuguese term for Hindus. The term has its origin in the Biblical term 'Gentiles', meaning heathens or nonbelievers.

<sup>3</sup> See *Raj Bahadur v Bishen Dayal* (1882) ILR 4 All 343; *Ma Yait v Maung Chit Maung* (1921) ILR 49 Cal 310.

<sup>4</sup> ST Desai, *Mulla's Principles of Hindu Law* (16th edn, NM Tripathi 1994).

<sup>5</sup> Amrita Shodhan, *A Question of Community: Religious Groups and Colonial Law* (Samya Press 2001).

<sup>6</sup> *Ardaseer Gursetjee v Perozeboye* (1856) MIA 348.

<sup>7</sup> Bernard S Cohn, *Colonialism and its Form of Knowledge: The British in India* (Oxford University Press 1997) 75.

<sup>8</sup> Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1865; Indian Succession Act 1865; Parsi Succession Act 1865; Indian Divorce Act 1869; Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872.

<sup>2</sup> Special Marriage Act 1872.

<sup>10</sup> (1887) LR 14 IA 89.

<sup>11</sup> *Waghela Rajsanji v Shekh Masluddin* (1887) LR 14 IA 89 [3].

<sup>12</sup> Flavia Agnes, *Family Law: Family Laws and Constitutional Claims*, vol 1 (Oxford University Press 2011).

<sup>13</sup> See *Re Ram Kumari* (1891) ILR 18 Cal 264; *Budansa Rowther v Fatima Bibi* AIR 1914 Mad 192; *Emperor v Mt. Ruri* AIR 1919 Lah 389.

 $\frac{14}{2}$  AIR 1947 Bom 272.