### **116 Medicalization and the Naturalization of Social Control**

- Leslie, C. (1974). The modernization of Asian medical systems. In J. Poggie, Jr. & R. N. Lynch (Eds.), *Rethinking modernization* (pp. 69–107). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
- Leslie, C. (1976). Introduction. In C. Leslie (Ed.), *Asian medical systems: A comparative study* (pp. 1–12). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Leslie, C. (1977). Medical pluralism and legitimation in the Indian and Chinese medical systems. In D. Landy (Ed.), *Culture, disease, and healing: Studies in medical anthropology* (pp. 511–517). New York: Macmillan.
- Leslie, C. (1992). Interpretations of illness: Syncretism in modern Ayurveda. In C. Leslie & A. Young (Eds.), *Paths to Asian medical knowledge* (pp. 177–208). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lock, M. (1984). *East Asian medicine in urban Japan: Varieties of medical experience*. Berkeley: University of California Press.

- Navarro, V. (1986). *Crisis, health, and medicine: A social critique*. New York: Tavistock.
- Romanucci-Ross, L. (1977). The hierarchy of resort in curative practice: The Admirality Islands, Melanesia. In D. Landy (Ed.), *Culture, disease, and healing: Studies in medical anthropology* (pp. 481–487). New York: Macmillan.
- Singer, M., & Baer, H. A. (1995). *Critical medical anthropology*. Amityville, NY: Baywood.
- Stoner, B. P. (1986). Understanding medical systems: Traditional, modern, and syncretic health care alternatives in medically pluralistic societies. *Medical Anthropology, 17*(2), 44–48.
- Strathern, A., & Stewart, P. J. (1999). *Curing and healing: Medical anthropology in global perspective*. Durham: Carolina Academic Press.

# **Medicalization and the Naturalization of Social Control**

### **Margaret Lock**

Although medicalization is a concept that has been widely taken up and used by medical anthropologists, it was sociologists who first coined the term and put it into circulation. One of the abiding interests of sociologists concerned with modernization and its effects, particularly those who followed in the legacy of Emile Durkheim and Talcott Parsons, has been to show how social order is produced and sustained in contemporary society. In this vein the sociologist Irving Zola (1972) argued in the early 1970s that medicine had become a major institution of social control, replacing the more "traditional" institutions of religion and law, resulting in the "medicalizing" of many aspects of daily life in the name of health. Zola's publication, in which he makes it clear that he is by no means totally opposed to the process he highlights, gave birth to a genre of research in which the cumbersome word medicalization—"to make medical"—was adopted as a key concept.

It can be argued that medicalization commenced many hundreds of years before Zola's observation, from the time that specialists devoted to healing were first recognized among human groups. With the consolidation of the several literate medical traditions of Europe and Asia between approximately 250 BC and 600 AD, professional healers made themselves available for treatment in connection with the stresses of everyday life and life-cycle-related problems, notably infertility, in addition to dealing with obvious physical malfunctions. Nevertheless, it is usually assumed, particularly in the sociological literature, that medicalization is a recent phenomenon and that it is inextricably associated with modernization as it unfolded in the "West." This entry will review this literature, drawing on research findings from both the "developed" and the "developing" world, giving emphasis to the contribution made by medical anthropologists.

# **MODERNIZATION AND MEDICALIZATION**

Commencing in the 17th century, European and North American modernization fostered an "engineering mentality," one manifestation of which was a concerted effort to establish increased control over the vagaries of the natural world through the application of science. As a result, by the 18th century, health came to be understood by numerous physicians and by the emerging middle classes alike as a commodity, and the physical body as something that could be improved upon. At the same time, legitimized through state support, the consolidation

#### **Modernization and Medicalization 117**

of medicine as a profession was taking place, together with the formation of medical specialties and the systematic accumulation, compilation, and distribution of new medical knowledge. Systematization of the medical domain, in turn, was part of a more general process of modernization to which industrial capitalism and technological production was central, both intimately associated with the bureaucratization and rationalization of everyday life.

Medical interests expanded in several directions during the 18th and 19th centuries. First, there was an increased involvement on the part of medical professionals in the management not only of individual pathology but of life-cycle events. Attending birth had been entirely the provenance of women, but from the early 18th century in Europe and North America, male midwives trained and worked at the lying-in hospitals located in major urban centers to deliver the babies of well-off women. These *accoucheurs* later consolidated themselves as the profession of obstetrics. By the mid-19th century other life-cycle transitions, including adolescence, menopause, aging, and death had been medicalized, followed by infancy in the first years of the 20th century. In practice, however, large segments of the population remained unaffected by these changes until the mid-20th century.

Another aspect of medicalization can be glossed in the idiom of "governmentality" proposed by Michel Foucault. With the pervasive moves throughout the 19th century by the state, the law, and professional associations to increase standardization through the rational application of science to everyday life, medicine was integrated into an extensive network whose function was to regulate the health and moral behavior of entire populations. These disciplines of surveillance, population "bio-politics" as Foucault (1979) described it, function in two ways. First, everyday behaviors are normalized so that, for example, emotions and sexuality become targets of medical technology, with the result that reproduction of populations and even of the species are medicalized. Similarly, other activities, including breastfeeding, hygiene, exercise, deportment, and numerous other aspects of daily life are medicalized—largely by means of public health initiatives and with the assistance of the popular media.

The medical and public health management of everyday life is evident not only in Europe and North America, but also in 19th-century Japan and to a lesser extent in China. In India, Africa, South East Asia, and parts of the Americas, medicalization was intimately associated with colonization (Comaroff, 1993). Activities of military doctors and medical missionaries, the development of tropical medicine and of public health initiatives, designed more to protect the colonizers and to "civilize" the colonized than to ameliorate their health, were integral to colonizing regimes. As with medicalization everywhere, large segments of the population remained untouched by these activities until well into the 20th century (Arnold, 1993).

From the late 18th century, yet another aspect of medicalization became evident. Those populations labeled as mentally ill, individuals designated as morally unsound, together with targeted individuals living in poverty were for the first time incarcerated in asylums and penitentiaries where they were subjected to what Foucault termed "panopticism." Inspired by Jeremy Bentham's plans for the perfect prison in which prisoners are in constant view of the authorities, the Panopticon was, for Foucault, a mechanism of power reduced to its ideal form—an institution devoted to surveillance.

These changes could not have taken place without several innovations in medical technologies, knowledge, and practice, among which four are prominent. First, the consolidation of the anatomical pathological sciences whereby the older humoral pathology is all but eclipsed so that belief in individualized pathologies is essentially abandoned in favor of a universal representation of the "normal" body from which sick bodies deviate. Second, introduction of the autopsy enabling systematization of pathological science. Third, the routinization of the physical examination and of the collection of case studies. Fourth, the application of the concept of "population" as a means to monitor and control the health of society, central to which is the idea of a norm about which variation, which can be measured statistically, is distributed. The belief that disease can be understood as both individual pathology and as a statistical deviation from a norm of health becomes engrained in medical thinking as a result of these changes. Treatment of pathology remains, as was formerly the case, the core activity of clinical medicine, but the new epistemology of disease causation based on numeration gradually gained ground. Public health and preventive medicine, always closely allied with the state, made the overseeing of the health of populations its domain.

Other related characteristics of medicalization, well established by the late 19th century, and still evident today, can be summarized following Rose (1994), into "dividing practices," whereby sickness is distinguished from health, illness from crime, madness from sanity, and so on. With this type of reasoning certain persons and populations are made into objects of medical attention and distinguished from others who are subjected to different authorities including the law, religion, or education. At the same time various "assemblages" are deployed: a combination of spaces, persons, and techniques that constitute the domain of medicine. These assemblages include hospitals, dispensaries, and clinics, in addition to which are government offices, the home, schools, the army, communities, and so on. Recognized medical experts function in these spaces making use of instruments and technologies to assess and measure the condition of both body and mind. The stethoscope, invented in the early 19th century, was one such major innovation, the first of many technologies that permit experts to assess the condition of the interior of the body directly, rendering the patient's subjective account of malaise secondary to the "truth" of science.

Several noted historians and social scientists argue that from the mid-19th century, with the placement in hospitals for the first time not only of wealthy individuals but of citizens of all classes, the medical profession was able to exert power over passive patients in a way never before possible. This transition, aided by the production of new technologies, has been described as medical "imperialism." Certain researchers limit the use of the term medicalization to these particular changes, whereas other scholars insist that the development of hospitalized patient populations is just one aspect of a more pervasive process of medicalization, to which both major institutional and conceptual changes contribute. Included are fundamentally transformed ideas about the body, health, and illness, not only among experts, but also among populations at large.

# **THE MEDICALIZATION CRITIQUE**

In writing a review article about medicalization Conrad (1992) argues that during the 1970s and 1980s the term was used most often as a critique of inappropriate medicalization, rather than simply to convey the idea that something had been made medical. The sociological and anthropological literature of this period argued uniformly that health professionals had become agents of social control. This position was influenced by the publications of Szasz (1961) and Laing (1960) in connection with psychiatry where they insisted that the social determinants of irrational behavior were being neglected in favor of an approach dominated by a biologically deterministic medical model. Zola (1972), Conrad, and others argued in turn that alcoholism, homosexuality, hyperactivity, and other behaviors were increasingly being "biologized" and labeled as diseases. While in theory this move from "badness to sickness" no longer made patients morally culpable for their condition, it nevertheless permitted medical professionals to make judgments about the labeling and care of such patients that inevitably had profound moral repercussions.

Once it became clear that life-cycle transitions and everyday behaviors were increasingly being represented as diseases or disease-like, a reaction set in during the late 1970s against medicalization. It was Ivan Illich's stinging critique of scientific medicine in his book *Medical Nemesis* (1976) that had the greatest effect on health care professionals and the public at large. Illich argued that, through overmedication, biomedicine inadvertently produces iatrogenesis, creating negative side-effects in the body (an argument that no one denies today) and, further, that the autonomy of ordinary people in dealing with health and illnesses is compromised by medicalization.

At the same time certain feminists, among them anthropologists, publicly characterized medicine as a patriarchal institution because, in their estimation, the female body was increasingly being made into a site for technological intervention in connection with childbirth and the reproductive life cycle in general (Oakley, 1980, 1984; Romalis, 1981). Similarly to what had happened in 18th-century Europe, medical anthropologists, including Fiedler (1997), Fraser (1992), Jordan (1978), Laderman (1983), O'Neil and Kaufert (1990), Pigg (1997), and Sargent (1989), among many others, have documented the ways in which midwifery has been forcibly professionalized, systematized, and placed under the authoritative knowledge (Jordan, 1997) of governments and the medical profession.

Much of this literature has also paid attention to women's responses to medicalization. In contemporary writing it is common to assert that to cast women in a passive role with respect to medicalization is to perpetuate the very kind of assumptions that feminists have been trying to challenge. It is recognized that an active resistance to medicalization has contributed to the rise of

### **The Medicalization Critique 119**

the home-birth movement and to widespread use of alternative therapies and remedies of numerous kinds. But empirical research has also made clear that the responses of individuals to the availability of biomedical interventions are pragmatic, and based upon what are perceived to be in the best interests of women themselves, often their families, and at times their communities (Lock & Kaufert, 1998).

Martin's cultural analysis of reproduction was one of the first attempts to show how women are not simply victims of medical ascendancy, but exhibit resistance and create alternate meanings about the body and reproduction than those that are dominant among the medical profession (Martin, 1987). Davis-Floyd uncovers two cultural models about the pregnant body in America: technocratic and holistic. She finds that, for professional women, keeping control of their bodies during pregnancy and birth is crucial, and to this end they subscribe heavily to technological interventions. On the other hand, for those women who adhere to the holistic model giving up control is laudable, pain is acceptable, and "nature knows best" (Davis-Floyd, 1988, 1996). Lazarus (1997) has shown how middle-class women are better able to manage their own births, even in a medicalized hospital setting, than are poor women.

It is clear that the majority of women studied globally internalize the norm that their prime task in life is to reproduce a family of the ideal size and composition, and that failure to do so diminishes them in the eyes of others. Under these circumstances it is not surprising that a pragmatic approach to medical technology and medical services is much more common than is outright resistance to these products of modernization. For Egyptian women seeking to overcome infertility through resort to medical interventions, both indigenous and biomedical (Inhorn, 1994), Chinese women making use of IVF, despite the county's one-child policy (Handwerker, 1998), lesbian couples using reproductive technologies in order to create a family (Lewin, 1998), and Americans who are labeled as infertile (Becker, 2000), selective, calculated acceptance of medicalization is much more apparent than is outright resistance. Nevertheless, in certain situations the majority of women apparently think that medicalization coincides with their own best interest. Browner and Press (1996) have shown how, until relatively recently American women valued subjective knowledge over biomedical recommendations during pre-natal care even though during labor technological intervention was welcomed. Over the past several years this situation has changed, and as the state of California (in common with other locations) has become increasingly involved in the promotion of pre-natal genetic screening, many women now think of these tests as indispensable to the highquality pre-natal care they desire (Browner & Press, 1995). On the other hand, the Inuit strongly resist medicalization when they give birth, in large part because this has usually involved routine "evacuation" from the Arctic to urban tertiary care hospitals in the Canadian south (O'Neil & Kaufert, 1995).

Documenting the pragmatism of individuals is not to argue that the micro-physics of power, dominant ideologies, culturally constructed orthodoxies, and hegemonies are not at work. Numerous informants, wherever their location, exhibit pragmatism, cynicism, or ambivalence about medical interventions, at least some of the time. But unquestioned participation in medicalization is also visible everywhere.

Individual desire is frequently informed sometimes over-determined—by the mystification associated with political regimes, religious organizations, nationalistic interests, or cultural esthetics. Perhaps the most pervasive example of this is that worldwide governments of all kinds are deeply involved in the politics of contraception, abortion, population management, birth, and sexually related diseases, in particular AIDS. Sometimes women and their partners resist the normative order with respect to these interventions; at other times they comply because they have no choice (Anagnost, 1995; Barroso & Corrêa, 1995; Kligman, 1995). But people are increasingly able to reflect critically on their own situation and that of those around them. Paradoxically, medicalization has actually promoted such reflection by presenting people with choice, although globalization rather than medicalization per se has no doubt been the major driving force for change. The result is that older hegemonies have crumbled, only to give way to new ones, most often in the form of knowledge that comes under the rubric of science.

It is evident that an era of new nationalisms has set in, often as a result of the self-conscious development of post-colonial identities, or else as a response to feelings of being over-run by values associated with the West. In such circumstances the fostering by governments of pluralistic medical practices is very common (Leslie, 1980, 1989), but more often than not indigenous medications, knowledge, and technologies are subjected to commodification, rationalization, and sometimes wholesale restructuring based on globalized biomedical standards and local interests (Adams, 2001, 2002; Farquhar, 1995; Ferzacca, 2002; Nichter, 1996; Pigg, 2002). Under these circumstances medicalization is itself diversified and pluralized, and the associated moral discourse is similarly diverse and dependent upon the specific medical traditions involved (Brodwin, 1996). The misapplication of medicalized interventions, notably pharmaceuticals, is also evident in situations where governments are chronically short of money (Nichter, 2001).

At times, as in the cases of the breast cancer movement, AIDS activists, support groups for children with rare genetic diseases that demand more research on these problems, or where toxic environments are at issue, people unite to fight for more effective medical surveillance (Kaufert, 1998; Rapp, Heath, & Taussig, 2001). Under these circumstances, the knowledge and interests of users results in an expansion of medicalization.

Recent research has emphasized the way in which people are at times active "consumers" of medicine, notably in connection with the new reproductive technologies, genetic testing, and direct-to-consumer advertising of medication (Becker, 2000; Hogle, in press; Lock, 1998). What is clear from this research is that without the ethnographic approach the complexity of selective acceptance and resistance, and how this changes over time and in light of new medical technologies, will not be well understood.

# **MEDICALIZED IDENTITIES AND CONDITIONS**

Social science critiques of medicalization, whether associated more closely with labeling theory and the social control of deviance, or with Foucaldian theory and the relationship of power to knowledge, have documented the way in which identities and subjectivity are shaped through this process. When individuals are publicly labeled as schizophrenic, anorexic, infertile, menopausal, a heart transplant, a trauma victim, and so on, transformations of subjectivity are readily apparent (Ablon, 1984; Becker, 2000; Estroff, 1993; Kaufman, 1988). At times medicalization may function to exculpate individuals from responsibility for being sick, and individuals may then actively participate in this process (Lock, 1990; Nichter, 1998).

### A large body of anthropological research has focused on Zola's original intent in creating the concept of medicalization and has revealed how a range of behaviors and distress are constructed by the medical world as diseases. Robert Barrett shows how the institutional practices of psychiatry first created in the 19th century made possible the production of a new category of knowledge—schizophrenia. Prior to institutionalization, the kind of "crazy" behavior involving disorders of cognition and perception that we now associate with schizophrenia would have elicited a range of responses, not all of them indicating that pathology was involved. Barrett interprets schizophrenia as we know it today as a "polysemic symbol" in which various meanings and values are condensed, including stigma, weakness, inner degeneration,

a diseased brain, and chronicity. Without this associated constellation of meanings, schizophrenia as we understand it would not exist. Barrett goes on to argue that the individualistic concept of personhood so characteristic of Euro-America has also contributed to our understanding of this disease. He shows how a theme of a divided, split, or disintegrated individual runs through 19th-century psychiatric discourse, and continues to the present day. Schizophrenia is not the only disease associated with splitting and dissociation, but it has been the prototypical example of such a condition. The perceived loss of autonomy and boundedness taken as characteristic of schizophrenia are signs of the breakdown of the individual, and thus of the person, and, further, the classification and treatment of schizophrenic patients as broken people with "permeable ego boundaries" profoundly influences the subjective experience of the disease (Barrett, 1988).

Barrett, himself a psychiatrist, argues that categorizing patients as suffering from schizophrenia implies a specific ideological stance which may highlight, problematize, and reinforce certain experiences, such as auditory hallucinations, for example. Barrett's argument is neither one of simple social construction, nor of schizophrenia as a myth, but a more subtle argument in which he does not dispute at all the reality of symptoms, or the horror of the disease. He points out, however, that a careful review of the cross-cultural literature indicates that some of the constitutional components of what we understand as schizophrenia may be virtually absent in certain non-Western settings: "Thus, in some cultures, especially those that do not employ concept of 'mind' as opposed to 'body,' the closest equivalents to schizophrenia are not concerned with 'mental experiences' at all, but employ

### **Medicalization of Wellness 121**

criteria related to impairment in social functioning or persistent rule violation" (Barrett, 1988, p. 379). Similar arguments to that of Barrett have been developed for clinical depression as it is currently defined, that is, as being a psychiatric ethno-category characteristic of Euro-America society (Kleinman & Good, 1985).

The literature of medical anthropology is replete with examples in which arguments about bodily ills are essentially moral disputes about the boundaries between normal and abnormal, and their social significance. Ong (1988), for example, interpreted attacks of spirit possession on the shop floors of multinational factories in Malaysia as complex and ambivalent, but not abnormal, responses of young women to violations of their gendered sense of self, difficult work conditions, and the process of modernization. The psychologization and medicalization of these attacks by consultant medical professionals permitted a different moral interpretation of the problem by employers: one of "primitive minds" disrupting the creation of capital.

Similarly, the refusal of many Japanese adolescents to go to school is labeled by certain psychiatrists in that country (but not all) as deviant, and as behavior that should be medicalized. In a few cases the children are clearly mentally ill, but this behavior can also be interpreted as an individualized, muted form of resistance to manipulation by families, peers, and teachers and to larger stresses associated with the education system and Japanese modernization (Lock, 1991). Similarly, Kleinman and Kleinman (1991) have analyzed narratives about chronic pain in China as in effect normal responses to chaotic political change at the national level. These changes are associated with collective and personal delegitimation of the daily life of thousands of ordinary people, and the subjective experience of physical malaise, that in the clinical situation are interpreted as and reduced to physical disorder. In a Brazilian shantytown, Scheper-Hughes interprets what she describes as an epidemic of nervoso as having multiple meanings: at times a refusal of men to continue demeaning and debilitating labor, at times a response of women to violent shock or tragedy, and also in part a response to the ongoing state of emergency in everyday life. The epidemic signals a nervous agitation, "a state of disequilibrium"—the only means of expressing dissent in a truly repressive society. Individuals are often quite conscious of the injustice of their situation, but at the same time exhibit ambivalence and describe their own bodies as "worthless" or "used up" (Scheper-Hughes, 1992, p. 187). She concludes that the semi-willingness of people to participate in the medicalization of their bodies is the result of participating in the same moral world as their oppressors.

Swartz and Levett (1987, p. 747) note that, not surprisingly, "psychological sequleae" have been frequently reported in connection with the impact of massive long-term political repression of children in South Africa. They go on to argue that this psychologization is too narrowly defined, and that "the costs of generations of oppression of children cannot be offset simply by interventions of mental health workers." Further, these researchers argue, "it is a serious fallacy to assume that if something is wrong within the society, then this must be reflected necessarily in the *psychopathological* make-up of individuals" (p. 747, emphasis added). In common with those authors cited above, Swartz and Levett oppose the normalization and transformation of political and social repression into individual pathology, and its management solely through medical interventions.

Allan Young, researching the invention of posttraumatic stress disorder, shows just how powerful is the current psychiatric model in the creation of this new disease. Psychiatrists assume that the uncovering and reliving of a single traumatic episode during the course of therapy will open the door to relief from chronic debilitating stress and postulated pathological changes in the neuroendocrinological system (Young, 1995). Thus, even the atrocities of the Vietnam war and moral condemnation of them are individualized and depoliticized.

# **MEDICALIZATION OF WELLNESS**

Medicalization is not limited to sickness and "deviance." Wellness—the avoidance of disease and illness, and the "improvement" of health—is today a widespread "virtue," notably among the middle classes. As part of modernity, practices designed to support individual health have been actively promoted for over a century, and are now widely followed. The individual body, separated from mind and society, is "managed" according to criteria elaborated in the biomedical sciences, and this activity becomes one form of self-expression. Bodyesthetics are clearly the prime goal of some individuals (Sullivan, 2001), but a worry about the "risk" of becoming sick is at work for the majority. By taking personal responsibility for health, individuals display a desire for

### **122 Medicalization and the Naturalization of Social Control**

autonomy and in so doing they actively cooperate in the creation of "normal," healthy citizens, thus validating the dominant moral order (Crawford, 1984). Health is medicalized and commoditized.

As evidence is amassed to demonstrate conclusively how social inequity and discrimination of various kinds contribute massively to disease, ranging from infections to cancer, the idea of health as virtue appears increasingly out of place. Owing to poverty, large segments of the population in most countries of the world have shorter life expectancies and a greater burden of ill-health than do their compatriots. The pervasive value of individual responsibility for health enables governments to narrow their interests to economic development, while ignoring redistribution of wealth and the associated cost for those individuals who, no matter how virtuous they may be, are unable to thrive.

# **RISK AS SELF-GOVERNANCE**

Activities designed to assist with the avoidance of misfortune and danger are ubiquitous in the history of humankind, but the idea of being at "risk" in its technical, epidemiological meaning is a construct of modernity. In theory, morally neutral risk provides a means whereby experts can distance themselves from direct intervention into people's lives while employing the agency of subjects in their own self-regulation through "riskmanagement." Among the numerous examples of this process, the transformation of aging, in particular female aging, into a discourse of risk is illustrative. Given that women live longer than men it seems odd that female aging has been targeted for medicalization, but this move is in part driven by a fear of the enormous expense to health care budgets that very old infirm people, the majority of them women, are believed to incur.

Medicalization of female middle age, and in particular the end of menstruation, commenced early in the 19th century but it was not until the 1930s, after the discovery of the endocrine system, that menopause came to be represented in North America and Europe as a disease-like state characterized by a deficiency of estrogen. In order to sustain this argument, the bodies of young pre-menopausal women must be set up as the standard by which all female bodies will be measured. Postmenopausal, post-reproductive life can then be understood as deviant. This "expert knowledge" is buttressed through comparisons made with human populations where post-menopausal life is less common, and with primate populations in which post-reproductive life is very unusual. The arguments of biological anthropologists that older women are essential to the survival of highly dependant human infants and their mothers in early hominid life are ignored. Moreover, it is argued erroneously that women have lived past the age of 50 only since the turn of the 20th century, and that post-reproductive life is due entirely to improved medical care and living conditions.

Today older women are warned repeatedly about heart disease, osteoporosis, memory loss, and Alzheimer's disease, and numerous other conditions for which they are said to be at increased risk due to their estrogen-deficient condition. Misleading interpretations of often poorly executed epidemiological research create confusion about estimates of risk for major disease in women who are past menopause. Even so, daily medication on a permanent basis with regular medical monitoring has been recommended by gynecological organizations in many countries for virtually all older women, although reversals of these blanket suggestions are now taking place in light of recent evidence from longitudinal research trials. Few commentators deny that drug company interests have contributed to this situation.

The situation is made yet more problematic because cross-cultural research suggests that the common bodily experiences of populations of middle-class North Americans at menopause are significantly different from those of some women in other parts of the world. Local biologies and cultures contribute inextricably to this situation, making medicalization of this part of the life cycle exceedingly problematic (Lock, 1993). Nevertheless, hundreds of thousands of women willingly medicate themselves daily in the firm belief that aging is pathology. Among them a few, but we cannot predict who exactly, may avert or postpone the onset of debilitating and lifethreatening diseases, while others may well hasten their own death. Medicalization on a prophylactic basis of diseases statistically projected as probabilities is in itself a risky business, but even so is on the increase, particularly as the new genetics become increasingly routinized.

The combination of the emerging technologies of the new molecular genetics with those of population genetics is currently opening the door to an exponential growth in medicalization in the form of what has been termed "geneticization." As genetic testing and screening of fetuses, newborns, and adults becomes increasingly institutionalized, the possibilities for surveillance are boundless, particularly so because proponents of genetic

### **References 123**

determinism promote the idea that genes are destiny. Our genes are increasingly thought of as "quasi-pathogens" that place us at increased risk for a spectrum of diseases. Rapp (1999) has shown the way in which decisions made by women and their partners in connection with pregnancy and its termination are increasingly informed by genetic testing, the results of which are often based on probabilities (Lock, 1998).

This biomedicalization of life itself comes with extravagant promises about our ability in the near future to harness nature as we wish, the enhancement of human potential, and access to the knowledge that makes it possible to know what it is that makes us uniquely human. Based on the results of genetic testing, a laissez-faire eugenics, grounded in individual choice and the inalienable right to "health" for our offspring, is already taking place (Lock, 2002). Of course, suffering is reduced when, for example, families choose to abort fetuses with Tay Sach's disease. On the other hand, how can discrimination on the basis of genetics, already evident in some workplaces, insurance companies, and the police force, be controlled? Should entrepreneurial enterprises have a monopoly over the development of testing for multifactorial diseases such as breast and prostate cancer as is currently the case? How should the findings of these tests be interpreted by clinicians and the public when all that can be surmised if the results are positive is the possibility of elevated risk for disease in the future? Negative results do not indicate that individuals will not contract the disease. Who will store and have access to genetic information, and under what conditions? And who, if anyone, may patent and commodify genetic materials and for what purpose? The new genetics and geneticization make answers to such questions an urgent matter.

It has been proposed that we are currently witnessing a new "biomedicalization" associated with late modernity or post-modernity (Clarke, Mamo, Shim, Fishman, & Fosket, 2000). A technoscientific revolution is taking place involving increased molecularization, geneticization, digitization, computerization, and globalization, and these changes are in turn associated with a complete transformation of the organization (including the privatization of a great deal of research), expertise, and practices associated with the medical enterprise. In this milieu the potential exists to make the body increasingly a site of control and modification, much of it carried out, in the West at least, in the name of individual rights or desire.

Such modifications are often highly profitable to involved companies and frequently correspond to the utilitarian interests of contemporary society; one prime objective is to save on health care expenditure. A danger exists of overestimating the consequences of technological innovation and associated biomedicalization. A large proportion of the world's population effectively remains outside the reach of biomedecine. That medication for HIV/AIDS is not universally available is a gross injustice, as is the increasing incidence of antibiotic-resistant tuberculosis that could be controlled efficiently if biomedicine was competently practiced. At the other extreme, despite an enormous promotion of hormone-replacement therapy, research shows that less than a quarter of the targeted female population takes this medication, and even then not consistently. It is also clear that many women do not make use of selective abortion should a fetal "flaw" be found through genetic testing.

Medicalization, understood as enforced surveillance, is misleading. So too is an argument that emphasizes the social construction of disease at the expense of recognizing the very real, debilitating condition of individuals who seek out medical help. Rather, an investigation of the forms taken by political economies, technological complexes, and the values embedded in biomedical discourse and practice and in popular knowledge about the body, health, and illness that situate various states and conditions as residing within the purview of medicine better indicates the complexity at work.

# **REFERENCES**

- Ablon, J. (1984). *Little people in America: The social dimensions of dwarfism*. New York: Praeger.
- Adams, V. (2001). Particularizing modernity: Tibetan medical theorizing of women's health in Lhasa, Tibet. In L. Connor & G. Samuels (Eds.), *Healing powers and modernity* (pp. 222–246). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Adams, V. (2002). Establishing proof: Translating "science" and the state in Tibetan medicine. In M. Nichter & M. Lock (Eds.), *New horizons in medical anthropology: Essays in honour of Charles Leslie* (pp. 200–220). Reading, UK: Harwood Academic.
- Anagnost, A. (1995). A Surfeit of bodies: Populations and the rationality of the state in post-Mao China. In F. D. Ginsburg & R. Rapp (Eds.), *Conceiving the New World Order* (pp. 22–41). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Arnold, R. (1993). *Colonizing the body: State medicine and epidemic disease in nineteenth century America*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Barrett, R. J. (1988). Interpretations of schizophrenia. *Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 12*, 357–388.