# **DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY**

## GAUTAM BHATIA

## **I. INTRODUCTION**

THE Directive Principles of State Policy ('DPSPs') occupy an ambiguous place in our constitutional scheme. They are framed as a set of obligations upon the State. Nonetheless, the constitutional text expressly renders them unenforceable. At the time of drafting, the only other Constitution that contained anything analogous was the Irish. The members of the Constituent Assembly themselves were deeply divided over the DPSPs. Many could not see the utility of an unenforceable set of exhortations. Some recommended scrapping the chapter altogether, while others argued for placing it within the domain of **Part III** and the fundamental rights. Still others argued over the level of detail that the DPSPs set out. And some of them pointed out the contradictions inherent in placing abstract principles of economic justice alongside concrete policies like prohibition and controlling cow slaughter.

Nonetheless, Part IV survived the birth pangs of the Constitution relatively unscathed. Yet its life after that has been anything but straightforward. Judicial approaches to the interpretation of **Part IV** as a whole, to individual principles, and to their relationship with fundamental rights, have been inconsistent. And lately, directive principles such as the provision of universal primary education have been shifted from **Part IV** to **Part III** *via* constitutional amendment—raising the question whether there *is* any genuine conceptual distinction between fundamental rights and DPSPs at all. In this medley of diverging voices and with such a chequered history, is it at all possible to ground the DPSPs within a coherent intellectual vision, one that is justified both constitutionally and philosophically?

In this chapter, I argue that it is. Drawing upon the text of the Constitution, its structure, its history, judicial precedent and political philosophy, I shall make two claims. First, the directive principles are best understood as providing the *framework of values that structure and constrain the interpretation and construction of fundamental rights*; and secondly, in giving teeth to the DPSPs, the Court has regularly adopted a limiting principle that constrains *its own role* in interpretive exercise, one that is grounded in ideas of institutional competence and legitimacy.

My method of analysis is chronological. I substantiate the above claims by examining the Court's own evolving understanding of the place of **Part IV** within our constitutional scheme: starting from a blanket refusal to accord the Principles any weight in an interpretive inquiry, to a more detailed and nuanced approach, developed over sixty years—not always consistently—that seeks to balance the non-enforceability commandment with an approach that does not simply relegate DPSPs—as so many members of the Constituent Assembly feared they *would* be relegated—to mere 'pious wishes'.

It is often stated that the courts have accomplished an end-run around the non-enforceability of the DPSPs by developing a jurisprudence that interprets the Fundamental Rights chapter in light of the DPSPs, and virtually incorporates some of the DPSPs into  $Part III$ , despite the constitutional separation between the two. This claim is true, but also rather empty: what does it mean to say that fundamental rights are interpreted 'in light of' the DPSPs? How does that play out in concrete cases? One of the principal endeavours of this chapter is to unpack this truism, and explain the different ways in which the Court has fused Parts III and IV of the Constitution in its jurisprudence.

A caveat: the DPSPs' abstract and wide-ranging scope has rendered them particularly suitable for providing the rhetorical window-dressing to a rapidly proliferating set of judicial opinions especially over the past twenty years. This chapter does not—indeed, it cannot—catalogue all those instances. Rather, its aim is to provide a conceptual understanding of their role in constitutional reasoning, and its examination of the cases is limited to that end.

## **II. ORIGINS: JUDICIAL MINIMALISM**

Let us commence with the constitutional text. The preambular Article 37 states:

The provisions contained in this Part *shall not be enforceable* by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless *fundamental in the governance of the country* and it shall be *the duty of the State* to apply these principles in making laws. 1

The three underlined terms can carry multiple meanings. 'Not enforceable' means, straightforwardly, that a breach of a directive principle cannot ground a legal claim (unlike the breach of a fundamental right). But does unenforceability prohibit the Court from taking into account the existence and content of the Directive Principles while *interpreting* other laws? The word 'fundamental' has been used for a very specific purpose in **Part III**, to characterise the Bill of Rights. Does the use of the same word in Part IV imply at least some conceptual overlap between fundamental rights and DPSPs? And what precisely is the nature of the 'duty' placed upon the State? Is it a legal duty or a moral duty? If it is the latter, then what is it doing in a document whose intention is to define the basic legal structure of the Indian polity and its set of governing institutions? The text of the Constitution, standing alone, cannot answer these questions for us.

HM Seervai, however, sees no ambiguity in Article 37. He argues that the Directive Principles are merely *political exhortations* to the legislature. They possess no legal significance, and the only remedy for their violation lies in the ballot box.<sup>2</sup> For Seervai, the presence or absence of the DPSPs should make absolutely no difference to anything a court does.

This, precisely, was the judiciary's initial approach, between 1950 and 1960. In *State of Madras v Champakam Dorairajan*, 3 for instance, Madras attempted to justify caste-based affirmative action policies, which conflicted with the fundamental right to non-discrimination, on the basis of the DPSPs. The Supreme Court flatly rejected the argument, pointing to the non-enforceable nature of the DPSPs in refusing to accord them any weight in judging the constitutionality of the action.

This strict approach continued in *Muir Mills v Suti Mills Mazdoor Union*, <sup>4</sup> where the DPSPs were invoked in an argument over workmen's rights to bonus payments. *Muir Mills* was not even a question of enforcement, involving only a question of *interpretation*. Nonetheless, the Court refused to use the DPSPs even as interpretive guides, preferring to adhere instead to traditional common law employment concepts of wages and bonuses. Various State High Courts followed the Supreme Court's lead, taking the non-enforcement clause as evidence that the DPSPs had no role whatsoever to play in the judicial task. In *Jaswant Kaur v State of Bombay*, 5 the Bombay High Court refused to let the DPSPs inform its interpretation of the Bill of Rights, holding categorically that 'any article conferring fundamental rights cannot be whittled down *or qualified* by any thing that is contained in part IV of the Constitution'. 6

In this early phase of the Court's history, therefore, the DPSPs were a classic example of what James Madison referred to as 'parchment barriers'.<sup>7</sup> Perhaps the exemplar of this approach is the constitutional bench judgment in *Mohd Hanif Qureshi v State of Bihar*. <sup>8</sup> A cow slaughter ban was challenged under Article 19(1)(g). It was argued that because the ban was designed to give effect to Article 48, and because the DPSPs were fundamental to the governance of the country, a rights-based challenge to such a legislation must fail. The Court made short shrift of this contention, holding:

[A] harmonious interpretation has to be placed upon the Constitution and so interpreted it means that the State should certainly implement the directive principles but it must do so in such a way that its laws do not take away or abridge the fundamental rights. 9

In other words, it was desirable for the government to frame legislation advancing the DPSPs, but the provisions of <u>Part III</u>, standing alone and interpreted autonomously, would serve as side constraints on any such endeavour. The DPSPs might or might not have some role to play at the time of enacting legislation, but none afterwards. This was evident in the manner in which the Court decided *Qureshi*. Its exhaustive economic analysis informing the application of Articles  $19(1)(g)$  and  $19(6)$  saw no reference to the DPSPs.<sup>10</sup>

The end of the 1950s, however, marked a subtle—yet distinct—change. *Re The Kerala Education Bill* dealt with the rights of minorities to run educational institutions. $\frac{11}{1}$  Referring to the Directive Principle that mandated the State to ensure the provision of effective and adequate education,  $\frac{12}{1}$  the Court observed, in language that would soon become a staple feature of judicial decisions:

The directive principles of State policy have to conform to and run as subsidiary to the Chapter on Fundamental Rights ... nevertheless, in determining *the scope and ambit* of the fundamental rights relied on by or on behalf of any person or body the court may not *entirely ignore* these directive principles of State policy laid down in **Part IV** of the Constitution but should adopt the principle of harmonious construction *and should attempt to give effect* to both as much as possible. 13

While both *Mohd Hanif Qureshi* and *Re The Kerala Education Bill* use the phrase 'harmonious construction/interpretation', they use it in different senses. *Qureshi'*s harmony does not accord any interpretive role to the DPSPs. In *Re Kerala Eduction Bill*, on the other hand, while reaffirming the primacy of the fundamental rights, the Court nonetheless opens the gates for DPSPs to play a tangible —if subsidiary role—in interpretation, holding that the 'scope and ambit' of the fundamental rights should be determined in such a harmonious way that full effect is given both to **Part III** and **Part IV**. This is the first hint that we have of that oft-repeated phrase, that is, that fundamental rights must be interpreted in light of the DPSPs.

Before we pause to examine the evolution of this approach, we must examine the constitutional arguments that support this position. The first is textual. Article 37 states that it *shall* be the duty of the State to apply the DPSPs in making laws. Now, whether the obligation is legal, moral, or political, it is, at the very least, a *constitutional* obligation. <sup>14</sup> And if we are to accept the benign fiction that the legislature is composed of reasonable persons pursuing reasonable ends reasonably,  $\frac{15}{2}$ then it makes sense to assume that, insofar as Parliament acts in good faith while enacting laws, it is taking the DPSPs seriously, and applying them in the making of such laws. Consequently, when a court is called upon to *interpret* those laws, the DPSPs may be invoked in determining their content. 16 Thus, textually, there is at least *some* scope for the DPSPs in an interpretive inquiry (the clause leaves open what scope, exactly) that does not rise to the level of 'enforcement'. According to Ambedkar

himself, the proscription on enforceability was to be as imposing no obligation upon the State to *act* upon the DPSPs—not that the Principles themselves were irrelevant in understanding *how the State had (legislatively) acted*, once it did. 17

Seervai relies upon Ambedkar's initial speech in the Constituent Assembly debates to substantiate the ballot box argument.<sup>18</sup> Ambedkar, however, made the ballot box point in a very specific context: to draw a contrast between requiring the government to answer for the *breach* of a Directive Principle in a court of law, and to answer for it to the electorate. That is, he was concerned about non-enforceability, which, as we have seen, does not exhaust the textual possibilities of Article 37. In the same speech, indeed, Ambedkar repudiated the objection that the DPSPs were no more than pious wishes, arguing that no *legal* force did not imply no *binding* force. <sup>19</sup> Ambedkar's use of the word 'binding' (as opposed to 'political' or 'moral')—a word that is equally at home in both a legal and a non-legal context—seems to indicate that the DPSPs, while falling well short of enforceability, were not meant to be legally *irrelevant* either. <sup>20</sup> Responding subsequently to Naziruddin Ahmad's call to remove Part IV altogether, he expressly argued that the DPSPs were both *fundamental* and *directive* in the sense that they 'should be made the basis of all executive and legislative action'.<sup>21</sup>

Other members of the Drafting Committee agreed. Alladi Krishnaswamy Iyer argued that while the DPSPs were neither *justiciable* not *enforceable*, it would be 'idle to suggest that any responsible government or any legislature elected on the basis of universal suffrage *can* or will ignore these principles'.<sup>22</sup> The use of the word 'can' (in addition to 'will') is telling: it suggests that it is simply not open to the legislature to ignore the Principles, *whether it chooses to or not*. But the only way in which this makes sense would be if the Court was to impose the legal fiction that we have discussed before—that the legislature *has* applied the DPSPs in the making of laws (whether or not individual legislators consciously did so). $\frac{23}{2}$ 

Evidence that what distinguished Part III and Part IV, in the mind of the framers, was a narrow conception of legal *enforceability*/remedies is evident from the debate over draft Article 36. Originally worded as 'every citizen is *entitled* to free primary education', it was amended to 'The State *shall endeavour* to provide … free and compulsory education'*—*on the *specific ground* that the language of entitlement (which, of course, logically entails a remedy) was the language of fundamental rights. $\frac{24}{ }$  In addition, the fact that the word 'enforceable' in Article 37 was actually brought in to *replace* the word 'cognisable' (which is of much wider import) makes the argument compelling.<sup>25</sup>

To these arguments, we can add a brief, structural point. The principle of non-superfluity is a standard interpretive technique, based on the assumption that the legislature does not waste its words. Thus, an interpretation that renders a part of a statute legally irrelevant is to be avoided, if possible. Surely the same argument applies with even greater force to the Constitution: *ceteris paribus*, an interpretation that renders an entire chapter *constitutionally* irrelevant is to be avoided, if possible. The above arguments have been designed to demonstrate that at the very least, an interpretation that *does not* do so is feasible.

In sum, therefore, the text, history, and structure of the Constitution suggest the following holistic reading of Article 37: the first part—the non-enforceability clause—is limited to just that: citizens may not move the Court seeking remedies for either breach of a Directive Principle, or for requiring Parliament to *enact* a Directive Principle into law. The second and third parts—that specify the fundamental nature of the DPSPs and the duty of the State to apply them—set out an interpretive role for the Principles to play in determining the *legal meaning* of statutes. Article 37, thus, is Janusfaced: it carves out a sphere in which the DPSPs have no role to play, and at the same time, carves out another sphere in which they do. I suggest, therefore, *contra* Seervai, that in *Re The Kerala Education Bill*, therefore, the Supreme Court was correct in turning away from its own earlier jurisprudence.<sup>26</sup>

Let us now turn to the Supreme Court's jurisprudence in the aftermath of *Re The Kerala Education Bill*, to understand what interpretive role the DPSPs have played in the judicial inquiry.

# **III. THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES AS MARKERS OF REASONABLENESS**

The Indian Constitution provides inbuilt, textual limitations to its fundamental rights. For instance, Article 19(1)(g), which guarantees the freedom of trade, also permits the government to legislate 'reasonable restrictions … in the interests of the general public'. 27 In the aftermath of *Re The Kerala Education Bill*, the Court made the DPSPs an integral part of any inquiry into the validity of fundamental rights restrictions. This was the first—and most basic way—in which fundamental rights came to be interpreted in light of the DPSPs, and the DPSPs began to be read into **Part III**: the question of what restrictions were in the public interest was to be adjudged by looking to the DPSPs.

This happened primarily in the realm of labour legislation, where a number of employee-oriented laws were challenged under Article 19(1)(g). In *Prakash Cotton Mills v State of Bombay*, 28 the question was whether the State could compel companies to join collective bargaining agreements to which they had not directly consented. Examining the application of Article 19(1)(g), the Bombay High Court observed, 'In the larger interests of the country an employer must submit to those burdens and carry on his business in conformity with the *social legislation* which is put upon the statute book.' 29

While *Prakash Cotton Mills* did not *directly* refer to the DPSPs, *Jugal Kishore v Labour Commissioner* did so, <sup>30</sup> citing no less than three of the principles to hold that notice requirements and other restrictions upon employers' discretion were restrictions in the interests of the general public. Similarly, in *Chandra Bhavan Boarding and Lodging v State of Mysore*, 31 the Court upheld State minimum wage legislation, cursorily dismissing the  $19(1)(g)$  claims of the employers by stating: 'We are not convinced that the rates prescribed would adversely affect the industry of even a small unit therein. If they do, then the industry or the unit as the case may be has no right to exist. Freedom of trade does not mean freedom to exploit.<sup>32</sup>

*Chandra Bhavan* is also noteworthy in that it came at the end of the 1960s, and marked another shift in the Court's jurisprudence by abandoning the 'subordinate-but-relevant' doctrine of *Re The Kerala Education Bill.* In *Chandra Bhavan*, the Court observed that the Bill of Rights and the DPSPs were 'complementary and supplementary' to each other. In some way, this approach had already been adopted in *IC Golaknath v State of Punjab*, <sup>33</sup> and it was echoed in two of the important constitutional cases of the 1970s, *Kesavananda Bharati v State of Kerala <sup>34</sup>* and *Minerva Mills v Union of India*. 35 The Court rationalised this approach by defining the DPSPs as 'social goals', and the fundamental rights as 'side constraints' to be scrupulously adhered to by the government in its pursuit of those goals. In thirty years, therefore, the Court moved from a position where the DPSPs were constitutionally irrelevant to a point where they were constitutionally *on par* with the Bill of Rights, with the only difference being that citizens could not move the Court *directly* to enforce them. Yet the

judgments of the 1970s, placing the DPSPs on the same *conceptual* level as the Bill of Rights was to have far-reaching consequences, as we shall presently note.

The shift in the 1970s, which we shall go on to discuss, was complementary to the reasonablenessof-restrictions approach; it did not replace it. Throughout its history, the Court has regularly invoked the DPSPs to find that Article 19 restrictions are valid, in fairly unproblematic ways. The Court has done this through a simple argument: the DPSPs, it has held, are self-evidently expressions of what public interest is. Any governmental policy aimed at advancing a Directive Principle, then, cannot but be in the public interest,  $\frac{36}{2}$  and can, at times, raise a presumption of reasonableness.  $\frac{37}{2}$  Unfortunately, the Court has also held, on occasion, that such a policy is reasonable simply by virtue of being enacted in pursuit of a Directive Principle.

This is clearly unwarranted. Consider, for example, the 2012 *Right to Education* case. The Court held that the obligations imposed by the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 upon private schools—that is, a compulsory 25 per cent intake from economically underprivileged households within a certain catchment area—to be reasonable restrictions under Article 19(6), by virtue of being in pursuance of the DPSP. $\frac{38}{3}$  The Court would probably not have reached the same result had the compulsory reservation been, say, 80 per cent, although that *too* would have been in pursuance of the DPSPs.

Clearly, then, it is quite possible to implement the goals set out in Part IV in an *unreasonable* manner. This was something the Court clearly understood in *Mirzapur Moti*, where it held that a restriction aimed at fulfilling the DPSPs will be reasonable insofar as it does not run in 'clear conflict' with the fundamental right.<sup>39</sup> It is this line of reasoning that is correct and—it is submitted ought to be followed in the future.

#### **IV. THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES AS INTERPRETIVE GUIDES**

Once the Court had cleared the path for invoking the DPSPs in legal adjudication in *Re The Kerala Education Bill*, it was not long before it took the next logical step: using them as interpretive guides. In *Balwant Raj v Union of India*, <sup>40</sup> a 1966 judgment of the Allahabad High Court, an employee of the Indian Railways contracted tuberculosis and was unable to come to work for a time. Consequently, he was discharged for 'failing to resume duty' under the stipulated rule. Reading the Directive Principle requiring the State to secure the right to work, the Court limited the phrase 'failing to resume duty' to *voluntary* failures, holding that 'the rule must be interpreted in accordance with letter and spirit of the Directive Principles of State Policy'.  $\frac{41}{1}$  Thus, the Court assumed the legal fiction that the State had, in fact, applied the Principles in framing the contested legislation.<sup>42</sup>

Yet what, precisely, is the *strength* of that legal fiction? A survey of comparative constitutional practice reveals four distinct standards that constitutional courts have adopted when construing legislation to harmonise with standards contained in a super-statute or constitution. Let us call these four standards 'weak', 'medium', 'strong', and 'modificatory'.

A weak standard only requires courts to select that interpretation, out of a series of *equally reasonable interpretations arrived at independently*, which coheres better with the background right at issue. A medium standard, found in New Zealand, requires a meaning that is 'fairly open… and tenable<sup> $3/43$ </sup> to be preferred if it is consistent with the Bill of Rights. The strong standard, adopted by the UK Supreme Court in interpreting the Human Rights Act, goes further and allows for any interpretation, no matter how strained, to be preferred if it is consistent with the Human Rights Act and is an *intelligible* reading of the statute in question.<sup>44</sup> And the modification standard goes furthest of all—it stipulates that the *meaning of legislation itself* is to be determined by referring to the background right.<sup>45</sup>

In *Balwant Raj*, the Court adopted—arguably—a strong standard of review, infusing an additional condition into a provision that was nowhere in evidence on its face. Subsequently, however, it went even further: in *Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Board v Hari Shankar*, 46 the Supreme Court was interpreting the phrase 'Nothing in this Act shall apply…' The technical details of the case need not detain us here; it is this observation of the Court that is striking: 'That is the only construction which gives meaning and sense to Sec. 13-B and that is a construction which can legitimately be said to conform to the Directive Principles of State Policy proclaimed in Articles 42 and 43 of the Constitution.<sup>'47</sup>

In other words, the Court treated the DPSPs as *constitutive of legislative meaning*: the maximum degree to which it could infuse Directive Principles into the law without directly enforcing them. This strong vision of the DPSPs has been latent in the Court's jurisprudence since then. $\frac{48}{10}$  In 2013, for example, the Court invoked the DPSPs in determining the meaning of the phrase 'public purpose' under Article 282 of the Constitution. It held that the Tamil Nadu State Government's distribution of free televisions was a valid 'public purpose' under Article 282 *because* it was in pursuance of the DPSPs.<sup>49</sup> Unfortunately, however, the Court—thus far—has failed to undertake a coherent, doctrinal analysis of the precise role that the Principles are meant to play in statutory interpretation.

#### **V. THE DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES AS ESTABLISHING FRAMEWORK VALUES**

We have seen how in the 1960s and 1970s, the Court gradually chipped away at its earlier jurisprudence: beginning with making the DPSPs constitutionally relevant, and then erasing their subordinate status to the fundamental rights. The consequences of these two moves are crucial. Before we examine the cases, however, a brief digression into political philosophy is apposite.

It hardly needs repeating that Bills of Rights are framed in abstract language, laying down broad principles and concepts rather than concrete conceptions. Take the classic example of 'freedom'. Everyone agrees that if I am locked up in a room, my freedom is curtailed. Everyone also agrees that my inability to fly unaided is a *limitation* upon my actions, but not an infringement upon my *freedom*. My body structure and the forces of gravity, which combine to render it impossible for me to fly, are simply background conditions that structure the world in which we all live. But now consider this: my lack of money bars my access to goods and services that I otherwise want or need. Is *this* a violation of my freedom? Hayek would answer in the negative, holding that only the *intentional actions of individuals*—and not the impersonal workings of the market—can constitute restrictions upon liberty.<sup>50</sup> GA Cohen, on the other hand, would argue precisely the opposite.<sup>51</sup> What, then, are we to make of a constitutional clause that promises freedom? Does it embody Cohen's vision—and thus, potentially, place an obligation upon the State to provide adequate social security—or does it embody Hayek's vision—placing no such obligation? Or another vision altogether? To answer this question, naturally, we must investigate the basic values that underlie the Constitution in question, and going
beyond that, the political, economic, and social values that structure the polity that has adopted that Constitution.

The result of the Indian Supreme Court's twenty-year incremental approach to the DPSPs brought it to a point, I argue, where the Directive Principles finally came to assume the role of structuring values. The best example is *State of Kerala v NM Thomas. 52* In order to understand what was at stake in *NM Thomas*, recall the judgment in *Champakam Dorairajan*. The government's affirmative action programme for admissions to medical and engineering colleges was struck down on Article 15 grounds, and the State's reference to the DPSPs (Article 46) was rejected. In response, Parliament *amended* the Constitution to introduce Article 15(4), specifically allowing for affirmative action in educational institutions.

The Court's judgment—and Parliament's response—demonstrates a specific vision of equality running through Articles 15 and 16. Let us call this the 'colour-blind conception' of equality.<sup>53</sup> This holds that there is a specific harm whenever the State classifies *individuals* on the basis of their caste, race, sex, etc—because historically, it was these bases that were used to sort people into categories, and determine their worth. Therefore, any distribution of benefits or burdens that classifies us into groups on such grounds is presumptively suspect. Individuals are to be treated *qua* individuals, and not as *members* of groups.

That this was the animating vision of the *Dorairajan* court is evident from the fact that it refused to locate the permissibility of remedial affirmative action *within* Article 15 itself, and that it required a specific amendment from Parliament to legalise it. Cases after *Dorairajan* affirmed this view, treating Articles 15(4) and 16(4) as *exceptions* to the Articles 14–16 equality code. 54

While the colour-blind conception of equality is individual-centric, there is a competing vision. Call it the 'group-subordination' vision. <sup>55</sup> This argues that groups have been the *locus* of historic discrimination. Thus, remedial action must take into account the subordinate status of groups (such as women, or 'lower caste'), and governmental policies are perfectly legitimate if they make groups the site of redressing historic discrimination and achieving genuine present-day equality. Article 46, which was cited and dismissed by the Court in *Champakam Dorairajan*, specifically envisages this conception, when it refers to the interests of the weaker *sections* of the people. 56

Under the colour-blind conception of equality, *NM Thomas* ought to have been an easy case. The question was about the constitutionality of caste-based affirmative action in employment. Article 16 guaranteed the equality of opportunity in employment. Article 16(4) carved out a specific exception for 'socially and educationally backward classes'. 57 It was not disputed that *caste*-based affirmative action was not covered by the 16(4) exception. Surely, then, this was a straightforward equalopportunities violation. Not so, said the Court. Articles 15(4) and 16(4) were not *exceptions* to 15(1) and 16(1), but *emphatic restatements* of it. In other words, remedial affirmative action for certain historically subordinated groups was no longer grounded in 15(4) and 16(4), which specifically provided for it, but *implicit within the logic of the constitutional commitment to equality itself.*

What justifies this departure from precedent, and seemingly from the text as well, that speaks of 'persons' under Articles 15(1) and 16(1)? The majority doesn't say, but Mathew and Krishna Iyer JJ, in their concurring opinions, do. According to Mathew J:

<sup>[</sup>I]f we want to give equality of opportunity for employment to the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, we will have to take note of their social, educational and economic environment. Not only is the directive principle embodied *in Article 46* binding on the law-maker as ordinarily understood but it should equally inform and illuminate the approach of the Court … the guarantee of equality, before the law or the equal opportunity in matters of employment is a guarantee of something more than what is required by formal equality. It implies differential treatment of persons who are unequal ... today, the political theory

which acknowledges the obligation of government under *Part IV* of the Constitution to provide jobs, medical care, old age pension, etc., extends to human rights and imposes an affirmative obligation to promote equality and liberty. The force of the idea of a state with obligation to help the weaker sections of its members seems to have increasing influence in Constitutional law. 58

This is crucial, because the *shift* from the precedent-based, colour-blind vision of equality to a group subordination conception is *justified* by invoking the DPSPs in general, and Article 46 in particular. Articles 14, 15, and 16 set out the abstract concept of equality. Mathew J uses the Directive Principles to decide which *conception*—colour-blind or group subordination—is more faithful to the Constitution. *It is in this way that the Directive Principles act as structuring values*. Thus, as Krishna Iyer J observed: 'The upshot, after *Bharati*, is that *Article 46 has to be given emphatic expression* while interpreting Article 16(1) and (2).<sup> $59$ </sup>

The point is perhaps summed up best by Bhagwati J's partially dissenting opinion in *Minerva Mills*:

Where a law is enacted for giving effect to a Directive Principle in furtherance of the constitutional goal of social and economic justice it may conflict with a formalistic and doctrinaire view of equality before the law, but it would almost always conform to the principle of equality before the law in its total magnitude and dimension  $\dots$ <sup>60</sup>

Once again, then, it is the DPSPs that inform the conception of equality that Articles 14, 15, and 16 only lay out abstractly. More recently, *Ashoka Kumar Thakur* put the point another way, holding that 'the *facets* of the *principle* of equality could be altered … to carry out the Directive Principles …' 61

The present argument reflects a point first made by Tripathi, long before this jurisprudence came into being. In 1972, Tripathi argued that it is the Supreme Court's 'duty so to discharge its own function of enforcing fundamental rights as *not to obstruct the legislature in its respective function of applying the directive principles* in the making of laws'. <sup>62</sup> Drawing an analogy with the American Supreme Court's upholding of President Roosevelt's extensive New Deal social welfare legislation (despite no express textual peg in the American Constitution on which to hang them), Tripathi understood the Directive Principles to be performing a similar function of mitigating the social evils that spring from a laissez-faire interpretation of formal equality, the right to property, and other such civil rights. Indeed, Tripathi saw the abstract wording of **Part III** rights as an invitation for 'judicial creativity'.<sup>63</sup> The aim of this section has been to demonstrate how such creativity might best be applied in a manner that is most consistent with the text, structure, and animating philosophy of the Constitution.

This argument conforms with the three-pronged holistic interpretation of Article 37 that we discussed above. It is consistent with the prohibition on enforcement, while maintaining a place for the Principles in the judicial inquiry, and saving them from redundancy. It also tracks a strain of constitutional thought that was present throughout the late stages of the freedom struggle, up to the framing of the Constitution. In her survey of the primary material, Jayal notes that economic and social rights were understood through the 1930s and 1940s as essential for securing the 'meaningful' enjoyment of civil and political rights. In his 1947 *Memorandum*, Ambedkar specifically argued that political democracy must ensure that an individual is not forced to 'relinquish… rights as a condition of receiving a privilege',  $\frac{64}{9}$  and focused on the meaninglessness of civil and political rights to the unemployed, starving, and economically powerless. *Ergo*, even if social and economic rights were not to be made enforceable, there was strong support for the proposition that meaningful civil and political rights could not exist without being conceptualised in a way that took into account socioeconomic considerations.

This tempered understanding of socio-economic rights—unenforceable yet relevant—is evident in the Constituent Assembly debates. Consistent with the role of the principles as structural values, arguments to make them more detailed and specific were repeatedly rejected. For example, an amendment to add the prohibition of monopolies to the Directive Principle prohibiting the concentration of economic wealth did not succeed. KT Shah's proposal to add 'socialist' to the preamble was met with Ambedkar pointing out that the 'socialistic direction' of the Constitution was provided by the Directive Principles such as equal pay for equal work, the rejection of the concentration of economic wealth, and so on. $\frac{65}{5}$  Yet perhaps the best evidence of the framers' intent can be gleaned from Ambedkar's elaborate speech in defence of the DPSPs. Ambedkar identified the goal of the Directive Principles as the achievement of 'economic democracy', complementary to 'parliamentary democracy', which was the task of the rest of the Constitution. He steadfastly refused to identify economic democracy with a particular economic or political school of thought (notwithstanding his earlier remark about the socialistic direction of  $Part IV$ ), only referring ambiguously to the principle of 'one man, one value'.<sup>66</sup>

Ambedkar's speech does two things. First, it affirms that there is an animating vision underlying Part IV as a whole, one that is sufficiently abstract so as not to be tied to political and economic-isms, but also sufficiently constraining (through specific provisions such as non-concentration of wealth, equal pay for equal work, and so on). And secondly, if *economic democracy* and *parliamentary democracy* are meant to be complementary and of equal importance—as the speech reflects—then the interrelation between Parts III and IV that we have proposed appears to be a seamless integration of the two. Parliamentary democracy is guaranteed by the set of individual rights located in **Part III**; but the substantive *content* of those rights—whether equality means colour-blindness or remedying group subordination, for instance; whether the free speech guarantee requires the government to adopt a laissez-faire approach<sup>67</sup> or permits it to remedy market inequalities guaranteeing persons an equitable access to the *modes* of communication (like newspapers)—*these* questions, that Part III *leaves open*, are to be resolved by determining what economic democracy under **Part IV** means, and informing the content of fundamental rights based upon that understanding.

This, therefore, is perhaps the best way of understanding—and intellectually grounding—the Court's approach that Seervai finds so unpalatable. In a series of cases, from *Kesavananda Bharati 68* through *Minerva Mills*, and beyond,  $\frac{69}{2}$  the Court has called for a 'harmonious construction' of Parts III and IV and regularly cited Granville Austin to observe that Parts III and IV 'are complementary and supplementary' to each other, followed by vague pronouncements that leave it entirely unclear how this harmonising is done, and what basis it has. $\frac{70}{1}$  If we view harmonising as the DPSPs providing the structural foundation within which fundamental rights are understood, it is not only one way of understanding what the courts are doing, but also—as we have seen above—grounded in both text and history.<sup>71</sup>

Although we have traced this interpretive approach to *NM Thomas*, we find glimpses of it throughout the Court's jurisprudence. In his concurring opinion in *Re The Kerala Education Bill*, for instance, Aiyer J refused to find a right to State recognition in minority educational institutions under Article 30(1) as implicit in the right to *establish* minority institutions, *on the ground* that this would make Article 45 redundant. Aiyer J was very clear that the question was not about a *conflict* between Article 30(1) and Article 45; it was not about which of the two was subordinate to the other. Rather, the question was about the *content* of the Article 30(1) right, whose determination was informed by Article  $45.\overline{^{72}}$ 

We can also find the argument in cases after *NM Thomas*. In *Randhir Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh*, the question was whether different pay scales for drivers working in different departments violated Articles 14 and 16. Invoking Article 39(d)—equal pay for equal work—the Court held:

Construing Articles 14 and 16 in the light of the Preamble and Art. 39(d) we are of the view that the principle 'Equal pay for Equal work' is deducible from those Articles and may be properly applied to cases of unequal scales of pay based on no classification or irrational classification though those drawing the different scales of pay do identical work under the same employer.<sup>73</sup>

This is precisely the kind of reasoning we have discussed above. The Court invokes the DPSPs to understand what equality under our Constitution truly means, in concrete circumstances; that is, in this case, it is the <u>Part IV</u> commitment to equal pay for equal work that informs the understanding of the Court that a *distinction* in pay for similar work is precisely the kind of arbitrary/irrational classification that amounts to unequal treatment under Article  $14.\overline{14}$  A similar argument was echoed in *Atam Prakash v State of Haryana*, <sup>75</sup> where the Court referred to the preamble and the DPSPs to examine whether a particular classification was legitimate under Article 14.

Interestingly, the argument made by the Court in *NM Thomas, Randhir Singh* and *Atam Prakash* had been anticipated as far back as 1973, in the context of Article 19(1)(a). In *Bennett Coleman* the Court held that the government was not permitted, under  $19(1)(a)$ , to impose restrictions upon big newspapers in an attempt to equalise market conditions and facilitate the entry of new players into the marketplace of ideas, who wouldn't otherwise be able to compete.<sup>76</sup> In so doing, the Court adopted a particular individualistic, liberal theory of free speech that rendered constitutionally irrelevant the economic conditions that limited access to the existing means of effective communication of ideas in society, such as newspapers, television, etc, all of which require a substantial resource base.<sup>77</sup> Mathew J's dissent invoked the DPSPs to argue against this conception, and advocate an alternative vision of free speech that refused to separate the freedom of expression from the economic and social conditions that defined and shaped it in a liberal-capitalist society. He held:

[A]ny theory of freedom of expression must take into account … the right of the public to education arising from the affirmative duty cast on the Government by the directive principles to educate the people, apart from the right of the community to read and be informed arising under the theory of the freedom of speech itself. $^{78}$ 

Mathew J's rejection of free speech as an individual right of non-interference, in favour of it being a social good characterised by principles of equal access, was grounded in the DPSPs, much like *NM Thomas*'s changed vision of equality. And twenty years after *Bennett Coleman*, in *LIC v Manubhai D Shah*, $\frac{79}{2}$  the Supreme Court, in holding that Article 19(1)(a) required having a right to reply, even for an in-house journal, in order to ensure complete information, essentially accepted the free-speech-asa-social-good approach. Although the *LIC* Court did not expressly cite Part IV, the implications are obvious, when it held that fundamental rights were broadly phrased, as abstract concepts, precisely so that courts could ground them and give them meaning in accordance the socio-economic goals found elsewhere in the Constitution (which, obviously, would be the preamble and Part IV):

[The framers] *had themselves made provisions in the Constitution to bring about a socio-economic transformation*. That being so, it is reasonable to infer that the Constitution makers employed a broad phraseology while drafting the fundamental rights  $\cdots$   $\frac{80}{ }$ 

Similarly, in *Bandhua Mukti Morcha v Union of India*,  $\frac{81}{2}$  the Court referred to Articles 39(d) and (e),

41, and 42 to infuse substantive content into the dignitarian principle underlying Article 21's guarantee of the right to life—and many of the substantive rights that the Court was to subsequently read into Article 21 were located within this dignitarian foundation. In *Olga Tellis v Bombay Municipal Corporation*, <sup>82</sup> the same technique was used (relying upon Articles 39(a) and 41) to read in a right to livelihood under the right to life. In *Nashirwar v State of Madhya Pradesh*, 83 the Court invoked the Directive Principles dealing with prohibition to infuse moral content into Article 19(1) (g)'s freedom of trade: the right to freedom of trade itself was held *not* to include activities of a *res* extra commercium nature such as trade in alcohol.<sup>84</sup> And as recently as 2014, it invoked Articles 39(e) and (f) to hold that the right to a safe and healthy environment was part of the right to life.  $85$ 

In sum, we have seen how the DPSPs have structured the application of equality under Articles 14– 16, free expression under 19(1)(a), freedom of trade under 19(1)(g), and life under Article 21, helping the courts to select which conceptions, out of a number of available (and conflicting) ones, all consistent with the abstract concepts of equality, speech, etc, are *concretely* required by the Constitution.

But doesn't this approach, it might be objected, render fundamental rights utterly subordinate to the DPSPs? We are, after all, arguing for the DPSPs playing a role in ascertaining the very *content* of fundamental rights. It is important to understand that this is not so. The Directive Principles, we have argued, *inform* the content of fundamental rights; they do not *determine* them. The fundamental rights continue to embody *concepts*, and concepts themselves not only have determinate meaning, but also have core, paradigm cases that any conception must respect and account for. To invoke an old chestnut: HLA Hart's famous 'No vehicles in the Park' rule has its penumbra of doubt in the case of bicycles and toy trucks, where the decision might go either way without necessarily being right or wrong, but it also has its core of certainty that definitively proscribes buses and tractors. <sup>86</sup> Similarly, the DPSPs might tell us which *conception* of equality the Constitution subscribes to, as they did in *NM Thomas*, but they can only do so within the bounds allowed by the *concept* of equality.

The tortured history of Articles 31A and 31C seems to bear this out. Article 31A, aimed at land reform, was inserted into the Constitution following a series of Article 14 challenges to land legislation. Article 31A bars an Article 14 challenge to laws—inter alia—authorising the acquisition of any estate, taking over the management of any property, and so on. Although the amendment itself historically—was necessitated by a particularly doctrinaire interpretation of equality by the early Court, it is also obvious that its provisions are broad enough for land legislation that might be difficult to justify on most conceptions of equality, even those shaped by the DPSPs—hence the need for the protection of a constitutional amendment. Similarly, Article 31C insulated *any* law aimed at giving effect to anything in **Part IV** from a 14 or 19 challenge—clearly indicating that it is possible for Part IV-grounded laws to violate fundamental rights (hence, the need for an amendment to insulate them). $\frac{87}{3}$ 

This understanding at least partially motivates the Court's 2005 opinion in *State of Gujarat v Mirzapur Moti Kasab Jamat*, <sup>88</sup> another cow slaughter case. There, the Court observed, 'A restriction placed on any Fundamental Right, aimed at securing Directive Principles will be held as reasonable and hence intra vires [as long as] it does not run in clear conflict with the fundamental right  $\dots$ <sup>89</sup>

In light of our discussion above, I suggest that 'clear conflict' is best understood as implying the settled, indisputable central (or minimum) core of any concept (such as equality, free speech, freedom of conscience, etc) that conceptions cannot violate if they are to be conceptions of that concept in the first place. The DPSPs are structuring values, but they themselves operate within a web of constraints

determined by the very concepts (located in  $Part III$ ) whose underlying structure they must provide.

## **VI. THE LIMITING PRINCIPLE: NON-ENFORCEMENT**

Is there any difference that now remains between fundamental rights and Directive Principles, one may well ask—apart from the fact that laws cannot be struck down for violating the DPSPs?<sup>90</sup> The Court answered that question in its 1982 case of *Ranjan Dwivedi v Union of India*, <sup>91</sup> well into the heyday of the Directive Principles era. Article 39A mandated the State to provide equal justice and free legal aid. 92 In *Ranjan Dwivedi*, the petitioner's claim to a State-paid counsel engaged at a fee commensurate with the fees the State was paying to its own counsel was rejected, the Court holding that:

As is clear from the terms of Art. 39A, the social objective of equal justice and free legal aid has to be implemented by suitable legislation or by formulating schemes for free legal aid. The remedy of the petitioner, if any, lies by way of making an application before the learned Additional Sessions Judge.<sup>93</sup>

In other words, the Court understood that shaping the State's fiscal policy was most definitely beyond its remit. A similar set of concerns guided the Court's decision in *Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation v Nawab Khan Gulab Khan*. 94 In that case, the Court invoked Articles 38, 39, and 46 to read into the right to life the right to shelter, and a correlative *constitutional duty* upon State instrumentalities to 'provide adequate facilities and opportunities by distributing its wealth and resources for settlement of life and erection of shelter over [indigent persons'] heads to make the right to life meaningful, effective and fruitful'. 95 In the same breath, however, it *also* held that 'courts cannot give direction to implement the scheme with a particular budget as it being the executive function of the local bodies and the State to evolve their annual budget<sup>2</sup>.<sup>96</sup> Thus, the Directive Principles played a structuring role in determining the contours of the right to life under Article 21, but insofar as *enforcement* of that right appeared to require decisions that, according to classical separation of powers models, belong to the legislative <sup>97</sup> or executive branches, the Court said, *thus far and no further*. 98

This institutional concern is reflected most vividly in the history of the right to education through the 1990s and the 2000s. In a series of cases such as *Mohini Jain*<sup>99</sup> and *Unnikrishnan* v *State of Andhra Pradesh*, <sup>100</sup> the Court invoked the DPSPs to read into Article 21's guarantee of a right to life, a right to education as well—but conspicuously refrained from going any further into an issue that would have profound economic and social implications, not to mention a massive reorientation of budgetary priorities. Eventually, it was the legislature that amended the Constitution to introduce Article 21A, codifying the right to education; <sup>101</sup> and the Court's task was to uphold the validity of legislation passed under that provision that imposed certain economic burdens upon private schools.<sup>102</sup>

## **VII. CONCLUSION**

Between 1950 and 2015, as far as the DPSPs go, the wheel has turned a full 180 degrees. When the Constitution was written, there was a clear separation between Parts III and **Part IV**, between enforceable civil/political rights (classically understood), and non-enforceable socio-economic guarantees. But after sixty-five years of judicial interpretation, finding different ways to read the Part IV guarantees into Part III and blur that distinction, it has now become almost routine for the Supreme Court to invoke Part IV in its decisions—as routine as Articles 14 and 21. With the increasing role of the DPSPs, the need for judicial discipline cannot be overstated. If the DPSPs are interpreted to mean everything, then they will end up meaning nothing. This chapter has attempted to use constitutional text, history, precedent, and philosophy to tether the DPSPs to a firm conceptual foundation, offering both a faithful description of existing practice and prescriptive recommendations for the road ahead.

The DPSPs, I have argued, serve three distinct roles in judicial interpretation; in other words, there are three different ways in which fundamental rights (and other laws, for that matter) are interpreted 'in light of' the DPSPs. *First*, legislation enacted in service of the DPSPs meets the 'public interest' threshold in a fundamental rights challenge (importantly, its reasonableness must then be examined, and *not* on the touchstone of the Directive Principles). *Secondly*, if legislation is intelligibly susceptible to more than one interpretation, then the meaning that corresponds more closely to the DPSPs is to be preferred over others (although, as we discussed, the Court is yet to clarify the standard applicable to this inquiry). And *thirdly*, the DPSPs play a structuring role in selecting the specific conceptions that are the concrete manifestations of the abstract concepts embodied in the Fundamental Rights chapter. This is the best way to understand the Court's dictum that fundamental rights 'ought to be interpreted in light of the DPSPs'. There is thus a clearly delineated role for the Directive Principles in constitutional analysis.

The limits to this role are twofold: *first*, the Court may not strike down legislation for noncompliance with the DPSPs; and *secondly*, the Court may not incorporate the DPSPs to a point that requires it stepping outside its designated role under classical separation-of-powers theory—making policy choices and budgetary allocations (of course, the Court has not shirked from this role more generally).

Such an approach, I suggest—although complex—is both intellectually defensible and constitutionally faithful. Importantly, it ensures against the judicial drift that has blighted Articles 14 and 21, and is threatening to blight  $Part IV$ , with its recent indiscriminate usage. Only time will tell, however, whether the Court will follow this path.

 $\frac{11}{1}$  AIR 1958 SC 956.

 $\frac{1}{2}$  Constitution of India 1950, art 37 (emphasis added).

<sup>2</sup> HM Seervai, *Constitutional Law of India*, vol 2 (4th edn, Universal Law Publishing 2002) 1934–40.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>3</sup> AIR 1951 SC 226.

 $4$  AIR 1955 SC 170.

 $\frac{5}{2}$  AIR 1952 Bom 461.

<sup>6</sup> *Jaswant Kaur v State of Bombay* AIR 1952 Bom 461 [4] (Chagla CJ) (emphasis added).

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>7</sup> James Madison, *The Federalist No 48* (1788) [<http://www.constitution.org/fed/federa48.htm](http://www.constitution.org/fed/federa48.htm)>, accessed November 2015.

<span id="page-13-0"></span> $8$  AIR 1958 SC 731.

<sup>9</sup> *Mohd Hanif Qureshi* [\(n](#page-13-0) 8) [12] (Das CJ).

 $\frac{10}{2}$  *State of Bombay v FN Balsara* AIR 1951 SC 318, which used the DPSPs to interpret the reasonableness of an art 19(6) restriction, is an exception to the rule. The analysis in that case, however, is minimally developed.

 $12$  Constitution of India 1950, art 45.