36

# **Policy and Planning** for Health Services

Indira Chakravarthi

ost of the countries across the world have developed a healthcare and medical care system in a planned and organized way. In addition to this, some countries have also attempted to use the system to advance other social goals, such as to reduce inequities and corruption. The provision of medical care has been viewed and undertaken as a part of the larger policy and planning processes, and has largely been provided through non-profit mechanisms, as a basic right of citizens, and is the most important social security element in the welfare state.

It is useful to make a distinction between 'health' and 'health services system', even though much of the discourse on health is largely about health services for the provision of medical care. It is an accepted fact that health is more than the absence of illness and it is a dynamic concept involving the biological and social dimensions of the well-being of all individuals and populations. Healthcare refers to prevention of illness, protection from illness and promotion of health in populations. It is about paying attention to the availability of sufficient food, clean water, shelter, hygienic living and working conditions, and a clean environment, in short, all the aspects conducive to prevent illnesses and diseases in a population and to keep people healthy. Hence, healthcare is much more than merely organizing health services for medical care. However, provision of medical care to sick individuals is essential and critical as a preventive measure for spread of infectious diseases, as well as for provision of cure and relief from pain, and support to disabled and chronically ill individuals. The health services system is a complex of education, research and delivery systems for providing curative, preventive, promotive and rehabilitative services to the population<sup> $1$ </sup>.

There is a substantial amount of literature and discourse on the health status of the Indian population, on the health policy and planning process in India, on the status of health services infrastructure, on medical education, and so on. A comprehensive account of the developments in the health sector requires several volumes; it is impossible to do justice to this vital, critical area of social policy and inter-disciplinary study within the confines of a single chapter. Here, an attempt is made to present a bird's eye view of the salient features of the health sector, and the various forces that have shaped the developments thereof.

This chapter deals with the organization and provision of health services in India in the post-1947 period. It does not touch upon several important components of the health services system, namely medical education, production and supply of medicines, vaccines, medical devices and equipment-based medical technologies. Incidentally, production of drugs and pharmaceuticals in the country is administered by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals.

### ❑❑ **Health Policy and Planning in India**

A broad range of economic and social rights, and 'development' have been endorsed and officially acknowledged, at national and international levels, to be central to health. Article 21 of the constitution of India, 'Right to Life', has also been interpreted widely to include in its ambit rights to health, shelter, food, education, etc.

The constitution outlines the division of responsibilities in the health sector among the state, central and local governments, with the state essentially responsible for the delivery of health care. The sixth item in the State List in the constitution of India vests responsibility for 'Public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries' on the state governments. However, a number of items related to health are listed in the Concurrent List; Items 20 and 20A in the List, on Economic and Social Planning and Population Control permit both the State and the Union to function in these areas. In practice, much of the directions, plans and priorities, as well as resources go from the Centre and its role is therefore important. Over time states have became increasingly dependent on the centre for financial assistance to implement disease control programmes and community-based health services. In turn, the centre has increasingly gained financial and programmatic control of these areas, adversely affecting the development of technical and organizational capacity in the states.

*It is only when the description of the present structure of the health sector is preceded by a historical analysis of its varying components and the forces that determine it can one understand the current values and meaning of present experiences.*<sup>2</sup>

# ❑❑ **Public Health and Health Services in colonial India**

The foundations for the present-day health policies, plans and programs originated in the late 19th and early 20th century during the colonial rule and in the course of the nationalist movement against it.

"The initial phase of this effort, from 1700 to 1835, was guided by an open policy of learning from the Indian medical systems and their practitioners, but after 1835, the British policy became more dominating. Not only were the schools teaching both ayurveda and allopathy asked to abolish the former, but English was also made compulsory in medical schools. British standards were rigorously imposed and all support to traditional systems was withdrawn. This period, is one of major changes when the preexisting medical systems were completely over-shadowed by allopathy in India. However, there have been certain areas of continuity as well, which are more crucial…".<sup>3</sup> Namely, hospitals in the pre-colonial period were run more as charity institutions for the poor, while the rich availed the services of private practitioners at home; the major patrons of Ayurveda were the courts and the urban elite; famous practitioners like *Dhanvantari, Charaka, Susruta, Atraya,* were all court physicians and lavishly rewarded for their services. These features remained in the colonial period and continue till today i.e., of elitism in medical services and availability of private practice for those who could afford it.

Right through the first half of the 19th century, the focus of the colonial government in provision of healthcare services was on armies and European civilian populations. The Indian Medical Service (IMS) was primarily a military medical service, constituted for maintaining the health of the army. The professional medical men, both in the IMS and the civil medical services, did not show much interest in the sanitary matters unless there were epidemics. Before the 1860s sanitary arrangements for the civilian population was not given much attention. Any efforts for local improvements, such as removal of filth, or repair of wells and drains, depended on the individual official in-charge.

Sanitation and hygiene as one of the preventive health measures can be considered to date from the 1859 Royal Commission appointed to inquire into the sanitary state of the army in India. The Commission recommended measures not only for the army but also for the civilian population. It reported that the health of the army could not be separated from the sanitary conditions of the neighbouring population, and that proper measures for water-supply, drainage, paving, cleansing and general constitution in these towns would be most beneficial to the health of the troops living near them. In accordance with the suggestions of the Commission, Commissioners of Public Health were established in 1864 in Madras, Bombay and Bengal. In Madras and Bombay, public health services were initiated through the municipal and district boards. The Commissioners put forward far-reaching recommendations, which included employment of trained public health staff in towns and districts. But these recommendations were not carried out and no comprehensive policy was laid down with regard to development of preventive health services. Not much progress was actually made and in 1869 the sanitary commissions were practically abolished. The reasons given for this lack of performance ranged from lack of funds, to unsatisfactory legislation, to apathy of the people. According to Jeffrey, little was achieved partly because sanitary concerns were restricted to official circles, and technical disputes about the relationship between sanitary measures and medical science hindered the implementation of policy*,* especially with respect to the role of clean water in preventing cholera.<sup>4</sup> The doctors of the Indian Medical Service argued that the sanitary commissioners would unnecessarily limit the functions of army medical officers, and through the Indian Medical Gazette waged a war against the appointment of a layman to head the Bengal Sanitary Department. Sanitary Commissioners were expressly excluded from any concern with the cantonments and the European civil lines which remained the responsibility of the army. The measures proposed to deal with cholera were implemented for the army and cholera mortality dropped in the 1870s (to 3 per 1000). However, when medical men came to deal with civilian cholera they invoked excuses such as the superstition of the natives. Increasingly, the towns had local municipal committees, which focused on activities like conservancy, by employing sweepers to collect sewage and bury it, and on transportation. However, because of financial constraints these committees could not impact much on sanitation. In 1888, in view of the then recently created local bodies – in municipal and in rural areas – the Government of India issued a resolution drawing their attention to their duties in matters of sanitation, and the task of sanitation was entrusted to these local bodies in many parts of the country. The training in hygiene and sanitation was expanded, and graduates were brought into sanitary work. Most of the activities were severely restricted however, by a shortage of funds, and by blaming the poor natives for their ignorance, superstitions, etc., to be the reason for their sickness and ill-health. There was opposition from local politicians for taxation for sanitary purposes.<sup>5</sup>

The report of the Plague Commission in 1904 recommended the strengthening of public health services and the establishment of laboratories for research and for preparation of vaccines and sera. The action taken on these suggestions included: (1) creation of a Medical Research Department under the Central Government; (2) establishment of the India Research Fund Association for promoting research into medical problems; and (3) annual grants from the central funds to the provinces to assist execution of public health works, such as drainage and water supply, and strengthening of public health personnel, such as appointing Deputy Sanitary commissioners and health officers in local bodies (Health Survey and Development Committee 1946). The success of such 'preventive' sanitation efforts were negligible, except in the larger cities. Sanitary policy was restricted to towns and military areas, as the Royal Commission was to consider improvements for the towns in proximity to military stations.

In the early 20th century, capitalist development and rapid unplanned increase of the urban population led to slums, overcrowding and urban squalor in India just as it had in Europe over the previous century. There was a large-scale urbanization in India after the First World War, with Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Kanpur, Ahmedabad, Madurai and Coimbatore becoming major industrial centers. There were an estimated 7-8 million industrial workers. There was an overcrowding on an unprecedented scale, largely associated with influx of rural population, which constituted the urban industrial working class. The urban industrial worker lived in abysmal conditions in the *bastis* (slums), which lacked all civic amenities. The Second World War aggravated the existing conditions in all industrial areas. It was expected that this would aggravate further in the post-War period with further development of industry, unless adequate measures were taken, such as laying down minimum standards of housing for workers. Even in the towns most directly amenable to the British influence and action, the conditions were appalling, with very high morbidity and mortality.

After the 1900s, the state became increasingly active in the provision of public health for the general population, by funding measures such as small pox vaccination and loans and grants-in-aid for sanitation. The two Acts of 1919 and 1935 transferred medical administration (namely that of hospitals-dispensaries), medical education, and public health activities to the provinces. Decision-making in matters of sanitary and medical policy were devolved to Indians who were also employed as municipal health officers and surgeons in the civilian wing of the Indian Medical Service, which underwent a drive towards 'Indianization' after 1919.<sup>6</sup> While such measures led to greater public health activity in the provinces than before, however, they continued to be plagued by a lack of adequate resources and personnel.

While public health measures were not a priority, this was not the case as far as medical services were concerned. Medical colleges had been established as early as in 1835 in the three Presidencies namely Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, and they followed the guidelines laid down by the General Medical Council of England. The rudimentary medical services provided by the medical officers of the East India Company to its army as well as to British civilians got consolidated as the Indian Medical Service soon after 1857. In addition, several eminent Indian medical professionals also set up a variety of medical colleges and hospitals in different parts of the country. As a result, many Indians were exposed to and received 'western' medical education since the beginning of the 20th century.

According to the Annual Report of the Sanitary Commissioner (1910), there were in-patient, out-patient and surgical treatments being offered in all of the 2670 hospitals and dispensaries (both funded by state as well as by private sources). The number of such institutions increased to 2707 in 1911, and in addition there were 829 special hospitals of the state, for example the Railway Hospitals. We learn from this Annual Report that at that time private dispensaries were also far more common in India than anywhere else, approximately 706 in that period. By the 1900s it was common in most cities and towns to find men making their living from practicing Western medicine.<sup>7</sup> There were also 4 medical colleges offering University degrees and 14 schools offering diploma courses. While these numbers may not have been sufficient for the large population, they indicate that the institutions being set up provided allopathic services and served to propagate it further.

Western medicine has had a long and complex history in this country; it was not simply an 'imposition' of the British colonizers. Before the 1800s western medicine had made few inroads into India and was largely confined to European enclaves and the major port cities. A dramatic transformation took place over the next hundred years, whereby it became the dominant system within the realm of state medicine and public health. In the late 19th century the exposure to English education led to the growth of an English-educated, elite class of Indians in the country. By the 1900s western medicine had started gaining in prestige and popularity among the western educated middle class. The medical profession proved attractive to many Indians, who sought a career in the subordinate branch of the IMS. Indians started joining the Indian Medical Service after 1855. The western medicine came to enjoy formidable degree of authority and ultimately became the universal system. While the policies and actions of the colonial government contributed in a large measure to the process by which it acquired its privileged position, yet 'the adoption of western medicine was punctuated by resistance, negotiation and participation'.<sup>8</sup> After the passing of the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms of 1919, the British expected the Indian ministers of health and education to try to support indigenous medicine, since the Indian National Congress had begun to pass resolutions in its support. While some ministers did support the Indian system of medicine on both patriotic and economic grounds, some (in Bombay and Punjab for instance) resisted nationalist pressures and used their limited funds to support modern scientific medicine and surgery and make it accessible to all. While the Congress and non-Congress parties never committed themselves exclusively to one or the other side, leaders like Nehru supported the spread of western scientific medicine. By 1920 many middle-class practitioners of western and indigenous systems of medicine were also involved in Congress.

'Western medicine' became the established mode of providing medical care, and was also followed by the dominant Indian classes. Accordingly, the medical education also gave priority to the teaching of western medicine, and was supported by not only the colonial state, but also by the indigenous private philanthropic organizations, as well as the Rockefeller Foundation. The other medically related ideas that evolved in the west and the various measures that were adopted in England got 'imported' to India. Sanitation, hygiene and vaccination became the 'public health' measures, and the Factories Act was introduced to regulate industrial working conditions, and thereby ensuring the health of the workers.

Some of the erstwhile eminent medical professionals, such as Dr B C Roy, Dr A R Ansari, Dr Khan Saheb, Dr Jivraj Mehta, Hakim Ajmal Khan, and Dr N M Jaisoorya, occupied leadership positions in the national struggle. Inspired by the welfare state movement in England and the socialized health services in the Soviet Union, they articulated a demand for a more egalitarian health service system, and made this an important demand in the anti-colonial struggle.

Dr B C Roy's presidential address at the All India Medical Conference in Lahore in 1929 gave an idea of the issues that merited attention, according to sections of medical professionals back then, such as that of inclusion of practitioners of indigenous systems of medicine (*vaids* and *hakims*) in the Indian Medical Association. He said, "Should we restrict the membership to such persons only as follow the western system of Medicine? ...If we take medicine merely as science it may be argued that only those who are trained in scientific methods prevalent in the west should be eligible to be members. But to my mind it is taking a very narrow view of the whole matter. On the other hand, if we define science as a systematized branch of human knowledge we cannot ignore other systems…it is not for us to be cut off from the past systems but it is necessary for us to resuscitate them and to develop them…. We cannot ignore them…". There was also a call for efforts to promote self-reliance and self-confidence and to make medical education relevant to Indian conditions, "We do not desire to depend on others. We therefore desire to utilize such powers as the Universities and the Councils of Medical Registration in different provinces have given us for the purpose of developing medical education in our own way". Dr Roy concluded his speech with the assertion that the Association had an important role in the ongoing political struggle of that time: " ...It has been asked often whether a member of the profession should interest himself in any matter outside the four corners of his professional life, whether this Association should take up matters which, in common parlance, are dubbed political….In India we have never regarded the various affairs of life as being in watertight compartments: politics, technically so called, is intermixed with economic, social and medical problems. If politics means the science of organization for the purpose of securing the greatest good for the largest number, I declare, we members of the profession dare not keep away from politics".<sup>9</sup>

The Rockefeller Foundation (RF) was also interested in promoting 'western medicine' and associated medical practices such as nursing in India. It focused on plantations in different parts of Asia and Latin America to increase the productivity with scientific inputs, including control of diseases, which affected labour productivity. In India the RF began its activities in 1915, with control of hookworm disease in the tea gardens of Assam, initiated by Heiser. One of the interests of the RF in India was medical education. According to the RF, officials who visited India in that period would be more desirable to co-operate with the Indians than with the British, as education was under the control of Indians. The RF supported the establishment in Calcutta of the All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, which was formally opened in 1932. The RF also provided fellowships that enabled Indians to receive training in laboratories in the United States of America.

Interestingly, vaccine research, development and the production of vaccines in India was an area where institutions which were established here in the same period, started gaining importance and various institutions were being established in the other parts of the world for the same. As recommended by the Plague Committee research, institutes were set up in the early decades of the 20th century. The organization of medical research in India started with vaccine research in British India, with the objective of primarily protecting the imperial army from infectious diseases. The first bacteriological institute in India was founded in 1892 at Agra, followed by the establishment of the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Madras, and the Haffkine Institute, Bombay, both in 1898; the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, in 1905, and the Pasteur Institute, Coonoor in 1907. There were also a few private companies that produced vaccines and sera, such as Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals, Bengal Immunity, and Smith Strain Street and Co. all in Calcutta. Indigenous vaccines and sera were produced against rabies, tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis, cholera, smallpox, typhoid and antisnake venom. India was considered to be at par with the rest of the world in vaccine technology till the 1930s.

In the process of putting in place the public health structure described above, while the Sanitary Commissioners had inadequate support, the main emphasis continued to be on the development of medical relief, based on the system of western medicine. It received much more attention than the development of those preventive health measures which were collectively termed as 'public health activities', which too was derived from modern medicine.

Interestingly, the Director-General of the Indian Medical Service in the early 1930s argued that excessive reliance on medical intervention was 'onesided' and 'dangerous'. That 'even if public health services were to achieve success in stamping out malaria, cholera, tuberculosis and other diseases, there would still be deaths from starvation if nothing was done to increase the production of food or restrict the growth of the population'.<sup>10</sup>

This points to the important issue of the occurrence of famines in the colonial period and their impact on the nutrition, and the health of the Indian population. In fact, the close link between famine and/or economic (agricultural) crisis and soaring malaria mortality was a frequent reference in the historical records of the pre-1910 colonial period. Most provincial sanitary commissioners throughout the 19th and early 20th century began their annual reports by quoting the price of staple food grains, followed by the wage rates, and then the state of the harvests. The then prevailing economic conditions were thus seen as central to interpreting the data on vital statistics that were given in their report. Most famine inquiries of the late 19th century refer specifically to the selectively greater malaria mortality among the starving.

As in England, in the Indian sub-continent too, linkages between ill-health and factors such as food availability, poverty, and urban living conditions, were raised by certain sections of the colonial administration. However, the public health here too was restricted to environmental hygiene, to sanitary and other technical/legal measures. So the model adopted here was that of 'assimilation and application of knowledge of medical science' to public health, as had happened in Great Britain and other industrialized Western countries.

# II

# ❑❑ **1950s to 1980s: Planning for Healthcare Services Through Five-Year Plans and Committee Recommendations**

Various political groups participating in the nationalist movement drew up plans in the 1940s for development of health services, as part of their overall planning for the economic development of the country. In 1938 the National Planning Committee of the Indian National Congress set up a sub-committee on Health, known as Sokhey Committee. There were three other plans namely, the Gandhian Plan of Economic Development, the Bombay Plan of Economic Development, and the People's Plan of Economic Development of the Indian Federation of Labour. Except for the Bombay Plan, the other two focused on agriculture and health of the rural people. The Bombay Plan focused on urban services for industrial growth and proposed to deal with rural problems through proper instructions and education, and a wellorganized propaganda. Interestingly, the system of medical and health care envisaged by all these plans was also based upon modern medicine, and along similar lines namely that of a network of dispensaries for rural areas, maternal and child health centres, and hospitals for urban areas, to be staffed by trained doctors and nurses. It was not very different from that of the Bhore Committee set up by the colonial government.

The Sokhey Committee report, submitted in 1948, stressed that the maintenance of the health of the people was the responsibility of the state, and called for integration of curative and preventive functions in a single state agency. It recommended a scheme of having large number of community health workers with training in practical community and personal hygiene, first aid and simple medical treatment, with stress on social aspects; for drawing in Ayurveda and Unani practitioners, and self-reliance. This committee endorsed the findings and recommendations of the Bhore Committee that had submitted its report in 1946.

### **Post-1947 - Bhore Committee: Idea of a National Health Service System**

The British government too set up the Health Survey and Development Committee in 1944 to make (1) a broad survey of the existing position in regard to health conditions and health organization in British India; and (2) recommendations for future development. The need for such a survey had arisen from the need to make plans for postwar development in the health field. The report of this Committee, popularly known as the Bhore Committee in four volumes, gives a picture of the state of public health and of the existing health organization in the country in the years preceding the Second World War, and made detailed recommendations and measures for setting up a national health system in the country.

The Bhore Committee was influenced by the development of national health systems in countries such as the erstwhile Soviet Union and England, wherein the trend was that of provision by the State to provide a complete health service which was treated as a matter of right. According to the Report in drawing up a health plan, in the first place certain primary conditions which are essential for healthful living must be ensured. These were:

- Provision of adequate health protection to all covering both curative and preventive aspects, irrespective of their ability to pay for it.
- Improvement of nutritional standards qualitatively and quantitatively.
- Suitable housing, sanitary surroundings, and safe drinking water.
- Elimination of unemployment.
- Provision of a living wage for all workers.
- Improvement in agricultural and industrial production and means of communications, particularly in rural areas.

In addition, the measures for a healthy community life and for physical and mental recreation must also receive serious consideration. There must be practical co-operation of the people themselves in the improvement of public health. It concluded that:

"Under the conditions existing in the country, the medical services should be free to all without distinction and that the contribution from those who can afford to pay should be through the channel of general and local taxation. It will be for the governments of the

#### **652** ✽ CHAPTER 36

future to ultimately decide whether medical service should remain free to all classes of people or whether an insurance scheme would be more in accordance with the economic, social and political requirements of the country at the time".<sup>11</sup>

The Bhore Committee envisioned a National Health Service system for a provision of comprehensive primary health care. Some of the salient features of this system were to be:

- It would provide universal coverage, free of charges, through a comprehensive,<sup>12</sup> state-run, salaried health service.
- No individual should fail to secure adequate medical care, curative and preventive, because of inability to pay.
- It was planned for rural population.
- Services to be as close as possible to people in order to ensure their maximum use by the community.
- The district as the unit, and the district health scheme to be organized in a three-tier unit.
- Special provisions will be required for certain sections of the population, such as mothers, children, mentally disabled.
- Health organization to be such so as to provide for co-operation between health personnel and people.
- There should be no attempt to isolate and implement specific parts of the plan, on grounds of lack of funds, as component parts were inter-related.

Given the need for a vast health service for the largely rural population and the difficulty experienced in the past in attracting medical practitioners to the countryside, it concluded that the most satisfactory way of meeting the situation was to provide a whole-time salaried service, which would enable government to ensure that doctors are made available where their services are most needed. It also concluded that these whole-time salaried doctors employed by the State should be prohibited from private practice. If private practice by these State employed doctors was not prohibited, their preventive duties in the peripheral institutions would not receive adequate attention. It suggested scales of pay to provide adequate remuneration for their services. The Doctor, the leader of the health team should be a 'social physician', who should combine remedial and preventive measures, and the future doctors should be trained to equip them for all such duties.

The health plan was drawn up in two parts – one a comprehensive long-term programme for the somewhat distant future (also known as the three million plan), and the other a short-term programme covering two five-year periods.

The recommendations were rather comprehensive: they addressed subjects such as health services (which included services for specific diseases, for mother and children, dental services, etc), occupational health, environmental hygiene (issues such as town and village planning, housing, water supply, general sanitation, and vector control), nutrition, medical education and research, requirements of drugs and medical equipment, establishment of standards for medical institutions and equipment, measures to address the "population problem", regulation of the medical and related professions, and budget for such a health service system.

The Committee stressed the organic unity of the component parts of the programme it had put forward. According to the Committee, "Large scale provision for the training of health personnel forms an essential part of the scheme … Side by side with such training of personnel, we have provided for the establishment of a health organization which will bring remedial and preventive services within the reach of the people, particularly of that vast section of the community lies scattered over the rural areas and which has, in the past, been largely neglected from the point of view of health protection on modern lines. We have drawn attention to these aspects of the health programme because we feel that it is highly desirable that the plan should be accepted and executed in its entirety. We would strongly deprecate any attempt, on the plea of lack of funds, to isolate specific parts of the scheme and to give effect to them without taking into consideration the inter-relationships of the component parts of the programme. Our conception of the process of development of the national health services is that is will be a co-operative effort in which the Centre, acting with imagination and sympathy, will assist and guide a co-ordinated advance in the Provinces. We therefore look forward to a pooling of resources and of personnel, as far as circumstances permit, in the joint task that lies before the Governments".

While the Bhore Committee made such detailed suggestions for the organization of the government health services, however, it did not say anything about private practitioners and private hospitals/institutions, their place in the health system they envisaged, and their regulation.

It is important to take note of the position of the Bhore Committee regarding the indigenous systems of medicine.<sup>13</sup> It acknowledges that these systems have played a part in the long distant past in influencing the developing of medicine and surgery in other countries of the world. However, it goes on to say, "We do, however, say quite definitely that there are certain aspects of health protection which, in our opinion can be secured wholly or at any rate, largely, only through the scientific system of medicine. Thus, public health or preventive medicine, which must play an essential part in the future of medical organization, is not within the purview of the indigenous systems of medical treatment as they obtain at present. This in no way reflects upon these systems. It has, however, to be recognized that great improvements have taken place in the field of public health as the result of many discoveries of science, which are and can be implemented only through the scientific system of medicine, and through personnel trained in such a system…. It is necessary to prominently keep before our eyes the intimate relation between science and the advancement of medicine… no system of medical treatment which is static in conception and practice, and does not keep pace with the discoveries and researches of scientific workers the world over, can hope to give the best available ministration to those who seek its aid… [Modern medicine] must be regarded as neither Eastern nor Western but as a corpus of scientific knowledge and practice belonging to the whole world and to which every country has made its contribution".

Thus, the Bhore Committee clearly favoured the Western medicine for medical relief, as also for public health activities. It also envisaged public health as part of medical organization. It was this Report, and not any of the others that had been made by the Indian nationalist groups, which became the basis for the health system in India after 1947.

The Chopra Committee on the Indigenous Systems of Medicine (1946) was set up to rectify the marginalization of those in the Bhore Committee, which recommended a mutual learning between allopathy and the indigenous systems; and that some practitioners of each should impart education in the other systems, and an attempt be made to evolve an integrated knowledge system.

In the post-World War II period, the newly independent states of Africa and Asia undertook a programme of planned economic transition to development, within a liberal-welfarist approach. In 1950, the new government embarked upon a planned effort for economic progress and development of the country. Economic progress was to mean much more than building up an efficient apparatus for production of material goods; it also encompassed provision of social services, widening of opportunities for the common people, social equality and justice. Development Planning was adopted to achieve the social objectives enshrined in the Constitution, to bring about economic growth and development, to promote a rapid rise in the standard of living of all the people, by efficient exploitation of the resources of the country, by increasing production, and offering opportunities to all for employment in the service of the community. The overall objective was rapid economic development oriented towards establishing social justice, by refashioning existing economic and social institutions.

Health planning was made an integral part of the overall planning for socio-economic development. In the initial years the planners recognized the need for addressing the problems of unemployment, malnutrition, social justice, housing and environmental sanitation, along with the need for developing integrated health services for the entire population. Within the health sector of the developing countries such as India the vision and goal was that of universal provision of curative, preventive and promotive health services by the state, by creating and extending primary healthcare infrastructure, especially in the rural areas where much of the population lived.

### **1950s-1970s: Vertical Programs versus Comprehensive Primary Health Care: Increasing Rural-Urban Gap In Infrastructure**

The Five Year Plan (FYP) recommendations of various Committees, and proceedings of the Central Council of Health and Family Welfare, have largely provided the framework for development of health services infrastructure, medical education and research.<sup>14</sup> The Five Year Plans have, by and large, looked upon the health sector as constituted by various schemes that had targets to be fulfilled. Each Plan gives a picture of the state of affairs and progress, the focus areas/plans for the period under consideration, of the various components placed under the health sector, and the financial outlays. It was not until 1983 that India adopted a formal or an official National Health Policy, which was revised in 2002.

The First FYP (1951-56) proposed the following health services:

- Network of peripheral primary health units to provide both preventive and curative services.
- Secondary units and district units to provide better and more complete facilities.
- Mobile dispensaries to be associated with these rural health units in order to provide medical care and specialists services to the rural population.
- Population control to be a part of the public health programme.

With respect to finances, the plan proposed that the Central government would be responsible for the overall development of primary health services in the country as a whole, for higher education and research, for specific programmes; while local authorities would execute medical and public health programmes.

The priorities for the first plan period were:

- Provision of water-supply and sanitation.
- Control of malaria.
- Preventive health care of the rural population through health units and mobile units.
- Health services for mothers and children.
- Education, training, and health education.
- Self-sufficiency in drugs and equipment.
- Family planning and population control.

In the 1950s the Primary Health Centres (PHCs) were established as part of the broader strategy of rural development through the Community Development Programme (CDP). The CDP was to address agriculture, rural industry, education, communication, transport, nutrition, sanitation, and water supply. The PHC was to provide a curative, preventive, promotive services, and hence its functions covered: provision of medical care, control of communicable diseases, promotion of maternal and child health; collection of vital statistics; protection of water supply and promotion of environmental sanitation; conducting school health programmes; and providing family planning services.

Attempts were also made to bring about a social orientation of education and training of health workers, and to make them more relevant to the conditions prevalent in the country. An upgraded department of preventive and social medicine was established in medical colleges, and was expected to provide a wider academic base than the conventional hygiene, public health, and a social-cultural-economic context to clinical medicine.

While the Bhore Committee and the initial plans proposed development of the district level integrated health unit, the practice was at variance with these proposals. In the 1950s and the 1960s the entire focus of the health sector in India was on management of epidemics. As communicable diseases formed the bulk of the health problems back then, in view of the limited resources, it was considered best to tackle them initially through separate mass campaigns, each campaign directed against a single disease. The national programs were launched for eradication of several communicable diseases. The international agencies supported this approach and separate countrywide campaigns with a techno-centric approach were launched against malaria, smallpox, tuberculosis, leprosy, filaria, trachoma and cholera. Separate cadres of workers were trained in each of these vertical programmes. They were termed 'vertical programs' as each of them was run through a single-purpose, country-wide organization, each with an independent line of command from national to village level. The National Malaria Eradication Programme (NMEP) alone required the training of 150,000 workers spread over 400 units for the prevention and curative aspects of malaria control. These campaigns tended to be highly techno-centric, owing to availability of 'miracle' tools like DDT (Dichloro Diphenyl Trichloroethane), BCG (Bacille Calmette Guerin), and small pox vaccines, mass X-ray units and chemotherapeutic drugs like streptomycin, and penicillin.

The policy of launching mass campaigns was in continuation with the policy of colonialists who subscribed to the ideas then of modern medicine that health could be looked after if the germs which were causing it were removed. In the first two Plans, the bulk of the resources which were allocated for the health outlay was for these programs. These programs depended on international agencies like UNICEF, WHO and the Rockefeller Foundation for supplies of necessary chemicals and vaccines. Along with financial aid came political and ideological influence. Experts of various international agencies decided the entire policy framework, programme design, and financial commitments etc.

In that period malaria was considered an international threat. The NMEP was started in 1953 with an aid from the Technical Cooperation Mission of the USA and technical advice of the WHO. The DDT spraying operations were one of the most important activities of this programme. The tuberculosis programme involved vaccination with BCG, TB clinics, and domiciliary services and after care. The emphasis however was on prevention through BCG.

The Mudaliar Committee, set up in 1959 to evaluate the progress made in the first two plans and to make recommendations for further development of health services, recorded that the disease control programmes had some substantial achievements in controlling certain virulent epidemic diseases. Malaria was considered to be under control. The deaths due to malaria, cholera, smallpox etc., were halved or sharply reduced and the overall morbidity and mortality rates had declined. The death rate had fallen to 21.6% for the period 1956-61, and life expectancy had risen to 42 years. The Mudaliar Committee also recorded that the PHC programme was not given the importance it should have been given right from the start. Most of the PHCs were understaffed, large numbers of them were being run by ANM's or public health nurses in charge. The fact was that the doctors were going into private practice after training at the public's expense. The condition of the secondary and district hospitals was the same as that of the PHCs. The report showed that the majority of the beds and various facilities were located in the urban areas. The Committee recommended that in the immediate future instead of expansion of PHCs, consolidation should take place and then a phased upgrading and equipping of the district hospitals with mobile clinics for the treatment of non- PHC population. But the urban health infrastructure continued to increase to meet the growing demands for medical care and this was where the state government's funds were getting committed. An important observation of this Committee was that dealing individually with diseases such as tuberculosis, small pox, cholera, leprosy and filariasis would not be conducive to the organization of unified efforts that would be needed for promotion of total health care. According to this Committee the health personnel engaged in such mass campaigns must be trained to tackle all health problems in any area; it was neither possible nor desirable to have separate agencies to deal with separate diseases.

It also suggested measures to improve the service condition of doctors and other personnel in order to attract them to rural areas, and recommended promoting education in the Indian systems of medicine; and giving attention to tribal and backward areas, such as suitable tribal student to be selected even while at school for training as doctors, duty in tribal areas for limited areas should be made compulsory for members of the Central and State Health services.

The Third Five Year Plan (1961-66) also highlighted inadequacy of health care institutions, doctors and other personnel in rural areas as being the major shortcomings at the end of the second Five Year Plan. While the third plan did give serious consideration to the need for more auxiliary personnel, no mention was made of any specific steps to reach this goal. In the actual training and establishment of institutions for these people, inadequate funding became the constant obstacle. On the other hand, the proposed outlays for new medical colleges, establishment of preventive and social medicine and psychiatric departments, completion of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), and schemes for upgrading departments in medical colleges for post graduate training and research continued to be at a high. The plan also suggested "that a new short term course for the training of medical assistants should be instituted and after these assistants had worked for five years at a PHC they could complete their education to become full-fledged doctors and continue in public service". The Medical Council and the doctors lobbied to oppose this and hence it was not taken up seriously.

Ignoring the Mudaliar Committee's recommendation of consolidation of PHCs this plan period witnessed a rapid increase in PHCs numbers but there was not much improvement in their condition. However, there was an army of special uni-purpose health workers under the vertical programmes. In the same geographical area there was an overlap and duplication of work.

The major diseases affecting the Indian population, such as diarrhoea, amoebic dysentery, cholera, typhoid, and jaundice were water borne, and they also spread due to lack of basic sanitation. To address this problem in 1960 the National Water Supply and Sanitation Committee (Simon Committee) was formed to review the progress made under the national programmes in the first two plans.

India was the first country in the world to adopt a policy of reducing population growth through a government sponsored Family Planning (FP) program in 1951. In the first two plans, the FP program was mainly run through voluntary organizations, under the umbrella of Family Planning Association of India. The program was guided by the Central and State Family Planning Boards. Faced with a rising birth rate and a falling death rate, the Third Plan stated that "the objective of stabilizing the growth of population over a reasonable period must therefore be at the very center of planned development". Hence it was stated that greatest stress has to be placed in the Third and subsequent Plans on the program of family planning, through intensive education, provision of facilities and advice on the largest scale possible and widespread popular effort in every rural urban community. Family planning was to be undertaken, not merely as a major development programme, but as a nation-wide movement. In this, the central feature was to be the integration of family planning with the normal medical and health services, especially those rendered through the primary health centres. To an extent, such services could also be made available through voluntary agencies, mobile units, industrial and other establishments. The distribution of simple contraceptives and general advice could be entrusted in a much larger measure to voluntary organizations, to paramedical personnel and to people specially trained in family planning work. In the urban areas it was proposed that greater use should be made of private medical practitioners in providing advice, distributing supplies and, to the extent possible, in undertaking sterilization. It was during this period that the camp approach was tried out and government agencies began to actively participate in pushing population control. Family Planning became an independent department in the Ministry of Health. The heavy emphasis on population control was due to the influence of various developed countries, but especially the United States of America. In 1966 a UN advisory mission visiting India strongly recommended that the directorate (health and family planning) should be relieved from other responsibilities such as maternal and child health, and nutrition.

This was a fundamental change in India's health policy. This policy change, though it had its own inner compulsions, was more so due to the influence of foreign agencies. To endorse this strategy The Special Committee to Review the Staffing Pattern and Financial Provision under Family Planning was appointed also known as the Mukherjee Committee. This Committee indicated that the camp approach had failed to give the family planning program a mass character and hence the availability of the Intra-Uterine Contraceptive Device (IUCD) was a great opportunity. This committee recommended introduction of target fixation, payments for motivation and incentives to acceptors. It suggested reorganization of the FP program into a vertical program like Malaria.

The Chadha Committee in 1963 and the Committee on Integration of Health Services in 1967 recommended the integration of health and family planning services. The idea of integration of preventive and curative services was first mooted in 1937 in India. According to the latter Committee, an integrated health service would have a unified approach for all problems instead of a segmented approach for different problems, and medical care of the sick and conventional public health programs should function under a single administrator and operated in a unified manner at all levels of hierarchy with due priority for each program obtained at a point of time. According to the Committee parallel services, whatever may be the historical reasons, they are wasteful and are primarily the result of lack of planning or bad planning. Among the advantages of integrated services was that they laid the basis for comprehensive health service and the health of the total community was looked after more effectively and more economically. The Committee foresaw that attempts at unification would be resisted; and many virtues of separate cadres would be invoked.

The Fourth Plan (1970-1975) continued on the same line as the third plan. The importance of PHCs was felt to consolidate the maintenance phase of the communicable diseases programme. This was due to the fact that the entire epidemiological trend was reversed in 1966 with the spurt in incidence of malaria which rose from 100,000 cases annually between 1963- 65 to 149,102 cases. The FP continued to get more emphasis with 42% of health sector plan allocation going to it. During this period the water supply and sanitation were separated and allocations were made separately under the sector of Housing and Regional development.

### **Committee on Multipurpose Workers (Kartar Singh Committee) 1972**

We see that through the 1960s and 1970s the vertical programs in health, family planning and nutrition were being run almost independently of each other by staff recruited under each; there was little or no co-ordination between the field workers of these programs and even at the supervisory level. In 1972 the government constituted a Committee to study the question of feasibility of having multi-purpose workers in the field. The Committee found that clearly people were not happy with so many workers visiting their houses and making enquiries for individual programs. The community leaders were of the opinion that a single worker delivering both health and family planning services would be more welcome. It was also mentioned that the existing health & family planning workers were not able to provide remedies even for simple ailments like headaches, cuts and burns, and the village people had to resort to either the village quack or trudge long distances to get relief at the PHC. The ANMs and malaria and small-pox workers, all endorsed this view, and further added that their acceptability to the community would be increased if they were in a position to provide a rudimentary treatment for minor ailments.

According to this Committee having multi-purpose workers for delivery of health, family planning and nutrition service to the rural communities was both feasible and possible. After an integrated training, each health worker should be given a first-aid kit and also some medicines for minor ailments. These medicines should be replenished at regular intervals. The workers must be taught when to refer cases beyond their competence to the PHC doctor. It recommended that each PHC (covering a population of 50,000) should have at least two doctors, wherein one of them should be a female. This Multi-Purpose Workers' Scheme was launched in 1974, with the objective of re-orienting uni-purpose workers serving in vertical public health programmes like malaria control, etc., into multipurpose health workers.

As mentioned in the previous section, during the colonial period the early leaders in modern medicine, also prominent in nationalist politics, had called for an inclusive medical registration system and the admission of indigenous practitioners in the medical association. However, in the course of the dispute over the formation of an all-India medical council, it became clear that international recognition of medical degrees by the General Medical Council in London depended on a very clear distinction between doctors trained in western medicine and the rest. By the mid-1930s many of these medical practitioner-leaders withdrew their support for indigenous medicine and took up positions in the new Indian Medical Council, which excluded indigenous practitioners. Thus, 'the future of western medicine came to lie, not with the English colonizers, but with India's emerging elites, who took it up after 1914, as part of their own hegemonic project'.<sup>15</sup> The adoption of 'western' medicine by the Indian middle-classes and the training received by those who went to the West had created an elite class of medical practitioners. They reproduced those patterns of education and thinking, continued to maintain their professional links, and all this was only reinforced and strengthened in the post-1947 period. Given that some of these medical practitioners had also been active in the nationalist politics, it was this system that got state patronage, as clearly enunciated by the Bhore Committee. State promotion and patronage for 'western' medicine continued after the colonial period, and also received support from various western institutions and foundations. Thus, the hegemony of western medicine was retained and extended by influential sections of the nationalist leadership and the medical profession after 1947. Since then the state and these elites took over the task of modernizing the country, through modern medicine and through modern science and technology. India received aid and grants in the early years of Independence for the health sector from several institutions such as WHO and private foundations from the west such as Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, largely towards research and training. In the post-Independence period too, India received grants from Rockefeller Foundation (RF) to varying institutions to aid research. The combined outcome of all these actions was such that by the early 1970s the government was trying to address the issue of the essentially urban orientation of medical education in India, which heavily relied on curative methods and sophisticated diagnostic aids.

#### **Group on Medical Education and Support Manpower (Srivastava Committee) 1974**

Although the number of doctors had steadily increased over the successive plan periods, the alienation of these doctors from the rural environment had deprived the rural communities of total medical care. The Fifth Plan had stated that teaching in medical colleges required a radical change. The undergraduate medical education would have to be re-oriented towards the needs of the country and emphasis would have to be placed on community care rather than hospital care. A change in the structure of medical education was therefore called for to meet the changing requirements and to provide adequately for future needs, particularly of the rural community. At the same time, improvement in the delivery of health services by integration of health, family welfare and nutrition services though multi-purpose workers was also being attempted. Keeping these in mind the government set up a Group on Medical Education and Support Manpower to devise a suitable curriculum for training a cadre of Health Assistants, and to suggest suitable ways and means for implementation of recommendations of earlier Committees on Medical Education.

This Committee felt that in spite of the substantial investments made and the impressive results particularly in the field of medical manpower, the health status of the Indian people was still far from satisfactory. It put forth a framework for development of a universal and an egalitarian health service for India. It admitted that so long as stark poverty persisted, the benefits of even the meager investments made in the health services would not reach the people. Hence there was no alternative to making a direct, sustained and vigorous attack on the problem of mass poverty and for creation of a more egalitarian society. A nation-wide program of health services should be developed side by side as it would support this major national endeavour and be supported by it in turn.

The committee also pointed out that 'the over-emphasis on provision of health services through professional staff under state control has been counter-productive. On the one hand, it is devaluing and destroying the old traditions of part-time semi-professional workers, which the community used to train and throw up and proposed that with certain modifications it can continue to provide the foundation for the development of a national program of health services in our country. On the other hand, the new professional services provided under state control are inadequate in quantity and unsatisfactory in quality. With regard to medical education the committee cried for a halt to opening of new medical colleges and emphasized that there was no point in thinking that doctors would go to rural areas because there were a number of socio-economic dimensions to this issue. Thus, the option for rural areas was the Community Health Worker (CHW) scheme.

The Committee suggested having para-professional or semi-professional health workers from the community itself to provide simple preventive, promotive and curative health services which are needed by the community. It also recommended having a referral services complex, in which the PHCs as well as taluk/tehsil, district, regional and medical college hospitals should each develop living and direct links with the community around them well as with one another within a total referral services complex. Finally, it recommended the establishment of a Medical and Health Education Commission.

In the Fifth Plan period (1975-80) there was a re-thinking on the social, and technological basis of the development of health services. The government acknowledged that despite advances in terms of infant mortality rate going down, life expectancy going up, the number of medical institutions, functionaries, beds, health facilities etc., were still inadequate in the rural areas. There was serious dissatisfaction with existing model of hospitals, specialties and super specialties and highly trained doctors which were limited to urban areas mainly for well-to-do lifestyle. An attempt to search for alternative models was made with the Srivastava Committee recommendations to train health workers from the community, to link this basic services within the community with the infrastructure of dispensaries and hospitals through a well-organized referral system.

In accordance with the recommendations of the Study Group on Medical Education and Support Manpower (1975) two centrally sponsored schemes *viz.,* (1) Community Health Workers and (2) Re-orientation of Medical Education were initiated in 1977. These schemes were to be continued in the Plan.

In October 1977 the Community Health Worker (CHW) scheme was introduced with the objective of providing a trained community health volunteer selected by the community itself for every village or a population of 1000 people. These were part time workers selected by the village, who were then trained for three months in simple promotive and curative skills, both in allopathy and indigenous systems of medicine. They were to be supervised by MPWs, and the programme was started in 777 selected PHCs where MPWs were already in place.<sup>16</sup>

### **Reorientation of Medical Education**

The scheme for Re-Orientation of Medical Education (ROME) was introduced with the objectives of:

- 1. Introducing community bias in the training of undergraduate medical students with emphasis on preventive and promotive services.
- 2. Re-orientation of the role of medical colleges so that they became an integral part of the health-care system and did not continue to function in isolation.
- 3. Re-orientation of all faculty members so that hospital-based and diseaseoriented training was progressively complemented by community-based and health-oriented training for providing comprehensive primary health care.
- 4. The development of effective referral linkages between PHCs, District Hospitals and Medical Colleges.

The scheme was implemented in its first phase, in about 106 medical colleges. In spite of a one-time grant-in-aid of about `16 lakh to each of the participating institutions, the objectives of the scheme could not be achieved to the desired extent. This was largely due to (1) a lack of commitment to the programme at all levels, (2) slow progress in the utilization of Central funds, and (3) absence of efforts in the restructuring of teaching and training programmes at the college levels.

The Minimum Needs Programme (MNP) was introduced in the first year of the Fifth Five Year Plan, to provide basic minimum needs and improve living standards. The basic needs identified for this programme were Elementary Education, Adult Education, Rural Health, Rural Roads, Rural Electrification, Rural Housing, Environmental Improvement of Urban Slums, and Nutrition. The health infrastructure was to be strengthened and expanded through this MNP.

### **Shortage of Doctors for Rural Areas and the Steps to Address This in the Sixth Plan Period**

Despite the high yearly turnout of medical graduates and growing unemployment among them, in several States, doctors were not available to serve in the rural primary health centres/hospitals. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Re-orientation of Medical Education was to be continued and the present deficiencies noted in the implementation of the schemes set right. The Medical Council of India has also prescribed service in rural medical institutions for six months as part of the compulsory internship. In addition, reforms in other directions like modification of the curriculum, training of medical under-graduates in certain fields relevant to the problems of rural health care, community orientation etc, were to be given an adequate attention in the Sixth Plan. The other measures proposed to address the shortage of doctors for rural areas were mainly incentives to work in rural areas, and steps to encourage private practitioners to work in rural areas.

In the middle of the Fifth Plan a State of National Emergency was proclaimed and during this period (1975-77) population control activities were stepped up, with compulsion, force and violence characterizing the FP program. In the midst of all this the National Population Policy was announced whose core aim was a "direct assault on the problem of population rise as a national commitment." This was a stark contrast to the statement made at the Bucharest Population summit in 1974 by the erstwhile health minister that "development was the best contraceptive."

Overall, it is seen that between 1950 to 1965 there was a period of growth at several levels of health services. Medical colleges with tertiarylevel hospitals, advanced research institutions and Primary Health Centres (PHCs) were set up, while sub-centres at the village level lagged behind. Vertical disease control programmes grew while general health services received inadequate attention. Similarly, courses in college for medical education grew while training of nursing and other health personnel lagged behind. A significant number of institutions of indigenous medicine and homoeopathy were set up, but with nominal resources as compared to the allopathic institutions. From 1966-1980, there was a growth of village level services with the institution of several village health worker schemes and some feeble attempts to Re-Orient Medical Education (ROME scheme) to rural conditions. A massive program of expansion of primary health care facilities was undertaken in the sixth and seventh Five Year Plans. Yet, all plans and recommendations for an integrated, comprehensive health service have largely remained on paper, and the focus has remained on single-issue programmes. Among vertical programmes too, the Family Planning programme has occupied centre-stage, and larger proportion of the resources.

### **Vertical Programmes: Significance and Impact – Alma Ata Declaration on Comprehensive Primary Health Care**

Few issues relating to the organization of health systems and service delivery have been discussed so much as the pros and cons of vertical versus integrated health programmes. Vertical programmes involve an exclusive/

selective targeting of specific interventions against a specific disease or problem through a single-purpose machinery, and they are not fully integrated in the health systems. In vertical approaches (also referred to as stand-alone, disease management or disease control programmes), interventions are provided through delivery systems that typically have separate administration and budgets. In the integrated model (also known as horizontal approaches or programmes), services do not have separate administration or budgets and are typically delivered through health facilities that provide routine or general health services.

The debate on the comparative effectiveness of vertical versus more systemic approaches can be traced back to the 1960s, and it has persisted and emerged time and again, such as following the 1978 Declaration of Alma-Ata on primary health care; in the 1980s with the success of the smallpox eradication programme; and with the proposal of the 1993 *World Development Report: Investing in Health for "Essential Packages of Care"*. More recently, the debate has been rekindled due to the growth in funding which were targeted at specific diseases and services, from sources such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) and WHO's emphasis on strengthening health systems and primary care.

The arguments for vertical programmes are, in the main, driven by the assumption that concentrating on a few well-focused interventions is an effective way to maximize the effect and time response of the available resources rather than waiting for changes in the health system so that the delivery of better services would be viable. The arguments against vertical programmes tend to assert that they are value driven, often have limited chance of sustainability and have negative spillover effects on health systems and non-targeted populations. Despite the wide-ranging discussion over the past 50 years, evidence on the relative benefits of vertical versus integrated service delivery is limited.

The Vertical programs have had a major influence on the development of health services in India. In the 1940s–50s it was thought that a unipurpose mass campaign approach, involving a single line of command was the most effective mechanism for tackling several communicable diseases that accounted for substantial mortality and morbidity then, such as small pox, malaria, tuberculosis, filariasis, etc. The programs for control or eradication of communicable diseases were taken up on lines of a military operation, involving preparation for the operation (Preparatory Phase), launching a strong attack on the disease (the enemy) (Attack Phase), consolidating the gains made through the attack (Consolidation Phase), and surveillance to ensure that the disease does not come back (Maintenance Phase). Vertical approaches to public health problems were favoured by WHO, international aid agencies, and the technical co-operation missions of the industrialized countries of the West. They presented opportunities to provide 'services of experts', supply equipment, drugs, insecticides, and vehicles. While India was dependent on these foreign sources for vital supplies for the programs, it had to bear bulk of the costs for such programs. Vertical programs were also favored by the local political leadership as they gave results within a short time for widely prevalent problems, and offered a simpler alternative to establishing a permanent network of comprehensive health services across the country. Except for the National Smallpox Eradication Program, other mass campaigns have not yielded the expected results. While there are several reasons for the failure of these vertical programs, a major casualty has been the stunted development of a comprehensive health infrastructure across the country. The preoccupation with running of vertical programs has lead to neglecting the development of permanent network of health institutions in the rural areas and diversion of the inadequate human resources to these programs. In turn, the weaknesses in the general health infrastructure have made it difficult to maintain a disease at a low level of incidence after the attack and consolidation phases of a program.

After many such expensive failures and loss of time, it was finally accepted by the administration and political establishment that a permanent rural health infrastructure employing multi-purpose workers was a better alternative to mobile units with uni-purpose workers. However, before the health system could recover from the pernicious impact of the vertical programs, an even more extensive program was launched in the form of the Family Planning Program.

The Declaration of Alma Ata on Primary Health Care was an outcome at the international level of the adverse impacts of vertical programs of the 1960s in many parts of the world, and the general disillusionment with modern medicine in the 1970s and its 'inability to address the needs of the developing countries'. The Alma Ata Declaration together with the slogan of "Health for All by 2000 AD" (HFA) proposed at the 1976 World Health Assembly, is considered to be the major public health initiative of the 20th century. It was made at the International Conference on Primary Health Care, jointly sponsored by two UN organizations – WHO and UNICEF, and held at Alma Ata (now known as Almaty), Kazakhstan, in erstwhile USSR.

The priority of WHO in the 1950s and 1960s was the eradication of malaria which was largely promoted by the U.S government, and also control of certain other communicable diseases. Criticism of the malaria eradication program began in the 1960s from those who felt that the development of health services was suffering due to the attention being given to malaria. The Soviets took the lead in calling for a review of the campaign, which took place in 1969 and essentially led to the abandonment of the eradication program. The Alma Ata Declaration arose from the observation of failings of the Vertical Programs, as well as the positive results from community health programmes in countries such as Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, India, Cuba, Bangladesh, the Philippines and China (barefoot doctors). In other developing countries, as in India, during 1950s-1970s, it was the period of population control programs and of technological transfer to the less developed countries by the developed countries (S&T assistance as instruments to resolve world poverty). There was questioning of the hospital-centered bio-medical model of healthcare services from many quarters. In that same period Christian medical missionaries had trained villagers as health workers, and the Chinese Cultural Revolution had thrown up the concept of 'barefoot doctors', and there had been large-scale expansion of rural medical services in China. In India too, villagers were being trained as community health volunteers and trained birth attendants, and indigenously formulated programs were being implemented, by non-governmental groups and doctors working in rural areas. In general, the 1960s and 1970s were a period of social ferment, and there were calls and movements for alternative technologies, for 'appropriate' technology, 'intermediate' technology, as also opposition to ideologies of a 'technological imperative'.

The Alma Ata Declaration placed health within a global and political context by calling for peace, reduced military expenditure and a 'New International Economic Order' to reduce the health status gap between developing and developed countries. The main features of the Primary Health Care (PHC) approach that was articulated were: healthcare is a fundamental human right and a responsibility of the government; and has to be equitably distributed; essential health care should be based on practical, scientifically sound and socially acceptable methods and technology, made universally available to the community though their full participation at a cost that the community and country can afford to maintain at every stage in the spirit of self-reliance and self-determination. Furthermore, the PHC approach extended far beyond narrow medical activities to living conditions in general, such as ensuring sufficient food, water, sanitation, etc. In the years immediately after Alma Ata, the District Health System (DHS) model was formulated as an organizational framework for a health care system to deliver the PHC Approach.<sup>17</sup> This PHC approach was to be the means to achieve 'Health For All by 2000 AD'.

As a signatory to this Declaration and as the guidelines enunciated, it provided another opportunity to the Indian government to put in place a system of basic health services (that had been envisaged in the earlier planning periods), based on local needs and capacities (self-reliance), and to shift from use of highly sophisticated medical technology to less sophisticated or locally appropriate ones. However, this did not happen. That the comprehensive proposals of the Alma Ata were never seriously implemented is a well documented fact. On the contrary, the selective PHC approach promoted by international institutions was adopted, which brought in more technological interventions into the rural primary health care system in developing countries, specifically in areas of maternal and child health, and some infectious diseases. These were to be delivered through community health workers.

As pointed out by Banerji, in the *History of Public Health in Western Countries* virtually no such Vertical Programs were employed to tackle communicable diseases. The changes in the ecological conditions brought about by socio-economic development have been the principal factors which led to control or eradication of communicable diseases prevalent there.<sup>18</sup>

*(This) focus on the health sector without analysis of the socioeconomic system that determines it assumes an autonomy and near independence of the health sector that is both unempirical and unhistorical. Moreover, it leads to conclusions that are also empirically invalid and ineffective policywise. This is most clear in international health studies, where pieces of and individual experiences in the health sector are usually perceived as meriting "export" to other countries. A recent example of this is the present attention given to the Chinese barefoot doctors' experience. Much has been written concerning that use of personnel in the People's Republic of China. Consequent to that interest many national and international agencies, including the World Health Organization, are encouraging the export of that specific Chinese experience to other countries. Oblivious of China's socioeconomic determinants that may explain the success of the barefoot doctors, those exporters have tried to transform what is basically a political phenomenon into a mere managed one. Not surprisingly, the export of the Chinese barefoot doctors' experience has failed to grow in those countries where the socioeconomic determinants were different ones. Indeed, that experience assumes and presumes a series of economic and political parameters that determine its success. The purpose in citing this example and many others is not to question the value of international studies, but rather to stress the great importance of analyzing the nature of the health sector within a country's broader economic and political parameters which determine it*. 19

### **ICSSR-ICMR Study Group on an Alternative Strategy for Health Services in India in 1981**

In the late 1970s the two major funding agencies in medical sciences and social sciences, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR), respectively came together to prepare an alternative strategy for health services in India. This report stated that for achievement of health for all by the year 2000, a radical change was called for, and it was necessary to develop a comprehensive national policy on health. A major program for the development of health care services, through an alternative model and not by expansion or tinkering with the existing system, was necessary but not sufficient. Simultaneously, there was need for integrated overall development, including family planning; and for improvement in nutrition, environment and health education. The objectives of overall development, through rapid economic growth, were to eliminate poverty and inequality, to spread education, and to enable the poor and underprivileged to assert themselves. The alternative model of health care services was to be strongly rooted in the community and one that replaced the existing "top-down, elite, curative and urban-oriented, centralized and bureaucratized system".

### **1980s – Rhetoric of comprehensive PHC – Reality of 'Selective' PHC – re-incarnation of Vertical Programmes**

The principles of PHC were taken largely from experiences in developing countries of community based health programmes, such as the barefoot doctor experience in China arising from a political and cultural revolution, and in other countries it were part of larger struggles for political reform, for rights and well-being of all, and awareness of social and economic dimensions of poor health. So the implementation of PHC had socio-political implications to an extent that governments had to address the underlying social, economic and political causes of poor health. Despite being a signatory to such principles, it was not implemented seriously by the Indian government.

In 1979, a conference was sponsored by the Rockefeller Foundation with assistance from the World Bank at Bellagio, Italy, with the President of the World Bank, Vice President of Ford Foundation, USAID, and UNI-CEF officials. This conference advocated an alternative concept to that of the Alma Ata Conference – that of Selective Primary Health Care; meaning limited focus on certain health care interventions, as distinct from comprehensive or holistic health care. The arguments of this group for selective PHC were: that the comprehensive PHC of Alma Ata was too unrealistic and costly, and that it should be postponed. If health statistics were to be improved, high risk groups must be targeted with carefully selected costeffective interventions for a limited number of diseases. Until health care systems are adequately resourced and organized, it is better to deliver a few proven interventions of high efficacy at high levels of coverage, aimed at diseases responsible for the greatest mortality. Selective PHC was simply a re-incarnation of the earlier 'vertical programmes', and a packaging of the scientific and biomedical orientation that emphasizes the delivery of 'medical technologies' amenable to vertical programmes as the only remedies for disease and illness.

By the early 1980s, WHO, UNICEF and major bilateral donors, notably USAID, also endorsed this selective approach, epitomized by the 'Child Survival Revolution' launched in 1982. This prioritized seven child health interventions: growth monitoring, Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORT), breastfeeding, immunization, family planning, food supplements and female education, which collectively became known as the acronym GOBI-FFF. This emphasis on a limited set of technological interventions detracted attention from a more comprehensive approach to child health that would prevent the occurrence of diseases in the first place. For example, treating children with acute diarrhea disease would not be accompanied by interventions to improve childcare, nutrition of mother and child, or access to clean drinking water. The biomedical orientation resulted in the promotion of manufactured oral rehydration salts rather than more appropriate and accessible rehydration fluids that could be prepared locally. In many countries, the selective health care approach has manifested itself as a set of multiple, parallel programmes, not very different from the vertical programmes of the previous decades.

Although selective health care was advocated on the grounds that basic health care infrastructure is inadequate, it is rarely implemented in conjunction with a plan to strengthen such infrastructure at the same time. As a result, many selective and vertical programmes have short-lived results because they are not accompanied/followed by the establishment of permanent health services to sustain the on-going control and prevention of diseases. In practice, they actually undermine the development of health care systems. Mass immunization campaigns such as the Pulse Polio programme, have been prioritized to such an extent that other services have been disrupted and the long-term development of sustainable routine immunization services have been hindered.20, 21

Currently, selective approaches are a prominent feature of the international health policy landscape. Many of the selective health care initiatives now operate as global Public Private Initiatives (PPIs), introducing a much higher level of involvement from the commercial/private sector. This brings in private financing and technical solutions, but at the same time provides the commercial sector with further public subsidies, and the opportunity to capture a share of the resulting market for their products. Some of these global PPIs are Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI), Stop TB, Global Alliance for TB Drug Development, Roll Back Malaria, Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, Malaria (GFATM), and so on.

The Sixth Plan (1980-85) conceded that "there is a serious dissatisfaction with the existing model of medical and health services with its emphasis on hospitals, specialization and super specialization and highly trained doctors which is availed of mostly by the well to do classes. It is also realized that it is this model which is depriving the rural areas and the poor people of the benefits of good health and medical services". The plan emphasized the development of a community based health system. The strategies advocated were: (1) provision of health services to the rural areas on a priority basis. (2) the training of a large cadre of first level health workers selected from the community and supervised by MPWs and medical officers of the PHCs. (3) No further linear expansion of curative facilities in urban areas; this would be permitted only in exceptional cases dictated by real need or priority. The objective of strengthening the Health and Family Planning infrastructure was also towards realization of the objectives of family planning and population control.

### **National Health Policy 1983**

The National Health Policy brought together and re-iterated much of the elements of the previous recommendations and the Alma Ata Declaration, and called for an integrated comprehensive approach towards the future development of health services infrastructure, medical education and research. It observed that between the 1950s and 1970s "a network of dispensaries, hospitals and institutions providing specialized curative care had been established; a large stock of medical and health personnel of various levels were available; and there was significant indigenous capacity for production of drugs, vaccines and hospital equipment". Yet poor health status of the people remained a cause of concern. Along with factors such as poverty, ignorance, and lack of safe drinking water, the high population growth rate was identified as one of the contributory factors for the high mortality and morbidity, and high levels of malnutrition. The adoption of the western model of hospital-based curative care was considered to be inappropriate and irrelevant to the prevailing socio-economic conditions of the country as there was neglect of preventive and promotive aspects of public health and no involvement of the community in the planning, identification, and implementation aspects of the health services. According to this Policy, "To ensure that the approach to healthcare does not merely constitute a collection of disparate health interventions but consists of an integrated package of services seeking to tackle the entire range of poor health conditions on a broad front", there was need to restructure the health services infrastructure based on epidemiological needs, re-orientation of existing health personnel, decentralization, development of the indigenous systems of medicine and their involvement in the overall health system, and a meaningful integration of the indigenous and modern systems of medicine. In addition, there was also a need to phase out private practice by government doctors and a need to utilize the private practitioners and private voluntary organizations particularly in rural areas and urban slums. The NHP 1983 also pointed out that there was a need to pay attention to food distribution systems, to generate productive employment, to improve purchasing power, along with having special schemes to address chronic nutritional disorders.

Over the years, through the five-year plans, the central government has been setting the priorities and targets, financing, and implementing the family planning, immunization, and 19 national disease control programs, and the expansion of primary care services to rural areas under the minimum needs program across the country. Despite the rhetoric to integrate programs and strengthen local decision-making, the funding system has reinforced a series of parallel disease control programs and separation of health and family welfare programs. It has also institutionalized a centrallybased rigid approach for planning of personnel and health facilities based on population norms. Whereas, the state governments have been responsible for the implementation of the national programs and providing curative care through their respective departments of health. So, in practice both the centre and the state are involved in the provision of medical and public health services.

Currently, the role of the central government is as follows:

● Sets policy and legal framework, national goals, develops national health laws.

- Regulates medical and dental education, manages national institutions for medical, nursing, and public health education, training and research, and manages national public health institutions.
- Financing–provides funds to states through taxation revenues, and through funds from external development assistance.
- Provides curative services through national hospitals, clinics and regional cancer hospitals etc., and through services in specialized projects, such as the reproductive and child health projects, tuberculosis, kala azar, etc., which are provided through the three-tier network of rural health centres.
- Provides public health services through 19 National Health Programs implemented through the rural health facilities, and IEC (Information, Education and Communication in Health).

# ❑❑ **Structure of the Health Services System**

The health services system in rural areas is a three-tier system comprising of Sub-Centres (SCs), Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs), which are set up on a population basis. The Sub-Centre is the most peripheral facility located in rural area, and first contact point between the primary health care system and the rural community. Each Sub-Centre is required to be staffed by at least one Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) / Female Health Worker and one Male Health Worker. These workers in the Sub-Centres are assigned tasks relating to communication in order to bring about behavioral change and provide services in relation to maternal and child health, family planning, nutrition, immunization, diarrhea control and control of communicable diseases programmes. Since 2005 there has been a provision for a voluntary, community level health worker (Accredited Social Health Activist - ASHA), who is expected to assist the ANM in her tasks in the village. Unlike all the other health workers, the ASHA does not receive any salary but is paid based on performance/case-basis. The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare provides Central assistance to all the Sub-Centres in the country in the form of salary of some staff, rent, drugs for minor ailments, contraceptives, and vaccines. The salary of the Male Worker is borne by the State Government. The PHCs and CHCs are the referral facilities, staffed by doctors and other support staff, and are to be equipped to provide a range of curative services. Together with the District Hospital, these facilities form a referral network, to be equipped to cater to the curative and preventive needs of the population of the district.

The health needs of large urban slum populations in India have been left to the local municipalities. While a metropolitan city such as Delhi will have health departments for provision of health services through big and small municipal hospitals and local clinics, etc., to provide a wide range of services, most municipalities have budget deficits and have difficulty even paying for staff salaries, leaving most curative health care in urban areas to the private sector.

Although a significant expansion of rural healthcare infrastructure did take place during the 1980s, this remained grossly under-utilized because of poor facilities, lack of doctors and support staff, low attendance by medical staff, inadequate supplies, insufficient hours, lack of community involvement and lack of proper monitoring mechanisms. The Primary Healthcare Approach was never implemented in its full form, and selective vertical programmes have been pushed as a substitute for comprehensive health system development. We see that there has been a colossal divergence between the policy rhetoric and actual implementation. At the same time there has been a massive expansion of an unregulated and unaccountable private sector.

# III

### ❑❑ **Private Medical Care Sector**

Throughout these years the private sector has grown unchecked to fill in the gap in availability of public health services, with little attempts by the governments to regulate its activities. Government policies in the health sector have always been favourable for the growth of the private sector. There has been direct support in form of customs duty exemption and reduced duties on imported equipment, concessional loans, land at subsidized rates for construction of hospitals, etc. There has been indirect support, by accommodating private interests in the government healthcare sector for purchase of drugs, supplies and equipment, and allowing private practice by government hospital doctors. Since 1990s, the growth of the private sector has taken place through various PPP arrangements, medical tourism, and offering tax holiday for setting up hospitals in tier II cities/towns.

Apart from such direct favourable policies, other reasons indirectly contributing to the huge growth of private medical sector have been:

- Neglect of public services in general, including public health services, leading to stagnation, and quantitatively and qualitatively inadequate services.
- Growth of middle-classes in urban areas, as also in rural areas due to green revolution; subsequent emergence of a 'globalized' middle class, with aspirations different from the large sections of the poor. These classes found the public sector inadequate and moved to the private sector. This class not only comprises a large market for corporate hospitals and the insurance sector but has also justified and pushed neo-liberal moves towards privatization<sup>22</sup>.

The private medical care sector in the country is extremely diverse and fragmented. Over the years the private sector has grown phenomenally, as well as diversified its operations. The private sector in India has a dominant presence in all the sub-sectors – namely, medical education and training, medical technology and diagnostics, pharmaceutical manufacture and sale, hospital construction and ancillary services and, finally, in the provisioning of medical care.

The private sector can be characterized in the following ways.

- Based upon training/qualification as Formal Providers or Informal Providers.
- Based upon orientation of the provider(s) as For-Profit and Not-for Profit.

The Formal for-Profit can be further classified based upon ownership as:

- Formally qualified as individual practitioners of all systems of medicine, such as allopathy, ayurveda, unani, homeopaths, etc.
- A range of small and big healthcare facilities, namely nursing homes, hospitals, specialty centres, diagnostic laboratories and pharmacies, owned by individual practitioners, or small groups of practitioners, or franchised by larger 'brand' healthcare companies.
- Large corporate hospitals, specialty hospitals, diagnostic and imaging centers, set up by industrial houses or listed on the stock market.

#### The Informal for-Profit sector comprises:

Individual practitioners with no formal training in any particular system, who have picked up skills through apprenticeship with a formally trained practitioner; compounders, practitioners of folk traditions, birth attendants, traditional healers, small chemist shops, quacks; largely located in slums and working class colonies in cities and in villages lacking in any health facility.

#### The Not-for-Profit sector comprises:

Religious organizations, charities, social organizations and other nongovernmental institutions that offer a range of health services. These institutions are not motivated by profit, but may impose charges to recover cost of services. Some are dependent upon funding from government or from non-governmental local or overseas sources.

It is only in 2011-12 that the government made steps towards regulation, by enacting the Clinical Establishments Act for registration of private healthcare institutions. However, there are still no effective measures for regulation or monitoring of the private sector, and its quality has never been adequately established in comparison to the public health services. In the absence of regulations for the private sector regarding elements such as location, standards, pricing, nature of care to be provided, private facilities are set up, operate in marketplaces, residences/residential colonies, pharmacy shops, with freedom to provide any kind of service, of whatever quality and at exorbitant cost, which varies from facility to facility. The medical councils of the various systems of medicine perform only the jobs of registering qualified doctors and issuing them the license to practice. There is no monitoring, continuing education, price regulation, etc., either by the councils, or by the government.

The steady corporatization of medical care is another development, not totally unrelated to the liberalization-privatization regime of the early 1990s. Since the early 1990s, when healthcare was seen as a 'sunrise industry', several big corporate houses, Fortis Healthcare (promoted by Ranbaxy Labs), Wockhardt Hospitals (promoted by the pharma company Wockhardt) and Max Healthcare announced plans to set up hospital chains across the country. In addition to these big hospital chains including the oldest one, Apollo Healthcare Enterprises Limited (AHEL), a large number of other private hospitals and specialty facilities, such as for cardiac care, renal care, eye care, laparoscopy, pathological laboratories, imaging facilities, etc., have also come up. The International Finance Corporation (IFC), a member of the World Bank Group, is providing loans for expansion of private hospitals and for setting up hospitals in smaller cities and towns in the country (such as to Apollo, Max and Rockland groups), as part of its strategy to invest in health care, and to promote private sector involvement in healthcare in India.<sup>23</sup>

Increasingly over the past decade, healthcare has come to be viewed as a 'big business opportunity' and an 'engine of growth' and there is much discussion about the rising 'healthcare industry'<sup>24</sup> in India. There is strong advocacy and promotion by the industry of the idea that, "health care infrastructure should not just be viewed as a social good but also as a viable economic venture with productivity". The PPPs are being viewed as having potential to create 'an enormous market with a reliable, multiyear revenue stream for private investors'<sup>25</sup>. In fact the industry views the scenario thus: "*The first wave of healthcare provision in India was the government run healthcare network. The influx of the private players defined the second wave. Now a discerning and interconnected nation demands a new incarnation: Healthcare 3.0, which will transform the ground rules of healthcare…… Healthcare 3.0 will ordain that revenues are linked to patient satisfaction………….Seamless public-private partnerships will be the backbone of the new dispensation, emerging as fundamental to growth*."<sup>26</sup>

# IV

### ❑❑ **Low Public Financing of Health**

The primary source of public financing is the general tax and non-tax revenues, including grants and loans received from both internal and external sources. In addition to tax revenues, a meagre amount is also raised through user charges, fees and fines from the sector. This pool of resources is used to finance the programmes of the Centre and the States. In the case of local governments, the respective state governments largely finance their health programs. Local governments do raise resources through user charges and certain fees, though the quantum varies widely from state to state.<sup>27</sup>

One of the reasons underlying the poor state of health care facilities in India happens to be the very low levels of public expenditure in health sector, which happens to be among the lowest in the world. In terms of resource allocations, almost throughout the post-independence period, the governments at the centre treated the social sectors- like health, education, housing, water and sanitation as being inferior to the Economic Sectors. The scenario has worsened since the beginning of 1990s, with the fundamental shift in the Central Government's policies. As of 2004-05 expenditure on health accounted for less than 2% of the total central government expenditures. Among states public expenditure on health formed 3-4 % of total expenditure, except in Maharashtra where it was 2.88%. Public spending on health in India gradually accelerated from 0.22% in 1950-51 to 1.05% during the mid-1980s, and stagnated at around 0.9% of the GDP during the later years.

Out of the total expenditure in India on health, almost 80% is private spending, with only 20% coming from government sources. In the public spending component the central government spending accounts for only 6.7%, while spending by the state government's accounts for 12%. The local bodies are accounted for less than 1% of the total government spending on health. In 10 states, private spending on healthcare is between 81 to 90%. Kerala had the highest private spending at 90%, followed by UP and West Bengal at 86%, and Maharashtra at 83%.

The State government's list consists of health and is financed primarily by the State Government, and is financed through general tax and non-tax revenue resources, as the cost recovery from the services delivered has been negligible, at less than 2%. As a result, resource allocation to this sector is influenced by the general fiscal situation of the State Government. Public spending on the health sector in the states increased to about 0.9% of the GDP in 2003-04, from 0.8% in 1975-76. It was during 1975-85 that public spending on health registered a substantial increase and reached a high of 1.05%. But shortly after, it deteriorated steadily due to general fiscal stress during the late 1980s followed by the reform measures initiated in the 1990s.The severity of the fiscal strain during the late 1980s forced the State Governments to introduce austerity measures and the soft sectors such as health were targeted for expenditure compressions. When reform measures were initiated at the Centre during the early 1990s, fiscal transfers to states were compressed leading to reductions in health sector allocation.<sup>28</sup>

External aid comes from bilateral and multilateral agencies as grants/ donations and/or as loans from World Bank. Such aid comes largely for different programmes or schemes, such as for reproductive and child health, immunization, family welfare, AIDS control. Out of the total external aid in 2004-05, 68.49% came to central government, 10.73 % came to state governments, and 20.78 % was as grants to NGOs.

The deficiencies of the existing public healthcare system could have been rectified and it could have been transformed into an universal, efficient, effective and accountable healthcare system by providing adequate financial, human, and material resources, and guided by principles of comprehensive Primary Health Care that evolved in the 1970s. Instead, they have been used to justify imposition of a series of Health Sector Reforms (HSRs) aimed at accommodating the vast private interests and creating healthcare markets, in the name of health system strengthening for equity and universal health coverage.<sup>29</sup>

# V

# ❑❑ **New Public Health from 1990s Onwards: Entry of the World Bank in 'International Health'—Structural Adjustment Programs and Health Sector Reforms (HSRs)—Transition from Health Service as a Basic Right to Healthcare Markets**

By the late 1980s, the worldwide economies were beginning to be restructured and an ideological shift had taken place vis-à-vis provision of welfare services by the state. The economic reforms initiated overturned the planned expansion of welfare and led to introduction of policies of liberalization, globalization, and privatization. Such resolution of the economic problems had significant implications for healthcare and for the social sector in general. It gave rise to a restructuring of health services in the name of social efficiency. Health sector reforms were initiated in many advanced capitalist countries, as well as developing countries, that had a public healthcare system, irrespective of whether it was funded by taxation or by insurance, and there has been dismantling and privatization of national health care systems in several countries in the name of these reforms or pressure to do so.

The State is identified as the cause of the crisis, due to its inefficiency in managing the productive enterprises and services, and its growing social expenditures. Hence there is need for reforms and restructuring. There is a 'social construction' of a new 'common sense' at the ideological and economic level. In the new context the 'new common sense' that is being constructed is that of health as a private good to be acquired, and is not a public good or universal right, nor is it a state responsibility.

Changes over the past have targeted this service sector for privatization and rapid global integration. These processes have been facilitated by the developments in communications and information technologies in the past two decades. Over the past decade the processes of globalization, mainly through privatization and expansion of corporate entities and market-led activities, have increased. The integration of commerce, investments and finance into the global economy has become the major force in the setting of public policies, including those in the health sector<sup>30</sup>.

The economic recession of the late 1970s and the crisis in developing countries namely the inability to pay earlier loans and an increase in debt were used by Indian state also to restructure the economy. The inefficiencies of public sector were used to justify introduction of neo-liberal economic policies and market-based solutions. The already highly unsatisfactory situation in the health sector in the country only worsened with the onset of such neo-liberal policies. A significant shift was affected from provision by the state of comprehensive health services through a publicly funded, universal, national health system, to free provision of just a minimum, essential package of services only to those identified as poor by the state. Overall, there has been a considerable impact of globalization on healthcare services.

The 'Washington Consensus' of WB-IMF-US treasury came up with the Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs) in 1980s for recovery from the crisis. The provision of new loans to repay earlier loans, became the main subject to implementing the SAPs. The World Bank also started playing an increasingly dominant role in the health sector in developing countries, through SAPs and conditionalities attached to grants, loans and debt relief.

# VI

# ❑❑ **Significant Presence of World Bank and Other Donor Agencies in Health Sector**

The World Bank's *World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health,* spelt out the guidelines for the Health Sector Reforms (HSRs), for restructuring health services in developing countries. According to this report good health increases the economic productivity of individuals and the economic growth rate of countries; hence investing in health is one means of accelerating development. Moreover, good health is a goal in itself. Based on such ideas and on estimations of the global burden of disease and costeffectiveness of interventions, the report also devised measures for priorities in health spending. The report advocated a threefold approach to health policy for governments in developing countries and in the formerly socialist countries:

- 1. 'To foster an economic environment that will enable households to improve their own health. Policies for economic growth that ensure income gains for the poor are essential'.
- 2. Limit public health expenditure.
- 3. Governments in poorer countries should focus their scarce public resources on providing a free 'basic' or 'minimum' package of preventive and curative services for the poor, while withdrawing from the direct provision of other services. In other words, 'redirect government spending away from specialized care and toward such low-cost and highly effective activities such as immunization, programs to combat micronutrient deficiencies, and control and treatment of infectious diseases. By adopting such packages of public health measures and essential clinical care, developing countries could reduce their burden of disease by 25 percent'.
- 4. Cost-recovery mechanisms in public sector, by enforcing charges for health services.
- 5. 'Encourage greater diversity and competition in the provision of health services by decentralizing government services, promoting competitive procurement practices, fostering greater involvement by nongovernmental and other private organizations, and regulating insurance markets'.

Such reforms, according to the WB could translate into longer, healthier, and more productive lives for people around the world, and especially for the poor people who account for more than 1 billion of the population.

These were structural and functional reforms in financing, governance related; through mechanisms for decentralization and involvement of the private sector through Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) in various forms in providing medical care. The reforms also stressed a change in management approach, aimed at redressing the issue of poor rural health infrastructure and increasing efficiency and effectiveness in implementation of the centrally administered programmes. These measures were piloted in the donor-funded projects, such as the Reproductive and Child Health Project and some of the disease control programs, or through the European Commission which funded the Sector Investment Program.

Some of the specific institutional mechanisms that were initiated to improve functioning of rural health facilities were:

- Deploying community health workers who would be paid based on performance and achievement of set targets (Mitanins in Chhattisgarh).
- To address the shortage of doctors by initiating steps such as reorientation, skill upgradation, redeployment of existing doctors, hiring part time or contractual staff.

- The involvement of local practitioners in provision of RCH services through franchising of NGOs/private providers, contracting out diagnostic and other services.
- Rogi Kalyan Samitis (RKS)/Patient Welfare Societies for autonomous hospital management; decentralization measures, and district health plans.
- Other decentralized management structures such as State Health Society, State Programme Management Units (SPMUs) and District Programme Management Units (DMUs) were being set up with various key personnel to manage finances and programs professionally.
- Performance-based funding by the Centre to the states had been taken up as part of the EC-SIP programme.
- Capacity building, for preparation of district health plans.

While most of the official development assistance comes largely through the national government, since the 1990s the central government enabled development assistance agencies such as the Department for International Development (DFID), European Commission (EC) and United States Agency for International Development (USAID) to work at the state level in the health sector. There is significant presence of multiple bi-lateral and multilateral donors, UN agencies and World Bank, all referred to as *development partners*, in the health sector, both at the state levels and in the union ministry of health. Several states had agreements with donor agencies, which defined Health Sector Reform (HSRs). The largest such state level projects have been the State Health Systems Development Projects (HSDPs) implemented in several states with loans from the World Bank – Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Karnataka, West Bengal, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Rajasthan. Specific objectives of the HSDPs were: constructing/improving infrastructure at secondary levels; policy reforms; development of management skills; and improving the performance of the healthcare system. DFID had such programmes for West Bengal, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. USAID was running projects in Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Jharkhand. European Commission was present in Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, and MP.

While donor assistance forms a small proportion of the health budget, yet there is presence/participation of donors in financial, personnel and policy areas and deployment of donor consultants in supportive roles within the ministry. Bilateral and multilateral funding agencies have come to dominate an area of health sector financing which is now defined as financing of technical assistance.

DFID started working in the health sector in Madhya Pradesh in 2004, and it started funding the development of a comprehensive Health Sector Reform Programme (HSRP) in 2007. The objectives of the reform programme were: improving quality and accountability of health services, developing human resource management, increasing financial allocations and effective use of same, regulation of private providers and improving services to reduce malnutrition and to improve child health. DFID contracted with development sector consultancy firms to form a Technical Assistance Support Team (TAST) to work with government departments to implement this programme. As per the 2007 Memorandum of Understanding for MP-HSRP (between Government of MP, India, and DFID), DFID was to provide a total of up to £60 million to Government of MP, over a seven year period beginning 2007.

Evaluation of some of these reform programmes have indicated that at the end of the project period, the States had not developed comprehensive State policies and strategies, and the project components to develop capacity in policy, planning, and management had also not taken place adequately.<sup>31</sup>

Another development was the involvement of the numerous divisions of the World Bank in driving privatization in healthcare, through projects, investments and institutional support for multinational and local companies. Specific loans from the World Bank or IDA often involve, and are conditional upon, privatization of the relevant services. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) is a division of the World Bank that invests solely in the private sector – it has a declared policy of extending the role of the private sector in public services including healthcare. As of May 2009 it had invested about \$200 million in the private healthcare sector in India. Since 2002 IFC has extended loans to Apollo Health Enterprises Limited, as well as to other hospitals such as Max, Rockland, Artemis, and Duncan-Gleneagles.<sup>32</sup>

Since the 1990s Global Public-Private Partnerships (GPPPs) have become common in the international health arena. Earlier international public health was dominated by the public sector through the World Health Organization (WHO) and other UN agencies and bilateral organizations, with NGO participation. Today there is much more involvement of the private corporate sector and private philanthropic foundations in health programmes, with the involvement of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation being the most visible: by 2012 Gates Foundation had invested more than \$1billion in programs 'to fight disease and poverty in India'. The Foundation gives funds to the central and state governments, non-governmental organizations and the private sector in the country. It began with funding the AIDS control program and has since expanded to areas such as maternal and child health, nutrition, vaccines and routine immunization, family planning, control of infectious diseases, and agricultural development. The Foundation is spending several millions of dollars to promote the use of vaccines for diseases such as diarrhea, influenza among children, diseases which can be more easily prevented by providing clean drinking water, improving sanitation, nutrition. The Foundation has significant presence in states like Bihar and UP, where it has an investment of ` 250 crore in medical, health and family welfare sectors, to provide technical and management support to the state health ministry.

# VI

# ❑❑ **Policy Measures Since Liberalization**

### **National Health Policy 2002**

According to the National Health Policy 2002, the previous policy of 1983, "in a spirit of optimistic empathy for the health needs of the people, particularly the poor and underprivileged, had hoped to provide *Health for All by the year 2000 AD*, through the universal provision of comprehensive primary health care services. In retrospect, it is observed that the financial resources and public health administrative capacity which it was possible to marshal, was far short of that necessary to achieve such an ambitious and holistic goal… it would be appropriate to pitch NHP-2002 at a level consistent with our realistic expectations about financial resources, and about the likely increase in Public Health administrative capacity…". The NHP-2002 made a break with the policies and vision of the past, to set out a new policy framework "within the socioeconomic circumstances currently prevailing in the country". Among the recommendations made were:

- The increase in the aggregate public health investment through a substantially increased contribution by the Central Government; given the extremely difficult fiscal position of the State Governments, the Central Government will have to play a key role in augmenting public health investments.
- By levying reasonable user charges for certain secondary and tertiary public health care services, for those who can afford to pay.
- Despite all that may be guaranteed by the Central Government for assisting public health programmes, public health services would actually need to be delivered by the State administration, NGOs and other institutions of civil society.
- In principle, the state would encourage the handing over of public health service outlets at any level for management by NGOs and other institutions of civil society.
- The policy welcomed the participation of the private sector in all areas of health activities – primary, secondary or tertiary. Its contribution would be substantial in the urban primary sector and the tertiary sector, and moderate in the secondary sector.
- In the context of the very large number of poor in the country, it would be difficult to conceive an exclusive Government mechanism to provide health services to this category. A social health insurance scheme, funded by the Government, and with service delivery through the private sector, would be the appropriate solution.
- The setting up of an organized urban primary health care structure, the funding for which would be jointly borne by the local self-government institutions and State and Central Governments.

- The national health programmes be implemented through autonomous bodies at State and district levels. The relative distancing of the programme implementation from the State Health Departments would give the project team greater operational flexibility.
- The alternative systems of medicine Ayurveda, *Unani*, *Siddha* and Homoeopathy — have a substantial role. Because of inherent advantages, such as diversity, modest cost, low level of technological input and the growing popularity of natural plant-based products, these systems are attractive, particularly in the underserved, remote and tribal areas.

### **National Commission on Macro-economics and Health 2005**

Following the publication by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2001 of its Report on Macroeconomics and Health, in 2003 the Government of India established a temporary National Commission on Macro-economics and Health to assess the place of health in national economic development. This Commission was co-chaired by the two ministers for health and finance. Among the objectives of this Commission were a critical appraisal of the existing health system—both private and public— and suggested ways for strengthening it to improve access to a minimum set of essential health interventions for all. It also looked into the issue of improving the efficiency of the delivery system and encouraging public-private partnerships in providing a comprehensive health care. According to this report, "Selective, fragmented strategies and lack of resources have made the health system unaccountable, disconnected to public health goals, inadequately equipped to address people's growing expectations and inability to provide financial risk protection to the poor…. The reasons for this failure can be attributed to three broad factors: poor governance and the dysfunctional role of the state; lack of a strategic vision; and weak management, unrealistic and non-evidence-based goal-setting, lack of strategic planning and inadequate funding". The Commission recommended a reform process to overhaul the existing system that was dominated by low-quality health care, was costly and unaffordable for the majority of the people, and where the public sector was under-funded, poorly equipped and constrained by bureaucratic procedures. It recommended that public spending be increased from the current level of 1.3% to 3% of GDP in the next few years; gradually shift the role of the State from being a provider to a purchaser of care; try out innovative financing models to provide a basic minimum package of interventions – such as targeting only the poor for publicly funded care, cost sharing through capitation, vouchers, and insurance.

### **National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) 2005**

The National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was announced in April 2005 as 'an articulation of the commitment of the Government to raise public spending on Health from 0.9% of GDP to 2–3% of GDP.' The Mission aimed 'to undertake architectural correction of the health system to enable it to effectively handle increased allocations as promised under the National Common Minimum Programme and promote policies that strengthen public health management and service delivery in the country'. Among the core strategies of the mission were training and enhancing capacity of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) to own, control and manage public health services; and provision of a female health activist in each village, named ASHA (Accredited Social Health Activist). The ASHA is an honorary volunteer, receiving only performance-based compensation for promoting universal immunization, referral and escort services for Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) services, construction of household toilets, and other healthcare delivery programmes. She is also given a Drug Kit containing generic AYUSH<sup>33</sup> and allopathic formulations for common ailments. ASHAs are trained periodically to act as a bridge between the ANM and the village population, and are accountable to the Panchayat. The Centre provides funding for key components in the 18 high focus States. The states were expected to increase contribution to Public Health Budget (preferably by 10% each year), and increase devolution to Panchayati Raj Institutions as per 73rd Constitution (Amendment) Act.<sup>34</sup>

The NRHM aimed at strengthening Health Infrastructure and human resources with a special focus on Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) services, but also including other Disease Control Programmes. Though largely restricted to rural areas, many programs such as the RCH program, Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) and Malaria Control were extended to urban areas. The strategy consisted of strengthening Sub-Centres, Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and Community Health Centres (CHCs) for improved curative care which conform to Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS). Strengthening the institutions involved both the creation and improvement of physical infrastructure as well as recruitment of health personnel.

The NRHM essentially functions as an omnibus broadband programme, comprising of four distinct budgetary components: the Reproductive and Child Health Programme, the various disease control programmes, the immunization programme, and the NRHM additionalities, which is the only new feature of NRHM. These additionalities consist of the ASHA programme, untied funds and maintenance grants for the district planning and maintenance of rural health facilities. Except for the NRHM additionalities which was purely tax-based, all the other three were supported by a large consortium of development partners comprising the World Bank, USAID, DFID, EC, UNFPA, UNICEF, and JICA. The immunization programme also had the WHO and GAVI (Global Alliance for Vaccination and Immunization). In the implementation of these programmes all the reform measures mentioned earlier were being adopted in all states.

NRHM focused on 18 states, with poor infrastructure and low public health indicators, namely the 8 Empowered Action Group (EAG) states -(Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Odisha and Rajasthan), 8 North Eastern States, and Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir. As part of the Mission's mandate of review and concurrent evaluation of the program, a Common Review Mission (CRM) has been set up. This CRM consists of Public Health Experts, Representatives of Development Partners, Civil Society Members, and officials, and is conducted annually. There was also an international advisory panel for NRHM, convened by the Earth Institute of Columbia University, USA, to review NRHM operations, assess progress, conduct evaluations and make policy recommendations.<sup>35</sup>

In view of the crisis in the health system in India and the appalling condition of the rural health services, some of the measures such as the promise of increased budgetary allocations, providing some untied funds and grants to the rural facilities, some increase in staff, increase in budgets for drugs, inclusion of some monitoring and accountability mechanisms were seen as positive steps towards systems strengthening, although inadequate. However, the ideas of providing only some basic services through these government facilities, targeting of the services, and privatization as the option for delivering curative services continue to remain. NRHM has approached the reform/re-organization of the health services system as solely a technical and financial issue, for which certain organizational and management changes aimed at internal reform of the system are being adopted.

### **The High Level Expert Group (HLEG) on Universal Health Coverage and 12th Five Year Plan**

Since 2005 the WHO has invoked the idea of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) in the international health discourse, urging all countries to achieve UHC as soon as possible.

We need to remember that the idea of UHC is not a new one. The provision of a comprehensive, universal health service, namely the same quality of curative and preventive services available to all irrespective of their ability to pay, as a right, through a publicly funded national health service system had been a central feature of welfare states, as also of the planning process in India since the 1940s.

In October 2010 the Planning Commission constituted a "High Level Expert Group on Universal Health Coverage for India" (HLEG) with the mandate of developing a framework for providing easily accessible and affordable healthcare to all Indians. This HLEG defines universal health care as "ensuring equitable access to all Indians, to affordable, accountable, appropriate healthcare services, with the government being the guarantor and enabler, although not necessarily the only provider of healthcare and related services". The HLEG recommended that general taxation should be the principal source of healthcare financing and that there should be no fees of any kind for health services; and that Government (Central government and states combined) should increase public expenditures on health from the current level of 1.2% of GDP to at least 2.5% by the end of the 12th plan, and to at least 3% of GDP by 2022. It also said that, "Purchase of all healthcare services under the UHC system should be undertaken either directly by the central and state governments through their Departments of Health, or by quasi-governmental autonomous agencies established especially for the purpose". Thus, the HLEG recommended a market approach entailing separation of financing and provisioning, and "purchase" of services from a fragmented system consisting of competing providers, instead of the system envisaged since the 1950s (but never effectively implemented), of a fully publicly financed, integrated health system, planning for and providing universal, comprehensive health services. However it also recommended that insurance companies or other independent agents should not be used to purchase health care services on behalf of the government<sup>36</sup>.

The Twelfth plan for health proposes a 'new strategy' as part of a longer term reform of the system over the next decade. It records that shortages remain in infrastructure and human resources for the health facilities; and proposes that there must be substantial expansion and strengthening of the public sector healthcare system, and that expenditure by the Center and the States, both plan and non-plan, will have to be substantially increased. According to this Plan, the health system will continue to have a mix of public and private service providers and the two need to coordinate for delivery of a continuum of care. That given the reality of public-private providers, there can be a network of public and private providers to attain universal coverage. It is suggested that various options of financing and organization should be explored by states and they be encouraged and financed to run one to three pilots to test out the models. Such as, "The pilots could explore different models for providing universal access to an essential health package (EHP) including … a combination of public and private facility networks. In areas where both public and private contracted in providers co-exist, patients shall have a choice in selecting their provider. Networks of such integrated facilities at different levels will be encouraged to provide a continuum of care …". There is also the proposal of granting financial and administrative autonomy to public facilities, encouraging them to raise their own resources, and more direct privatization measures to set up facilities to provide medical care.

This Plan suggests that various options of financing and organization be explored by states and they be encouraged and financed to run one to three pilots to test out the models. There is also the proposal of granting financial and administrative autonomy to public facilities, encouraging them to raise their own resources; and more direct privatization measures to set up facilities to provide medical care, to set up private sector medical colleges, to meet the requirements of skilled personnel. A strong regulatory system would supervise the quality of services delivered by such networks.<sup>37</sup>

Thus, we see that instead of asking why the government health system is so weak and ineffective, and why there is such a vast private sector, the Planning Commission serves it as a *fait accompli* and proposes to "strengthen" the public health system (for universal health coverage) by accommodation of the private sector within the health system, rather than explore other options. While the induction of the private sector into the healthcare system has thus been legitimized, yet these documents remain silent on the diverse nature of the private providers, the growing presence and influence of corporate providers, on the difficulties and negative experiences faced by other countries with corporate hospitals, and on how exactly they are going to be regulated. It is also noteworthy that the corporate sector and the policy makers are speaking in the same language.

The discourse on health systems is currently dominated by discussion on health financing mechanisms and on what is the best way for the government to organize purchase of health services. There are several demand side financing measures in the area of maternal health services meant to promote delivery in health facilities. These measures are intended to supplement traditional 'supply-side' financing by channeling resources directly to service users – a transfer of 'purchasing power'. There are unconditional cash transfers, conditional cash transfers, short term payments to offset the costs of accessing services, and vouchers for maternity services; the Janani Suraksha Yojana is an instance of a conditional cash transfer scheme, where payments are made to woman on undergoing delivery in an accredited health institution. The Chiranjeevi Scheme of Gujarat and Sambhav Scheme of UP are voucher schemes in which private providers have been contracted to provide cashless maternity services to designated groups of women.

### ❑❑ **Summing Up**

Universal health services coverage of the population through some health plan is well established today, whether this be through social health insurance or tax-funded national health services, or a combination of these. Most developed countries, capitalist or socialist, and some developing countries, have insured through either of the above means, a minimum standard of health care for their population. The experience of the pre-reform National Health Service (NHS) of UK shows that, although the system was far from perfect, yet, it was possible to have a taxation-based national health system, and undertake planning for large populations, avoid wasteful duplication and achieve efficiency, and secure comprehensiveness, universality and equity of health services, provided free to all as a right.<sup>38</sup> However, such assured universal coverage of health care has not emerged in any satisfactory manner in the developing countries such as India.

For various reasons – largely political and administrative that have been analyzed in great detail by many public health researchers, scholars and activists, the goal envisaged in the post-Independence period for the health services in India has not been fully realized. As pointed out by Banerji, 'considerable thought has been given to re-orienting this health service system and over the years several commissions, committees and study groups have pondered over it. Almost all of them have emphasized the need for radical change'.<sup>39</sup>

However, there has been a large gap between policy-planning and actual implementation. The public health services in India did not grow as envisioned due to factors such as lack of political will; inadequate budgets; pressure from international agencies such as WHO to implement vertical programmes for population control and against specific diseases such as malaria; corruption; and reluctance of doctors and specialists (trained in urban medical colleges oriented to western standards) to work in the rural health facilities lacking in basic infrastructure and amenities. The planning process itself has been top-down and highly centralized with little accountability, and dominated by the 'techno-managerial model of healthcare'. While there is substantial infrastructure, personnel, technology, well-equipped institutions for education and research, and production capacities in the public and private healthcare sector ('world-class'), they are riddled by several problems. The public health infrastructure, with a potential to provide primary health care, has been largely usurped by the family planning programme and some vertical disease programmes, which have strong political and administrative backing, and receive aid and assistance from the international development institutions, and most bilateral as well as UN agencies. An overview of the health system, whether public or private, reveals that despite repeated declarations to serve all especially the rural poor, the system is riddled with unevenness and inequalities of resource distribution, access, participation, and of health status. In addition it lacks an epidemiological approach (namely one catering to the disease and illness patterns), based on use of inappropriate technology, has a topheavy organization, and the hierarchical structure matches the hierarchies in the larger society. No matter what the slogans and promises, the effective result has been and continues to be that the benefits of the health services, as well as the profits from the supporting drug and equipment industries reach only a small section of the population. Further, this pattern is not unique to the health services system, but permeates every facet of development in the country.<sup>40</sup>

As has been pointed out in the context of Latin American countries, in India too, "The underdevelopment of health and health services (in these countries) is brought about by the same determinants that cause underdevelopment in general, the pattern of control over resources of these countries in which the majority of population has no control over their resources".<sup>41</sup> This scenario is a reflection of the values of the decision-makers, planners and those engaged in implementation, who largely belong to the elite upper classes and hold all the political and economic power. Hence, the path to another approach to health service development can be one towards