# **4 Civil service reforms in India** An aid to ethics in governance

As shown in Chapter 3, administrative reforms play a critical role in transforming governance in accordance with the prevalent ideological dispensation. Governments need to be regularly reinvented; otherwise, they lose viability and relevance. In other words, in order to remain sensitive to contemporary demands, what is thus pertinent is to go for systemic changes. The idea of government renewal thus assumes tremendous significance in contemporary thinking about how to make public services relevant to the stakeholders. This is done in a context that appears to exercise a determining influence on the ideological texture of administrative reforms, one that does not suggest mere structural changes, but also sets in motion processes whereby new ideas for better public services are welcomed and appreciated. The basic point, as argued in the earlier chapter, is how to make the administration truly public by being attentive to what is deemed to be appropriate in a particular socio- economic and political milieu. It is true that the fundamental conceptual parameters informing administrative reforms in India may have been derived from wider concerns for citizencentric public administration; nonetheless, the contextual influences always remain most critical in deciding the major thrust of administrative reforms. Two ideas are of significance here: on the one hand, administrative reform entails primarily specific measures for administrative renewal according to the prevalent ideological concerns of those in authority; on the other hand, they are futuristic too because reforms are said to set in motion processes for change which are reflective of what is required to be done to achieve administrative goals. Hence, administrative reforms cannot be a single shot phenomenon, but ones that need to be continuously pursued; otherwise, they will end up being mere contextbound technical devices.

 One of the major components of administrative reforms is civil service reform. Besides specific committees, appointed to review the functioning of the Indian civil services, the Pay Commissions are also integrally connected to the processes of change that Indian bureaucracy has so far undergone since the constitution of the first Pay Commission in 1946. The Weberian form of hierarchical governance was critical in setting the ideological tone for the first four pay commissions; given the universality of the state- led development paradigm, bureaucracy had always had an edge in contemporary thinking, because of its

assumed utility to accomplish the ideological goals that those in power sought to achieve. The situation underwent a sea change following the adoption of the 1991 New Economic Policy, which radically altered governmental priorities by giving precedence to the market in fulfilling the neo- liberal ideological directions of the state. Seeking to articulate the idea of governance in accordance with the World Bank- sponsored governance paradigm, the Pay Commissions since 1994 have suggested major measures for transforming Indian bureaucracy from being rent- seeking in the erstwhile Licence–Quota–Permit Raj to being a useful instrument for public services. Suggesting that the Weberian top- down model of administration is simply inadequate since citizens are also consumers, the governance model of governance is also an attempt to expand the base of public administration by taking into account the importance of external actors who had never had a role in the past. In order to remain truly public in its functioning, the government needs to be not only accountable to the stakeholders, but also attentive to their requirements. This is citizen- centric governance, as per the neoliberal conceptualization of governance.

 The chapter has two interrelated parts: given the overwhelming theoretical importance of the governance model, the first part of the chapter is devoted to the idea of governance, with a view to analytically assessing its viability in contemporary India. Despite being rooted in the World Bank endeavour, the idea of governance seems to have become critical in civil service reforms in India. With its analytical depth, the first part will be of tremendous use in comprehending the second part of this chapter, which focuses on the two pay commissions – the fifth and sixth Pay Commissions – appointed in 1994 and 2006 respectively. Although these are primarily review commissions, they are nonetheless major steps towards adapting the Indian civil services to the neo- liberal ideological dispensation in which the interests of the stakeholders always reign supreme. Besides suggesting significant structural changes, these two commissions are thus a watershed in so far as Indian public administration is concerned, because not only are they pay commissions in the conventional way, but they also seem to have translated the ideological intent of the ruling authority into concrete steps while reviewing the Indian civil services.

 Despite having provoked debates and criticisms, the governance paradigm appears to have been accepted as perhaps an antidote to the decline of ethics in governance in India. Based on the drive towards making administration accountable to the citizens, there is a sense in saying that governance is likely to succeed as a paradigm, given the optimism that it has, so far, generated in developing countries, including India, where bureaucracy, by being rent- seeking, was always the captive of vested social, economic and political interests. Governance is thus a powerful challenge in a rather stultified environment in which the citizens' roles as active partners in governance have always been compromised. In view of this, it is highly appropriate to pursue a critical discussion of the concept of governance, which the chapter seeks to do in Part A. Drawing on the argument that governance is a determining influence in both the fifth and sixth Pay Commissions, Part B is devoted to a detailed discussion of the recommendations that

these commissions made for streamlining Indian bureaucracy in order perhaps to articulate the idea of governance in spirit and depth. Both these parts, despite being analytically separate, hinge on the common argument that the clamour for ethics in governance seems to have become a natural call because of the well entrenched rent- seeking character of bureaucracy in the erstwhile era of state- driven and planned economic development. The fifth and sixth Pay Commissions may have had their limitations, but the drive towards setting new standards of governance, in which accountability, adherence to the rule of law and the commonly accepted ethical code of conduct remain supreme, is said to have drawn citizens, as Part B further argues, to public governance as active partners, because of their increasing faith that the instruments of governance will be tuned to what they require to gratify their individual and collective needs. Parts A and B are integrally connected, to show that governance, which is a conceptual category with practical implications, has gained salience in India where public administration gradually became an instrument which was neither public nor administratively effective. Hence there was a clamour for change, which the fifth and sixth Pay Commissions articulated in their recommendations. Whether these recommendations are adequate to halt the deterioration of ethics in governance is a question that cannot be easily answered. Nonetheless, there is no doubt that these pay commissions stand out in the annals of governance in India not only because of their attempt to alter the texture of Indian bureaucracy, but also because of the importance that they gave to the issue of ethics in governance as integral to the efforts towards building a corruption- and also prejudice- free governmental system.

# **PART A**

# **Conceptualizing the idea of governance**

Governance is not just a conceptual parameter, but a prescription to combat and also refashion a predatory state that has appropriated the government for partisan gain. This is also a shield for market- driven socio- economic regeneration, since an orderly governance creates political stability and also institutions which are critical to the smooth functioning of the market. So the notion of good governance in the neo- liberal realm supports and also expedites the processes for maintaining the status quo, for reasons connected with the market and its partisan functioning. By enhancing the state's capability within the neo- liberal predisposition, good governance accords a powerful conceptual justification to endeavours drawn from self- motivation, which is undoubtedly good provided there are well established mechanisms for such efforts. If such mechanisms are absent, they need to be created with state support, at least at the initial stages; hence, over emphasis on good governance may result in a situation in which the state withdraws hoping to be replaced by what is euphemistically characterized as 'popular initiatives'. Nonetheless, both as a conceptual category and a practical design, governance is a positive intervention in three fundamental ways: first, by shifting the focus from inputs to outcomes, it has radically altered our perception

of public administration, so that it cannot be conceptualized as an event, but as an integral process in which government is just a, albeit significant, player. Challenging the hierarchical bureaucratic governance, it has further reemphasized the importance of the horizontal coordination of agencies involved in the delivery of public services. As against hierarchy, the principal concern here is to evolve teamwork involving the stakeholders. The second implication is far more serious, especially in a developing country such as India, where the colonial bureaucratic structure of the bygone era was more or less retained. Governance, despite it being a market- friendly design, has unleashed forces supportive of institutional pluralism which are most radical given the wellentrenched bureaucratic hegemony, notwithstanding the commitment of the founding fathers for creating a new India, free from bias and prejudices of any kind. This is an opportunity for the Indian public administration to be substantially refashioned in the neo- liberal context, in which governance is not merely an act, but a coordinated effort seeking to redesign public administration in a creative manner. In this sense, governance cannot be just a checklist of items, as per the World Bank, but a fresh wave of thinking based on a thorough critique of the age- old Weberian conceptualization of hierarchical and control- stricken public bureaucracy. Third, governance is also an institutional mechanism to address the well entrenched inadequacies in India's public administration. It is now common knowledge that endemic corruption not only undermines the moral fibre of the polity, but has serious and irreversible practical consequences for politics, economic development and governance. With the growing involvement of stakeholders in governance, any corrupt practices that are indulged in attract immediate attention. This means that an alert citizenry is perhaps the most effective shield against corruption. Governance, by catapulting people onto the centre of the stage, thus becomes an important vehicle for change in circumstances in which stakeholders are being linked together in the service of common goals.

# **Theory and practice of governance**

In contemporary social science discourses, governance has acquired ubiquity. Governance does not simply mean 'rule' or 'administration'; it has a specific meaning in the context of globalization. Broadly speaking, governance is the manner in which power is exercised. It is different from public administration in that it underlines the importance of its 'purpose' as well as the structure and processes of administration. Governance is about 'the capacity' of the public authority and its accountability. Capacity includes the state's 'hardware', its financial resources and administrative infrastructure and its effectiveness in executing policy decisions. Accountability is 'the software' of the state whereby the political system is linked with its performance. Governance is thus another way of conceptualizing public administration in the changed global scenario. Before critically evaluating the phenomenon, the following three points seem most appropriate to put the discussion in perspective. First, governance as a concept and also as a paradigm is a practitioner's contribution to public administration, in the sense that it has been conceptualized by the World Bank in the context of sub- Saharan Africa at a particular historical juncture. Failure to repay the World Bank loans, among other things, led to its formulation. Second, the World Bank definition of governance is very limited and is associated with administrative and managerial arrangements seeking to instil 'efficiency' in public administration. Third, governance is also political, in the sense that it includes an insistence on 'competitive democracies' of the western variety. In a way, governance is therefore a well- defined administrative set- up that draws its sustenance from 'participatory democracy'. Its historical roots cannot be ignored, for governance was articulated when the state- led development that flourished in the former Soviet Union collapsed

 Governance generally means 'the act or process of governing, specifically authoritative direction and control'.1 To be more precise, governance can be further defined as 'the political direction and control exercised over the actions of the members, citizens or inhabitants of communities, societies and states'.2 While conceptualizing good governance in the context of debt- ridden sub-Saharan Africa, the World Bank was guided by

efforts to create an enabling environment and to build capacities that will be wasted if the political context is not favourable. Ultimately better governance requires political renewal. This means a concerted attack on corruption from the highest to lowest level. This can be done by setting good example, by strengthening accountability, by encouraging public debate, and by maturing a free press. It also means . . . fostering grassroots and nongovernmental organizations such as farmers' associations, cooperatives and women's groups.3

Underlining the above goal, the World Bank defined good governance in the following manner:

Good governance is epitomized by predictable, open and enlightened policy making, a bureaucracy imbued with a professional ethos acting in furtherance of the public good, the rule of law, transparent processes and a strong civil society participating in public affairs.4

 As is evident, there are four key elements: public sector management; accountability; legal framework for development; and information and transparency. Improving governance would begin with an assessment of the institutional environment (accountability, rule of law, openness and transparency) that determines the patrimonial profile of the country. Good governance is also contrasted with the 'poor governance' that is held responsible for lack of sound development in these sub- Saharan African nation- states. Poor governance is, according to the World Bank formulation, 'characterized by arbitrary policy making, unaccountable bureaucracies, un- enforced or unjust legal systems, the abuse of

executive power, a civil society unengaged in public life and widespread corruption'.5 According to the World Bank, some of the main symptoms of poor governance are as follows:6

- failure to make a clear separation between what is public and what is private, hence, a tendency to divert public resources for private gain;
- failure to establish a predictable framework of law and government; behaviour conducive to development, or arbitrariness in the application of rules and laws;
- excessive rules, regulations, licensing requirements, and so forth, which impede the functioning of markets and encourage rent- seeking;
- priorities inconsistent with development, resulting in a misallocation of resources;
- excessively narrowly based or nontransparent decision making.

 Underlying the litany of Africa's development problems is thus 'a crisis of governance', the World Bank expressed concern for 'the lack of official accountability, the control of information and a failure to respect the rule of law'. Since governance is 'the conscious management of regime structures, with a view to enhancing the public realm' the Bank thus insists on 'independence for the judiciary, scrupulous respect for the law and human rights at every level of government, transparent accountability of public monies, and independent public auditors responsible to a representative legislature, not to an executive'.7 Such a distortion in public institutions appears to be unavoidable because they, superimposed 'on political and economic systems in which they had no roots, continued to lack accountability, but were captured by clan pressures, politicized by booty [resembling largely] the kinds of patrimonial states common in early Europe'.8 The tragedy of 'mismanagement' and 'corruption' seems to have its root in this colonial imposition of states and bureaucratic institutions, rather than 'their natural evolution through a process of citizen demands for accountability and ruler adjustments'.9 Driven by concern for efficient governance, another World Bank document, *Governance and Development* (1992),10 defines governance as 'the manner in which power is exercised in the management of a country's economic and social resources for development'. That denotes (a) the form of political regime (parliamentary or presidential, military or civilian and authoritarian or democratic); (b) the process in which the power is exercised; and (c) the capacity of the government to design, formulate and implement policies – to discharge the government functions. While the first aspect of governance falls outside the World Bank's ambit, the second and third aspects, as claimed by the World Bank, appear critical to the Bank.11 However on a closer look at the subsequent elaboration of the concept by other international agencies endorsing the World Bank agenda, it is clear that these three aspects remain integral to governance. Absorbing the primary thrust of the World Bank prescriptions, the UN Development Programme (UNDP), for instance, elaborates the concept by underlining that governance is

the essence of economic, political and administrative authority to manage a country's affairs at all levels. It comprises mechanisms, processes and institutions through which citizens and groups articulate their interests, exercise their legal rights, meet their local obligations and mediate their differences.12

 Governance is also articulated by the UNDP in terms of the following major eight characteristics.13 It is participatory, consensus oriented, accountable, transparent, responsive, effective and efficient, equitable and inclusive and follows the rule of law. It assures that corruption is minimized, that the views of minorities are taken into account and that the voices of the most vulnerable in society are heard in decision making. It is also responsive to the present and future needs of society.

# *Participation*

Participation by both men and women is a key cornerstone of good governance. Participation could be either direct or through legitimate intermediate institutions or representatives. It is important to point out that representative democracy does not necessarily mean that the concerns of the most vulnerable in society would be taken into consideration in decision making. Participation needs to be informed and organized. This means freedom of association and expression on the one hand and an organized civil society on the other.

#### *Consensus oriented*

There are several actors and as many viewpoints in a given society. Good governance requires mediation of the different interests in society to reach a broad consensus on what is in the best interest of the whole community and how this can be achieved. It also requires a broad and long- term perspective on what is needed for sustainable human development and how to achieve the goals of such development. This can only result from an understanding of the historical, cultural and social contexts of a given society or community.

## *Accountability*

Accountability is a key requirement of good governance. Not only governmental institutions but also the private sector and civil society organizations must be accountable to the public and to their institutional stakeholders. Who is accountable to whom varies depending on whether the decisions or actions taken are internal or external to an organization or institution. In general an organization or an institution is accountable to those who will be affected by its decisions or actions. Accountability cannot be enforced without transparency and the rule of law.14

## *Transparency*

Transparency means that decisions taken and their enforcement are done in a manner that follows rules and regulations. It means that information is freely available and directly accessible to those who will be affected by such decisions and their enforcement. It also means that enough information is provided and that it is provided in easily understandable forms and media.

# *Responsiveness*

Good governance requires that institutions and processes try to serve all stakeholders within a reasonable timeframe. By being responsive, governmental institutions gain 'legitimacy' in the public realm, which will automatically ensure their wider acceptance and thus effectiveness in governance. Apart from welldesigned structural devices, responsiveness of public institutions can only be meaningfully ascertained if there is a serious civil society engagement in public affairs.

# *Effectiveness and efficiency*

Good governance means that processes and institutions produce results that meet the needs of society while making the best use of the resources at their disposal. The concept of efficiency in the context of good governance also covers the sustainable use of natural resources and the protection of the environment.

## *Equity and inclusiveness*

A society's well- being depends on ensuring that all its members feel that they have a stake in it and do not feel excluded from the mainstream of society. This requires all groups, but particularly the most vulnerable, to have opportunities to improve or maintain their well- being.

# *Rule of law*

Good governance requires fair legal frameworks that are enforced impartially. It also requires full protection of human rights, particularly those of minorities. Impartial enforcement of laws requires an independent judiciary and an impartial and incorruptible police force.

## *Strategic vision*

Leaders and the public have a broad and long- term perspective on good governance and human development, along with a sense of what is needed for such development. There is also an understanding of the historical, cultural and social complexities in which that perspective is grounded.15

 Governance is thus a checklist of criteria for managing public affairs, following certain well- defined codes of conduct based on the concern for ethics in public life. As Lewis T Preston, the World Bank President, categorically stated in his foreword to *Governance and Development*,

good governance is an essential complement to sound economic policies. Efficient and accountable management by the public sector and a predictable and transparent policy framework are critical to the efficiency of markets and governments, and hence to economic development.16

Broadly speaking, good governance is conceptually three dimensional. First, it refers to certain espoused principles of public administration, namely, accountability, transparency and participation. Second, it also dwells on the processes through which political power is articulated and exercised. The process involves a complex interplay among the prevalent values, policies and institutions that are critical to making and implementing decisions for the society in question. Governance also recognizes the importance of interactions between state, market and civil society. Third, the successful application of governance, both its principles and processes, is contingent on the regulatory capacity of the state. While control without good governance is oppressive, good governance without the capacity to apply it is an empty slogan. A perusal of these features suggests that governance is not a magical formula. Instead, it seeks to articulate a device to improve governmental functioning in areas where government is apparently minimal and is largely appropriated by 'partisan' interests where it does exist. Hence it is stated that

Governance is a continuum, and not necessarily unidirectional, it does not automatically improve over time. It is a plant that needs constant tending. Citizens need to demand good governance. Their ability to do so is enhanced by literacy, education and employment opportunities. Government needs to prove responsive to those demands. . . . Change occurs sometimes in response to external or internal threats. It also occurs through pressures from different interest groups, some of which may be in the form of populist demands. Although lenders and aid agencies and other outsiders can contribute resources and ideas to improve governance, for change to be effective it must be rooted firmly in the societies concerned and cannot be imposed from outside.17

 To sum up the discussion on the definition of good governance, one can safely make the following points. Governance is a conceptual approach (a) concerning 'big questions' of a 'constitutional' nature that establish the rules of political conduct; (b) involving creative intervention by political actors to change structures that inhibit the expression of human potential; (c) emphasizing the nature of interactions between state and social actors and among social actors themselves; and (d) referring to particular types of relationships among political

actors which are socially sanctioned rather than arbitrary.18 Taking all these features together, governance refers to 'the traditions, institutions and processes that determine how power is exercised, how citizens are given a voice and how decisions are made on issues of public concern'.19 Governance is thus inherently 'political', since it involves 'bargaining and compromise, winners and losers, among actors with different interests and resources'.20 Thus governance is also a platform for interaction between stakeholders and government that is always frictional due largely to the obvious incompatibility of interests among them. Informed by this concern, governance is also defined as 'engaged governance', whereby engagement between government and civil society is formally recognized. The primary focus is on the policy cycle of the government within a value- driven governance system.

 If assessed superficially, governance is just another mode of public administration. But if one locates governance in the global neo- liberal thrust for social, economic and political homogeneity, the concept acquires completely different connotations. This becomes a way of articulating the neo- liberal agenda and seeking to fulfil the neo- liberal goal. Anchored in specific theoretical reasoning, governance is not at all an innocent construction of administrative practices. Instead, it is loaded with specific ideological preferences, supported by the socalled unipolar world drawing from 'neo- liberalism'. The neo- liberal thought found favour with the Western donor agencies such as the World Bank and IMF that were engaged in the funding of the development projects of the 'debtridden' Third World. The convergence of thought with regard to change reached its apogee in the newly emergent phenomenon of globalization, facilitated by the free flow of funds, goods and services as dictated by the new conditionalities laid down by the WTO, and by the new IT revolution (internet, fax, and webbased communication).

## **Governance as an aid to ethics in public life**

Governance is a policy- making device that underlines transparency, accountability, integrity and legitimacy of the institutions, rules, practices and values on which a society is based. These characteristics are relative to the society in question, because they cannot be articulated in absolute terms. But what is critical is the process whereby citizens favourably link with governance because it generates trust and confidence in them. Governance is thus a mechanism involved in (a) 'the formation and propagation of values'; (b) 'the creation and distribution of wealth'; and (c) 'the emergence and consolidation of institutions'.21 In the governance paradigm, the traditional governance process, with the state as supreme actor, is now heavily influenced by international organizations with a growing number of regulations formulated at the supra- national level. These supra- national policies travel across 'languages and cultures, framing and positioning local discourses and being translated by the local configurations of resources and ideas'.22 As shown, the growing but critical importance of governance both as a technique and an agenda can easily be attributed to two important developments in the global order in recent times: first, the disintegration of the former Soviet Union, suggesting not only the weaknesses of Marxism–Leninism as a cementing ideology in diverse societies, but also the failure of the statedirected development model in mitigating the basic human social, economic and political needs. This apparent vacuum is being filled in by the consolidation of the neo- liberal discourse in which 'states should become commodified and marketized in their outlook and give way to the "market discipline" [paving the way for] governance without government'. The governance without government that is market discipline can be seen as the 'governmentality of neo- liberal globalization'. Drawing on Foucault, governmentality includes 'mental and practical levels of governance'. Governmentality is 'a result of mentality and the organization of conduct that composes the art of governance'.23 Drawing on 'the internalization of practices of governing', governmentality is a mechanism for policing the self 'according to existing conceptions of truth grounded in knowledge about the self '.24

 The second, and perhaps more significant, factor is the remarkable technological advances that shrink distance and the interdependencies that arise from much wider and deeper global economic integration. In these changed circumstances, if they do not reorient themselves substantially, the decision- makers can hardly remain appropriate in governance. As a result, public administration is bound to undergo radical changes because of the historical circumstances in which the idea of 'contextual' public administration seems to have lost its viability. The ecological view is replaced by the 'neo- Taylorist' philosophy of 'one best way' to organize public affairs. Neo- liberal values surged ahead, predicting 'the end of history' and the natural emergence of capitalism as 'the sole' arbiter of the fate of the world. In the contemporary socio- economic milieu, 'management' and 'market' seem to be inbuilt in public administration, redefining 'public' in a radical way.

 There is no denying that governance has refashioned the contemporary debate on public administration by raising certain major critical questions. However, the primary goal that remains at the core of this new dispensation in the World Bank- sponsored model is to seek to champion universal goals within particular constraints in which the role of politics is minimal, if not entirely outlawed. Despite the formally apolitical stance of the World Bank on this question, 'there is little doubt that underlying even this limited vision of governance is a Western model, ringing with Weberian ethos, with its emphasis on free markets, individualism and a neutral but efficient public administration, subject to a legitimate government'.25 Without politics, democracy has a restrictive meaning. Politics is the only social process of negotiation and contestation – politics as consisting of all the processes of conflict, cooperation and negotiation involved in the use, production and location of resources. Hence John J Kirlin argues that 'as long as democracy is valued the big questions of Public Administration must go beyond the big questions of Public Management'.26 Public Administration's role in society is diminished if it is understood primarily in terms of managing public agencies. The Minnowbrook I Conference (1968) and the Blacksburg Manifesto

have both raised this issue of democratic governance in the public interest. What is relevant in the context of the 'Third World' is that public administration is being crippled in the name of structural adjustment, invoking more and more 'the market model' of governance in utter disregard of the crucial social developmental role of the state in developing countries. The interests of public administration are no longer people- related but capital- related. And herein lies the perils of externally induced administrative reform, through which most of the Third World countries are passing today. Hence Leftwich rightly argues that

the primacy of politics in development should not . . . be disguised any longer behind a technicist language about governance and management. For while no one would deny the importance of institutions and rules, it is political processes which bring them into being and crucially, which sustain them.27

 Governance, by absorbing the urge to govern following the well- established dictums, thus misses altogether the overarching perspective of a democratic polity. The sustained capacity of the political system for collective action, effective citizenship and developing and nurturing the civic infrastructure for protecting citizens' rights and promoting collective life is of vital significance for any public administration in a democracy. The new governance cult is particularly ominous for Third World public administration, as it tends to strengthen bureaucracy further, impeding the development of the alternative people's institutions so necessary for both generating social capacity to govern and creating more democratic spaces independent of bureaucratic administration. Characterized as 'neo- Taylorism', good governance seems thus a rehash of 'the one- bestway principle' of the classical administrative theory, which is a complete mismatch, for obvious reasons, with the contemporary global context that demands more 'open- endedness' in governance than rigidity of any kind.

# **PART B**

# **Civil service reforms in India in a neo- liberal context**

Discussion on civil service reform is generally confined to changes in bureaucracy. Administrative reforms are, as shown in Chapter 3, efforts towards transforming bureaucracy within certain well- defined theoretical parameters, reflective of the ideological underpinning of the polity in question. A perusal of major administrative reforms in India reveals how the wider ideological concern of the polity shapes their nature: so long as the idea of a socialist pattern of society remains dominant, administrative reforms generally prefer those structural changes which uphold the determining role of bureaucracy in governance. Given the wider acceptance of state- led developmental planning, the role of bureaucracy, as perhaps the most effective instrument in the entire process, was far more appreciated. The scene had, however, undergone dramatic changes following the adoption of the 1991 New Economic Policy in which the neo- liberal approach to the economy gained precedence. The growing ascendancy of the market as a determinant of public policy resulted in conceptualizing bureaucracy as one of the many critical instruments that contributed to successful governance. Being recognized as a collective venture, governance creates an environment in which the so- called external actors also remain significant. The idea that governance is not at all bureaucracy- centric leads to a new conceptualization of bureaucracy that cannot be understood in the traditional theoretical format of public administration. So, there are two different phases in India's civil service reforms: until the appointment of the fifth Pay Commission in 1994, all pay commissions had recommended steps to further strengthen the hold of bureaucracy on governance, by suggesting multiple packages of salary improvements and other facilities. The issue of accountability was always raised, but was sought to be streamlined by improving the mechanisms for internal accountability; the idea of external accountability was considered to be an anathema. That was what provoked the Second Administrative Reforms Commission to argue that 'the functioning of the civil service [in India] is characterized by a great deal of negativity, lack of responsiveness to what the people want and the dictates of democracy'.28

 Conceptualized within the governance paradigm, the fifth Pay Commission is perhaps one of the most thoughtful statements on the importance of neo- liberal ethics in governance. As such, the fifth Pay Commission is not a pay commission in the conventional sense, given its efforts to reinvent the Indian civil service in the light of global inputs. The recommendations can be said to have drawn on the governance agenda, seeking to redefine bureaucracy merely as 'an enabler', and not 'a doer', as was the case in the past. By discarding the paternalistic idea of bureaucracy being a benevolent guardian, since it had become a rent- seeking instrument, the fifth Pay Commission also recognized the importance of external actors which had until then remained peripheral to governance. Ethics is now conceptualized with wide connotations, because governance is no longer an exclusive bureaucratic domain, but entails processes in which the bureaucracy collaborates with other actors. As shown above, governance is about those qualities that need to be uncritically appreciated to reorient public administration as an instrument for public well- being. Whether these measures are appropriate for inclusive development in India is a question that has no easy answer, since there is a strong argument that rights- based social provisions cannot be so easily dispensed with in India where the proportion of families living below the poverty line continues to cause alarm to the policy makers. Nonetheless, by recognizing governance as multidimensional and not monochromatic, the fifth and sixth Pay Commissions seemed to have set the ball rolling in a direction in which concern for ethics continues to remain critical in governance.

 As argued so far, even before the onset of liberalization, several measures were adopted to revitalize the administration, which had owed its origin to

completely different socio- economic concerns. The early reforms were largely generated by internal concerns, while the post- liberalization efforts were mostly driven by external considerations. There has been a clear shift towards a reduced role for the government in all countries. In the words of the fifth Pay Commission, 'Thatcherism in UK and Reagonomics in USA tried to pull out the State from the morass of over- involvement. The decline of Communism in Eastern Europe has furthered the trend towards economic liberalization and disinvestment in public sector enterprises'.29 So, the impetus for reducing the role of government came from outside, as the Commission admits by mentioning that 'India could not have remained unaffected by these global trends'.30 What was, however, most critical in the entire process was

the deep economic crisis of 1991 which pushed [India] on to a new path of development, [which meant that] Government should confine itself primarily to the core functions that cannot be performed by the market. Everything else must be left to private initiative.31

Underlining the reduced role of the government, the fifth Pay Commission clearly articulates 'a new path of development'. Critical of 'the over- involvement' of government, the Commission demarcates certain 'core functions' for the government, keeping aside a wide range of functions for private enterprises. Conceptualizing government within the governance paradigm, the Commission also seeks to negotiate with the neo- liberal thrust in public administration and accordingly suggests 'reform packages' to adapt the civil services in India to the changed milieu. The government retreats, giving space for private operators to discharge functions which it had performed traditionally for 'public well- being'. By redefining the role of government, the Commission seems to have equipped the state to keep pace with the changes in an interdependent world.

 The appointment of the fifth Pay Commission in 1994 by the Government of India is significant for two important reasons: (a) this is a Pay Commission which undertakes its exercise at a time when globalization seems to have influenced, if not shaped, human life to a significant extent; and (b) there is no doubt that the governance paradigm (which is clearly an antithesis to the state- directed development model) provides a critical reference point to civil service reform in most of the developing countries seeking loans from international agencies. The primary goal of the civil service is, as the Commission identifies, to 'understand customer needs'. Based on this fundamental concern, the mission statement32 of the Commission thus runs as follows. To:

- clarify the goals of the organization in the mind of the management;
- clarify for staff the purpose of their jobs in meeting the organizational goals;
- make clear the policy of the government to ensure that it is interpreted accurately by staff;
- engender pride in belonging to the organization;
- provide targets to aim for, against which results can be assessed.

These are not new ideas: in the 1996 Chief Secretaries Conference, they had been emphasized to reinvent civil services in the context of the changed neoliberal socio- economic and political environment in which citizens became the prime movers in governance.

 The fifth Pay Commission is a watershed in the evolution of India's civil service for a variety of reasons. This is not a pay commission in the ordinary sense of the term, since it has also sought to reshape the bureaucracy in the light of emerging global trends especially after the collapse of the Soviet system. By suggesting significant changes in the administrative hierarchy, the Commission translates into reality the drive towards 'de- bureaucratization'. There are two immediate consequences. (a) It draws our attention away from the 'steel- frame' to other agencies that are equally crucial in the 'public service', but have not been formally recognized so far. In this sense, the Commission provides a powerful critique of a Weberian bureaucracy that is strictly hierarchical and largely status quo- ist. (b) By recognizing the importance of civil society organizations in public administration, the Commission gives formal recognition to cooperation between the governmental bureaucracy and these organizations. Such cooperation was discouraged because of 'the sanctity' of the governmental domain, in which the state bureaucracy appears to be 'the only legitimate agency' in discharging responsibilities on behalf of the state. Underlining the importance of agencies that are not exactly linked with the government and its peripheral organizations, the fifth Pay Commission has not only redefined Indian bureaucracy but has also expanded its sphere of influence by seeking to involve various non- governmental agencies, whose role was never recognized under traditional theories of public administration.

 The fifth Pay Commission is also a significant comment on the nature of Indian administration, which has a clear colonial hangover. Critical of hierarchical Weberian administration, the Commission is clearly favourably disposed towards a 'decentralized' administration that provides room for organizations that are not exactly within the government. In structural terms, decentralized administration underlines the importance of various layers of decision- making process. What cripples public administration in the post- colonial India, as World Bank document underlines, is 'overregulation', which is both 'a cause and an effect of bloated public employment and the surest route to corruption'.33 Apart from 'contracting out of the state', the World Bank suggests several specific measures to 'motivate' the civil servants 'through a combination of mechanisms to encourage internal competition'.34 That the Pay Commission recommendations have not been accepted *in toto* by the government of India clearly suggests that the Indian response to the governance- initiated civil service reforms is a guarded one. In India's planned economy, the role that the civil service has discharged is that of 'a regulator' and not 'a facilitator'. And yet, the civil service was not severely challenged, because of its structural requirement in governance. The mood does not appear to have changed radically in the context of an interconnected global order. This can perhaps be linked with India's response to globalization, which is equally tempered by her peculiar socio- economic and

political circumstances. Hence two contrasting scenes are visible: on the one hand, there is evidence of a growing free market in India; on the other hand, the Indian state is still very interventionist and the Indian economy is still relatively closed to external goods, finance and investors. The policy trend is thus 'better interpreted as a rightward drift in which the embrace of the state and business continues to grow warmer, leaving many others out in the cold'.35

 Irrespective of whether the recommendations of the fifth Pay Commission are rightward drifts or not, the fact remains that it has drawn on the neo- liberal theoretical thrust towards globalization. Accepting that bureaucracies in the developing countries are also 'rent- seekers', the Commission has raised issues that are pertinent in redefining its role in the changed environment of governance. What is sadly missing is the context in which the recommendations are to be implemented. India is perhaps a unique example, showing a peculiar combination of roles in public bureaucracy that has a distinct colonial flavour, due to its obvious historical roots. Structured in the Weberian mould, Indian bureaucracy, however, reinvented its role and character following the adoption of the state- directed planned economy. Now, governance offers new challenges. The fifth Pay Commission, by seeking to reorient the Indian civil service, is responding to these challenges. Given the historical nature of Indian bureaucracy, most of the recommendations of the Commission may not be appropriate and thus not worthwhile. Nonetheless, there is no doubt that the Commission has played a historical role in the sense that it has drawn our attention to the weaknesses of a well entrenched bureaucracy and also the advantages of critically assessing its utility in the globalization- inspired social, economic and political circumstances.

 In some sense, the fifth Pay Commission brings back the Wilsonian dichotomy between politics and administration, in which administration is defined as an unalloyed technical exercise. Whether there is a conclusive resolution of this debate, which had its roots in the 1887 article by Woodrow Wilson, is debatable. However, one can confidently argue that administration without politics (denoting values or ideologies) is like a fish without water. Administration is a guided action. Hence values seem to be critical in its articulation and manifestation. The fifth Pay Commission does not seem to have paid adequate attention to this dimension of civil service reform. Instead, it has generally endorsed the ideal of governance in its recommendations. There is no doubt that the recommendations of the Pay Commission are historical in the sense that they approximate to neoliberal values; they are a- historical as well, because they are non- contextual responses to an environment where globalization continues to remain, for valid socio- economic and political reasons, an anathema.

#### **The Sixth Pay Commission, 2006**

What the fifth Pay Commission suggested was further reiterated by the sixth Pay Commission, which was constituted in 2006 with its final report submitted in 2008. It is the first Central Pay Commission that came into being in this century of rapid technological advances and after the coming into force of the RTI and *Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management* Acts. The government machinery, therefore, had to gear up for better performance under stricter fiscal discipline and delivery mechanisms. These imperatives are reflected in the terms of reference of the sixth Central Pay Commission which made it incumbent on the Commission to recommend systematic changes for (a) transforming the central government organizations into modern, professional and citizen- friendly entities that are dedicated to the service of the people; and (b) harmonizing the functioning of the central government organizations with the demands of the emerging global economy.

 The sixth Central Pay Commission, therefore, had not only to evolve a proper pay package for government employees but also to make recommendations rationalizing the governmental structure with a view to improving the delivery mechanisms for providing better services to the common man. The main recommendations of the commission that have a bearing on good governance are as follows.

## *Reduction of layers*

The commission recommended a reduction in the layers within the government structure so that decision making and delivery is expedited. From 35 standard pay scales, the grades have been reduced to 20 spread across four distinct running pay bands, one Apex Scale and another grade for the post of Cabinet Secretary/equivalent.

## *Restoring pride in public services*

Government employees have to be motivated to take pride in public services. Thus the Commission recommended various measures for job enhancement and job enrichment. The functions presently being discharged by Assistants and Private Secretaries will now be carried out by Executive Assistants. The upgrading of all posts in Group D in the government to Group C, along with retraining and multitasking, will provide enlargement and enrichment of functions and responsibilities for a large section of government employees.

## *Delegation with accountability*

Restoring delegation, with accountability at each level in the decision- making process, is one of the main proposals from the commission. Upgrading critical cutting- edge jobs such as teachers, staff nurses, and police constables has been recommended. Strengthening the decentralized levels with parity between field offices and the secretariat has also been recommended as the motivation and performance of the field and programme officers is critical to improving service delivery.

#### *Ensuring the availability of the best possible talent for government*

The Commission has recommended performance contracts, and lateral entry at higher levels in the government to ensure the availability of the best possible talent from within and outside government. It suggests a shift from career- based to post- based selection in the higher echelons of government in order to get the best domain- based expertise. A higher starting salary and better incentives have been given at initial entry level so as to attract younger talented staff. No increase in the retirement age is recommended, as an active younger employee profile is best suited for the tasks ahead. Additionally, the Commission argues for a market driven compensation package for young scientists and posts requiring special expertise and professional skills

#### *Performance related incentive scheme*

The introduction of a performance- related incentive scheme is designed to reward performance, innovation, creativity and the responsive administration of relations with stakeholders to create inclusive outcomes and effective service delivery. This will be a budget- neutral tool for results- based management with performance targets, standards and indicators and greater accountability.

 It may not be an easy task to define de- bureaucratization in precise terms because it is semantically multi- dimensional with a variety of nuances attached to it. In general, it is characterized by a situation that is devoid of bureaupathologies (red tape and delay); it also means downsizing, delayering (as opposed to a hierarchy), decentralization designed to enhance the importance of the lower strata of administration, and strengthening the cutting- edge functionaries (street- level bureaucracy) that are involved in executing the policies in the field. The term also refers to the efforts to bring about attitudinal change (from the typical indifferent bureaucratic response to one of extending as much help as possible) and articulate strategies to demystify governance through the simplification of procedures, rules and regulations. The idea is to democratize governance by involving the stakeholders who, with their inputs, make governance contextually relevant and meaningful. By insisting on citizen- centric public authority, governance is, as the Pay Commission suggests, no longer a distant entity, but one that is integrally connected with one's life.

# **Concluding observations**

Contemporary governance is not just about efficiency; it also upholds democratic participation, accountability and empowerment. There is therefore a constant tension between (a) how to make government efficient and (b) how to keep it accountable. There is also a corresponding tension between 'the conception of people as consumers in the context of relations between state and market' and the conception of 'people as citizens in the context of relations between state and society'.36 What it suggests is the increasing importance of citizen participation in public affairs. So, institutional reforms are but a significant step of 'strengthening [people's] voice in general – and the voice of the poor in particular'. This strategy, as the 2000 World Bank report endorses, emphasizes that

the institutional reform is not simply a matter of changing the ways in which public hierarchies are arranged. Its focus is on the broad array of 'rules of the game' that shape the incentives and actions of public actors – including the 'voice' mechanisms that promote the rule of law and the accountability of government to its citizens.37

What this perspective underlines is the need for a citizen- centric government. The only flaw in this argument is that the village- based institutions continue

to reflect unequal social and economic structures . . . and higher castes and economically powerful groups within the village continue to be the de facto leaders in *panchayats*; while the women, despite the reservation, remain 'proxies' to male counterparts who participate in *panchayat* affairs and decisions.38

Notwithstanding the obvious structural constraints, the *Panchayati Raj* institutions provide a form of governance that is based on community resources. At the grassroots, community is the organic unit of cultural, social, economic and political organization. In view of the growing popularity of the *Panchayat* institutions, there is no doubt that a better administration can easily be achieved by building on community resources rather than trying to import 'managerialization' of public services.39

 So, civil service reforms entail designs for extending opportunities for all and not just for a select few. This will mean in a country like India, as a former chief minister elaborates, 'creating opportunities for people for education, health, employment and general well- being. If these are not the focus of concern, the reforms will face a very rocky path because their very logic will be questioned. If reform cannot provide people [with] better education, health care and job opportunities, it will belie its very name'.40 Governance is thus an endeavour to ensure public well- being, and reform measures should be directed towards that, although it is easier said than done, given the well entrenched vested interests challenging rather instinctively efforts towards building ethically sensitive governance. Civil service reforms are important but not sufficient because administrative debasement is deep- rooted. It can be conclusively tackled only by creating parallel social movements in favour of ethics in governance as perhaps the only means to arrest the decadence in public administration.

 There is one final point. Civil service reforms are a testimony to the desire for change in bureaucracy because bureaucracy- led governance seems to have lost its vitality from the time that it was well equipped to bring about development in the real sense of the term. Poverty shows no signs of abatement and the benefits of development are being appropriated by the elite at the cost of far more

deserving segments of Indian citizenry. As the trajectory of India's development in the twentieth century shows, state- led development planning failed to bring about the changes as the founding father felt. The inadequacies of the erstwhile reform packages can be said to have contributed to the growing acceptance of an alternative model of development, insisting on localizing governance in a decentralized and people- centric self- development mode. Development is not the brainchild of the experts; it is an outcome, drawn on inputs from the grassroots. What is critical in this conceptualization is the role of civil society that has emerged as a third sector along with the state and the market. This is a new venture in societal problem solving in which governance is less bureaucratic. A significant departure from the conventional approaches to public authority, civil society- centred governance creates a space for voluntary action in areas where the state has already retreated.

 Governance and civil service reforms seem to have gone hand in hand in India. Despite being rooted in the neo- liberal justification for the withdrawal of the state from social sectors, the contribution of the model of governance is enormous in reiterating the importance of ethics in public authority. It is being increasingly felt in every walk of life in India that one of the major reasons for the lack of expected growth is an inefficient and insensitive civil service that needs complete overhauling. The recommendations of the fifth and sixth Pay Commissions are instructive here: in order to make the Indian civil service an ethics- driven instrument of governance, these pay commissions, besides fulfilling their traditional role of adjusting pay packages in the light of the changing price index, seem to have upheld the fundamental tenets of the governance paradigm while seeking to reinvent civil services in India as both civil and responsible for providing quality services to the citizens. From the point of view of the recommendations which these pay commissions have made to revamp the civil services, they have certainly fulfilled their mandates, although the fact remains that, without a complementary mindset, the transformative design that they have articulated is unlikely to be put into effect. Nonetheless, by showing concern for ethics in governance, these pay commissions seem to have unleashed processes whereby principles of accountability and responsiveness have been persuasively espoused as critical for public authority.

#### **Notes**

- 1 Webster's *New Universal Unabridged Dictionary*, Dorset & Baber, London, 1979.
- 2 *Random House College Dictionary*, (revised Edition), Random House, New York, 1984, p. 571.
- 3 *Sub- Saharan Africa: From Crisis to Sustainable Growth: a long- term perspective study*, The World Bank, 1989, p. 18.
- 4 *World Development Report*, The World Bank, Oxford University Press, New York, 1992, p. 29.
- 5 *The World Bank in Governance: the World Bank Experience*, The World Bank, Washington DC, 1992, p. 27.
- 6 *Government and Development*, The World Bank, Washington DC, 1992, p. 9.
- 7 *Sub- Saharan Africa,* p. 192.