#### **Norma H. Wolff**

## **Alternative Names**

In the past the Yoruba have been identified by outsiders as the Anago, Olukumi, and Aku (Adediran, 1998) Major subgroups include the Egba, Egbado, Ekiti, Igbomina, Ijebu, Ijesa, Ife, Kabba, Ondo, Owo, and Oyo.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Yoruba are located in the tropical rain forest and guinea savanna zones of coastal West Africa, concentrated in southwestern Nigeria (Yorubaland) with smaller groupings in southeastern Benin, Togo, and Ghana. As a result of the diaspora, enclaves of Yoruba culture are evident in Cuba and Brazil. The Yoruba language, marked by dialect diversity, and in some cases unintelligibility between subgroups, is a tone language that is a member of the Kwa group of Niger–Congo languages.

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Twenty to twenty-five million people speaking dialects of the Yoruba language form one of the largest ethnic groups in Nigeria, making up about 20% of the population (Zeitlin & Babatunde, 1995). Yoruba culture emerged in a series of kingdoms and chiefdoms in the tropical forests of southwestern Nigeria between the 9th and 12th centuries AD. The forest environment, with wide biodiversity, an abundance of mineral resources, numerous north-south flowing rivers, and a climate conducive to year-round agriculture, encouraged surplus agriculture, leading to population growth, centralized political systems, large-scale craft production, and trade. The early concentration of populations into large indigenous towns which were political, economic, and residential centers prior to European contact set the Yoruba apart in sub-Saharan Africa.

The Yoruba are horticulturalists. Root crops, including a variety of yams, cocoyam, and cassava, are the most important food crops. Maize, rice, millet, beans, plantains, bananas, and a wide variety of vegetables including tomatoes, onions, okra, peppers, and greens are also grown. Kola nuts are harvested for trade, and palm oil is processed for sale. Cocoa, introduced during the colonial period, is a major cash crop. Agricultural surpluses are the rule and have long been a staple of trade between rural and urban areas.

Despite the economic importance of farming, Yoruba take great pride in being town dwellers. Long before European contact, Yoruba towns were residential centers and the foci for economic redistribution, political administration, ritual activities, and the production of crafts. With the rise of long-distance trade, they became important links in the major trans-Saharan and Atlantic coastal trade routes of the region. A typical walled Yoruba city (*ilu*) is made up of multi-familied lineage compounds with a centrally placed palace of the king to whom descent groups acknowledge allegiance. The town is the core of a kingdom, and the palace provides a central focus for administrative, ritual, and economic activities with a major market in front. Beyond the walls of a city, farmlands, corporately owned by descent groups, extend 2–30 miles outward. Farmers live in town compounds and commute to their farms on a daily or seasonal basis. Temporary small hamlets (*aba*) spring up at farm outposts and sometimes develop into larger more permanent villages (*abule*). Villagers remain loyal to their citybound king and retain links to the city compounds of their lineages.

Men were full-time farmers in the past. Other indigenous male occupations include long-distance trade and part-time crafts such as iron-smithing, weaving, woodcarving, and beadworking, combined with farming. Men's crafts are hereditary occupations associated with specific lineages. While women farm and raise vegetables, the ultimate female occupation is trader. Virtually all women take part in local trade and the controlled distribution of foodstuffs and trade goods at periodic markets. Women's craft skills include pottery manufacture, weaving, dyeing, and decorating textiles with resist designs.

Political organization of a Yoruba subgroup revolves around an *oba*, a king with divine attributes. The oba embodies the kingdom; his health is an indicator of the strength and stability of the polity. Decisions concerning the maintenance of peace and order in the town, such as quarrels between lineages, land disputes and other local altercations, are made by ward or town chiefs. Palace chiefs, backed by the oba, are ultimate decision-makers concerning public affairs and outside threats that endanger the kingdom. Public morality and the maintenance of social order is supported by members of ancestral cults such as *Egungun* and *Oro* who take active roles in applying supernatural sanctions to encourage proper social behaviors and punish wrongdoing. Today, national and state sanctions overlay indigenous practices.

The concept of family begins with membership in a lineage that traces ancestry back to a known male ancestor five or six generations in the past. While individual social mobility is possible, lineage membership determines boundaries of possible achievement. Religious choice, rights to land and property, occupation and access to political office, in large part, are a prerogative of lineage membership. Living male descendants of a named progenitor, their wives and children and unmarried female descendants live together in a walled compound named for the ancestor. Today, with a changed social and economic climate, individuals feel more free to reside outside the family compound, but lineage loyalties remain strong, and visits and extended stays at family compounds are typical. Within the lineage, the polygynous family is the ideal. Beyond family, the Yoruba are group-oriented, and non-kin associations based on economic cooperation, occupation, age, and religion are common.

Religious belief reflects an ongoing relationship with the rain forest environment. Olorun (Olodumare), the supreme deity, created a multitude of lesser *orisha* (deities) who control the forces of nature and culture, including Osanyin, the deity of medicine. For each deity, there are ritual paraphernalia, taboos, praise names, symbols, sacrificial foods, and texts for worship and supplication. In contemporary "Yorubaland," indigenous belief is retained in varying degrees. Most Yoruba are Muslims or Christians. Islam is seen as more compatible by many, because polygyny is allowable and Islamic medicine shares characteristics with the Yoruba religio-medical system. Christianity's promotion of Western education has brought vast changes in Yoruba life and culture. However, Christian

syncretic churches combine indigenous and Western beliefs and practices.

Social interactions are governed by two important Yoruba precepts: seniority and good character. Respect for age and seniority plays a part in every social interaction. From the palace to family compounds people are ranked by age and birth order with elders given positions of responsibility. Beyond the family, status accrues with lineage affiliation, individual industriousness, wealth, and achievement of honored positions such as chieftaincies. Personal character (*iwa*) is of extreme importance. To have good character one must honor and respect the elderly, show generosity and kindness, engage in selfless service to others, be truthful and moral, and show hospitality to all, especially strangers.

Contemporary Yoruba life and belief are shaped by multiple forces. Islam and Christianity influence belief, and Western-style education, industrialization, and modernization affect every aspect of life. With the introduction of universal primary education in the mid-1950s, awareness grew of opportunities to make one's own life decisions, enter new professions, and practice new health strategies. Today the Yoruba are identified as the most urbanized and industrialized ethnic group of sub-Saharan Africa. Nine Yoruba cities are estimated to have populations of over 100,000. With more than 50% of Nigeria's light manufacturing located in Yorubaland, the Yoruba have one of the highest population densities of sub-Saharan Africa and face some of the highest environmental pollution threats in the world (Adediran, 1998; Zeitlin & Babatunde, 1995).

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

## **Environmental Factors**

The Yoruba live in a tropical ecosystem where diseases, illnesses, and parasites are endemic. These include malaria, cholera, skin diseases, unspecific fevers, and guinea worm. Historically, global diseases such as smallpox and influenza took their toll. In a 1980 United Nations Report for Nigeria, infectious diseases, combined with malnutrition, accounted for about 70% of illnesses, with the leading causes of death being malaria,

#### **The Context of Health 1031**

dysentery, pneumonia, measles, tuberculosis, gastroenteritis, and gonorrhea. Water-borne diseases such as cholera, diarrhoea, and other enteric infections are common due to the lack of reliable water supplies. Piped water is available only in urban areas. Villages depend on streams, wells, and rainwater stored in pots and drums for their water. Such water is often polluted. Another major factor in determining health status is diet. Ecological conditions are such that the major crops raised are high carbohydrate foods. They include cassava, yam, and maize. Protein sources are scarce and expensive to acquire. Children are fed a high carbohydrate diet, particularly *eko* or *ogi* (cornmeal pap). Malnutrition based on inadequate consumption of proteins and enteric infections caused by bad water and contaminated food, stored and cooked under unsanitary conditions, are common (Iyun, 1994). Aspects of the built environment also contribute to health problems. Particularly in the urban areas, overcrowding and inadequate public services contribute to deplorable sanitation and outbreaks of diseases in low income neighborhoods.

It is estimated that half of Nigeria's children die before the age of 6 from such causes as measles, gastroenteritis, malaria, tetanus, meningitis, pneumonia, diarrhoea, whooping cough, polio and tuberculosis (Osunwole, 1997; Oyeneye, 1991). In parts of Yorubaland, infant mortality rates remain high, 78 out of 1,000 children dying before the age of 3 (Folasade, 2000). The most common nonfatal chronic diseases are malaria and guinea worm infestation. In 1987, the World Health Organization estimated that Nigeria had the highest number of guinea worm cases (140 million) in the world. Complications of guinea worm infestation are the major cause of work and school absenteeism. At the end of the 20th century, epidemics of infectious diseases included cholera, yellow fever, cerebrospinal meningitis, and AIDS, as well as continuing chronic infections of malaria, guinea worm, and high rates of malnutrition (Metz, 1992). A newer trend that is affecting higher income groups is the prevalence of noninfectious social-stress diseases. Hypertension is a leading cause of illness of Yoruba adults over the age of 30 treated in hospitals in Ibadan,Yorubaland's largest city, with males over the age of 45 bearing the greatest risks of developing cardiac disease (Iyun, 1994, 1995). Upper income males are most likely to suffer from hypertension and myocarditis, while women run the risk of rheumatic and pulmonary heart disease (Iyun, 1995). The increase in heart disease in urban Westernized Africans has been attributed to changes in lifestyle associated with pursuit of the modern lifestyle. Risk factors leading to hypertension include dietary changes such as increases in alcohol and salt intake, smoking, physical inactivity, obesity, and continual psychological stress (Akinkugbe, 1995; Iyun, 1994, 1995). A four decade study revealed that 1 in every 10–15 Nigerian adults is hypertensive, leading to strokes, heart and kidney failure and visual impairment (Akinkugbe, 1995).

## **The Introduction and Impact of Biomedicine**

Dual medical systems, indigenous and Western, have competed in Nigeria since European colonization. Yorubaland was a primary target for the establishment of Christianity in West Africa. European and American missionaries introduced biomedical care in the 19th century, and the British colonial government continued to develop modern healthcare facilities in the 20th century. In 1948, the British established Nigeria's first medical school as part of the University College of Ibadan, with a modern teaching hospital opening in 1957. By the time the British left Nigeria in 1960 they had laid the foundations for modern medical services with over 3,000 hospitals, all concentrated in urban areas (Falola, 1999). Following independence in 1960, a first priority of the new government was to control endemic diseases and improve medical care services, particularly building hospitals. However, in the early 1970s, it was felt that most of the Nigerian population still relied on traditional medicine; those who accepted modern medicine were the urban educated (Foreign Area Studies [FAS], 1972). In 1975, the Nigeria Primary Health Care program was established to control communicable diseases, improve environmental hygiene, deliver preventive and curative care to at-risk populations such as the elderly and handicapped, and provide family planning and mother–child health services. Problems persisted. In 1980, over 85% of the doctors in Nigeria trained in Western medicine were concentrated in urban areas, and only about 35% of Nigeria's population had access to modern health-care services (Oyeneye, 1991; Warren, Egunjobi, & Wahab, 1996). In the 1980s, Nigeria's first population policy was implemented (Riedmann, 1993), and a Primary Health Care program was launched to serve all urban and rural Nigerians. The goal was to increase health-care personnel, collect reliable health data, make essential drugs

available to all, improve nutrition, promote health education, develop a family health program, promote family planning, introduce improved therapy for childhood diarrheal diseases, and implement vaccination campaigns against major childhood diseases (Metz, 1992). In the early 1990s, challenges remained, including continuing disparities between rural–urban availability of healthcare facilities and personnel. These problems persist in the 21st century due to continuing economic tensions and lack of foreign exchange limiting the availability of medical supplies, drugs, and equipment.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Yorubas have a wide variety of options in seeking health care. Choices are determined by the nature and history of the illness and the availability of services. Treatment often starts in the family with herbal remedies made with recipes passed through generations or after consulting locally printed indigenous medical formula books (Maclean, 1971). Indigenous practitioners who tap nature's unseen powers to treat a full range of human misfortunes and illnesses are often the next recourse. *Onisegun* are herbalist-healers who heal illness and combat misfortune. *Oloogun* are more likely to both cure and cause illness and misfortune (Wolff, 1979, 2000). When supernatural causation of illness is suspected, the close ties between the medical and religious systems draw the afflicted to *babalawo*, divination priest-healers of Ifa, or *olorisa*, priests of deities. Additional specialists include midwives, bone setters, circumcisers who cut tribal marks and incisions for medicines placed under the skins, and specialists in the treatment of mental illnesses.

Gender is not a problem to practicing indigenous medicine. Women practitioners (*iya isegun*) specialize in women's and children's health, as well as treatment of conditions such as asthma, diabetes, jaundice, hypertension, and fractures (Osunwole, 1997). As midwives, female practitioners manage childbirth and gynecological problems that affect fertility. Women favor female healers because of the bonds of similar experience and their expertise on children's diseases, including whooping cough, measles, neo-natal tetanus, tuberculosis, and polio. Women do not treat mental illnesses and other conditions that necessitate using powerful supernaturally charged medicines for fear that exposure to such forces causes infertility or birthing of deformed children by the practitioner. Because of the importance placed on women treating women in indigenous context, there is a modern focus on training Traditional Birth Attendants (TBAs) who combine indigenous and biomedical practices to oversee pregnancies and act as educators on women's and children's health. TBAs provide both pre- and postnatal care and take an active role in Primary Health Care programs including family planning and safe mother programs. They give advice on curing infertility, preventing unwanted pregnancies, and consult with pregnant women on diet, activity levels, and sexual relations during pregnancy. As midwives, they provide indigenous herbal therapies to speed birth, stop postpartum bleeding and stimulate breast milk, as well as perform childbirth rituals (Osunwole, 1997; Oyeneye, 1991).

In the urban areas, health-care options are evidence of the contemporary indigenous and biomedical mix. Clinics and hospitals provide access to biomedical specialists, including doctors with a wide range of specialties, nurses, interns, midwives, and other medical workers. On the streets and in the markets, every sort of pharmaceutical drug is for sale, specialists offer indigenous medicinal ingredients including plants, animal parts, and minerals; peddlers hawk patent medicines and home remedies, and injectionists provide shots for every ailment. Contemporary religious beliefs also play a part in urban healing practices. Christian faith healers of the syncretic churches, such as Aladura, cure and drive out harmful spirits with prayers and holy water. Muslim scholar-healers cure with Islamic medicines and charms and the power of the holy word.

Biomedical doctors in Yorubaland have found that cooperation with indigenous healers is feasible, costeffective, and welcomed by patients, particularly in the rural areas. Blending indigenous with scientific medical practices makes them more acceptable and sustainable in the Yoruba worldview. Adeoye Lambo, a Western-trained Yoruba psychiatrist who served as the head of the World Health Organization, was a pioneer in this effort. As director of Aro Psychiatric Hospital in southwestern Nigeria, Lambo found that Yoruba mental patients recovered more quickly when indigenous practitioners were involved in their treatment. He developed the therapeutic village approach where the mentally ill and their relatives live together in a nearby settlement where the patient receives treatment from both hospital and indigenous practitioners.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

The Yoruba take a holistic approach to health or *alafia* (lit. "peace"), a philosophy of life, health, and death tied to the indigenous religion. *Alafia* encompasses physical, social, emotional, psychological, and spiritual well-being in the total environmental setting (Ademuwagun, 1978). Physical health (*ilera)*, a prerequisite to achieving life goals, is negatively impacted by *aisan*, minor illnesses, such as fevers, headaches, diarrhoea, and vomiting that interfere with daily activities, and *arun*, which includes serious pathological conditions, communicable diseases such as smallpox and venereal diseases, infirmities, chronic tiredness, debilitating mental illnesses, and unexplained misfortunes (Ademuwagun, 1978; Warren, Egunjobi, & Wahab, 1997a).

The indigenous medical system takes into account both natural and supernatural causation of illness and misfortune (Awolalu, 1979; Odebiyi, 1989). It is a "personalistic medical system" where causation includes super-sensory forces directed toward afflicted individuals in acts of "active purposeful intervention" by human or nonhuman beings (Foster, 1976). Giving offense to potentially dangerous human beings such as witches (*aje*) or sorcerers (*osho*) and to entities such as evil spirits (*anjonu*), deities (*orisha*), and ancestors (e*gungun*) is an ever-present danger. The belief that misfortunes of all kinds result from power attacks directed by malevolent beings is firmly entrenched in Yoruba thought. Every stage of life is fraught with possibilities of supernatural intervention that negatively affect advancement. Medicines or *oogun* are designed to combat these forces.

*Oogun* takes tangible or intangible form to either cure, cause, or counter illness and misfortune. In medicines, *ashe*, a potent universal power that the creator god put into all nature, is focused and energized for good or evil purposes through the combination of ingredients, preparation procedures, and incantations or words (Abiodun, 1994). To make medicine is to transform the raw materials of nature such as leaves, roots, fruits, woods, bird and animal parts, minerals and soils, and sometimes artifacts, into power objects according to specific formulas. The potential danger in the powers incorporated into medicines necessitates taboos and precautions in the making. *Osanyin*, the deity of medicine, is

often appealed to for success. Sexual abstinence and the banning of women from the area during preparation may be necessary because of the perceived polluting effect of females (Buckley, 1985; Wolff, 2000).

While there are dialectal differences, a complex lexicon identifies medical conditions, symptoms, and treatments. Distinctions are made between diseases by sex, age, location in or on the body, natural or spiritual causation, and harshness of effect (Warren, Osunwole, & Wolff, 1997b). There is also a sense of hot and cold illnesses and the need to balance the body with foods and medicines of the opposite nature. The hot diseases (*arun gbona*), usually characterized by high fevers, include epidemic diseases such as cholera, yellow fever, and smallpox, as well as severe mental illnesses; they may be caused by deities and are considered serious and difficult to cure. Cold diseases (*arun tutu*) are less serious, associated with natural causation such as exposure to cold, and may manifest themselves as pains and aches in the body and mucous discharges (Odebiyi, 1989).

Abnormal behavior and states of personality disintegration that are identified as psychoses or neuroses in the West are recognized. *Were* labels chronic psychoses and persons manifesting symptoms of schizophrenia, where the afflicted poses no threat to the social order. It is the most common condition treated by indigenous and biomedical practitioners. *Were alaso* ("*were* who wear clothes") refers to less severe cases where the personality is intact. *Were agba* ("elderly *were*") labels conditions such as Alzheimer's disease and senile dementia. *Were d'ile* ("*were* of the lineage") refers to hereditary psychosis. Withdrawal into paranoid uncommunicative psychosis is known as *dindinrin*. Yorubas are generally tolerant of the mentally ill who are allowed to roam if they are not violent. *S*evere mental illness, characterized by violent acute psychotic episodes involving mania, catatonic excitement, or agitated delirium, is called *isinwin*. Neuroses are also recognized and labeled; they are thought of as physical diseases. Persons diagnosed with *ori ode* ("hunter's head") have sensations of burning or insects crawling in their brains, coupled with vision problems, dizziness, trembling, and insomnia. Organic and hysterical paralysis *(aluro, egba, ategun*), posturing and tics (*aiyiperi*), and epilepsy (*warapa*) are also distinguished (Prince, 1961).

Medicines are categorized by function, techniques used in preparation, and the physical form of the resultant products (e.g., Buckley, 1985; Verger, 1995; Warren et al., 1997b). Types commonly identified include *agunmu* (pounded medicines), where ingredients are pounded to a pulp, dried, and ground to powder to eat or mix in a drink; *oogun jijo or etu* (burnt medicines) made by charring ingredients in a dry pot and grinding them to powder to ingest dry or add to liquids to drink or rub into skin incisions (*gbere*); *agbo* (infusions) prepared by steeping fresh ingredients to ingest or rub on body; and *oshe* (black soap) made by pounding burnt or fresh ingredients into palm kernel oil soap used to wash. Charms (*onde*) are a popular form of medicine. The most requested charms are *awure* that bring power, wealth, and good luck in life's ventures (Verger, 1995). *Afose* are charms that cause misfortune to enemies if placed in their proximity. Medicines can also be nonmaterial. The importance placed on the efficacy of words is exhibited in incantations (*ofo*) and curses (*epe*) that call directly upon the powers of nature, spirits, deities, witches, and wizards for a desired effect. A particularly malevolent spirit (*shigidi*) is summoned by sorcerers to attack people as they sleep (Wolff, 2000). The prescription and proscription of medicinal foods (*aseje*) is another medicine category (Buckley, 1985; Odebiyi, 1989). Some food proscriptions are widely held. Sweets, in particular, are considered to cause health problems and discomfort caused by worms. In a commonsense cure, healers forbid the eating of vegetables when patients have dysentery or gastroenteritis, because eating vegetables as roughage is affective in the treatment of constipation. The magical principle of similarity is applied when okra and other slimy foods are banned during treatment of infected wounds or skin lesions of measles and smallpox. Thermally hot food and alcoholic beverages are prescribed to alter body balances to combat cold diseases. Food and behavior proscriptions are also associated with avoiding offence to deities. For example, *Soponna*, the deity of smallpox, may punish people for roasting and eating melon seeds in the dry season or whistling in the hot part of the day.

In treatment, practitioners take natural and supernatural causation into consideration. They observe patients by examining their skin, eyes, and afflicted body parts and may look at blood, urine, and stool samples. Before arriving at a diagnosis, there are questions about social relationships between patient, relatives, and neighbors to determine the likelihood of supernatural attack. Once causation is ascertained, the healer prepares an appropriate medicine. Healers have many remedies for any one condition that are tried serially until a cure is affected. When stubborn conditions do not respond to treatment, divination may be performed to determine ultimate causes and treatment is adjusted. A common finding is that the ill person or someone close to the patient has broken a taboo associated with a deity. Dealing with such transgressions can involve sacrifices and joining cults dedicated to the deity.

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Traditional Yoruba attitudes favor "excessive fertility" (Olusanya, 1969) in a society that stresses ancestry and descent. The economic importance of children's labor in horticultural farming practices, a desire for lineage continuity, and economic and emotional security for parents in old age, coupled with high child mortality rates, have favored a high birth rate. A Yoruba proverb asserts that a man's wealth is counted in terms of money, wives, and children. This strong desire for children shapes Yoruba sexuality and promotes men's desire to control women's fertility. While Yoruba women enjoy a surprising amount of economic independence, their lives still center upon childbearing. In a typical village surveyed in the mid-1990s, Total Fertility Rates averaged over 8 births per woman and the overall fertility rate of 6.5 is among the world's highest (Lawoyin & Onadeko, 1997; Riedmann, 1993). Education has modified but not eliminated the desire for large families. In a study of fertility attitudes of Nigerian university students in the United States, ideal family size was five to six children (Adebayo & Adamchak, 1991). Today, among university-trained Yoruba, four children per monogamous family is common. It is generally held that men are the decision-makers about how many children a wife should bear. However, when women wield significant economic power, men may have to negotiate their own preferences regarding family size. With literacy and the increased sense of self worth associated with education, coupled with lower infant mortality rates, women are more outspoken about reproductive goals.

By the late 1980s Nigeria's official policy was to encourage four children per woman, and biomedical contraceptives became increasingly available. Pills, condoms, spermicides, injections, diaphragms, and IUDs are widely available in urban and rural areas. However, attempts to introduce birth control technology such as IUDS have met with resistance from men (Renne, 1993).

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 1035**

Both illiterate and educated men consider that women using contraceptives without the consent of their husbands contradicts male authority and is morally wrong; their wives might be unfaithful if given access to such technology. In 1992, 43% of married Yoruba women were using some form of modern birth control (1993). Because women who use contraceptives risk detection from a disapproving husband, they often depend on patent medicine abortifacients or abortion at clinics or alternatively leave their husbands if they do not want more children. A man who wants more children may take another wife or threaten to do so; if he wants fewer children, he can abstain from sexual relations, withhold financial support, or refuse paternity for an unwanted child (Olusanya, 1969; Renne, 1993).

Abstinence is the major form of birth control, and men practice coitus interruptus or withdrawal (*adaye*). Postpartum abstinence for 2–4 years until a child is weaned is an indigenous form of birth control. During this period, the prohibition against sexual intercourse is reinforced by the prevailing belief that such activity spoils the breast milk and causes life-threatening infant diarrhea (Olusanya, 1969). The practice regulates the number of children a woman bears in a lifetime, but does not limit a man's desire for a large family of children in a polygynous society. The period of abstinence has declined as educated working women seek to complete their families by an earlier age (Osunwole, 1997). Additional indigenous birth control methods used by women include wearing magic iron rings (*oruka irin*) and amulets (*onde, igbada*) or drinking extremely salty water immediately after intercourse. Women employ abortifacients. For example, in the first month of pregnancy, women may drink a mixture of potash and lime juice to terminate a pregnancy or insert herbal suppositories into the vagina (Olusanya,1969).

Yoruba attitudes toward infertile individuals are harsh, with blame usually placed on women. The social disapproval directed toward barren women is indicated in the term of reference *agon*, from the verb *gon* meaning "to despise" or "hold in contempt" (Abraham, 1958). Initially, a woman who does not conceive after marriage is treated with indigenous medicines and given advice on sexual relations by midwives (Oyeneye, 1991). If barrenness persists, it is thought to be either preordained, a condition of destiny (*iponri*), or due to supernatural intervention. Deities and ancestors may have been neglected or offended so that sacrifices must be made. If a woman remains barren despite treatment, she may be pointed out as a witch so imbued with evil that her own body is corrupted (Wolff, 1979).

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

#### **Pregnancy and Birth**

The Yoruba believe that pregnancy and birth are natural phenomena that create no health problems unless taboos are broken or witchcraft, sorcery, or other forms of spiritual attack occur. To avoid such incidents pregnant women observe behavioral and dietary prescriptions and prohibitions to ensure the safety of mother and foetus (Maclean, 1971; Odebiyi & Togonu-Bickersteth, 1987). The cooperation of deities, particularly when they have been appealed to for children, is sought through appeasement rituals, sacrifices, and the consumption or avoidance of special foods (Odebiyi, 1989; Osunwole, 1997). Beliefs about the properties of foods also determine diet. Expectant mothers consume starchy foods while avoiding nutritional foods such as milk which is thought to create large babies that are difficult to birth (Odebiyi, 1989). Postpartum depression is recognized, and if severe symptoms emerge it is identified as *abisinwin*, a supernaturally caused mental illness to be treated by indigenous healers (Prince, 1961).

When a child is born, precautions are taken to ensure an easy delivery and the future welfare of the child. Men are not normally present. The husband's presence is thought to delay the delivery. Both male and female practitioners can act as indigenous birth attendants, but male specialists are called only when complications develop, particularly those requiring spiritual interventions. Traditionally umbilical cords are ritually buried in the family compound to link the child to the father's lineage and to protect the mother from future barrenness. To prevent infertility in the child's adulthood, no word is spoken until it cries. The newborn is held by the feet and shaken three times to ensure that it will be brave and not have spasms; its head is touched to the ground so that future accidental falls will not result in injuries (Bascom, 1969; Osunwole, 1997).

Children born with striking physical traits or birth circumstances, such as twins and triplets, those born with the umbilical cord wrapped round the neck, an unruptured caul, extra fingers or toes, or abundant curly hair, are given special names and treatment. Multiple births are common. The Yoruba have the highest rate of fraternal twinning (4.4% of all births) in the world (Leroy, Olaleye-Oruene, Koeppen-Schomerus, & Bryan, 2002). Twins are both desired and feared as they have special powers. In the past twin infanticide was practiced, but it was replaced by elaborate ritual activities that harness the powers, particularly when a twin dies (Renne & Bastian, 2001).

It is still common for children to be born in lineage compounds. In urban areas only about 40% of women use modern health institutions at delivery (Oyeneye, 1991). A reason many women prefer home delivery is that modern health workers discard umbilical cords. Harmful effects of home birthing are unsanitary conditions and remedies administered during the birthing. Maternal mortality is primarily due to malnutrition, contemporary shortness of pregnancy intervals, and absence of adequate obstetric services.

#### **Infancy**

Male and female circumcision is performed a few days after birth, although the Egba and Ijebu sub-groups do not practice female excision (Caldwell, Orubuloye, & Caldwell, 1997). Men report that circumcision enhances sexual performance and reproductive potential, as well as reduces the female libido and promiscuity. Women support the practice of female circumcision by claiming that it makes child delivery easier (Osunwole, 1997). There is also a belief that the clitoris tip is charged with dangerous power that can kill the birthing child if it touches its head (Caldwell et al., 1997). It is only recently with global campaigns condemning female circumcision that Yoruba women identified the practice as an act of male domination to reduce female sexuality. In a 1997 survey, male circumcision remained universal while female circumcision, still prevalent in the rural areas (98%), had slightly declined in the urban areas (94%). Education, religion, and socioeconomic status were significant factors in the decline. Only 87% of girls born to mothers with secondary school education were circumcised. Christians were less likely than Muslims to circumcise females, and there was a decrease in families where fathers were in professional, managerial, or clerical occupations. The most significant change has been the medicalization of circumcision beginning in the 1970s. With involvement by biomedical professionals, circumcisionrelated deaths are rarely reported, and there has been a

major shift from excision to clitoridectomy in female circumcisions (Caldwell et al., 1997).

Infants are carried on the mother's back and breastfed on demand. From birth breastmilk is supplemented with herbal infusions (*agbo*) thought to guard against a variety of ailments and ward off evil influences. Solid food in the form of cornstarch pap is introduced as early as 2 months. While seen as health-enhancing, these practices increase the likelihood of death-threatening diarrhea and other illnesses. Malnutrition is also a strong possibility if breast-feeding is not continued, because pap is a poor source of protein and kwashiorkor may develop (Davies-Adetugbo, 1997). In addition, the tonic purgatives (*agbo*) given to infant early each morning in the first 6 months and to older children whenever they fall sick may be detrimental to health as ingredients, including cow urine, are variable and unregulated (Maclean, 1971).

Some infants are singled out for special treatment. Tied to high infant mortality rates is the belief in *abiku* ("born-to-die") children, troublesome spirits that die before adulthood and return again and again to the same mother. Such children are treated with special medicines and given names such as Malomo ("Do not go again") (Maclean, 1971).

## **Childhood**

There are many safeguards to ensure the health of children and protect them from evil influences and accidents. Home remedies are used to treat minor illnesses and indigenous and biomedical healers are consulted for more serious ailments. From birth, children wear charms and have imposed food proscriptions associated with attracting the favor of deities. However, children born with physical and mental defects are stigmatized. Congenital malformations in children are perceived as supernatural punishment for the parents and can be grounds for a husband to desert his wife (Odebiyi & Togonu-Bickersteth, 1987). There is little tolerance for individuals with physical abnormalities, despite the indigenous belief that they are favored children of Obatala (Orisha-nla), the "sculptor-divinity" who shapes children in the womb. Albinos (*afin*), dwarfs (*irara*), hunchbacks (*abuke*), cripples (*aro*), and the dumb (*odi*), for example, are sacred to Obatala (Awolalu, 1979). In the real world, handicapped children are ridiculed and avoided and often exhibit withdrawal behavior. For example, in studies of attitudes toward deaf children, no efforts were made at home

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 1037**

to communicate with them, they were not taken out socially, and they were disciplined more harshly than normal siblings. Attempts at curing deafness and other handicaps focuses on placating witches or offended deities (Odebiyi & Togonu-Bickersteth, 1987).

#### **Adolescence**

While there are no elaborate prolonged puberty rituals, the importance of women's childbearing role is marked by special ceremonies with sacrifices to the deities to thank them when a girl reaches menarche (Togonu-Bichersteth, 1988).

## **Adulthood**

The Yoruba have no ritual acknowledgment of adulthood. Adulthood is recognized by taking on the expected male and female roles defined by the division of labor. Men take up economic activities, such as farming and craft production, and women become childbearers and rearers. It is marriage and parenthood that fully identify individuals as adults. Men marry between ages 25 and 30 and women between 17 and 25. An integral part of marriage negotiations between families is investigations to reveal any family history of undesirable characteristics such as the presence of leprosy, insanity, epilepsy, barrenness, birth anomalies, or social digressions. It is expected that the bride be in good health and be able to bear strong healthy children. While expectations of virginity have altered in contemporary context, the unquestioned health of wife and future children is imperative (Eades, 1980; Olusanya, 1969).

### **The Aged**

Yoruba old age occurs when the person can no longer effectively carry out primary gender roles associated with the division of labor. For men, the critical sign is decreased stamina, so that active farming and labor become difficult and economic productivity dwindles. The critical indicator for women is menopause when childbearing ceases. Three major factors contribute to a sense of well-being and happiness in old age. These are having good health, responsible children nearby, and sufficient money. Security for the elderly comes from within the family where adult children, particularly sons, provide for aged parent's economic and emotional needs. Without such support, old age is a period of sadness and dependancy upon distant relatives or strangers (Togunu-Bichersteth, 1988). Urbanization, industrialization, migration, and rural change have altered the context of aging. With national and local inflation and recurring economic crises, adult children have more difficulty in meeting their obligations, and the number of elderly destitutes has grown, specifically in urban areas (Togunu-Bichersteth, 1988). In a study of 706 urban women aged 55–102, it was found that 70% continued to work to meet their sustenance needs and suffered a higher rate of depression than rural elderly women (Udegbe, 1995).

#### **Dying and Death**

At death, funeral rites and burial are guided by the circumstances of death. Age at death, reputation, status, and the predominant religion of the family all play a part (Adelowo, 1988). In the case of elders, the funeral and burial is a time for descendants and relatives to come together and celebrate the good life, with the funeral used by the family as an opportunity to display affluence and filial status. It is common for burial to be postponed until funds can be collected for the feasting.

Rites are carried out to move the spirit away from the living world but enable it to return as ancestor, or through reincarnation, in the future. The first child of the right gender born after a death is named either Babatunde ("father returns") or Iyabo ("mother returns"). The corpse is buried under the floor of the house or outside the door in the lineage compound. The often unmarked grave site becomes a focal point where the ancestral spirit can be summoned by pouring libations and calling out praise names (*oriki*) of the deceased to encourage the spirit to return to the household of the living when help is needed. It was only with the adoption of Christianity and Islam that designated burial grounds were established.

The bodies of those whose deaths are considered unnatural are treated differently (Adelowo, 1988). There is no mourning allowable at the death of abiku ("born-todie") children. The corpses of infants and abiku children who die young or in an untimely fashion, lepers, hunchbacks, albinos, pregnant women, persons killed by lightning, those who hang themselves and others who die unnatural deaths are buried in the bush outside town or in special sacred groves. Suspected witches and wizards may be denied burial, and their bodies are thrown into bush areas inhabited by wicked spirits.

## **CHANGING HEALTH PATTERNS**

The Yoruba are one of the most studied ethnic groups of sub-Saharan Africa. International and national research projects have provided continuing information on health status, the prevalence of diseases, fertility, and the interface of biomedicine with indigenous cultural belief. A current focus of research is AIDS. The presence of AIDS in Nigeria was officially announced in 1987. In 1990, it was estimated to affect less than 1% of the population (Metz, 1992). In early 2002, it was estimated by the Federal Ministry of Health of Nigeria that the HIV population in Nigeria was over three million (National HIV/Syphilis Seroprevalence Survey).

# **REFERENCES**

- Abiodun, R. (1994). Understanding Yoruba art and aesthetics: The concept of *ase*. *African Arts, XXVII*(3), 68–78.
- Abraham, R. C. (1958). *Dictionary of Modern Yoruba*. London: University of London Press.
- Adebayo, A., & Adamchak, D. J. (1991). Ethnic affiliation and fertility attitudes of Nigerian university students. *College Student Journal, 1*, 470–477.
- Adediran, 'B. (1998). Yorubaland up to the emergence of the states. In A. D. Ogunremi & 'B. Adediran (Eds.), *Culture and society in Yorubaland* (pp. 1–14). Ibadan: Rex Charles Publication in association with Connel Publications.
- Adelowo, E. D. (1988). A comparative look at the phenomena of death (*iku*), burial and funerary rites (*isinku*) in Yorubaland. *Odu, 33*, 163–188.
- Ademuwagun, Z. A. (1978). Alafia—the Yoruba concept of health: Implications for health education. *International Journal of Health Education, XXI*(2), 89–97.
- Akinkugbe, O. O. (1995). Lifestyle and cardiovascular diseases: Emerging problems of health development in the Third World. In B. F. Iyun, Y. Verhasselt, & J. A. Hellen (Eds.), *The health of nations: Medicine, disease and development in the Third World* (pp. 177–183). Aldershot: Avebury.
- Awolalu, J. O. (1979). *Yoruba beliefs and sacrificial rites*. London: Longman.
- Bascom, W. (1969). *The Yoruba of southwestern Nigeria*. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
- Buckley, A. D. (1985). *Yoruba medicines*. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Caldwell, J. C., Orubuloye, I. O., & Caldwell, P. (1997). Male and female circumcision in Africa from a regional to a specific Nigerian examination. *Social Science and Medicine, 44*, 1181–1193.
- Davies-Adetugbo, A. A. (1997). Sociocultural factors and the promotion of exclusive breast-feeding in rural Yoruba communities of Osun, State, Nigeria. *Social Science and Medicine, 45*, 113–125.
- Eades, J. S. (1980). *The Yoruba today*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

- Falola, T. (1999). *The history of Nigeria*. Westport, CN, London: Greenwood Press.
- Folasade, I. B. ( 2000). Environmental factors, situation of women and child mortality in southwestern Nigeria. *Social Science and Medicine, 51*, 1473–1189.
- Foreign Area Studies (FAS) of The American University. (1972). *Area handbook for Nigeria*. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- Foster, G. M. (1976). Disease etiologies in non-western medical systems. *American Anthropologist, 78*, 773–782.
- Iyun, B. F. (1994). Health problems in Ibadan region. In M. O. Filani, F. O. Akintola, & C. O. Ikporukpo (Eds.), *Ibadan region* (pp. 256–268). Ibadan: Rex Charles.
- Iyun, B. F. (1995). Cardiac morbidity in Nigerian society: Trends and inter-relationships. In B. F. Iyun, Y. Verhasselt, & J. A. Hellen (Eds.), *The health of nations: Medicine, disease and development in the Third World* (pp. 139–151). Aldershot: Avebury.
- Lawoyin, T. O., & Onadeko, M. O. (1997). Fertility and childbearing practices in a rural African community. *West African Journal of Medicine, 16*, 204–207.
- Leroy, F., Olaleye-Oruene, T., Koeppen-Schomerus, G., & Bryan, E. (2002). Yoruba customs and beliefs pertaining to twins. *Twin Research: The Official Journal of the International Society for Twin Studies, 5*, 132–136.
- Maclean, U. (1971). *Magical medicine: A Nigerian case-study*. London: Allan Lane, The Penguin Press.
- Metz, H. C. (Ed.). (1992). *Nigeria: A country study*. (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress.
- Odebiyi, A. I. (1989). Food taboos in maternal and child health: The views of traditional healers in Ile-Ife, Nigeria. *Social Science and Medicine, 28*, 985–996.
- Odebiyi, A. I., & Togonu-Bickersteth, F. (1987). Concepts and management of deafness in the Yoruba medical system: A case study of traditional healers in Ile-Ife, Nigeria. *Social Science and Medicine, 24*, 645–649.
- Olusanya, P. O. (1969). Nigeria: Cultural barriers to family planning among the Yorubas. *Studies in Family Planning, 37*, 3–17.
- Osunwole, S. A. (1997). The role of women in traditional Yoruba medicine. In D. M. Warren, L. Egunjobi, & B. Wahab (Eds.), *Studies of the Yoruba therapeutic system in Nigeria* (pp. 118–128). Ames: Iowa State University, Center for Indigenous Knowledge for Agriculture and Rural Development. Studies in Technology and Social Change, No. 28.
- Oyeneye, O. Y. (1991). Family health in Nigeria. *International Journal of Sociology of the Family, 21*, 189–99.
- Prince, R. (1961). Indigenous Yoruba psychiatry. In A. Kiev (Ed.), *Magic, faith, and healing: Studies in primitive psychiatry today* (pp. 84–120). New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
- Renne, E. P. (1993). Gender ideology and fertility strategies in an Ekiti Yoruba village. *Studies in Family Planning, 24*, 343–353.
- Renne, E. P. (1997). Local and institutional interpretations of IUDs in southwestern Nigeria. *Social Science and Medicine, 44*, 1141–1148.
- Renne, E., & Bastian, M. L. (2001). Reviewing twinship in Africa. *Ethnology, 40*, 1–11.
- Riedmann, A. (1993). *Science that colonizes: A critique of fertility studies in Africa*. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.