# **Hausa**

#### **Murray Last**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

"Hausa" is the most common term for these people. Earlier terms include "Habasha" (from which "Hausa" probably derives) and "Afnu" (used by Kanuri-speakers of Borno), but political scientists are apt to use "Hausa-Fulani" to indicate the fact that the old ruling elite is often labeled "Fulani" for historical reasons (they no longer speak the language of the Fulani, fulfulde) (Paden, 1975).

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Hausa-speaking people number at least some forty million and live mainly in the most northerly states of Nigeria and in the Republic of Niger. Hausa-speakers are also found in the Republic of the Sudan as well as in Eritrea, Chad, Cameroon, and Ghana. And there is a diaspora to North Africa and the Middle East (Tunis, Tripoli, Cairo, the Saudi cities), to Europe (especially France, Britain, with immigrants to Spain and Germany coming from the Hausa communities in Ghana), and to the USA. In the past Hausa traders traveled widely, and could be found living in India and southern Russia for example; there were also Hausa-speaking communities in 18th and 19th century Brazil due to the slave trade. Hausa was a written language using Arabic script (*a'jami*) for poetry and personal correspondence; prose works were later, dating from the late 19th century, and in the 20th century Hausa has been printed using a slightly modified roman script for textbooks (e.g., on subjects like health), religious works, and novels. The Hausa language is one of the "Chadic" languages, within the Afro-Asiatic language group (Newman, 2000). It became the language of cities and long-distance trade, and has spread as a lingua franca. It was used as the language of government by the British colonial administration in northern Nigeria. There is also an elaborate traditional sign-language used by the Hausa deaf and their neighbors (Schmaling, 2000).

### **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

In the 19th century, Hausaland constituted the political and economic core of the Sokoto Caliphate, then the largest autonomous state in pre-colonial Africa (Last, 1967). The caliphate, governed from Sokoto and from Gwandu, consisted of a large number of emirates, in Hausaland the most important of which were Kano, Katsina, and Zaria. Under colonial rule (1903–60), the emirates formed the core of separate Provinces, and these became states during the Nigerian civil war (1967–69). The original states have since been sub-divided to create more states; each state is in turn divided into Local Government Areas.

The economic base of Hausaland was its farming (Hill, 1972; Mortimore, 1989). Cotton growing and weaving was a major activity, and still is today. Under colonial rule, groundnuts became an important export crop. Otherwise, trading and transporting was the staple of the urban economy, along with a variety of craft production using metals, wood, leather as well as cotton; the production and trading of books in classical Arabic was also significant, requiring a large learned class (cf. Koki, 1977). Since the 1980s, oil has supplied over 95% of Nigeria's national income. The rural economy is focused on food production, while the urban economy is heavily dependent on revenue funneled to the states and to the local governments from the Federal Government and its oil account.

Hausa society is Muslim (Sunni, using the Maliki school of Islamic law). In the countryside, there exist small non-Muslim communities (*Maguzawa*; *Arna* or *Anna*), and there are converts to Christianity, many of whom speak Hausa as the language of the church (Crampton, 1979; Last, 1993b; Nicolas, 1975). Inheritance is patrilineal, and polygyny is permitted; though the limit is four wives (and, in the past, any number of concubines), two wives are not uncommon for a man in his 30s or 40s. Divorce is common and easy; a woman might get through four husbands in a lifetime, even taking her very young children with her. Slavery was made illegal by the British administration in the 20th century.

#### **The Context of Health 719**

The relatively brief period of British administration (1903–60) transformed Hausaland, not only by making it part of the new confederation, Nigeria, and eliminating local warfare, but also by slowly introducing new schools, a new medical system (including public health), new methods of transport (railways, roads, later airlines), and an economy of export crops (groundnuts, cotton); a market in hired labor replaced the previous use of slave labor, while dry-season migrant labor traveled far south, beyond Hausaland, for work. Existing Quranic schools and the tradition of Islamic learning were maintained, as were the courts administering the sharia law (with modifications). Hausa medical and surgical practices continued, as did the methods for controlling and curing mental illness; healers were neither illegal (as elsewhere under colonial regimes) nor persecuted. Christian missionaries were not allowed until the 1930s, and then restricted to non-Muslim areas; apart from leprosaria (and an eye hospital in Kano since the 1940s) their medical work was minimal (Schram, 1971).

The sixth largest oil-producer in the world, and with a population of some 120 million people, Nigeria has several major medical schools (among its 36 universities). There are some 3000 Nigeria-trained doctors working abroad, so that there is a shortage of high-caliber medical staff in Nigeria itself. Currently the shortcomings of most biomedical facilities have meant that Hausa people are still using traditional medicines, self-medicate, or opt to take no medicines at all.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Oil-derived wealth has transformed young people's awareness of health and medicine. Traders in village markets opened booths selling a variety of biomedicines, with some having needles to offer injections of antibiotics as well as capsules. Medicines have become a profitable business; little expertise is needed, as diagnoses and prescriptions can be had from hospital staff even when the hospital pharmacy has no drugs on its shelves. Cut-price but fake drugs are commonplace and undermine confidence. By contrast, leprosy clinics handing out a weekly supply of dapsone (thought useful for a range of disorders) have all but disappeared. And cigarette smoking has plummeted as women, once the greatest purchasers of cigarettes, have turned against it, persuaded by Muslim preachers in the marketplaces.

The elimination of smallpox and the control of sleeping sickness have made a significant difference in rural areas. A more common yet major hazard for countrydwellers used to be guinea-worm (often acquired when washing after a day's work). New hazards include the widespread use of amphetamines (and now a cheaper local tonic known as *gadagi*), to make one work faster or for longer hours, and some take overdoses and have to be taken to a mental hospital. Another new hazard is road accidents; emergency services are poor, with neither phones nor ambulances and stocks of blood rarely ready for transfusion. Most recently (in the late 1990s) HIV has been diagnosed in country villages, with occasional deaths noted as being from AIDS. In the big cities of Hausaland it has been more commonly reported, but the stigma (and the lack of diagnostic facilities) has kept figures down. Less than 5% are infected (according to the government), with much higher levels among the sex workers surveyed; the military are also concerned about higher-than-average infection rates in army barracks. Epidemics of measles and cerebro-spinal meningitis cause higher numbers of deaths, as does cholera. Malaria, too, is a seasonal cause of death.

In rural areas meat is rarely eaten (dogs are vegetarian too), except at the annual festivals. Milk products have become rare as reduced grazing areas have reduced cattle herds; soured milk and butter were once regularly available (raw milk, being indigestible by adults, was not drunk). Only in far northern areas of Hausaland might camel's milk be available for making cheese. Hens' eggs are not eaten (except in cities), while those of guinea fowl are sent for sale to southern Nigeria as they have stronger shells and last three weeks unrefrigerated. No game remains; even birds are rare as children shoot them with catapults to eat roasted. Some insects (*gara*) are also roasted seasonally by rural children. In recent years bread has been widely marketed, with sugar but not salt added; biscuits, boiled sweets and mints are widely available, as is Coca-Cola and similar drinks in village market shops. Sugar consumption has therefore increased, even though the once-common supplies of semi-refined brown sugar blocks (*mazarkwaila*) have all but disappeared. Honey (*zuma*) from wild bees is comparatively rare now too. In general, foods that are sweet (and "sweet" includes salt) are thought to be bad for you, producing a mucus-like

substance (*majina*) in the body; many snack foods are indeed sweet but are taken in small quantities. Late-onset diabetes is quite commonly diagnosed among the well-todo (who have access to the routine tests of clinical medicine), and may be a response to an unusually high consumption of imported sugars taken with tea and breakfast cereals, foods that are not commonly found in the village diet.

Hausaland thus offers two distinct dietary regimes: the rural areas which would normally be self-sufficient in foodstuffs and export surplus grains to the big towns; and urban economies which import their food supplies not only from surrounding areas but also from abroad. Imported rice and maize as well as processed "fast" foods such as semolina and pasta, along with a variety of readymade sauces and spices, have altered the "traditional" diets of many wage earners whose staples in the past were sorghum and millet, with gravies including products of the baobab or locust bean tree, or with local groundnutor palm-oil. Cowpeas added variety, as did spinach leaves mixed with processed groundnut; so too did cassava, grown on special plots and sold, cooked as snacks; in the cities especially, fried fish of various kinds are available on the street, cheaper now that dams have been built for irrigation and rivers are no longer the main site for fishing. Goats, sheep, hens, and ducks are reared within houses, especially by women, but their role is not as food for the household but as items for sale: they serve as a woman's "savings bank," especially in cities.

Water from wells (and not from open pits) is commonly drunk in villages. Tap water is relatively scarce even in cities, where water-carriers distribute water from boreholes. Wells within houses in old cities such as Kano are now often contaminated, and their water at best can be used for washing; its taste precludes use in cooking (Last, 1999). Rarely is water boiled before use, nor is it filtered. Hence soft drinks like Coke and Pepsi are "pure," as is bottled beer, which, being alcoholic, is not allowed for Muslims. Traditionally, non-Muslim Hausa brewed beer, which was drunk once or twice a week as a social drink, especially by elders; it was cloudy, nutritious, and (when very fresh) not very alcoholic. It was the only boiled liquid available. Today, it is more rarely found, and those who drink it drink to get drunk (if there's enough for sale); alternative sources of alcohol are distilled spirits, imported from southern Nigeria. But alcoholism is unusual in Hausaland, or is invisible; hard drinking is done in private.

Wells have other uses, too. Deep wells are the most common site for suicide and attempted suicide (the fire brigade is called upon to rescue people from wells). They are also places where the bodies of victims of violence can be hidden. Contamination of wells and water supply is a standard source of panic, and scare stories against a pariah group may accuse them of this crime. Water, then, is dangerous; only children swim for pleasure—no one is taught to swim. Bilharzia is common where children have been tested for it. Defecation in rural areas is traditionally done on waste ground or on fields close by the farmstead. Only in towns are there pit latrines (*salga*) which are emptied periodically by hand by specialists hired by the residents. The night soil is taken to the edge of town where it dries out and solidifies and is eventually sold to farmers for use as manure. While the latrine is partly full, ash from the cooking place is sprinkled on the surface to reduce the smell. The hole, being infested with cockroaches, is often kept covered with a plate. A rising water table (as in Kano city today) causes latrines to fill more rapidly with water than was usual in the past. Where possible, the preferred direction to face when defecating is south (one prays, in contrast, facing east). Most people defecate very early in morning or at night; and if they are defecating outside they often choose a high place or a slope too steep for housing.

Houses are regularly swept clean by the women of the house, though not in the middle of the day when spirits might be playing (you normally say "excuse me" as you sweep, in case a spirit is about to be disturbed). Inside a house the ground is kept very tidy; but outside the house, rubbish tends to accumulate as the public authorities have generally ceased to clean the streets even in relatively wealthy parts of town. There is a good side to this: as spirits like rubbish to play in, heaps in the street keep them occupied there rather than coming over the wall and inside houses. Spirits are coming into towns, cities, and even villages in ever larger numbers from the "bush" because their "homes" are disturbed by people and especially by motor traffic; hence modernity brings mental illness.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

### **Healers**

There is a range of terms for healers. The most traditional are *maye* ("witch," implying he deals with spirits) and

#### **Medical Practitioners 721**

*boka* who is more aligned with herbal medicine. *Maita*, the ability to be a witch, is inherited; there are lineages of *mayu*. Itinerant sellers of medicine may call themselves (or be labeled by villagers) *mayu*, and advertise their wares by a particular roar that can be heard from the street. Their witchcraft substance, ideally *kankara* (hailstone or ice), is in my experience a glass marble flecked with red paint ("blood"); this is elaborately coughed up from the stomach and an object of real panic to villagers. A *maye* in serious medical practice does not travel, but runs an asylum for the mentally ill, often deep in the countryside. Patients are brought to him from afar (sometimes from outside Hausaland), and they may stay with him for a year before they are discharged. He gives patients herbal medicines to drink, and shackles them if they are prone to running away. He initiates them eventually into the *bori* cult, but the primary treatment is herbs, incense, and time. A *boka* may do much the same work (Last, 1976, 1981; Wall, 1988).

Other healers include the *masu magani* (skilled in medicines, mainly herbal) and *masu bori* (skilled in the *bori* spirit cult). The *wanzami* is the barber who may also do some surgical procedures such as circumcision on boys (occasionally on baby girls too, when he merely nicks the hypertrophied hymeneal tags) and a uvulectomy; he is likely too to incise the identity marks on babies and the decorative patterns on girls' necks or upper chest at puberty. He usually tours his district, often on horseback, and is quite distinctive with his hat and equipment. The *madori* sets bones that have been broken (now more common with football being such a popular sport), using bandages, herbs, and prayer (plus a chicken bone), with repeated visits to his patient; no anaesthetic is used, and manipulation is minimal. Finally there is the *ungozoma*, who is any woman serving as a midwife at childbirth in a home delivery. With obstructed labor or especially difficult deliveries, women try to get to a hospital; the traditional midwives are not really experienced in turning a fetus and do not use instruments such as forceps. Cases of retained placenta are treated at home, using a log of wood pressed on the abdomen, but again husbands try and take their wives to the nearest hospital. Pregnant women fearing an obstructed labor may take a razorblade and do a kind of episiotomy on the anterior wall of the vagina. Since the area is particularly vascular, considerable blood loss is possible; worse still, the urethra may be cut, resulting in incontinence that is very difficult to repair in hospital. What women are worried about here is *gishiri*, an infection that "causes" the anterior wall to swell and "block" the birth canal. It is transmitted from woman to woman, via cooking stools (Last, 1979). The cutting of the umbilical cord and using herbs to seal the cut sometimes results in tetanus in the newborn, whose death is attributed to spirits or to witchcraft within the house. Accusations of witchcraft can split the household, leading to divorces or to physical violence against the "witch" (*mai dodo*).

Other specialists include men expert at pulling teeth without an anesthetic; and there are those who specialize in treating livestock. Oxen are castrated, by smashing the testicles with a stone; wounds from fights involving horns have to be sewn up; cattle need de-worming. But small livestock are treated by their owners, using the common wisdom of the house which may include opening up capsules containing antibiotics and applying the powder to wounds. Snakes are relatively rare, and snakebites even rarer. Lancing (*sakiya*) a boil or an infected site is done with a red-hot arrowhead (*kibiya*). It is a procedure done at home, as is the procedure for removing "dead blood" from the back of a man by applying suction through a cow's horn. Cesarean sections were apparently not done traditionally.

The main modes of healing involve (1) spirits and/or ghosts of the dead; and (2) remedies made from plant materials, parts of dead animals and minerals ground down into powders (Etkin, 1979, 1981, 1996; Etkin & Ross, 1991; Ross, Etkin, & Muazzamu, 1991, 1996). Some healers have their own brews, unguents, or powders, whose composition is a secret; others combine these with verses of the Quran, with numerological "squares" or with special prayers and words written on scraps of paper folded into a "charm" (*laya*). "Islamic medicines," sold in bottles, are now gaining popularity in towns. Farmers often bring plants in very early on market day in order to sell them to the medicine seller (*mai magani*). Although herbs are collected from forested areas, in practice most useful plants grow on farmland or around settlements. In demand are the various incense woods that are burnt at night in people's rooms; Muslim spirits especially are associated with particular scents.

The cult of spirits known as *bori* has been the subject of much study (Besmer, 1983; Last, 1991a; Lewis, 1991; Nicolas, 1972). *Bori* divides into two kinds, one public and the other private. The first, accessible to visiting Europeans and others, is run by public healers competing in the bigger towns for the prestige of being the leading traditional practitioner. Many of these healers are from out of town; in Kano they are often men and have come from the Niger Republic. Equally public used to be the *bori* performances put on occasionally by the women in brothels (*gidan karuwai*; *gidan mata*), where they danced late into the night to the specific tunes of their spirits. The second kind of *bori* is usually private (if not secret), performed within a purdah'd house with women guests invited; it is usually run by women and is focused on a specific problem, such as illness or a misfortune in the family. In a crisis, a mother may go into possession-trance in the middle of the night to identify what is killing her daughter; desperate to find a remedy, she'll have awakened a co-wife or a neighboring woman to help in posing the questions and hearing the answers.

A dead person's soul (*kurwa*) may possess a kinswoman or descendant, and speak through her; curing requires acceding to the soul's demands and then exorcising the patient who might then go on to be initiated (*girka*) into the spirit possession cult (*bori*). A spirit (*iska*) can trouble a person (usually a woman), either through illness or dreams or loss of children, and "call" her, so that her kin then finance her initiation into the spirit cult (cf. Erlman & Magagi, 1989). At its end, one or more spirits have been identified as linked to the initiate, and they are escorted to her room in her husband's house, where they will act as guardians or helpers. A particular kind of hen, goat, or sheep will then be kept by the initiate, as symbol of the spirit's readiness to help. That spirit may on occasions possess her and, speaking through her, express the initiate's complaints and her wants. These wants may include perfume, new clothes, or some luxury, or more prosaically the rightful share of some property or a special ritual (mobilizing her kin to carry out a sacrifice of an animal on her behalf). If a marriage is in difficulty, spirit possession may be a means of negotiating a better relationship with the husband or a co-wife.

The work of healers is to mediate between spirits and patients. The healer supervises initiations (which can be done for more than one initiate at a time, thus reducing the costs of hiring a musician, his assistant, and the healer), and helps to identify the particular spirit that is to act as long-term guardian of the patient. But the healer, who has a spirit of her own, can herself become possessed by that spirit and offer answers to questions posed by the women coming to seek her advice. This consultation is normally done in the healer's room in her house, and is more or less private. Questions are usually about the underlying causes of illnesses, or how to prevent a child's ill health or some other misfortune, but may also be about a pending move to another house, or re-building a house, or even about the consequences of converting to Islam. As spirits do not always speak "normal" Hausa but disguise it by switching sounds, their pronouncements are not always clear, and can lead to discussion afterward and reinterpretation.

While women are common as *masu bori*, the major asylums where the mentally ill live (in the healer's compound) are run by men, with the help of wives. Such asylums are usually found in the midst of farmland, not far from villages or even towns where inmates on the mend can find odd jobs or extra food. Inmates may come from non-Hausa backgrounds and include both men and women, adolescents and adults. They may stay up to a year in an asylum, being treated with medicines to drink (which may include pills acquired by the healer from a government mental hospital).

### **Hospitals**

Government hospitals, whether run by university medical schools or by state ministries of health, exist in the major cities, but in recent years their services have been marred by lack of drugs and by basic equipment being out of operation. Electricity has also been intermittent. Shortages of running water have made hygiene difficult for in-patients, whose relations are expected to bring in food and drinking water and do the washing of bed linen and patients'clothes. Private clinics have provided good services for the rich. Mentally ill patients are treated in special units (Last, 1991c). In rural areas medical services vary enormously, from a well-staffed and managed hospital to dispensaries or "cottage hospitals" where the few staff can offer little or nothing beyond advice; private clinics now compete for patients too. Drugs may be out-of-date, dumped by firstworld suppliers; or they may even be "fake," sold by unscrupulous local "manufacturers" in plausible packaging. Where blood transfusions are possible, blood may be supplied by a relative; if not, a person waiting by the hospital may be hired to supply blood. This is screened, and if all right, added to the blood bank; if not, it is disposed of.

Ambulance services are almost non-existent, in towns or in rural areas, so in an emergency adult patients are carried to the roadside and put in a bus. But cases of obstructed labor, for example, pose a real problem, as they cannot be carried using a bed as a stretcher; that is taken to be a bier and to presage death. Since hospitals are often seen as places where the sick die, there is a reluctance to be taken to hospital. Taking a body back means specially hiring a vehicle (given the reluctance of public vehicles to carry corpses). Furthermore, a post-mortem in the hospital can leave a body mutilated, giving rise to fears that hospital staff have robbed the body of significant parts for magical use (or for sale). In short, those considered near death are not necessarily rushed to hospital; a decent death at home is preferable. A hospital can ameliorate pain or cure illness but it cannot of itself prevent death, though some of its staff may believe they can delay it.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

Biomedical ideas about disease and about human anatomy and physiology are quite widespread, being taught in schools. But the older generation as well as many young also know the "traditional" ideas, especially about mental illness. Some illnesses are caused by spirits or sorcery: that is, illness originates outside the individual and involves malice. The idiom is that of someone "shooting" you as with an arrow; the "wound" (and the pain) is in the outer layer of the body. In Hausa thought, the body is composed, broadly speaking, of two layers: an outer layer (*jiki*) and an inner core (*ciki*). The outer layer is essentially fluid, with breath, blood, sweat, saliva, and semen, as well as sounds, smells, and sights. Entry points into the outer layer include the throat, ears, nose, eyes; the penis and the vagina are exits. The inner layer contains solids, brought inside via a separate throat and expelled through the anus.

Post-mortems on humans are not part of traditional Hausa mortuary culture, so that there is no formal anatomical knowledge of what is inside the human body. Parts of the body are, of course, given names—heart, lungs, kidney, liver, stomach—and as butchery of livestock is commonly witnessed, the innards of goats and sheep are well known. But people are reluctant to equate human with animal anatomy; to do so would presume acquaintance with the inside of a human, and that is knowledge that only witches have.

The outer layer of the body is not just the site for illness-as-injury, but for all social interactions. Popularity

and pleasures occur on the outer layer, whereas innate characteristics are "solid" and located "inside." So too is witchcraft substance and a propensity for evil. Life is there too; in death, the solids within liquefy and pour out. Ageing is the gradual drying out of the outer layer, leaving the elderly almost all "solids" and scarcely mobile. The young are predominantly "fluid" and mobile. One symptom of illness is for the fluids of the outer layer to get blocked, and form a swelling that may need to be lanced. Liquids, like semen or urine or "dead" blood ("dead" because of exertion in a hot sun), must be eliminated, or else they back up and go bad (for example, in the small of the back). Too much sweat is a bad sign; liquids should not pour out through the skin.

Medicines enter the outer layer as fluids, whether drunk or (nowadays) through injections. The outer layer can also be massaged with unguents and scarified; it is accessible through incense as well as music and words. It can be terrified by a horrible sight or soothed by what's pleasing. Mental illness is an affliction of the outer layer; spirits, ghosts can enter that layer, just as a person's self can go out in dreams, without depriving the person of life.

Many illnesses afflicting people are seasonal and caused not by spirits or sorcery; they are God-given. Seasonal variations affect the outer layer, too: cold and rain, mosquitoes, biting flies and insects, guinea-worms (in the past), as well as the hot sun (noontime is especially dangerous). Night, too, has potential sources of illness, in particular, dew (*raba*) and the full moon, and no one should sleep outside. The countryside is criss-crossed by spirit "highways," and it is wise not to rest under one of these highways, let alone site a house there. Similarly, paths or cross-roads where people deposit rubbish, old medicines, and any other contaminated article, are sources of "infection": such items are placed there specifically in order that their "infectiveness" can be carried away by a passerby. It is possible to map sites of danger in a community, and these are usually also sites where extra protection against harm is required (Last, 1988, 1991b). Each adult would expect to have sufficient protection for everyday life. But chance encounters, especially with strangers, carry risks: the marketplace is one such site.

Protective medicine in the form of charms (*laya*; commonly a combination of text in Arabic script plus a few dried leaves and a twig) can be carried on the body. Some special underwear (*bante*) can give magical protection. But the main source of preventive medicine is based in the house, where the ancestors and domesticated spirits are located, where there are medicines built into the walls of each room and the homestead as a whole, as well as in the structures of the granaries. The regular five prayers a day and the strict practice of Islam ensure well-being, too; the annual rituals are carried out to cleanse the house and sanctify its residents and their kinsfolk. Almost daily the elder men of the household eat together and resolve any conflicts or preempt tensions; senior wives are within earshot, and relay news of problems. The regular succession of illnesses and deaths shows how important prevention is.

### **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Both men and women have "semen" (*maniyi*) that is necessary for reproduction. Without regular expression, the semen can back up, perhaps go bad, and cause illness especially in the lower back. Marriage and regular coition for both men and women are therefore necessary for health. In a polygynous household, wives take turns to cook for their husbands two days at a time, and by implication the two nights are theirs too. (Concubines in the past had one night only; irregular unions occur in the afternoon.) Whereas marriage may take place at a young age (even before puberty) a very young bride is not usually sexually active until she is "strong enough," that is large enough to bear children safely; this may be a year or two after menarche. Her first child may die in infancy, particularly if the newborn loses maternal immunity at the height of the malaria season (August/September). Given that weddings often occur in March/April, a baby conceived very early in the marriage and born in December/January is at extra risk.

Pregnancies may go to "sleep" (*kwanta*), and not come to term in nine months (Kleiner-Bosaller, 1993). In Maliki (Islamic) law, such sleeping pregnancies can last up to 7 years, so that a divorced woman who conceives out of wedlock can within that period claim her former husband as the father of the fetus; otherwise the formal penalty for fornication outside marriage is death by stoning. But such "sleeping" pregnancies also occur when a wife is having difficulty becoming pregnant and feels threatened by divorce; it can occur too when there is an ectopic pregnancy or a cyst that mimics an early pregnancy. There is no traditional treatment for it. Sleeping pregnancies are not, of course, confined to Hausa culture, but are potentially found wherever the Maliki School of Islamic law is in force, as for example in Morocco.

A further complication of pregnancy occurs when a woman's uterus has been entered by a spirit, and a changeling child (*dan ruwa*) is later born to her. Spirits are apt to enter women when they bathe or are near water. There are no clear signs of such a compromised pregnancy; and the child only shows his or her changeling status later, for example by sickle-cell anemia or by dying prematurely. A child born to a mother after earlier children have died is known as a *dan wabi*. It is not uncommon for a woman to lose all her children while a co-wife has all hers alive; one assumption is that the repeated deaths are a single child or spirit repeatedly reentering the mother and dying early (Last, 1992). Another assumption is that her breast milk may be bad, or even contain some poison.

A wife who is losing all her children may well decide to leave her husband and "drink other water" in the hope of bearing a child who will survive. While divorce is common and easy, I have known women who have remained with their husband despite having borne him eight or more children all of whom died young. The explanation is that wife and husband both love each other deeply (Last, 1992). Romantic love is not uncommon and may lead to a couple, who were childhood sweethearts, marrying finally in their old age after both have been through other marriages. Some wives concerned over their husband's apparent infertility may discreetly become pregnant outside the marital home. Similarly, where the husband is from a lineage that only produces daughters, the pressure on a wife to provide him with his only son may result in her taking special measures. There are special sites and rituals (including *bori*) that are supposed to restore fertility, but the most commonly tried cure is a change of husband.

Apparently infertile women may often remarry, and be the third or fourth wife in a large household with many children, one or more of whom she may help to bring up. Such junior wives can be hugely popular, with their stories, songs, and humor bringing fun to the children of the house; they can devote themselves to making snack foods or to petty trading or a craft to earn cash and give presents. They cannot live on their own, nor can they readily return permanently to their father's house (at least not until old age). Modern conditions may make womenheaded households more socially acceptable: for example, where the husband has died of an illness that has been labeled as AIDS (*kanjemau*), his widow may have to live alone, as people fear contact with her and her cooking. Otherwise, every woman has the right to a husband, no matter how disabled she might be (Last, 2000a).

### **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

A pregnancy is not considered established until 6 months, when the pregnant mother (*mai ciki*) will cover herself up (e.g., with a cloth over her breasts) and be teased (e.g., asked if she's been eating beans). When spontaneous abortions (*bari*) occur, the fetal matter is disposed of without ceremony. Miscarriages (also known as *bari*) are similarly treated; the dead child is not formally buried in the graveyard. Until recently, women might commonly smoke cigarettes, resulting in babies of low birth-weight. Six pounds was not an uncommon weight, and obstructed labor was relatively rare. Birth is done kneeling down (*nakuda*); another woman (who is then known as *ungozoma*) picks up the child and cuts the umbilical cord. It is she who bathes the cord stump, and washes the baby each morning and evening, in principle until the day for naming. But in practice mothers may take over the care of their babies straightaway, and breast-feed them, despite taboos on letting a neonate suck the colostrum. The placenta (*mahaifa*) and cord (*cibiya*) are both buried behind the mother's room by the *ungozoma*. First births are given this full attention; later births can happen so easily and unexpectedly that the mother may find herself giving birth in a field or in a latrine.

Once delivered, the mother has to be purified and "heated" to remove the damp-cold of birth; the full procedure (*wankan jego*) lasts for 40 days and thereafter continues once a day for 3 or 4 months. If she fails to do this, she will swell and die, or at least become pale and chill. Twice a day she has to wash herself by sprinkling boiling water over herself with special leafed branches (*kunfu* or *cediya*). In Zaria (since at least the 16th century) the mother also lies on a special clay bed under which a fire is kept burning; she is gradually "roasted." Elsewhere she is "steamed" over a pot of boiling water. Finally, she is given a special food made from the feet and head of an ox and medicines (especially potash, but also spices). A consequence of this excessive heat and salt intake is the above-average incidence of peripartal heart failure (*daita*) from which women can die. The local remedy is a plant found in marshy areas similar to foxglove, but it is not always given in sufficient quantity to prevent death. A baby whose mother dies is usually not nursed by a wetnurse, though if some kinswoman is lactating and is willing to take on the orphan, that is acceptable (but the baby already on the breast and the orphan cannot later marry; sharing the same breast milk makes them siblings).

In theory, on day three a barber will come and cut the uvula, incise marks on the baby's chest, and also cut marks on the baby's face. But I have known these to be done later, on the occasion when a girl baby has her hypertrophied hymeneal tags nicked as if it was the clitoris that was being cut. The baby's first haircut is on day seven, when it is named in a big ceremony.

### **Infancy**

The baby is solely breast-fed until about 6 or 7 months old. Weaning occurs after 2 years and some months, usually by being sent away on a Friday to the mother's mother; sometimes a bitter substance has earlier been smeared on the nipple to discourage the infant from suckling. A baby may react badly to weaning. If an infant is weakening before it is weaned, it may be a sign that the mother's husband has started touching her, or even that she is pregnant with another baby. Such a woman feels shame. Her infant, in its distress, typically has flies hovering over its face. More routine are the diarrheas associated with teething. A mother watches the fontanel for signs of stress. Another hazard is the fire within the mother's room; babies have occasionally been known to fall into the fire as they sleep with their mother. The baby by day is carried on her mother's back (or by an elder sister), and is therefore very early taught not to urinate or defecate except when told (the baby is held between the mother's ankles, and a "ssss" sound is made). The twinning rate in Hausaland is much lower than among the Yoruba to the south; twins may be unusually bad-tempered.

### **Childhood**

Children work as well as attend school. Punishment is given to those who fail to do their work properly; a child absconding from school may find himself kept in shackles (*mari*). But willingness to punish varies between Hausa communities: Muslims are readier to punish the young than are non-Muslim Hausa (Last, 2000b). Child sexual abuse does occur, if rarely: there are stereotypical stories about sadistic or sexually active teachers who abuse their pupils. So, too, young girls may be sexually abused in cities by adult men on weekends (and need urgent hospital repairs the next day). But sometimes children use their time on the street to experiment sexually with each other.

Circumcision of Muslim boys occurs about 7 to 9 years old, and a group of boys is operated on by the barber at a major ritual in the cold dry season; non-Muslim Hausa boys may be circumcised just before puberty. The operation is done with a knife with the boy sitting on the ground over a small hole; the fraenum, though, is cut not with a blade but with the barber's fingernail (*akaifa*). The wound is then smeared with juice from acacia pods, and bound up. It can take a month before he is fully recovered. Newly circumcised boys usually do not sleep on a mat or wear clothes; and there is traditionally an adult man to keep an eye on them at night, so as to stop anyone from rubbing his penis. Nowadays, bandages are used.

Hausa girls are not excised (nor were they in the 19th century), apart from the nicking of the hypertrophied hymeneal tags shortly after birth, at the time when the uvula is also cut. The object in both cases is to keep open the two orifices (the throat, the vagina), on the assumption that both might otherwise become blocked at maturity; it is not about controlling sexuality or closing the vagina. Confusion arises because the term used, *beli* (cf. *belu* for uvula), implies that it is the clitoris, seen as a parallel organ to the uvula, that is being cut, when observation of the operation clearly shows that it is not cut, and could not be at that age. I have known people worry that their uvula has grown (or re-grown) and is causing them trouble in their throat; I have never heard of the clitoris growing to cause a blockage. Vaginal "blockage" occurs only in late pregnancy and is caused (if at all) by a temporary swelling of the anterior wall of the vagina. This swelling is relieved by using a razorblade to remove the liquid, not by cutting the clitoris.

### **Adolescence**

While menarche may mark the start of adolescence, courtship may precede menarche, with the girl receiving presents from older suitors. The period of courtship in villages may start with girls having decorations (depicting, e.g., drums or even a boxer) incised on the neck and upper chest; pot black darkens the drawings. Ideally in the middle-class urban context, the would-be husband should be 10 or more years older than his bride. In rural areas, the age difference is less pronounced, and adolescents go courting in marketplaces and in the evenings once the harvest is brought in (October to January). Courting involves petting but not coition. The process from betrothal to wedding takes some 3 months, and is a dry-season activity involving elders as well as the couple's friends and kinswomen. Male adolescents may go to a village brothel if they have the funds after the harvest, but today, with AIDS and the reintroduction of Islamic law, many brothels have been closed down and the women dispersed.

Young men have to work hard to accumulate cash to buy presents for their girlfriend. Many go on dry-season migration (*ci rani*), to farms in the south of Nigeria and even Ghana, or to cities where laboring jobs are to be found. They gain experience by seeing the world and experimenting with different foods, drinks, and social habits; by being away, they also save their parents the costs of feeding them from the family's granary (cf. Last, 1993a). Adolescent girls stay at home, possibly going to school or trading on their mother's behalf. Stricter households, particularly in the towns, may insist on the girl being in purdah by day, and only allowed out with an escort after dark. Ideally, she will be betrothed or married soon after menarche, thus transferring responsibility for her well-being (and her further education) from her parents to her new husband.

### **Adulthood**

An adolescent male becomes an adult when he takes a wife; he is responsible for another person. A woman becomes an adult, not when she marries, but when she has her first child, when she too is responsible for another person. The couple are housed by the husband's parents, with the bride having a room of her own, filled with her bridal goods, and she has her own waterpot as well as food bowls there; she cooks at her own fire in front of her room (unless there is a single family kitchen). She is likely to get pregnant within 2 years; if not, there may be pressure on her to leave her husband, or on him to seek a second wife (if he can afford one). If she does get pregnant and bears a child, it is not unusual for the first child to die young. Although there is pressure on her to "avoid" her baby (and not over-coddle it), in practice mothers are very solicitous of their firstborn. If all goes well, she will be pregnant again some 2 years after the first child is born. And the process will continue for some six to ten births. Women do seek means of restricting the number of conceptions, but there are no formal means of contraception. Were she to divorce her husband, she would conventionally have to leave behind all her weaned children; alternatively, she could declare herself menopausal, and

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 727**

stop sleeping with her husband. If he had not already done so, he would seek another wife or wives. The first wife may well encourage him to do so, to save her some of the hard labor of being his sole wife; a good polygynous household, run by a competent senior wife and a just husband and filled with children, is more desirable than a small domestic unit. An unhappy polygynous household can be riven by conflict and jealousies, with fears of competitive love-magic and sorcery resulting in mental or other illness; a husband's favoritism adds to the tension. Violence between wives, symbolic or actually physical, may result, and the husband may resort to beating a wife. Divorce is always a possibility, more often initiated by an unhappy wife, but she may just go away awhile to cool off; she would return to her parents' home or seek out a sympathetic brother.

As a divorcee a woman can expect to re-marry as a junior wife. Although a husband has to treat all his wives with strict equality, her status is still subordinate to the senior wife. A woman may move on from husband to husband until she finds a congenial household; some in the period between marriages set themselves up as courtesans, keeping a salon where men come to chat and one or more of these men court her with a view to sleeping with her regularly or marrying her. This is not the same as prostitution based in a brothel; relations of courtesanship are built up over time, and sexuality is controlled and only part of the scenario. Finally a divorcee may decide to marry a farmer, in which case he may give her fields to farm on her own account, and she re-builds a life around her own earnings and new friendships. Although adultery (*zina*) occurs in towns and villages alike, only pregnancy outside marriage is really serious; as noted, it can now result in the woman being sentenced to stoning.

As a married man's household expands, he may section off part of his father's compound, dividing it from his brothers' area; but where a house is crowded (as in an old city), a wash-room may have to be converted into another bedroom, in which case it may still retain the "wrong" aura and give rise to illness. Alternatively he may (especially in rural areas) build himself a new house of his own, choosing a propitious site with the help of an Islamic scholar. The well-being of his household may depend on how carefully the sacred rituals have been carried out at the house building. Repeated illness may force him to move house again, or his wives to leave him. Spiritual well-being can be enhanced by regular religious practice, for example by being part of a Sufi brotherhood and joining in the extra recitations after the Friday prayer; extra fasting, twice a week, may be done too, as well as regular reading of the Holy Quran. Drinking alcohol or smoking or intemperate behavior generally calls into question not just his own health but that of his whole household.

### **The Aged**

A man starts becoming an elder (*dattijo*) around 40 years old, but can cease to be regarded as an elder once he becomes senile. An elderly woman too, after menopause, acquires a special status, staying on with her grown-up sons who have taken over the house and its land after the death of her husband. Such old women are no longer subject to purdah, but they may have little reason to go out except to the life cycle rituals of their children's families and other kin. Elders seldom leave the house and its environs, spending long hours in their dark room with enough of a fire to keep them warm and may be fed by their sons' wives. Often toothless, they need to grind such luxuries as kolanuts or groundnuts on a small tin grinder; other foods require no chewing. Now they may have a radio with its songs to listen to.

### **Dying and Death**

In the 19th century, March/April and October/November saw more deaths than other seasons. Malaria is particularly lethal in August/September, and was attributed traditionally to the newly harvested grains. A study I organized of burials in the old city of Kano showed that more women and children died on a Friday (and Thursday). To die on a Friday is a blessing given by Allah, and it might seem that people "choose," if they can, to die on that day. But the timing of death is Allah's alone, people say. Yet people also report mothers (and fathers) summoning their children to come to them and awaiting their arrival; after speaking to them in front of others (a sure sign of impending death), the dying mother closes her eyes. Foreknowledge of death does not provoke attempts to avoid it, but rather to ensure that what needs to be done right is done. Near-death experiences occur on occasions of very high fever, which may provoke visions of ancestors. The corpse is washed in the ritual Islamic manner. No post-mortem is done. A death in the house is marked by a deep, almost audible silence; no wailing is heard (as it implies impatience with Allah). No work is done that day (two days if the dead person was important), and visitors come to express condolences. Grief is meant to be restrained.

Burial is done within a few hours; or if the death occurred at night, early the following day. Graves in city cemeteries are dug in advance each day by a gravedigger and on Fridays by volunteers. A head of a house is likely to be buried in the yard behind his room; others are carried out on a bier and buried in a cemetery, with graves unnamed and all aligned toward Mecca (head to the south, facing east). It can soon be difficult to locate a specific grave in a city cemetery where 10 to 15 new graves are dug daily; the body is meant to have anonymity in death. But in recent years gravestones with names have become fashionable. The body is never disinterred, and though graves can in theory be reused after seven years, they seldom are. There is a persistent fear of grave robbers digging up recent corpses at night for body parts to be used in magic or for sale; anyone loitering in a graveyard therefore attracts suspicion.

Some bodies have to be treated differently. Wives brought back dead from the hospital to their husbands' house are buried in a field near where they lived, and not in the family or village graveyard. In the past, slaves who died in town were not necessarily buried; their bodies were thrown into ponds (where crocodiles ate them). War dead were quickly buried, unwashed and in their clothes, on the battlefield, but many such bodies were in fact eaten by hyenas. Nowadays hyenas, crocodiles, and vultures are all so rare that carrion (*mushe*) rots uneaten. Hausa, being Muslim, have no concept of reincarnation.

## **REFERENCES**

- Besmer, F. E. (1983). *Horses, musicians & gods: The Hausa cult of possession-trance*. South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey.
- Crampton, E. P. T. (1979). *Christianity in Northern Nigeria* (3rd ed.). London: Geoffrey Chapman.
- Erlman, V., & Magagi, H. (1989). *Girka: Une cérémonie d'initiation au culte de possession boorii des Hausa de la région de Maradi*. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag.
- Etkin, N. L. (1979). Indigenous medicine among the Hausa of Northern Nigeria: Laboratory evaluation for potential therapeutic efficacy of antimalarial plant medicinals. *Medical Anthropology, 3.4*, 401–429.
- Etkin, N. L. (1981). A Hausa herbal pharmacopoeia: Biomedical evaluation of commonly used plant medicines. *Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 4*, 75–98.
- Etkin, N. L. (1996). Ethnopharmacologic perspectives on diet and medicine in northern Nigeria. In E. Schroder, G. Balansard, P. Cabalion, J. Fleurentin, & G. Mazars, (Eds.), *Médicaments*

*et aliments: Approche ethnopharmacologique* (pp. 8–62). Metz: Société Française d' Ethnopharmacologie.

- Etkin, N. L., & Ross, P. (1991). Recasting malaria, medicine and meals: A perspective on disease adaptation. In L. Romanucci-Ross, D. E. Moerman, & L. R. Tancredi (Eds.), *The anthropology of medicine: From culture to method* (2nd ed., pp. 130–258). New York: Bergin & Garvey.
- Hill, P. (1972). *Rural Hausa: A village and its setting*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Kleiner-Bosaller, A. (1993). Kwantacce, the "sleeping pregnancy": A Hausa concept. In Gudrun Ludwar-Ene, & Mechthild Reh (Eds.), *Gros-plan sur les femmes en Africa; Afrikanische Frauen im Blick; Focus on women in Africa* (pp. 17–30). Bayreuth African Studies Series 26. Bayreuth: Bayreuth University.
- Koki, A. M. (1977). *Alhaji Mahmudu Koki: Kano malam*. (Neil Skinner, Trans. Ed.). Zaria: Ahmadu Bello University Press.
- Last, M. (1967). *The Sokoto caliphate*. London: Longmans Green.
- Last, M. (1976). Presentation of sickness in a community of non-Muslim Hausa. In J. B. Loudon (Ed.), *Social anthropology and medicine* (pp. 104–149). ASA monographs 13. London: Academic Press.
- Last, M. (1979). Strategies against time. *Sociology of Health and Sickness, 1.3*, 306–317.
- Last, M. (1981). The importance of knowing about not knowing. *Social Science and Medicine, 15B*, 387–392.
- Last, M. (1988). Charisma and medicine in northern Nigeria. In D. B. Cruise O'Brien & C. Coulon (Eds.), *Charisma and brotherhood in African Islam* (pp. 176–224). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
- Last, M. (1991a). Spirit possession as therapy: Bori among non-Muslims in Nigeria. In I. M. Lewis (Ed.), *Women's medicine: The zar-bori cult in Africa & beyond* (pp. 49–63). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
- Last, M. (Ed.) (1991b). Adolescents in a Muslim city: The cultural context of danger and risk. In Youth & Health in Kano Today. *Kano Studies* (special issue, pp. 3–17). Kano: Bayero University.
- Last, M. (1991c). The presentation of mental illness at the Gorondutse Psychiatric Hospital, Kano (pp. 33–54) (with G. Ilyasu). In M. Last (Ed.), Youth & Health in Kano Today. *Kano Studies* (special issue). Kano: Bayero University.
- Last, M. (1992). The importance of extremes: The social implications of intra-household variation in child mortality. *Social Science and Medicine, 35.6*, 799–810.
- Last, M. (1993a). The power of youth, youth of power: Notes on the religions of the young in northern Nigeria. In H. d'Almeida-Topor, C. Coquery-Vidrovitch, O. Goerg, & F. Guitart (Eds.), *Les Jeunes en Afrique* (pp. 375–399). Paris: L'Harmattan.
- Last, M. (1993b). History as religion: Deconstructing the Magians ("Maguzawa") of Nigerian Hausaland. In J-P. Chrétien (Ed.), *L'invention religieuse en Afrique: histoire et religion en Afrique noire* (pp. 267–296). Paris: Karthala.
- Last, M. (1999). Rubbish: Public health in northern Nigeria. In Jean-Pierre Olivier de Sardan (Ed.), *Second rapport intermédiaire (1999)* (pp. 37–43). Marseilles: CNRS/EHESS.
- Last, M. (2000a). Social exclusion in northern Nigeria. In Jane Hubert (Ed.), *Madness, disability and social exclusion: The archaeology and anthropology of "difference"* (pp. 217–239). London: Routledge.