**Nancy Romero-Daza and David Himmelgreen**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Basotho, Basuto, Southern-Sotho.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Sotho inhabit the southernmost region of Africa and are found across the international lines of three countries: South Africa, Botswana, and Lesotho. The Sotho constitute about 1% of the general population in Botswana and 16% of the total population in South Africa (Ikuska, nd). In both these countries, the Sotho are scattered around the territory and are not geographically distinguishable from other ethnic groups. On the other hand, there is a considerable concentration of Sotho in Lesotho, where they comprise 99.7% of the national population (Central Intelligence Agency, nd). Because of the close correspondence of ethnic and political boundaries, our discussion of cultural characteristics and their relation to health will be drawn from populations living in Lesotho. The Sotho are native speakers of Sesotho, one of the Bantu languages. Sesotho is closely related to other major languages spoken in southern Africa including Setswana (spoken in Botswana and South Africa), Sepedi (spoken in northern South Africa), and Siloze (spoken in Western Zambia) (Ambrose, 1976).

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Basotho society is patrilineal and patrilocal and politically organized as a chiefdom. Descent is traced exclusively through the father's lineage, as is the allocation of property rights (Gay, 1982). Upon marriage, women move to the husband's village, where they and their children reside for the rest of the woman's married life, usually in extended-family compounds. The Basotho people trace their ethnic origins back to the Bakoena clan, a group of cattle-owning agriculturalists who inhabited the Witwatersrand area of the Transvaal in present day South Africa as early as the 5th century (Ambrose, 1976). In the 19th century, several Sotho-speaking groups that were fleeing the Zulu chief Shaka came together under the protection and leadership of Moshoshoe, who would become the founder and first king of Lesotho. During the Lifaqane wars between 1820 and 1830, Moshoshoe and his people were forced to retreat to the Thaba–Bosiu mountainous fortress in the Maluti mountains (Schwager, 1986). From there, they continued fending off various attackers such as the Amangwane in 1828, the Batlakoa in 1829, and the Amandebele in 1831. Starting in the mid-1830s and continuing through the mid-1860s conflict over land rights between the Basotho and Boers from the Cape Colony in South Africa resulted in the loss of the most fertile lands and the relegation of the Basotho to the most arid and infertile mountain regions. In March 1868, Basutoland became a British protectorate, and in 1966 it gained its independence from Great Britain.

Although an independent entity, the Kingdom of Lesotho remains economically dependent on its allencompassing neighbor, South Africa. At present, only about 10% of the land is arable and agriculture contributes about 4% of the Gross National Product (GNP). There are some flourishing industries such as textiles, clothing, and mohair wool, and some natural resources such as water, which is exported to South Africa. Nevertheless, the country's main source of revenue is migrant labor to the South African mines (Romero-Daza & Himmelgreen, 1998). Participation of Basotho men in the South African mining industry dates back to the 1860s when the first diamond mines were opened in the Cape Colony (Gay et al., 1991; Murray, 1981). During the last decade there has been a very significant reduction in the number of Basotho men engaged in migrant labor in South Africa. For example, between 1997 and 1999 the number of Basotho miners was reduced to almost half due to the declining price of gold on the international market (Global Policy Network, 2001).

The present-day Basotho population in Lesotho is predominantly Christian. The main denominations include the Roman Catholic Church, the Lesotho Evangelical Church, the Anglican Church, the Methodist Church, and several independent churches (Ambrose, 1976). However, many traditional beliefs and practices, especially those relating to ancestor worship are still prevalent among the Basotho. The ancestors, those relatives who have died, are considered to be guardians of their living relatives, and to afford protection, good health, and prosperity. However, if they are not honored in the appropriate way, or if they are neglected, they are likely to cause misfortune and illness (Sheddick, 1953).

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

By the year 2000, the total population of Lesotho was estimated at around 2,033,000 inhabitants, with a population growth of 1.9% between 1999 and 2000 (WHO, 2002). Life expectancy at birth was calculated at 42 years, with no noticeable differences by gender. As of May 2002, infant mortality was estimated at 72 per 1,000 live births, and mortality for children under five at 99 per 1,000 live-births (WHO, 2002). However, accurate figures are very difficult to obtain. In fact, UNICEF reports considerably higher rates for both these indicators, 92 per 1,000 and 133 per 1,000 respectively as of February 2002 (UNICEF, 2002).

Lesotho's mountainous terrain and its location outside the tropics provide a relatively salubrious environment. As a result, many of the tropical diseases such as malaria and schistosomiasis that are commonly found in other parts of Africa are not common in Lesotho (Gish, 1982; Ministry of Planning, 1991). Rather, the main problems that affect the health of the population are directly related to widespread poverty and the lack of basic sanitation. Among these are diarrheal disease, typhoid, and dermatological infections such as bacterial skin sepsis, fungal infections, and scabies, which affect the population at large and especially young children (Ministry of Planning, 1991). Only about 62% of the total population have access to safe water sources, while the rest, especially those in mountainous areas, use unprotected springs and wells which, if contaminated with fecal matter or other waste, could become a major source of infection for many Basotho (WHO, 2002).

The marked seasonal differences found in Lesotho are closely associated with the health of infants and children. For example, the hot humid summer months are the prime time for diarrheal disease. The effects of diarrhea are compounded by the rise of malnutrition that results from the low availability of foods during this time of the year, which corresponds with the pre-harvest period. During the dry and cold winter months, when food is plentiful, the incidence of diarrhea decreases, but respiratory infections rise significantly (Himmelgreen, 1994). At present, it is estimated that about 16% of Basotho children under 5 suffer from acute malnutrition (WHO, 2002). For adults there are also seasonal differences in nutritional status, especially in the highlands and for households that rely mostly on their own agricultural production. For example, Huss-Ashmore and Goodman (1988) found a seasonal weight fluctuation of 4 kg (7%) among women living the Mokhotlong District, in the Northeastern Maluti mountains. In a later study, Himmelgreen and Romero-Daza (1994) also found seasonal differences among women from Mokhotlong but these differences were not as marked as the earlier study. However, women who relied on subsistence agriculture lost more weight seasonally than did women who purchased most of their food. Today, as many developing countries, Lesotho is also faced with increasing rates of overweight and obesity, partly as a result of rapid modernization and the increased consumption of sugars and fat. The traditional diet of the Basotho tends to be highly monotonous and consists mainly of maize meal ("papa") and wild vegetables ("moroho"). Consumption of animal protein is generally limited to that provided by eggs, while the much more expensive sources such as red meat are consumed much less frequently (Himmelgreen,1994).

An issue of central importance for the overall health of the Basotho is the rapid spread of Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs), including HIV/AIDS. Between 1983 and 1993, STIs were the second most common outpatient condition seen in Lesotho clinics and hospitals (Family Health International, 2001). It is estimated that about 24,000 Basotho are currently living with HIV, reflecting an infection rate of 24% among adults, one of the highest in the world. Over half of these cases (54%) are found among women. So far, the epidemic has left an estimated 17,000 orphans among Basotho children (Family Health International, 2001). Central among the factors that have contributed to the rapid explosion of the AIDS pandemic is the system of labor migration of men into South Africa

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 959**

(Romero-Daza, 1994b; Romero-Daza & Himmelgreen, 1998). The widespread poverty that fuels the prostitution industry in South Africa, coupled with lack of preventive and curative services for underlying STIs, results in increasing rates of infection for both women and men. Once infected, miners spread the virus to their wives and other sexual partners when they return to their home countries, and from them to their unborn children.

In Lesotho both traditional and biomedical systems of care co-exist. The country has been divided into 18 Health Service Areas (HASs), each of which includes a hospital, at least one clinic for outpatient care, health centers run by a nurse clinician with the support of village health workers and traditional birth attendants, and village health posts which are visited by medical teams on a monthly basis (Ministry of Planning, 1991). However, the provision of biomedical services to the Basotho is restricted by overall low budgets, limited infrastructure, and shortage of personnel, and is especially deficient in isolated rural areas. According to estimates by the World Health Organization, as of 1995 there were 5.4 physicians, 60.1 nurses, 47 midwives, and 0.5 dentists per 100,000 inhabitants (WHO, 2002). Traditional medicine provides a major source of health care for the Basotho, especially those living in places where biomedical facilities are inadequate. The practice of traditional medicine is regulated and overseen by the Universal Medicinemen and Herbalist Council established in 1978. This body is responsible for the registration and licensing of traditional medicine practitioners, and promotes the development of new skills among practitioners (WHO, 2001). It is not possible to get an exact number of Basotho traditional healers still practicing in Lesotho, since many of them are not officially registered with the Council. As of 1991, there were 9,579 registered healers and an estimated 23,000 unregistered practitioners (Gay & Hall, 1994).

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Basotho traditional healers can be categorized depending on the healing methods they use and the type of training received. Two of the major categories include herbalists and Bible readers (Romero-Daza, 1994a). Herbalists specialize in the treatment of diseases through the use of herbs and roots, while Bible readers usually belong to a specific church and treat their patients almost exclusively with blessed water and prayers. Depending on the severity of the disorder, some Bible readers mix their water with ashes obtained from animal bones or with specific types of soil. Bible readers usually diagnose through the use of biblical passages, by the "laying of the hands," or by praying over and examining water collected by the patient from a river or brook. Herbalists usually diagnose by casting bones, dice, or shells, and interpreting the way in which such objects fall on the ground. Regardless of healing or diagnostic differences, the call to become a healer follows a similar pattern. Usually the person becomes very sick (physically and/or mentally), and is said to have "moea" (literally wind, spirit), which is an indisputable sign of his/her call to be a traditional healer. The disease period is characterized by "thoasa," recurrent dreams in which the person's ancestors instruct the individual on their wishes and guide him/her to look for a tutor to teach the apprentice about traditional medicine (Romero-Daza, 1994a). The role of the traditional healers often extends beyond the treatment of physical and mental disorders, and covers the solution of interpersonal difficulties that may affect the harmony among family or village members. This role fits well with the overall Sotho conceptualization of "health" as a balance among physical, psychological, social, and spiritual aspects of life.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

While the biomedical paradigm is readily accepted by most of the Basotho, traditional beliefs regarding the cause of illness and disease are still commonly found among this population. Prominent among these is the belief that diseases are caused by the breech of taboo. For example, a person who has sexual relations while still mourning the death of his/her spouse may be afflicted by "mashoa" or "mahae" which roughly correspond to genital warts. According to traditional beliefs, as the body of the deceased decomposes, so do the sexual organs of the surviving spouse (Hall & Malahleha, 1989). Another common cause of disease is the use of witchcraft. For example, a person can cause another to become sick by placing a special magical substance (usually water containing powerful medicines) on the path to be traveled by his/her enemy (Romero-Daza, 1994a). Finally, disease can be caused when ancestors have been neglected by their living relatives, or when spirits such as the "thokolosi" enter the body. One of the main results of witchcraft or of spirit possession is the manifestation of mental health problems that can only be cured with traditional therapies. However, mental problems are not always considered negative. Quite often, a person who presents what would be classified as mental health symptoms (e.g., hearing voices, having hallucinations) is believed to have been chosen by their ancestors to become a traditional healer. In such cases, the ancestors communicate their desires and specific instructions through visions and dreams. Once the person becomes a healer, he/she may continue to communicate with the ancestors, thus continuing to strengthen his/her curative powers.

Regardless of the cause of disease, the placation of the ancestors' wrath is one of the main methods of treatment for the great majority of problems. Traditional Basotho culture prescribes the slaughtering of animals and the performance of specific rituals in honor of the ancestors. Other curative methods include the widespread use of medicinal plants both by traditional healers and by lay people. An important healing practice that might become significant in the spread of HIV is that of "scarification," in which traditional healers make small incisions on the patient's skin, and use their mouth to extract the disease-causing object from the patient's body (Romero-Daza, 1994a, 1994b). Given the great number of patients seen by traditional healers, many of whom may be HIV positive, the use of contaminated blades may provide an effective medium for the transmission of the virus from person to person (Romero-Daza & Himmelgreen, 1998).

# **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Fertility rates among the Basotho tend to be lower that among other African populations, and were estimated at 4.6 in 2000 (WHO, 2002). Possible reasons for such low rates are the constant absence of men engaged in migrant labor in South Africa, the practice of extended breastfeeding, and the existence of postpartum sex taboos. In addition, the high rate of sexually transmitted infections and of maternal malnutrition may also decrease pregnancy rates and increase spontaneous abortions (Ministry of Planning, 1991). The rate of contraceptive use has been estimated at 23% (UNICEF, 2002). Nevertheless, Basotho greatly value children of both sexes and strive to have large families. Children provide a source of support for elderly parents, a source of labor for domestic, agricultural, and pastoralist activities, and a great source of prestige. Having children affords women the status of full womanhood (this is represented linguistically by the honorifics *M'e* (mother) and *Ausi* (sister) used to address women who have children and those who are childless, respectively). Moreover, infertility was considered a just cause for divorce. Traditionally, remedies for infertility included the use of special herbs provided by healers who specialized in the treatment of the condition, and the practice of carrying specially made dolls on the women's back, as if they were children (Ministry of Planning, 1991). If the combination of these two methods was ineffective, the woman's husband was allowed to take a second wife. However, any children born of that union would be considered to belong to the first wife (Ministry of Planning, 1991). At present, infertility is still regarded as a serious problem that needs to be treated by either Western or traditional doctors. Even among traditional healers there is a growing understanding of the fact that men, and not only women, can suffer from fertility problems, and need to be equally evaluated.

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

A Basotho woman's first pregnancy is considered of great importance since fertility is an indication of harmony between the living and their ancestors, and pregnancy signifies the continuation of the father's lineage, and the establishment of the couple as a new family (Gay, 1980). The pregnant woman is expected to follow a diet that is rich in nutritious grains, and to avoid the consumption of fish, which is believed to cause health problems to the unborn child. Traditionally, Basotho women return to their paternal home around the seventh month of pregnancy and remain there for up to three months after the birth of their child. This transition from their husband's to their own group is marked by special rituals and feasts in which the two families participate (Gay, 1980).

Traditional Basotho considered spontaneous abortions, major abnormalities in infants and fetuses, and the death of young children to be the result of witchcraft

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 961**

(Ministry of Planning, 1991; Sechefo, nd). To protect against such problems, a pregnant woman was required to remain in her house, avoid going out at night, and avoid walking in places where people could have placed harmful medicines. Women in labor were supposed to cover their breast with a special skin to ward off evil spirits that could harm her or her baby (Ministry of Planning, 1991). Placentas were traditionally placed in earthen pots and buried in the early morning or at night. Only women who had helped the mother during her pregnancy or labor were allowed to perform the burial rituals (Sechefo, nd). While most of these practices have disappeared, some are still common in the most remote rural areas of the country.

### **Infancy**

During the first two or three months after the birth of a baby, mother and infant are secluded in a house whose entrance is marked with reeds projecting from the thatch right above the door. These reeds serve to warn strangers as well as men who are not immediate relatives to stay away (Gay, 1980). It is believed that this protects the new baby from evil that can be caused by the "bad conduct" of adults (Sechefo, nd). The new mother must remain inside as much as possible, but if she needs to come out, she must cover herself with a special blanket or shawl. Both mother and child receive direct care from the mother's female relatives, thus exposing the baby from the beginning of its life to direct interaction with many "mothers." Special ceremonies to end childbirth pollution are conducted when the baby loses the remains of the umbilical cord. These include the shaving of the baby's head and the washing of clothing and bedding. At this point, the baby's father is allowed for the first time to enter the house where his wife and child are (Gay, 1980).

Among Basotho, there is a strict taboo against sexual relations during the post-partum period and especially during the breast-feeding period, which may extend for up to two years. Engaging in sexual activity during the lactation period is believed to result in the contamination of the breast milk by the semen, which causes serious health problems to the infant (Romero-Daza, 1994a). "Senyeha" as the disease is called, is characterized by rapid weight loss, severe diarrhea, loss of appetite, and failure to thrive, and may be fatal to the infant. Weaning informally marks the end of the period of infancy, and signals that the mother is ready to resume sexual activity (Gay, 1980).

### **Childhood**

The beginning of the weaning period, when the child is around two years of age, coincides with the expansion of the number of caretakers a child has. At this time, the child begins to spend much more time under the care of other female relatives, including very young girls, and starts the active process of socialization into the prescribed gender roles. Young girls spend most of their time in the family compound and begin contributing to domestic chores such as the collection of dry dung to be used for fire, or the collection of wild vegetables. Young boys, on the other hand, spend most of their time taking care of the animals. In fact, with the absence of adult men for most of the year, even very young boys often spend extended periods of time away from their homes while taking care of the family's animals. This early division of labor translates onto marked differences in school attendance. Unlike girls in many other developing countries, Basotho girls have a higher school attendance rates and higher overall literacy rates than do boys (Ministry of Planning, 1991).

Although minor corporal punishment as a disciplinary measure is not uncommon among the Basotho, the culture rejects the use of excessive force that may result in injuries (Ministry of Planning, 1991). Among Basotho children, the most common health problems are waterborne diseases such as diarrhea and typhoid, nutritional deficiencies such as kwashiorkor and marasmus, acute respiratory infections, and skin problems such as scabies and fungal infections (Gish, 1982; Himmelgreen, 1994; Ministry of Planning, 1991; WHO, 2002). Rates of HIV infection among Basotho children are increasing rapidly. With prevalence rates among pregnant women reaching up to 24%, many HIV positive children are being born. Even those who are not infected are experiencing the indirect consequences of the epidemic, as they often lose one or both of their parents to the epidemic. More and more, orphaned children are being forced to take the responsibility for younger siblings if they do not have grandparents or other relatives who can support them when their parents die.

### **Adolescence**

In Basotho society, the end of childhood is traditionally marked by participation in initiation schools. Although the practice is diminishing in frequency, it still constitutes a major rite of passage for many young Basotho. During initiation school, groups of adolescents spend a period of up to several months in isolated areas of the country. During this time, which is surrounded by secrecy, teenagers learn about their traditions, their culture, and about what it means to be Basotho. At the end of the initiation school, boys are circumcised, and special ceremonial feasts are conducted to mark their entrance into adulthood and their new status as full members of the group. Young girls are not required to undergo any genital operation.

Basotho discourage the practice of premarital sex and encourage marriage at an early age. Traditionally, there existed taboos to regulate the sexuality of adolescents. For example, young women were not allowed to eat eggs, since these were believed to increase the adolescent girls' sexual needs and to make them more fertile than necessary. Nevertheless, premarital sex is on the rise, as is the number of children born out of wedlock (Ministry of Planning, 1991). Teenagers are also exhibiting increasing numbers of Sexually Transmitted Infections, and of HIV/AIDS. As of 1993, teens accounted for 9.4% of all individuals seeking outpatient care for STIs in public hospitals and clinics (Family Health International, 1997). One factor that contributes to the spread of STIs and undermines the efficiency of prevention programs is the cultural tradition that prohibits the open discussion of sexual matters before marriage (Romero-Daza, 1994a, 1994b).

### **Adulthood**

The most common health problems among Basotho adults include high blood pressure, alcoholism, respiratory tract diseases, cardiovascular disease, skin conditions, STI (especially gonorrhea, syphilis, and AIDS), and injuries (Gay & Hall, 1994; Schumacher et al., 1990). Among women, reproductive problems and STIs including gonorrhea, syphilis, trichomonal vaginalis, and candida moniliasis account for most outpatient visits to health facilities throughout the country (Gay & Hall, 1994). Women accounted for more than half of the HIV infection cases in the country as of 2000 (Family Health International, 2001). The rate of infection for pregnant women who seek prenatal care has been increasing considerably in both urban and rural areas of the country, and ranges from 12.3% in the isolated mountainous areas of Mokhotlong to 42.2 % in the capital city of Maseru (Family Health International, 2001).

Among men, the major causes of morbidity and mortality are associated with their occupation as miners. For example, mining accidents are a major cause of injury, disability, and death among Basotho males. Likewise, the high prevalence of tuberculosis may be directly related to the overcrowding and overall poor sanitary conditions of the living quarters commonly found in the mining compounds. The high rate of sexually transmitted infections is directly associated with sexual relations with prostitutes and the low use of condoms. In addition, alcoholism is a very serious problem among adult Basotho. In 1993 it was considered the second most serious disease affecting the population at large (Gay & Hall, 1994). Alcoholism has been associated with very high rates of automobile accidents and interpersonal violence. The easy availability of liquor, including the homemade traditional "joala" beer and the general social acceptance of drinking contribute to the problem.

Domestic violence also constitutes an important cause of morbidity and mortality among modern day Basotho. Actual rates are difficult to determine because many cases of domestic violence are never reported to the authorities. However, admission and treatment records from hospitals, clinics, and other health care facilities report high rates of violence-related injuries, especially among women of reproductive age (Gay, 1980).

### **The Aged**

Among the Basotho, the elderly are afforded special status and respect as pillars of the society. Traditionally, children and grandchildren offer a source of material and social support for their elders. However, as in many places in Africa, with the explosion of the AIDS pandemic, the traditional roles are rapidly changing, and the elderly are being forced to care for their younger relatives. Specifically, as adults of reproductive age become ill, their parents become the main care providers, who are also burdened with the responsibility of finding financial resources for the treatment of the diseased. As the younger generation dies, the elderly find themselves being responsible for the upbringing of any of their young grandchildren left orphaned (Romero-Daza & Himmelgreen, 1998).

### **Dying and Death**

Basotho consider the death of an older person as a normal part of the life cycle and as a transition to the world of the ancestors. However, the death of young people, and especially of children is often believed to be the result of either

#### **References 963**

witchcraft or of the failure to perform the necessary rituals or to fulfill obligations to the ancestors (Ministry of Planning, 1991). In the past, the death of a young woman at childbirth was especially alarming since it represented an omen of misfortune for the whole family. In such a case, the surviving child was considered to be highly vulnerable and was afforded special protection by his/her relatives throughout his/her life (Ministry of Planning, 1991). Also worrisome were any sudden deaths or those caused by lightning, which were believed to be the result of witchcraft. Regardless of the cause of death, the body was buried immediately following death, usually during the night. Only adults were allowed to participate in funerals, and there was a strict taboo against mentioning the name of the dead person, especially during the mourning period. Special ceremonies were performed immediately following the funeral. These included the cutting of the hair for all close relatives of the dead person, and the wearing of the "thapo" or mourning veil (Schefo, nd). The official mourning period lasted about one to two months for relatives other than the spouse of the deceased. The end of mourning was marked by the slaughtering of an ox in honor of the ancestors. Failure to do so could result in physical or mental problems for the surviving family. At present, many changes have occurred, including the common practice of holding wakes. However, prohibitions and taboos regarding widows remain unchanged. A widow is supposed to spend about one week after the funeral lying or sitting in the room where her husband's body was kept. After the funeral she is supposed to wear only black clothes, is not allowed to wear any new clothes, is not allowed to go out of her house after dark, and is forbidden from having sexual relations. After one year, the woman is supposed to return to her own family' home where her brothers perform a special ceremony to officially mark the end of the mourning period. The widow is expected to come back to her late husband's home where she remains the head of the household. The traditional practice of levirate by which a widow would become the wife of her late husband's brother has almost completely disappeared, as more and more widows choose to live by themselves or even to remarry (Gay, 1980).

# **REFERENCES**

Ambrose, D. (1976). *The guide to Lesotho*. Johannesburg, South Africa: Winchester Press.

- Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) (n.d.) The World Factbook, Lesotho. Available online at, http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/ factbook/geos/lt.html
- Family Health International. (2001). Lesotho and Swaziland, HIV/AIDS risk assessments at cross-border and migrant sites in Southern Africa. Available online at, http:// www.fhi.org /en/aids/ impact/impactpdfs/lesothoandswaziland.pdf
- Gay, J. S. (1980). Basotho women's options. A study of marital careers in rural Lesotho. Doctoral dissertation, University of Cambridge, Lucy Cavendish College, London.
- Gay, J. S. (1982). *Women and development in Lesotho*. Maseru, Lesotho: USAID.
- Gay, J. S., Gill, D., Green, T., Hall, D., Mhlanga, M., & Mohapi, M. (1991). Poverty in Lesotho, a mapping exercise, Phase II report. Maseru, Lesotho: European Community Aid Counterpart.
- Gay, J. S., & Hall, D. (1994). Poverty in Lesotho, 1994. A mapping exercise. Maseru, Lesotho: Secheba Consultants Publishers.
- Gish, O. (1982). Economic dependency, health services, and health: The case of Lesotho. *Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law, 64*, 762–779.
- Global Policy Network. (2001). Highlights of current labor market conditions in Lesotho. Available online at, http:// globalpolicynetwork.org
- Hall, D., & Malaheleha, M. (1989). *Health and family planning services in Lesotho: The people's perspective*. Maseru, Lesotho: World Bank for Lesotho Government Ministry of Health.
- Himmelgreen, D. (1994). *Coping in a highly seasonal environment: A household study of changing nutritional status, health, and diet among women and children from highland Lesotho*. Doctoral dissertation, State University of New York at Buffalo, Amherst, New York.
- Himmelgreen, D., & Romero-Daza, N. (1994). Changes in body weight in Basotho women: Seasonal coping in households with different socioeconomic conditions. *American Journal of Human Biology*, *6*(5), 599–612.
- Huss-Ashmore, R., & Goodman, J. L. (1988). Seasonality of work, weight, and body composition for women in highland Lesotho. In R. Huss-Ashmore, J. J. Curry, & R. K. Hitchcock (Eds.), *Coping with seasonal constraints* (Vol. 5, pp. 29–44). Philadelphia, MASCA.
- Ikuska website (nd). Sotho. Available online at, http://www.ikuska.com/ Africa/Etnologia/Pueblos/pueblos\_fram.htm
- Ministry of Planning. (1991). The situation of women and children in Lesotho. Maseru, Lesotho: Ministry of Planning, Economic and Manpower Development.
- Murray, C. (1981). *Families divide: The impact of migrant labor in Lesotho.* Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Romero-Daza, N. (1994a). *Migrant labor, multiple sexual partners, and STDs*. Doctoral dissertation, State University of New York at Buffalo, Amherst, N.Y.
- Romero-Daza, N. (1994b). Multiple sexual partners, migrant labor, and sexually transmitted diseases, the makings for an epidemic. Knowledge and beliefs about AIDS among women in highland Lesotho. *Human Organization, 53*, 192–205.
- Romero-Daza, N., & Himmelgreen D. (1998). More than money for your labor. Migration and the political economy of AIDS in Lesotho. In M. Singer (Ed.), *The political economy of AIDS,* Critical Approaches in Health Social Sciences Series. New York: Baywood Press: 185–204.