# **CRIMINAL LAW AND THE CONSTITUTION**

# APARNA CHANDRA AND MRINAL SATISH

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

THE interface between criminal law and the Constitution highlights a classic debate in political liberalism: where and how to draw the line between individual liberty and social control. Criminal law deals with the State's use of its coercive powers to limit individual liberty in the interest of some conception of the public good such as State security or public order, and criminal procedure describes the processes employed by the State to investigate and prosecute a crime, thus achieving the public good. Simultaneously, in order to protect individual liberty from excessive or arbitrary intrusion by the State, a liberal constitutional order seeks to restrict State power by placing constitutional limitations on the scope and processes of criminal law.

Constitutional choices in the domain of criminal procedure reflect, and often amplify, the tension between these competing goals of protecting individual liberty and promoting the public good.<sup>1</sup> At the very least, two options are available to constitution drafters and crafters: emphasising individual liberty by restricting State power (the 'liberty perspective') or emphasising public order by limiting individual liberty and expanding State power (the 'public order perspective').<sup>2</sup>

What we call here the 'liberty perspective' conceives of criminal process primarily as a *limitation* on State power, $\frac{3}{2}$  to ensure that the State does not arbitrarily or excessively trample over an individual's liberty interests, including her autonomy, dignity, and privacy. Therefore, constitutional rights against the State prescribe constraints on State power such as those of search and seizure, and arrest and detention, or through providing rights against self-incrimination, etc. $\frac{4}{3}$  To ensure that the State functions within constitutionally prescribed limits, the State has to justify every deprivation of liberty before an impartial tribunal, where individuals are guaranteed a fair trial, including equality in proceedings, especially through an assured right to legal representation. If the limitations imposed on the State curtail its ability to make accurate determinations of factual wrongdoing, then that is just the price for protecting liberty.

Conversely, what we call the 'public order perspective' prioritises social control and security over individual liberty when the two interests clash. Constitutional rights are restricted in scope and interpretation so as to leave the State with as much power as possible to identify and punish the accused. Here, criminal process is primarily tasked with making accurate determinations of factual guilt and innocence, and adequately punishing the guilty.<sup>5</sup> Thus, procedural norms restricting the government's power to make determinations of factual guilt are seen as 'technicalities' interfering in the securing of public order, and are therefore read restrictively.

The two perspectives are not mutually exclusive, watertight compartments or oppositional models, or even the only perspectives on understanding the criminal process. They refer to priorities tendencies, instead of binaries. Each perspective is a standpoint, an orientation, from which a decision maker canvasses the domain of constitutional criminal procedure, and determines where the

emphasis should lie in balancing individual liberty and social control. Approaching constitutional criminal procedure from one perspective does not imply that the values of the other are negated, but does influence their *inter se* prioritisation. For example, the liberty perspective *does* recognise the epistemological function of criminal trials and *is* therefore interested in accurate adjudication. However, the emphasis is on not depriving an innocent person's liberty. Conversely, the public order perspective prioritises identifying the guilty, but does not negate the importance of individual liberty.<sup>6</sup>

We present these perspectives not as ideal-type categories, but as descriptive accounts of approaches that have influenced Indian constitutional criminal procedure.<sup> $7$ </sup> They help us understand the types of values at play, and the trade-offs between these values in the adjudication process. We argue that the development of constitutional criminal procedure in India has demonstrated a shift from a liberty perspective to a public order perspective. On our account, the Supreme Court's perspective has resulted in distinct forms of interpretative practices and doctrinal construction, which helps explain the particular trajectories of criminal due process rights in India.

Section II of the chapter illustrates the liberty perspective by providing an account of discussions in the Constituent Assembly on criminal due process rights. In Section III, we describe how the Supreme Court's understanding of these rights significantly differs from the Constituent Assembly's. The intention behind drawing this distinction is not to suggest a methodology of originalism that privileges the intention of the 'founders' in constitutional interpretation. Instead, the distinction serves to provide a counterpoint to better understand, and 'de-normalise' the Court's perspective. In conclusion, we reflect upon the impact of the Court's approach on the rights of the impoverished in the criminal process.

The operation of the criminal law implicates many rights guaranteed by the Constitution. This chapter does not cover every aspect of the interface between criminal law and constitutional rights. Its focus is limited to the Court's interpretation and application of criminal process rights contained in Articles 20 and 22, as well as the fair trial guarantee rights read into Article 21 by the Court.

#### **II. THE LIBERTY PERSPECTIVE**

The Constituent Assembly debates illustrate the liberty perspective on criminal process rights. Members of the assembly recognised that drafting criminal process safeguards involved balancing the goals of individual liberty and social control.<sup>8</sup> Debates over what were to become Articles 21 and 22 exemplified the struggle to fine-tune this balance.  $\frac{9}{5}$  As we show below, in deciding where the balance should lie, the primary concern of the Constituent Assembly was on limiting State power, so as to prevent arbitrary intrusions into the realm of individual liberty.

The Constituent Assembly's Advisory Committee on Minorities, Fundamental Rights, etc. had recommended the inclusion of a provision guaranteeing that 'no person shall be deprived of his life, or liberty, without due process of law'.<sup>10</sup> The Drafting Committee later substituted the phrase 'procedure established by law' in place of 'due process of law' to address concerns that a 'due process' clause may result in *Lochner*-style <sup>11</sup> economic due process interpretations, which would be detrimental to social welfare measures enacted by the State.<sup>12</sup>

This decision to shift to 'procedure established by law' evoked sharp protests inside and outside the assembly on the ground that the new phrasing would provide the legislature carte blanche to

authorise use of the State's coercive powers in an arbitrary manner.<sup>13</sup> For this reason, one member of the Constituent Assembly described Article 21 as the 'crown of our failures'.<sup>14</sup> Others pointed out that the Drafting Committee, while borrowing the phrase 'procedure established by law' from Article 31 of the Japanese Constitution, had left out succeeding Articles, which provided guarantees to protect individual liberty against the State.<sup>15</sup> They argued that not including a due process clause or specific criminal process safeguards would render the Constitution 'lifeless' because it would lead to the destruction of individual liberty in the name of social control.<sup>16</sup>

Ambedkar agreed with the concern that the removal of the 'due process' clause may be inimical to individual liberty. As 'compensation', he introduced draft Article 15A, which went on to become Article 22 of the Constitution.<sup>17</sup> This Article contained criminal process rights, which could not be abrogated by Parliament. Long debates took place in the Constituent Assembly about the scope of these 'compensatory' due process guarantees. Although members disagreed vigorously on whether these safeguards were adequate to protect individual liberty against State tyranny, they agreed that the Constitution *had* to provide explicit limitations on the criminal process in order to protect individual liberty.<sup>18</sup>

Some members referenced the excesses of the State under British rule, especially their own experiences of incarceration during the freedom movement, to highlight the dangers of a legal order that permitted deprivations of liberty without any modicum of fair process.<sup>19</sup> In this spirit Thakur Das Bhargava asked the Assembly, 'Do we not know the Rowlatt Act which said, no *vakil*, no *daleel* no appeal?'<sup>20</sup>

Others expressed concerns about laws already being promulgated by the Central and Provincial Governments that were seen as unwarranted intrusions upon life and liberty. $\frac{21}{2}$  Members used these examples to emphasise the need for requiring the State to justify every deprivation of liberty by entrenching the right to a fair criminal process as a precondition for such deprivation.<sup>22</sup>

In sum therefore, in keeping with a liberty perspective, the Constituent Assembly conceived of criminal process rights as necessary limitations upon State power in order to protect individual liberty against arbitrary intrusions, even if as a result the security interest of the State or the efficient administration of the criminal process were thereby constrained. $\frac{23}{2}$ 

Contrast this with the approach towards preventive detention. Article 22 creates an exception to the ordinary rules of criminal due process, and permits preventive detention for up to three months, for cases where public order and State security are the predominant concerns. $\frac{24}{12}$  Ordinarily, therefore, the emphasis was on protecting the liberty of the individual by limiting the powers of the State. In exceptional circumstances, the balance would be reversed.

However, as we discuss below, the Supreme Court has largely eschewed this liberty perspective of limited State power and instead emphasised a public order rationale in interpreting the scope of the procedural guarantees contained in Articles 20–22.

# **III. READING AGAINST THE RIGHT: PUBLIC ORDER PERSPECTIVE**

The Supreme Court's rhetoric and doctrine in interpreting criminal due process rights reflects a different approach from that of the Constituent Assembly. The Court's dominant narrative emphasises the public order virtues of the criminal process. $\frac{25}{15}$  It sees the criminal process as primarily serving the

cause of societal security by identifying and punishing the guilty and liberating the innocent.  $\frac{26}{10}$  Thus, the Court views the trial as a process 'to find out the truth, and not to shield the accused from the consequences of his wrongdoing'.<sup>27</sup> This assists in the accurate identification of the 'factually' guilty.<sup>28</sup> According to the Court, this truth-seeking function reflects the 'ideals as enshrined under the Constitution and our laws', and has 'led to several decisions, whereby innovating methods and progressive tools have been forged to find out the real truth and to ensure that the guilty does not go unpunished'.<sup>29</sup>

As we seek to demonstrate below, the Court's rhetoric on the 'truth-seeking' and public- orderenhancing functions of the criminal process is evident from its distinct dynamic of engagement with criminal process guarantees. First, the Court predominantly reads criminal process rights to privilege accurate and efficient determinations of factual guilt and innocence in order to satisfy public order interests. This approach is contrary to one that emphasises limiting State power for preventing abuse. Since criminal process rights limit the power of the State to pursue public order goals, the Court's general interpretative approach is that of reading against the right—that is, reading criminal process rights restrictively. The Court expresses disenchantment with procedural technicalities and niceties that obstruct 'truth seeking'.<sup>30</sup> It reads down procedural safeguards that impact the State's ability in finding the truth and punishing wrongdoers. The Court therefore reads rights in a manner that narrows the field of limitation, and expands the power of the State, in the interests of public order.

Secondly, even when the Court upholds a particular safeguard, it privileges the role of the safeguard in promoting accurate determinations of 'factual' guilt rather than its importance in protecting individual liberty.<sup>31</sup>

Thirdly, in order to facilitate public order goals, the Court rejects categorical prohibitions against State actions that violate criminal process safeguards. Instead, it focuses on a case-by-case analysis, on whether the violation of a procedural safeguard led to any material prejudice to the accused. Instead of placing *ex-ante* limitations on State actors, the Court favours *ex-post* oversight or review of State action by the judiciary as a safeguard against abuse. Where, in the Court's estimation, no 'harm' has been caused to the accused by the violation of a right, it is reluctant to allow the accused to 'benefit' from such a violation.

In Section III.1, we survey the Court's doctrine on criminal process rights, and highlight how the public order perspective shapes the Court's interpretations of these rights.

### **1.** *Ex-Post Facto* **Laws**

Article 20(1) prohibits convictions and penalties under *ex-post facto* laws. An *ex-post facto* law is seen as 'highly inequitable and unjust' because it does not give fair warning to an individual that her conduct is proscribed, and punishes her for an act that she was otherwise free to do. <sup>32</sup> Further, *expost facto* laws can be misused by a State bent on persecuting an individual, since the State could criminalise an action that was lawful when it took place, or remove protective procedural rules in order to overcome a deficiency in legal proof.<sup>33</sup>

In India, the guarantee against *ex-post facto* laws comprises two distinct parts. <sup>34</sup> The first prohibits conviction for an act that was not an offence at the time of its commission. The second proscribes retrospective enhancement of penalty.

*Soni Devrajbhai Babubhai v State of Gujarat* exemplifies the impact of the first safeguard under Article  $20(1)$ .  $\frac{35}{10}$  The appellants here argued that Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code 1860, which had been inserted in November 1986, should apply to an alleged incident that had occurred in August 1986. The Court rejected this contention and held that Article 20(1) meant that Section 304B could not be given any retrospective effect.

On the question of retrospective enhancement of punishment, *Kedar Nath Bajoria v State of West* Bengal is a paradigmatic example.<sup>36</sup> Here, for an offence committed in 1947, the State sought to apply a law enacted in 1949 which provided that upon conviction for certain types of offences the Court would impose a special fine on the convict. The Court held that the special fine could not be imposed because of Article 20(1)'s prohibition against retrospective enhancement of punishment.

Paradigmatic cases aside, and viewed in its entirety, the Court's jurisprudence has sought to interpret the Article 20(1) guarantee restrictively, and has done so by making problematic distinctions between procedural rules and substantive provisions; and between criminal and civil liability.<sup>37</sup> For example, the Court has held that the retrospective application of provisions that raise new evidentiary presumptions against the accused and reverse the burden of proof, or otherwise disadvantage the accused, will not be barred by Article  $20(1)$ .  $\frac{38}{3}$  This interpretation is not sensitive to the history of abuse of *ex-post facto* laws, which provides ample examples of changes to substantive and procedural provisions to disadvantage accused persons.<sup>39</sup> It may be argued that the wording of Article 20(1), specifically the phrase '*violation* of the law in force at the time of the commission' does not permit an interpretation that allows for bringing disadvantageous procedural changes within the ambit of Article 20(1)'s protection. However, after the expanded 'due process' interpretation of Article 21, the Court can read such prohibition into Article 21, which it has not done. The Court continues to abide by the formal distinction between procedural and substantive rules, rather than looking at material disadvantage to the accused by the changed procedure.  $\frac{40}{2}$ 

Another formal distinction, which defeats the substantive concern behind enacting a prohibition on *ex-post facto* laws, is between criminal and civil liabilities. The second part of Article 20(1) prohibits subjecting a person to 'a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission of the offence'. The Court has refused to read the words 'penalty' and 'offence' expansively to include retrospective application of non-criminal liabilities within the scope of this part. It has held that *ex-post* imposition of civil liability, even when the failure to discharge such liability could lead to imprisonment, is not barred by Article  $20(1) \frac{41}{1}$ Similarly, upholding a law which authorised the *ex-post* levy of penalties for the failure to discharge tax liability, the Court held that Article 20(1) provides protection only to 'persons who are charged with a crime before a criminal court', and therefore does not bar the retrospective levy of penalties for failure to comply with tax laws. <sup>42</sup> So also the Court has held that *ex-post* levy of charges for unauthorised use of canal water,  $\frac{43}{2}$  retrospective application of a law authorising forfeiture of properties, <sup>44</sup> *ex-post* application of a law that permits restraining a person from associating with any corporate body in accessing the securities market, and prohibiting such person from buying, selling, or dealing in securities, all impose non-criminal liabilities, and are hence not protected by Article  $20(1)$ .<sup>45</sup> The Court reasoned that the second part of Article 20(1) only prohibits retrospective imposition or enhancement of imprisonment or fine levied as a result of conviction in a criminal case.

The distinction between criminal and civil liabilities does not account for the underlying concern about State abuse and denial of individual liberty that results from *ex-post* application of burdens on individuals. A fine or an imprisonment in a criminal proceeding, a penalty in a tax statute, or imprisonment as a consequence of failure to discharge an *ex-post* civil liability are not qualitatively different when the focus is on limiting the State's power to retrospectively impose burdens on individuals for the exercise of their liberty.

A similar concern with drawing specious distinctions between civil and criminal liabilities arises in cases of retrospectively imposed collateral civil liability on the basis of a prior criminal penalty. That is, if law A imposes a criminal penalty and law B retrospectively attaches an additional civil liability to the criminal penalty, the Court does not consider law B as violating the second part of Article 20(1). $\frac{46}{1}$  According to the Court, the prior criminal penalty was only the basis on which the legislature identified the class of people who would be subject to liability under the civil law. Although the Court's interpretation allows the State to place significant burdens upon individuals under the guise of using the previous conviction as the 'factual basis' for legislative classification, the Court has not discussed this implication of its decision. Instead, demonstrating its public-orderoriented approach, the Court has held that '[t]he nature of the activity and the harm it does to the community provide<sup>[s]</sup> a sufficiently rational basis' to justify such retrospective application.<sup>47</sup>

# **2. Double Jeopardy**

Article 20(2) provides that 'No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once.' The Court exhibits the same public order perspective of reading the right restrictively while interpreting this guarantee against double jeopardy. As explained by the US Supreme Court in *Green v United States*,  $\frac{48}{5}$  the basis of the guarantee against double jeopardy is that:

[t]he State with all its resources and power should not be allowed to make repeated attempts to convict an individual for an alleged offence, thereby subjecting him to embarrassment, expense and ordeal and compelling him to live in a continuing state of anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing the possibility that even though innocent he may be found guilty.<sup>49</sup>

UK and US courts have interpreted the guarantee against double jeopardy to protect against a second trial regardless of whether the first ended in conviction or acquittal.<sup>50</sup> The Indian Supreme Court, however, has refused to read the phrase 'prosecuted and punished' disjunctively, that is, as 'prosecuted or punished'.<sup>51</sup> Instead, it has interpreted Article 20(2) as only barring a second trial for an offence for which a person has already been punished once. An acquittal in the first prosecution does not bar another prosecution.<sup>52</sup>

The Court has also held that Article 20(2) only bars more than one criminal prosecution and punishment for the same offence.<sup>53</sup> It does not bar a civil trial, administrative proceedings, or any other non-criminal proceeding arising out of the same transaction for which a person has been prosecuted and punished in a criminal proceeding.<sup>54</sup> Proceedings before quasi-judicial bodies are also not barred by, and do not further bar, a prosecution before a criminal court.<sup>55</sup>

Similarly, the Court has interpreted the phrase 'for the same offence' to refer only to cases where the prosecution and punishment in the first and subsequent instances are for offences whose ingredients are the same. <sup>56</sup> Where the ingredients of two offences are non-identical, then, although the prosecution for both is based upon the same allegations, a person can be prosecuted and punished for both offences. 57

# **3. Right Against Self-incrimination**

The right against self-incrimination brings into confrontation, perhaps most directly, the liberty interest in preventing coercion by State authorities, and the public order interest in determining the 'truth'. The right against self-incrimination protects a person accused of an offence from being compelled to be a witness against herself.<sup>58</sup> The Court has understood this right as 'ensuring reliability of the statements made by an accused' along with 'ensuring that such statements are made voluntarily'.<sup>59</sup> According to the Court, the concern with voluntariness of the statements itself arises from the fact that a compelled testimony has a high likelihood of being false.<sup>60</sup>

The scope of the right against self-incrimination has been heavily litigated in the Supreme Court, which has been called upon to determine what the terms 'accused of an offence', 'being compelled', and 'to be a witness' mean. The Court has held that a person is considered to be 'accused of an offence' if she 'stood in the character of an accused' when making the statement, and includes the investigation and trial stages.<sup>61</sup> However, by its interpretation of what it means 'to be a witness', the Court has limited the scope of the right against self-incrimination.

In *MP Sharma v Satish Chandra* (hereinafter *Sharma*), <sup>62</sup> an eight-judge bench of the Court ruled that a person is a witness not only when she gives oral evidence, but also when she produces documents,  $\frac{63}{12}$  even during the investigative phase.  $\frac{64}{12}$  Subsequently, however, an eleven-judge bench in *Kathi Kalu Oghad v State of Bombay* (hereinafter *Oghad*) confined the term 'to be a witness' in Article 20(3) to cover only oral and written statements, which it termed 'personal testimony'.  $65$ Personal testimony involves conveying facts that are within the personal knowledge of the accused. Conversely, the Court held that a person is not a 'witness' when she produces physical objects or provides thumb impressions, handwriting samples, or other bodily substances using which she may be identified.<sup>66</sup> These amount to 'furnishing evidence', but not to 'being a witness', <sup>67</sup> the distinguishing feature being personal knowledge of the relevant facts.<sup>68</sup> The Court reasoned that the Constitution makers 'may have intended to protect an accused person from the hazards of self-incrimination… they could not have intended to put obstacles in the way of efficient and effective investigation into crime and of bringing criminals to justice'. $\frac{69}{2}$  'Arming' the police and courts with powers to 'bring offenders to justice' was as important as ensuring that accused persons are not compelled to make self-incriminatory statements.<sup>70</sup>

The distinction between personal testimony and physical objects derives from the concern that compelling personal testimonies may lead to non-voluntary statements, which will impair the truthseeking function of the criminal process. Conversely, the production of physical objects does not raise this concern, and actually furthers the ability of State actors to find the truth.

In contrast to *Sharma* and *Oghad*, the facts of which involved 'furnishing evidence', *Selvi v State* of *Karnataka* (hereinafter *Selvi*) dealt with compelling a person to make statements.<sup>71</sup> The Court in *Selvi* emphasised the 'reliability rationale' of the right against self-incrimination, observing that coerced, threatened, or induced statements have a higher tendency to be false. Since unreliable and false evidence leads to inaccurate verdicts, and thus a miscarriage of justice, statements obtained through coercion, threat, or inducement are not admissible.<sup> $72$ </sup> Holding that statements made by an accused in a narco-analysis test, under the influence of 'truth serum', are involuntary, and hence compelled, the Court reasoned that the involuntary nature of such statements heavily impacted their *reliability* and could therefore compromise the entire trial.<sup>73</sup>

The truth-seeking perspective of the Court has in the recent past extended to compelling accused persons to incriminate themselves during trial. This is starkly exhibited in the Court's interpretation of Section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code 1973, which requires the judge to pose questions to the accused about the circumstances appearing against her in the prosecution evidence.<sup>74</sup> Section 313 expressly states that the accused shall not be administered oath and shall not render herself liable to punishment by either refusing to answer the Court's questions or by answering falsely.<sup>75</sup> Departing from pre-constitutional law, the 1973 Code removed the permissibility of drawing adverse inferences if the accused refused to answer or gave false answers, to bring the provision in tune with Article  $20(3)$ . <sup>76</sup> However, in a series of recent cases, the Court has held that although the accused is entitled to remain silent or completely deny the allegation against her, an adverse inference can be drawn from such silence or false denial. $\frac{7}{2}$  This interpretation compels the accused to provide the court an explanation for the evidence against her.

The Court's engagement with the question of compulsion highlights its public order perspective. A liberty approach on the right against self-incrimination focuses on the importance of the right for curbing police brutality. The dominant narrative in the Indian context, exceptions apart,  $\frac{78}{10}$  however, has been on the reliability of the evidence generated through compulsion. The scope of the protection against compulsion is circumscribed by the usefulness of the evidence so generated in making a determination of guilt or innocence.

#### **4. Illegally Obtained Evidence**

The Court's focus on reliability of evidence in determining the scope of Article 20(3) permeates to its doctrine on whether evidence obtained in violation of a fundamental right should be admissible or not. 'Compulsion' is the sole ground for exclusion of evidence. Therefore, evidence gathered in violation of Article 20(3) is inadmissible, but evidence obtained by other illegal means, including through the violation of Article 21, is admissible.

Recall that Section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 makes confessions to a police officer inadmissible. However, Section 27 makes admissible a 'discovery' made on the basis of a confession to a police officer, and the relevant part of the confession. In the context of the right against selfincrimination, the Court has had to rule on whether a 'discovery' made as a consequence of a statement obtained in violation of Article 20(3) is admissible under Section 27. In *Oghad*, the Court held that if compulsion is used to obtain a confession, a discovery made on the basis of such a compelled statement would be barred by Article 20(3). <sup>79</sup> More recently, in *Selvi*, the Court, following *Oghad*, held that if a person is compelled to make a statement while in custody, neither direct nor derivative use of that statement is permitted.<sup>80</sup>

However, in *Yusufalli Esmail Nagree v State of Maharasthra <sup>81</sup>* and *RM Malkani v State of* Maharashtra (hereinafter *Malkani*), <sup>82</sup> the Court held as admissible a secretly tape-recorded conversation in which the accused incriminated himself, on the ground that since the conversation was entirely voluntary, and the accused had not been compelled, tortured, or threatened to make an incriminatory statement, the conversation was not hit by Article 20(3).

The Court's dicta is therefore unambiguous on the point that evidence obtained through compelled confessions violates Article 20(3) and is inadmissible. But what about evidence obtained through the
violation of other rights? Article 21 prohibits deprivation of life and liberty except by procedure established by law. Should it therefore bar the admissibility of illegally obtained evidence, which by its very nature is not obtained by 'procedure established by law'? The Court has repeatedly rejected this contention. 83 In *Malkani*, the Court rejected the claim that Article 21 rights of the accused are violated when telephonic conversations of the accused are secretly recorded, without following the 'procedure established by law'. It ruled that Article 21 is meant to safeguard privacy rights of innocent citizens, not to protect the guilty, and that it would not interpret Article 21 to prevent the police from acting against people seeking to violate the law by bribing public servants. <sup>84</sup> For this reason, evidence procured illegally would be admissible. More recently, in *State of Madhya Pradesh v Paltan Mallah*, the Court ruled that weapons obtained during an illegal search are admissible unless serious prejudice is caused to the accused. <sup>85</sup> Similarly, in *Umesh Kumar v State of Andhra Pradesh*, the Court expressly recognised that an illegally obtained document can be used as evidence as long as its relevance and genuineness is proved.<sup>86</sup>

## **5. Fair Trial Guarantees**

The Supreme Court has read a guarantee of 'fair trial' into the *Maneka*-expanded<sup>87</sup> 'procedure established by law' clause of Article 21.<sup>88</sup> While the Court has found it difficult to articulate an 'analytical, all-comprehensive or exhaustive definition of the concept of a fair trial',  $\frac{89}{5}$  the trend of cases indicates that fair trial under Article 21 has come to signify that the State should justify every deprivation of life or liberty before an impartial tribunal.<sup>90</sup> Consequently, the accused should be presumed innocent<sup>91</sup> until the State can prove her guilt beyond reasonable doubt.<sup>92</sup> Fair trial also encompasses the right of the accused to receive fair opportunity to defend herself against such charges and prove her innocence.  $\frac{93}{2}$  Apart from principles of natural justice,  $\frac{94}{2}$  the fair opportunity of defence includes the concomitant right to put forward a defence,  $\frac{95}{5}$  to receive legal assistance,  $\frac{96}{5}$  to adduce evidence in support of one's case,  $\frac{97}{2}$  to receive fair disclosure of exculpatory evidence,  $\frac{98}{2}$  and to appeal the decision to at least one other tribunal. $\frac{99}{9}$  Additionally, the right to speedy trial ensures that the accused is not put through extended pre-conviction detention, through 'worry, anxiety, expense and disturbance', and face impediments in defending herself because of an unduly prolonged trial.<sup>100</sup>

In line with its larger rhetoric in cases of constitutional criminal procedure, the Court has understood the purpose of the right to fair trial as enabling accurate determinations of factual guilt and innocence.<sup>101</sup> Therefore, the Court has held that a fair trial 'should be a search for the truth and not a bout over technicalities'. <sup>102</sup> Furthermore, courts should not be overly solicitous of the accused, but should also give weight to rights of victims and 'interests of society'.<sup>103</sup> This narrative exemplifies the public order perspective. $\frac{104}{9}$  A liberty perspective would examine criminal process rights as a matter of coordinating between the State's power and the individual's liberty so as to prevent arbitrary intrusion into individual liberty. The Court, however, throws the rights of victims into the mix, and suggests that 'the concept of fair trial entails familiar triangulation of interests of the accused, the victim and the society… [and that] [i]nterests of society are not to be treated completely with disdain and as *persona non grata*' in a criminal process.<sup>105</sup> Thus, along with the rights of the accused, the criminal process should give 'equal protection to the victim and to society at large to

ensure that the guilty does not get away from the clutches of the law'. $\frac{106}{100}$  Through constructing this tension between the rights of the accused on the one hand, and the rights of victims and society at large on the other, the Court emphasises the importance of the interests of (actual and potential) victims in crime reduction and maintenance of public order, in shaping the rights of an accused. $\frac{107}{10}$  In practice, the Court's invocation of 'rights of the victims' and 'society at large' is always accompanied by reading down of the rights of the accused.

At the doctrinal level, the focus on factual guilt and innocence translates into an emerging narrative that the denial of fair trial rights does not amount to per se illegality of the trial or of any procedure. Instead, the accused has to establish 'factual prejudice' due to the violation, for the trial to be set aside or for the Court to award any other remedy. Therefore, guarantees flowing from the right to fair trial have been read, not as placing categorical restrictions upon the State, but as requiring preventing, on a case-by-case basis, 'factual prejudice' to the accused.

Take, for example, *Zahira Sheikh v State of Gujarat*, where the Court explained that the right to fair trial has as its 'ultimate object … whether something that was done or said either before or at the trial deprived the quality of fairness to a degree where a miscarriage of justice has resulted'.  $\frac{108}{108}$ Similarly in *Rattiram v State of Madhya Pradesh* (hereinafter *Rattiram*), 109 the Court understood the 'sacrosanct purpose' and 'demonstrable object' of a fair trial to be that 'the accused should not be prejudiced'.<sup>110</sup> The Court emphasised that '[t]he concept of fair trial and the conception of miscarriage of justice are not … to be deduced from procedural lapse or [violation of] an interdict ...'<sup>111</sup> Rather, '[t]he seminal issue is whether the protection given to the accused under the law has been jeopardised as a consequence of which there has been failure of justice or causation of any prejudice'.  $\frac{112}{1}$ 

The right to receive disclosure of exculpatory material and the right to speedy trial also exemplify the 'factual prejudice' approach. In *Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi)* (hereinafter *Manu Sharma*), <sup>113</sup> the Court stated a broad principle that the prosecutor has a duty to make fair disclosure of all material that she relies upon, even if such material has not been placed in evidence before the court. However, the Court then curtailed the breadth of this principle, by requiring the prosecutor to disclose evidence relied upon only when the document was 'bona fide obtained by the investigating agency and *in the opinion of the Prosecutor* is relevant and would help in arriving at the truth'.  $\frac{114}{11}$ Further, on facts, the Court held that since the non-disclosure of a ballistic report did not lead to any 'irreversible prejudice' to the accused, the trial would not be vitiated for reasons of nondisclosure.<sup>115</sup>

Following *Manu Sharma* in *VK Sasikala v State*,  $\frac{116}{10}$  the Court held that if, in an ongoing trial, the accused seeks disclosure of documents that have been forwarded to the Court by the prosecution, but have not been marked or exhibited, the Court will permit inspection of such documents if it is satisfied that the accused has a *reasonable* perception of prejudice if the documents are withheld.<sup>117</sup> Here too, the accused has no indefeasible right to inspect all documents forwarded by the prosecution. Instead, the accused is required to establish, without having inspected the contents of the evidence, that denying its disclosure causes a reasonable perception of prejudice to her.<sup>118</sup>

Similarly, although the Court has read a right to speedy trial as part of the fair trial guarantee under Article 21, delay by itself is not considered a violation of the right. The accused has to establish that 'prejudice' was caused to her because of the delay.<sup>119</sup>

The Court has also read other fair trial rights restrictively. It has upheld the constitutionality of

reverse onus clauses that shift the burden of proof onto the accused once the prosecution has proved certain foundational facts. Upon a challenge that reverse onus clauses in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1985 (NDPS Act) violate the presumption of innocence, the Court held that such clauses were justified due to the public interest in controlling drug-related offences.<sup>120</sup> Similarly, the Court referenced the public interest in controlling 'the menace of adulteration of liquor' to uphold the constitutionality of reverse onus clauses in the Kerala Abkari Act 1977.<sup>121</sup> Though it recognised that these 'special provisions are to some extent harsh and are a departure from normal criminal jurisprudence', the Court held them to be 'a special mode to tackle new situations created by human proclivity to amass wealth at the altar of human lives'.<sup>122</sup> Consequently, despite arguments and citations to decisions around the world that have struck down reverse onus clauses for violating the presumption of innocence, the Court refused to strike or read down the law. Recently, in *Hardeep Singh v State of Punjab*, the Court explicitly recognised the truth-seeking virtues of such clauses, and held that their purpose lies in preventing 'the real perpetrator of an offence to get away unpunished'. $\frac{123}{ }$ 

In one line of cases, the Court has also expressed discomfort with the 'beyond reasonable doubt' standard, calling for the doctrine to be understood in a manner that does not 'destroy social defence'.<sup>124</sup> According to the Court, '[j]ustice cannot be made sterile on the plea that it is better to let a hundred guilty escape than punish an innocent. Letting the guilty escape is not doing justice according to law.<sup>'125</sup> The Court has also wondered 'whether in the meticulous hypersensitivity to eliminate a rare innocent from being punished, many guilty persons must be allowed to escape'. <sup>126</sup> Rejecting this contention, the Court has held that 'proof beyond reasonable doubt is a guideline, not a fetish'. $\frac{127}{127}$  Based on this reasoning the Court awarded the death sentence to the accused since his retracted, uncorroborated confession to a police officer was found to satisfy the standard of proof.<sup>128</sup>

## **6. Right to Counsel**

The right to counsel as part of a fair trial guarantee under Article 21 and a right under Article 22 (1) has also been diluted by the Court to a prejudice standard.

Article 22(1) of the Constitution mandates that no person who has been arrested shall be 'denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice'. Post-*Maneka*, 129 the right to legal assistance in a criminal proceeding has been unambiguously understood to be a core concomitant of the Article 21 fair trial guarantee. $\frac{130}{130}$  The right to free legal aid extends to any accused financially incapable of engaging a counsel. $\frac{131}{12}$  Noting that the curtailment of liberty begins with arrest, the Court extended the State's constitutional mandate to provide free legal aid to the time the arrestee is first produced before a magistrate.<sup>132</sup> Importantly, the Court has also ruled that a person is not required to make a formal application for free legal assistance; it is the Court's responsibility to ensure that a counsel is provided.<sup>133</sup>

While the right to legal aid is a well-established fair trial guarantee, the scope of the right is less certain. Two issues in particular have come up before the Court regarding the right to counsel: first, whether it implies that the counsel can be present during interrogation; secondly, whether it means right to 'effective counsel'.

Recognising that the right against self-incrimination would be meaningless unless the accused has access to legal advice, the Court in *Nandini Satpathy v PL Dani* (hereinafter *Satpathy*) and *Selvi* ruled that the right to counsel entitles the accused to have her lawyer present during interrogation.<sup>134</sup> In *Selvi*, the accused's inability to access counsel when semi-conscious was a major reason behind the 'truth serum' tests being held unconstitutional. $\frac{135}{13}$ 

Other judicial decisions have, however, whittled down the ruling in *Satpathy*. In *Poolpandi v Superintendent, Central Excise*,  $\frac{136}{120}$  the Court disagreed with *Satpathy*, stating that *Satpathy* was *per incuriam* two constitutional bench decisions of the Court on the right to counsel during interrogation. <sup>137</sup> More recently, in *Senior Intelligence Of icer, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence v Jugal Kishore Samra*, <sup>138</sup> the Court ruled that an accused is not entitled to have counsel present during interrogation, although the counsel can 'watch proceedings from a distance or from beyond a glass partition but  $\ldots$  not within the hearing distance'.  $\frac{139}{2}$ 

A slightly different approach was adopted in *State (NCT of Delhi) v Navjot Sandhu* (hereinafter *Navjot Sandhu*),  $\frac{140}{140}$  where the Court, citing *Satpathy*, ruled that if the accused 'wishes to have the presence of his lawyer, he shall not be denied that opportunity' to meet and consult with her lawyer 'at the stage' of interrogation. $\frac{141}{12}$  However, this was in the context of Section 52(4) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2002, which provided the accused the right to meet her counsel during interrogation.

*Mohd Ajmal Amir Kasab v State of Maharashtra* (hereinafter *Kasab*) <sup>142</sup> provides the latest word on the issue.<sup>143</sup> Following its truth-seeking approach, the Court drastically restricted the right to counsel. It ruled that in the Indian system, the role of the lawyer is predominantly in court proceedings, and is confined to arguing on issues of remand, bail, framing of charges and trial, in addition to providing legal advice at various stages of the process. The role of the defence lawyer was understood to ensure that rights guaranteed under the Constitution and various statutes are adhered to in practice. <sup>144</sup> The Court reiterated that failure to provide a lawyer during trial vitiates the trial. However, such failure during the pre-trial stage would not vitiate the trial, unless shown to cause *material prejudice* to the accused. It would only result in disciplinary action against the magistrate or give rise to a compensation claim from the State.<sup>145</sup>

Another important issue is whether failure to provide counsel renders confessions made by the accused inadmissible. The Court in *Navjot Sandhu* rejected this argument, holding instead that the right to counsel is only an important 'supplemental safeguard' necessary to ensure that selfincrimination rights are not violated. The Court ruled that the denial of these safeguards would be relevant in deciding whether the confessions should be acted upon or discarded.<sup>146</sup> Therefore, the question of admissibility of such confessions would be decided on a case-to-case basis. However, the Court did not lay down any standard, such as prejudice to the accused, to adjudicate the issue.

The same issue arose in *Kasab*, where the Court rejected Kasab's argument that not having counsel at the time of confession led to the denial of his right against self-incrimination. $\frac{147}{147}$  It held that the purpose of the criminal process 'is to find out the truth, and not to shield the accused from the consequences of his wrongdoing'. <sup>148</sup> The sole factor relevant in evaluating the evidentiary value of a confession is whether it was voluntarily made. The role of a lawyer is to conduct the trial 'on the basis of material lawfully collected' during investigation. To judge whether a confession is constitutional, the Court would not examine 'whether the accused would have made the statement had he been sufficiently scared by the lawyer regarding the consequences of the confession. The true test is whether or not the confession is voluntary. $\frac{149}{149}$ 

Finally, the question of whether or not the accused has a right to some minimum quality of legal assistance arose in *Navjot Sandhu*. The Court held that the right to legal aid in India 'cannot be taken thus far  $150$  and therefore rejected the applicability of 'ineffective assistance of counsel' as a ground to vitiate trials. Similarly, in *Ashok Debbarma v State of Tripura*, <sup>151</sup> where the question was whether ineffective assistance by counsel can be considered a mitigating circumstance in death sentencing, the Court held that a determination has to be made whether prejudice was caused because of the counsel's ineffectiveness. For this, a court has to consider the 'totality of the evidence' and conclude that absent the errors committed by the counsel, it was reasonably possible that the court would not have awarded the death sentence.<sup>152</sup>

Hence, the Court has refused to consider ineffective assistance of counsel as violating Article 21, although in passing it observed in *Noor Aga v State of Punjab* that ineffective assistance of counsel is a 'systemic violation of [an] accused's core constitutional right'. <sup>153</sup>

## **7. Rights upon Arrest and Bail**

Article 22 of the Constitution guarantees an arrested person the right to be informed of the grounds for arrest; to not be denied the right to consult and be represented by a counsel of her choice; and to be produced before the nearest magistrate within twenty-four hours of being arrested. The Court has expanded these rights in numerous judgments, and laid down extensive guidelines relating to the arrest procedure.<sup>154</sup> Recently, it frowned upon unnecessary arrests, and gave directions to curb unnecessary arrest.<sup>155</sup> However, unlike the United States, where an illegal arrest serves to exclude evidence gathered as a result of such arrest, <sup>156</sup> in India, no case has considered the impact of illegal arrests on trial. *Satpath*y and *DK Basu v State of West Bengal <sup>157</sup>* only provided for compensation and disciplinary action against delinquent police officers. In light of the discussion on illegally obtained evidence, it appears unlikely that the Court would declare a mistrial or exclude evidence because of an illegal deprivation of liberty.

As a general matter, the Court has understood the law of arrest as requiring a balance between the human rights of an arrestee and protecting societal interest in reducing crime rates.<sup>158</sup> This approach is particularly evident in the law relating to bail.

In the immediate aftermath of *Maneka Gandhi*, the Court held that any law authorising deprivation of liberty should be 'reasonable, even handed and geared to the goals of community good and State necessity'.<sup>159</sup> Reasonableness entailed not using pre-trial detention through the denial of bail as a punitive measure.<sup>160</sup> The Court held that '[t]he only material consideration[s]... are whether the accused would be readily available for his trial and whether he is likely to abuse the discretion granted in his favour by tampering with evidence'.<sup>161</sup> 'Bail not jail' should be the courts' mantra,  $\frac{162}{1}$ and bail should not be denied on grounds that the community's sentiments were against the accused.<sup>163</sup>

However, the Court's liberty-focused approach above has been significantly diluted in other decisions. Although continuing to pay lip service to the idea that bail is not punitive, its case law suggests a move towards such a model. Instead of focusing on factors such as the likelihood of the person absconding or tampering with evidence or witnesses, the Court has in recent cases focused on using bail law to balance between individual liberty and societal, security interests.  $\frac{164}{164}$ 

In a series of cases, the Court has denied bail, stating that 'societal interest' is not served by letting the person at liberty. This approach understands the purpose of pre-conviction detention as incapacitating the accused, which is a goal of punishment, not detention. The punitive approach is particularly evident in the Court's increasing focus on the nature of the crime, and its understanding that 'societal interests' would *ipso facto* be affected if persons accused of committing certain types of crimes are released on bail. Instead of individualised determinations of likelihood of absconding or tampering with witnesses, the Court's focus shifts to the nature of the crime, and the need to serve 'societal interests'seeking protection from such crime.

One such category is economic offences, where, on bail, the Court has advised against 'misplaced sympathy… on such white-collared accused persons whose acts of commission and omission has ruined a vast majority of poor citizens of this country'.  $\frac{165}{165}$  Similarly, finding that economic offences involve 'deep-rooted conspiracies', lead to a 'huge loss of public funds', and adversely affect the economy, the Court in *YS Jagan Mohan Reddy v CBI*, <sup>166</sup> denied bail to the accused, who had been in custody for more than a year, citing the magnitude of the fraud involved.

The Court has also developed distinct principles of bail law for terror- and drug-related offences, aided by the statutory trend of curtailing courts' discretion to grant bail in such cases, by placing stringent preconditions therefor. Take, for example, Section 20(8) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act 1987 (TADA), which permitted bail only when the Court was satisfied that reasonable grounds exist for believing that the accused is not guilty of the offence; and that the accused is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. The constitutionality of this section was challenged in *Kartar Singh v State of Punjab*, <sup>167</sup> on the ground that these conditions were too onerous, effectively making bail impossible. The Court upheld the provision's constitutionality, noting that though liberty has to be zealously safeguarded, in cases under legislation like the TADA, the rights of the victim are important too. The 'collective interest of the community' and national safety were deemed relevant in bail adjudication under such laws. <sup>168</sup> Similarly, in *Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee Representing Undertrial Prisoners v Union of India <sup>169</sup>* and *Shaheen Welfare Association v Union of India, <sup>170</sup>* where the Court was faced with prisoners in extended undertrial detention for drug- and terror-related offences, respectively, the Court framed the issue before itself as one of reconciling individual liberty versus the safety of the community. It adopted one-time 'pragmatic' measures to categorise prisoners based on the allegations against them, and determined bail for each category accordingly.

Thus a creeping 'public interest' logic seems evident in bail jurisprudence, where decisions are not determined any more by an evaluation of the likelihood of the accused absconding or tampering with evidence. Instead, the determining factor is a broad punitive logic that suggests that 'public interest' is best served by incarcerating certain specific persons, or persons accused of certain types of crimes. This logic of incapacitation is more suited to the regime of post-conviction incarceration than to pretrial detention.

## **IV. CONCLUSION: CONSTITUTIONAL CRIMINAL PROCEDURE AND RIGHTS OF THE IMPOVERISHED**

In its interpretation of constitutional criminal process rights, the Court is more concerned with State

security and truth seeking than individual liberty. Although the Court recognises the principle of presumption of innocence in individual cases, it creates a systemic presumption of criminality against accused persons as a class. Rights are read against the accused so as to not let the guilty get away. This is exemplified by the Court's more recent bail jurisprudence, and its treatment of the right to counsel. Although the Court has consistently held that bail should not be punitive in nature, its doctrine has defeated the principle. The systemic presumption of guilt against the accused is also evident in the Court's doctrine on reverse onus clauses.

Such systemic presumption of guilt; the dilution of the right to counsel during interrogations and confessions; the non-recognition of the right to effective counsel; the focus on *ex-post* review of State action for 'factual prejudice' rather than categorical *ex-ante* prohibitions on rights-defeating conduct; and the emergent public interest rationale for denial of bail, all serve to especially disadvantage impoverished accused persons. By reducing categorical principles to factual prejudice, the Court provides little *ex-ante* guidance to State actors on how to modulate their behaviour. Further, the Court puts the burden on the accused to prove factual prejudice. Not only is this a tough standard to meet the rights of the accused are not automatically guaranteed—but it also requires the accused to agitate them. This assumes a high level of knowledge of rights, and quality legal representation, both of which are generally not available to impoverished defendants. Therefore, the Court's approach does not augur well for those who face the brunt of police power: who cannot afford lawyers, and therefore depend upon the State, but do not get legal assistance until they are remanded to custody, and even then, have to be satisfied with whatever quality of legal assistance is provided.

When BR Ambedkar rose to introduce draft Article 15A in the Constituent Assembly, he drew a distinction between provisions relating to arrest in a criminal case, and provisions relating to preventive detention contained in the Article.<sup>171</sup> The rights upon arrest were 'safeguards against inroads' into the personal liberty of citizens. However, in emergency situations, especially those involving 'tampering either with public order … or with the Defence Services', he did not believe that 'the exigency of the liberty of the individual should be placed above the interests of the State'. <sup>172</sup> In such cases, the need of public order could trump an individual's liberty interest. However, through its public order readings of constitutional criminal procedure, the Supreme Court has conceived the quotidian reality of the State as one of routinised emergency.

<span id="page-14-2"></span> $4$  Packer ( $n/2$ ); Erik Luna, 'The Models of Criminal Procedure' (1999) 2 Buffalo Criminal Law Review 389, 402.

 $\frac{5}{2}$  Luna [\(n](#page-14-2) 4) 401.

<span id="page-14-1"></span><sup>1</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 853, 6 December 1948 (Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar).

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>2</sup> See generally, Herbert Packer, 'Two Models of the Criminal Process' (1964) 113 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 1. Packer uses the terms 'due process' model and 'crime control' model to describe approaches that value individual liberty and public order, respectively. However, Packer's models are not, and are not meant to be, descriptions of reality. Rather, they are abstractions from reality, set up as polar opposites on the scale of choices available in the construction of the criminal process, in order to discover and discuss the 'normative antinomy' between the value systems underlying the two models. While sharing Packer's assessment of these values, we do [n](#page-14-0)ot adopt his models or his terminology. See  $n / 7$  and accompanying text for our reasons for departing from Packer's framework.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>3</sup> See eg, *Miranda v Arizona* 384 US 436, 439 (1966), defining criminal procedure as 'the restraints society must observe consistent with the Federal Constitution in prosecuting individuals for crime'.

 $\frac{6}{5}$  See generally, Mirjan Damaska, 'Evidentiary Barriers to Conviction and Two Models of Criminal Procedure: A Comparative Study' (1972) 121 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 506, 575–77.

<span id="page-14-0"></span> $<sup>7</sup>$  In direct contrast with Packer, the liberty and public order perspectives are not conceived as polar opposites. They are presented as</sup> actual descriptions of approaches that have shaped the trajectory of Indian criminal procedure, rather than as hypothetical 'models'.