# 10 Sikh fundamentalism Translating history into theory<sup> $1$ </sup>

Harjot Oberoi

Fundamentalism among the Sikhs today is primarily a movement of resistance. While Sikh fundamentalists certainly envision a separate nation-state in the Indian subcontinent, in the last decade much of their energies have been spent in assailing and battling the Indian state. Denied political authority and engaged in constant struggle for survival and legitimacy, Sikh fundamentalists have not succeeded in articulating their vision of the world in any great detail. This lack of an elaborate model, say on the lines of Iranian clerics, of what the world should look like is closely tied to the social origins of Sikh activists. A great majority of them come from the countryside and would be classified as peasants by social anthropologists: Historically, peasants have not been known to come up with grand paradigms of social transformation. Peasant societies are by definition made up of little communities, and their cosmos is invariably parochial rather than universal. To speak of Sikh fundamentalism and its impact is to enter a universe that until recently was largely characterized by marginality, incoherence, and disorder.

In the present context any efforts to grapple with the raw and embryonic universe of Sikh fundamentalism will be considerably shaped by how we define and deploy the term fundamentalism. I use the term not out of any ethnocentrism or lack of understanding of the historical specificities that made it current in the United States at the turn of the century.<sup>2</sup> The current debate surrounding the term fundamentalism is hardly unique in the conceptual history of social sciences. In the past there have been similar discussions regarding the cross-cultural applicability of terms like feudalism, millenarianism, religion, class, state, madness, and so on. Interestingly, the arguments proffered in defense or rejections have not been dissimilar to the recent intellectual exchanges surrounding the term fundamentalism. Those keen on defending these terms have often argued that there was little scope for cross-cultural comparisons if they did not possess a common pool of conceptual vocabulary. Others opposed to the enterprise retorted that the history of the world should not be inscribed in terms of the Euro-American experience alone, for in doing so one would further enhance the hegemony of Euro-American intellectual discourse.

With this background to the contested nature of our conceptual vocabulary, and keenly aware of how loaded and tainted the term fundamentalism can be, I would like to defend my usage of the term Sikh fundamentalism on three grounds. First, in the Punjabi word *mulvad*, Sikhs possess a term that exactly corresponds to fundamentalism and stands in stark opposition to *adharma*, a Puniabi word for secularism. Although the term *mulvad* is of recent coinage, resulting from the need to have a Punjabi counterpart to fundamentalism, Sikh journalists, essayists, and politicians, in discussing contemporary religious and political movements, now constantly use the term *mulvad*, connoting a polity and society organized on the basis of religious (particularly scriptural) authority (for instance, see Azad 1988). Thus, in the Sikh case the commonly voiced objection, that non-Christian religious groups to which the term fundamentalism is applied have no such equivalent in their own lexicon, does not fully hold.

Second, there are strong cultural reasons for adopting the term 'Sikh fundamentalism.' Much like Protestant church groups in the United States that at the turn of the century insisted on the inerrancy of the Bible and opposed liberal theology, Sikh fundamentalists have no patience for hermeneutic or critical readings of Sikh scriptures. Their scriptural absolutism precludes any secular or rational interpretation of what they consider to be a revealed text. K. S. Mann, a secretary of the Institute of Sikh studies in Chandigarh, notes: 'Nobody who has any regard for feelings of the Sikhs. should take liberties to indulge in exercises with the Guru Granth Sahib [the Sikh scripture], literary or otherwise' (1989: 57). Similarly, a recent book written by a group of Sikh civil servants questions the use of Western historiography and textual analysis for the study of Sikh history and sacred texts (see Gurdev Singh 1986, especially pp. 3– 11).<sup>3</sup> It is their firm belief that only those scholars who can strengthen the faith and espouse its 'fundamentals' should study Sikhism. Daljeet Singh, a Sikh writer who for many years has opposed the study of Sikh religion and history within the academy, protests: 'From the point of views the men of religion, such studies would be limited in their scope, partial in their vision and inadequate as a study of man in the totality of his being and functioning, i.e., his spiritual and empirical life' (1989: 21).

Critical scholarship among the Sikhs is under attack, and those who dare to practice it are under constant pressure to relent or face elimination. On 22 February 1984 Summet Singh, the thirty-one-year-old editor of Punjab's oldest literary journal *Preet*-Larhi, was gunned down outside Amritsar. His main fault was his independent-minded interpretation of Sikh theology and tradition. More recent targets have been university professors, poets, artists, and journalists. Theoretically, the Sikh community should be guided divinely in all matters and this divine direction is seen to come from the Sikh scripture, which is perceived as normative for all time and in all place. A critical textual analysis of the Sikh scriptures that may introduce an element of historicity and plurality of interpretations, thus undermining scripturalism, would certainly be construed as an affront  $-$  one that would bring quick retribution. Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale (1947-84), a key figure in the rise of Sikh fundamentalism, repeatedly reminded his audience that they should not tolerate any form of insult toward the Sikh scriptures and that, where required, Sikhs were morally obliged to kill an individual who dared to show disrespect toward the holy book.

Third, the current Sikh movement, as will become apparent in this chapter, amply manifests many tendencies like millenarianism, a prophetic vision, puritanism, and antipluralism, trends that have been commonly associated with fundamentalism.<sup>4</sup> For these three reasons  $-$  linguistic, cultural, and associative  $-$  I think we are justified in speaking and thinking in terms of Sikh fundamentalism.

Having said this, I must stress that in Foucault's terms there is no archaeology to Sikh fundamentalism. It is an episteme that is still in the making, and its canon, ideology, objectives, and practices are being gradually defined. In this sense, for all those who are interested in fundamentalism, the Sikh case is of particular value, for here we can clearly see how a group of fundamentalists invent and reproduce themselves in the late twentieth century. Given its relatively recent origins, the success of Sikh fundamentalism has been staggering. In less than a decade Sikh fundamentalism not only established a multitude of relationships with ethnicity, political economy and nationalism but also eventually came to encompass these materially and conceptually varied conditions. To speak of Sikh fundamentalism is therefore to address simultaneously issues of Sikh identity, the crisis of agrarian development, class antagonisms, and the process of state formation in India, including popular resistance to this process. All this can be phrased in another way: When today large segments of the Sikh population consider who they are, how to live and die, and how to construct the universe they live in, the answers flow out of what may be termed the discourse and ideology of fundamentalism. Why is this discourse so attractive and powerful? What does this cultural innovation promise? I grapple with these issues in this chapter.

### The background

Despite the powerful normative notion of a Sikh collectivity, popularly known in the Punjabi language by the term *panth*, Sikhs are not a monolithic religious community. Much like other religious communities, the Sikhs are divided by geography, ethnicity, social hierarchy, sects, ritual practices, and individual preferences. Consequently, when it comes to political participation, Sikhs have never been represented by a single political party. They have always opted for a wide variety of political platforms, ranging from archconservative to ultraradical.

The first explicitly Sikh political party – the Central Sikh League – was formally established in Amritsar in December 1919. Before the end of the following year the Sikhs had founded two new organizations: the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (henceforth SGPC) and the Shiromani Akali Dal (henceforth Akali Dal). While the former was technically only supposed to administer major Sikh shrines, it soon turned into an arena within which to wage political battles and to garner social prestige and patronage. Its offshoot, the Akali Dal, initially formed as a body to coordinate Sikh religious volunteers, gradually matured as a political party. By actively participating in the anticolonial nationalist struggle, the Akali Dal gained pan-India recognition. Mahatma Gandhi, impressed by the nonviolent agitation of the Akalis, congratulated them for winning the first decisive battle in India's struggle for freedom (Ganda Singh 1965: 11). Although the growing political influence of the Akalis was often challenged by the Central Sikh League, several breakaway groups, and newly founded Sikh political parties, by the 1940s the Akalis had succeeded in establishing their hegemony among Sikhs. Master Tara Singh (1885–1967), an Akali Dal leader, emerged as the chief spokesman of the Sikhs and formulated Sikh positions on a variety of issues like India's participation in World War II, the demand of the Muslim League for a separate state of Pakistan, and the constitutional parleys when the British decided to pull out of India. When in 1947 the colonial government decided to partition the subcontinent, the Akalis aligned themselves with the Indian National Congress. Thus emerged East Punjab, an entity that was to crystallize into the postcolonial province of Punjab.

In the euphoria of independence many Akalis decided that their party had outlived its historic usefulness and that it should merge with the Congress, India's national party. However, the merger did not secure every Akali Dal member a place in the sun. The Congress had to take care of its own constituency and could not provide the Akalis with all that they aspired to in terms of policies and political power.

#### Harjot Oberoi 152

Disappointed, many Akali Dal leaders, never shy of hyperbole, incessantly inquired: 'The Hindus got Hindustan [out of independence], the Muslims got Pakistan [out of partition], what did the Sikhs get [out of independence or the partition]?<sup>5</sup>

One dominant response was the call to set up a 'Punjabi Suba,' a state within the Indian republic where the Punjabi-speaking Sikh population would be a majority. The story of how the Punjabi Suba was finally attained in 1966 despite massive opposition is too well known to be repeated here.<sup>6</sup>

What must be noted is that the establishment of the Punjabi Suba completely transformed the religious demography of the Punjab. Overnight, due to a redistribution of territories, the Sikhs turned from a minority into a majority in the Punjab. In the older, larger Punjab from 1947 to 1966, compared to a 63.7 percent Hindu majority the Sikhs constituted only 33.3 percent of the population. The new state of Punjab reversed the older equations. Now, the Hindus, with 44 percent of the population, became a minority and the Sikhs a majority with 54 percent of the population of the new state. The Akalis never had it so good. With such a large Sikh electoral base, Akali strategists thought political power was going to be theirs for the asking. After all, they had been the 'natural political party of the Sikhs since the 1920s. In their reading they had always tried to secure the interests of the panth; now it was time for the panth to reward them. Master Tara Singh's oft-repeated claim that 'Sikhs were either rulers or rebels' now seemed to have a ring of truth to it. The Sikhs were going to crown the Akalis as the rulers of the new Punjab.

Unfortunately for the Akali Dal, realpolitik proved to be different from the theory of politics. The Congress party, which had governed the Punjab since independence, was not about to let the Akalis walk away with the province. Punjab was too close to the national capital, New Delhi, and invariably what happened in the province had an impact on the neighboring states of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, and Rajasthan. From 1967 to 1990, a total of 23 years, an Akali-led government ruled the province roughly for one-third of the time (approximately eight years and two months). For the other 15 years the Punjab was either ruled directly by the Congress or put under president's rule. This in practice amounted to unfettered governance by the Congress, since it was the federal ruling party, and it decided on all the policies and key administrative appointments in the province.

Clearly, for some Sikhs the Akalis had badly failed in translating the Sikh demography of Punjab into a permanent political power for Sikhs. In their eyes the democratic option had only further weakened Sikhs, by making them susceptible to factionalism, political manipulation, and extended rule by the Congress. A further complaint was that even when an Akali government ruled the Punjab, it failed to advance Sikh religious interests, because the Akalis almost always had alliances with other political parties, particularly the Jana Sangh, an overtly Hindu political party. A position of compromise and consensus among the Akalis was for some a sure sign of political failure. Disillusioned and angered, some Sikhs were ready to teach the Akalis a few political lessons. After all, the Sikhs had a kingdom of their own in the early nineteenth century and this historical acumen could be once again put to use. The first sign of this came in April 1978, when a group of young Sikh men assembled in Chandigarh and founded the Dal Khalsa.

The founders of the Dal Khalsa justified the founding of the new body by claiming that the government of India had cleverly duped the Sikhs in the name of secularism. when actually all that had happened since India had attained its independence in 1947

from the British was the further extension of 'Hindu imperialism' and the enslavement of Sikhs.<sup>7</sup> In support of this thesis Dal Khalsa activists pointed to a series of abuses: Sikhs were not allowed to freely practice their religion, the sanctity of their holy places had been often violated, Akali governments in the Punjab were never allowed to last for the period of their constitutional term, and Sikhs were being economically discriminated against by the federal government, particularly in areas of employment and budget allocations.

While the Dal Khalsa came to contest the Akali Dal's power over the Sikhs from a largely political-secular context, another body, the Damdami Taksal, under the leadership of Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale sought to humble the Akalis on religious grounds. There is an almost obvious nexus between the success of Bhindranwale and the rise of Sikh fundamentalism. To account for this success is to explain Sikh fundamentalism. And any explanation of Sikh fundamentalism has to be made up of two ingredients: the crisis in Punjab's political economy and its articulation by the Damdami Taksal.

## **Political economy and Sikh subjectivity**

There is no denying the fact that the nature of the contemporary Sikh polity is closely tied to the social and economic transformations undergone by the province of Punjab over the last three decades. Punjab, one of the smallest states in the Indian union, is primarily an agrarian economy, and almost 80 percent of the Sikh population lives here. In 1988-89 over 48.6 percent of the state domestic product was derived from agriculture and livestock, and the same sector generated employment for 59.1 percent of the total labor force.<sup>8</sup> Following the capitalist path of development, the accelerated growth in the agrarian sector made Punjab the first region in South Asia to experience what is commonly known as the 'Green Revolution'. The social costs of such agrarian innovation have been extremely high, and Punjabi society over the last two decades has become highly polarized.

The benefits of agrarian development have primarily accrued to those sectors of rural society which already possessed substantial resources like land and capital. By successfully harnessing their resources to high-vielding varieties (HYV) of seeds and modern technology, the rich cultivators were able to produce large surpluses and further expand their resources, particularly land, the key economic input in Punjab. In 1970–71, rich cultivators having more than 25 acres of land constituted 5.01 percent of the total peasantry and operated approximately 27 percent of the land. Within a decade their proportion of land use increased to 29.17 percent.<sup>9</sup> In contrast to rich cultivators, small and marginal farmers have fared poorly in the Green Revolution. They are faced with a situation where their small land holdings, ranging from two to five acres, have increasingly become less viable. A recent study of agrarian conditions in Punjab points out that while small farmers were faced with an annual loss of 125 rupees per capita, farmers with land holdings between five and ten acres were earning a profit of 50 rupees per capita, while substantial farmers with 20 acres of land or more were producing a profit of 1,200 rupees per capita.<sup>10</sup> The negative returns have made it hard for the small and marginal farmers to sustain their family farms. Consequently, in recent years a large number of small holdings have disappeared. According to agricultural census data, from 1970–71 to 1980–81 operational holdings in Puniab declined by 25.3 percent (Gill 1988b: 441–42).

#### Harjot Oberoi 154

Suffering this decline were countless Sikh peasants from the small and marginal sector. As yet it is not clear what exactly has been their fate. In classical models of development those who are dispossessed either join the ranks of the agrarian labor force or turn to jobs in the burgeoning industrial sector. In Punjab there is no such simple transition. The bulk of the small and marginal farmers are from the high-status Jat caste, and even when they find themselves without land to cultivate they are most unwilling to become agricultural laborers. This would imply working in the midst of low-caste Harijans, a clear loss of face for the status-conscious Jats. The other alternative – working in the industrial sector – is equally difficult, for two reasons. First, Punjab does not have the large-scale industries which could absorb the depeasantized Sikh cultivators. Second, even where such jobs exist, particularly in medium- and small-scale industries, the work force is made up of migratory labor from the poorer areas of northern India. Given their already depressed conditions, these nonunionized workers are willing to work for subsistence wages for long hours, a prospect which Sikh peasants stoutly resist.

In entering the final quarter of the twentieth century, the Akali Dal, led almost exclusively by rich kulaks, had no solution for the crisis in Punjab's political economy. Parkash Singh Badal, who for a second time became a chief minister of Punjab in 1978 in an Akali Dal-led government, was one of the wealthiest farmers in the whole of India. Many of his cabinet colleagues came from highly privileged backgrounds. For the most part the Akali Dal leadership had prospered from the Green Revolution, and they were unconcerned about those who had lost out in the process (Narang 1983: 198–99). Ronald Herring is quite correct when, in analyzing the issue of redistributive justice in rural India, he observes: 'How can fundamental structural change be effected through the very institutions that service and reproduce the existing society and reflect the existing distribution of power and privilege' (1983: 2)? However, in all fairness to the Akali Dal, it must be acknowledged that the Akalis are part of the general political malaise in the country. India, a social democracy enamored of socialism, has never jettisoned capitalism. This hybrid model of development has only exacerbated poverty and social unrest. In this context the Akali failure to deal with the social inequities in Punjab was perhaps no greater than, say, that of Congress regimes in other provinces across northern India. But while provincial governments in the rest of the country could more easily gloss over the pervasive socioeconomic problems and their long-term failure to alter the situation, the Akalis had no such luck. They were faced with a rural electorate that had often been mobilized and had a bloody history of radical, religious solutions. The rising tide of inequalities in the Punjab did not easily blend with the dominant ethos of Sikh religious tradition, which demands a just moral economy based on an equitable distribution of wealth and resources. From its inception in the early sixteenth century, Sikh discourse has sought the creation of an egalitarian society where all men, if not all women, would be equal and share the ritual, sacred, profane, and economic resources collectively. The appeal of such teachings was considerable in a society where the organizing ideology gave open recognition to principles of human inequality, expressed in the caste system. Over a period of roughly three centuries the Sikh movement launched an offensive against the theory and practice of the 'Hindu' social structure, particularly its acceptance of the notion that inequality was inherent in the human condition. It set up the institution of the *sangat* (congregation) and *langar* (communal consumption) to combat social distinctions and molded a collectivity called the *panth*. The practitioner of faith had equal access to the holy scripture, and there

was no institutional priesthood that could act as the sole custodian of the Sikh holy book. During the eighteenth century, Sikh militants further sought to implement the egalitarian paradigm of Sikhism. The Sikh movement attracted the rural poor, the urban underprivileged, and others who persisted on the margins of Punjabi society. No efforts were spared by the peasant armies of the Sikhs to destroy all modes of authority, all order, and all mechanisms of social control. They succeeded in doing away with a whole range of intermediaries, those who extracted the much-hated land revenues for the state and often acted as instruments of oppression. Large estates were dissolved, and the lands distributed to the peasantry.

Whenever this egalitarian thrust within Sikhism has been ably voiced, it has demonstrated an immense power to mobilize the faithful and led them toward the inversion of the status quo, in order to establish a society free of religious and social inequalities. Such an ideology becomes most attractive in periods of intense social change. During the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries under British colonial rule, there were numerous movements within the Sikh community, like the Kukas, Ghadarites, and Babbar Akalis, which sought to recover the original message of Sikhism and establish a society relatively free of human distinctions. The Sikh past endowed its constituents with a highly developed vocabulary of social justice, and the community had a long experience of social movements that fought for greater social equality.

By the early 1970s there was a serious crisis in Punjab's political economy that polarized class distinctions. The scope of this crisis was further enhanced by the nature of the Indian nation-state in general and the pro-rich policies of the Akali Dal in particular. While the crisis may have been more easily accommodated in the rest of India, the egalitarian impulse within the Sikh tradition was to make the voice of redistributive justice more compelling in Punjab. All those who perceived their lived experience in this sequence began increasingly to search for solutions. Eventually in the late 1970s they were to shape a body – the Damdami Taksal – that was to articulate their aspirations forcefully and, by challenging the status quo, to turn the 1980s into a decade of Sikh fundamentalism.

Much as the history of modern Sikh politics is tied to the Akali Dal, so the tenor of contemporary Sikh fundamentalism is most forcefully represented by the Damdami Taksal. Earlier in their history the Sikhs went the way of orthodoxy, traditionalism, reformation, and nativism, but it is, only with the Damdami Taksal in the late 1970s, almost at the same time as the Islamic revolution in Iran, that a considerable segment of the Sikh population, particularly young males, seized on the powerful discourse of fundamentalism. Given the centrality of Damdami Taksal in forging Sikh fundamentalism, this section examines, first, the history of this organization; second, its worldview, particularly its nexus with a millenarian ideology; and, finally, its social makeup.

For all practical purposes the Taksal comes to the fore early this century under Sant Sunder Singh (1883–1930), a figure of great piety and traditional learning. As if almost to foreclose the rapid socioreligious transformation undergone by the Sikhs during this period of British colonial rule, Sunder Singh like many of his contemporaries set out to purge diversity in Sikh doctrine, ritual, and practice, hoping thereby to engender a uniform religious community. Given his special skills in exegesis, Sunder Singh's strategy to negate differentiation among Sikhs was quite simple: abolish all polysemous interpretations of Sikh scriptures and cultivate a univocal reading of texts, in order to shape a more homogeneous community. Accompanying this strategy was the insistence on a standardized Khalsa code of conduct, or rahit. Since many others at this

juncture – including the leadership of the influential Singh Sabha and the Akali movement – were engaged in a similar task, the Damdami Taksal under Sunder Singh and his two successors, Sant Kartar Singh (1932-37) and Sant Gurbachan Singh  $(1902-69)$ , continued to be a minor player in this project to manufacture a monolithic Sikh community.

Eclipsed by history, the Damdami Taksal and its cadres were rescued from potential oblivion by three factors: the political failures of the Akali Dal in post-1966 Punjab, the crisis induced by the Green Revolution in Punjab's political economy, and the millenarian teachings of Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, the new head of Damdami Taksal. Millenarianism is hardly new to Sikhism. Of all the indigenous religious communities in India, Sikhism possesses the most advanced paradigm of millennial thought and practice. For much of their history, at least since the rise of the Khalsa, Sikhs have opted to deal with major social crises – state oppression, economic upheavals, colonialism, collapse of semiotic categories – by invoking the millenarian paradigm. Central to this entire model has been a prophetic figure of extraordinary charisma with the will to establish an alternative social system in which oppression would cease and people would lead a life of harmony, purity, and good deeds. Bhindranwale was heir to this cultural tradition. Perhaps nothing would have come of it without the Green Revolution and the social processes it unleashed. In hindsight it is possible to see how the Sikh past, an expanding network of communications, mechanized farming, and the Sikh identity became inextricably linked in the Punjab of the 1970s. As the first people to experience the Green Revolution in South Asia, Sikhs were confronted with unprecedented change in economy, lived experience, and social relationships. No one had prepared them to handle so much change in so little time. Failed by established political parties, they turned to a messianic leader and his seminary to make sense of a world they had helped create, but one they no longer fully grasped or controlled.

Bhindranwale turned the complex problems faced by the Sikhs into simple homilies. In his worldview, what I shall call the 'Sikh impasse' resulted from the prevalent religious depravity among the Sikhs and the ever-increasing Hindu domination over the Sikhs. As had happened with earlier social movements within, the community, Bhindranwale sought a resolution to this new Sikh impasse by invoking the millenarian charter. In 1982 he agreed to participate in the *dharma yuddh*, or righteous battle, earlier launched by the Akalis. Unlike the Akalis, who viewed the dharma yuddh as a politically expedient campaign, Bhindranwale characterized it as an epic war where good was pitted against evil and only one side was to be victorious. His participation in the campaign was fired by the cultural logic of Sikh millenarianism.

During the eighteenth century many a Sikh activist had chanted the following quatrain: 'The army of the Guru will sit on the throne of Delhi/Over its head will be carried the umbrella of royalty, and its will shall be done/The Khalsa will rule, their enemies will be vanquished/ Only those that seek refuge will be saved'. In February 1984 Bhindranwale echoed that sentiment when he informed a visiting journalist: 'I do not want to rule. I would like the Sikhs to rule; rule Delhi, rule the world: *Raj karega* khalsa, baaqi rahe na koe [The Khalsa will rule, their enemies will be vanquished]. ... In the next ten years Sikhs will get their liberation. This will definitely happen'.<sup>11</sup> Many similar quotes from the speeches of Bhindranwale underscore his unflinching confidence in divine intervention and strong identification with apocalyptic thinking. How else could he believe that the Sikhs, with less than 2 percent of India's population, would rule Delhi or attain liberation within a decade? His refrain 'This will certainly

happen', is a hallmark of messianic leaders. As Yonina Talmon, notes in a review essay on millenarian movements.

Perhaps the most important thing about millenarism is its *attitude towards time*. It views time as a linear process which leads to a final future. ... The transition from the present into the final future is not a gradual process of progressive approximations to the final goal. It is a sudden and revolutionary leap onto a totally different level of existence. ... The apocalyptic victory will be won by means of a prodigious and final struggle which will destroy the agents of corruption, purge the sinful world and prepare it for its final redemption. Millenarism is thus basically a merger between an historical and non-historical conception of time. Historical change leads to a cessation of all change (1969: 240).

The Damdami Taksal is rooted in the metahistorical time to which Talmon alludes. According to its own version of history, the organization was founded by a cultural hero during the golden age of the Sikhs, the eighteenth century. Similarly, its new cultural hero, Bhindranwale, anticipated a 'decisive phase', a new redemptive age when the Sikhs were to be dramatically ushered in with the foundation of Khalistan. By casting this new utopia in a religious idiom, Bhindranwale recruited to his ranks a wide variety of people from different economic, cultural, and political backgrounds. But the bulk of his following from 1978 to 1984 was made up of those who were at the bottom of the social ladder. Such a constituency confirms a commonplace in the literature on millenarian movements: in class terms they invariably appeal to the disinherited, the marginalized, and the subordinate. Millennial aspirations are a cultural mode for securing self-respect, social dignity, and economic well-being for all those who lack it, particularly in preindustrial agrarian societies. This too is fully supported by Sikh fundamentalism.

# The vision

The utopia that fundamentalists envision is not a secular one. Its identity is to be defined in terms of Sikh religious tradition. The 1986 Declaration of Khalistan stipulates: 'The Sikh religion will be the official creed of Khalistan. Further, it will be a paramount duty of the Government to see that Sikhism must flourish unhindered in Khalistan' (Panthic Committee 1987: 390). By proclaiming an official religion for the state of Khalistan, Sikh fundamentalists stand in direct opposition to the present secular constitution of India that guarantees freedom of religious practice. Sikh militants are dismayed by several aspects of that constitution. One is its secular content. Another is its association of Sikhs with Hindus. Article 25, section 2b, states that all public Hindu shrines must be open to all Hindus, irrespective of their caste. The clause includes under the category 'Hindu' all persons professing the Sikh, Jain or Buddhist religions. For Sikh fundamentalists there can be no greater affront than being included among the Hindus. In their view, Sikhism and Hinduism are two diametrically opposed religions; there is no common ground between them. Angered by the insensitivity shown them by the constitution, Sikh leaders in February 1984 took to the streets of major cities in Punjab and publicly defaced copies of the Indian constitution in order protest article 25, section 2b. Behind this act of defiance stretches a long history of the Sikh search for a personal law.

# 158 Harjot Oberoi

I argue that the vision of Sikh fundamentalists is closely related to the problem of Sikh identity. Secular public culture in their view erodes morality and religion. To counter this threat, Sikh fundamentalists seek to inscribe their religious identity on all possible cultural resources: constitutions, dietary habits, and the environment of the body. The objective of all this is to leave no lacuna in definition. For Sikh fundamentalists it is ambiguity that breeds atheism, immorality, and denial of tradition.

There is a fundamental chasm between the worldview of Sikh fundamentalists and what Habermas has described as the 'project of modernity'. A key element in the 'project of modernity' has been its separation of the domain of politics from the sphere of religion. It was this differentiation across 'cultural value spheres' that Max Weber convincingly used to distinguish modern from premodern polities. This distinction between the political and religious domains is anathema to Sikh fundamentalists. For them religion and politics are inseparable. Indeed, the Sikhs have never known a truly secular movement of dissent. Opposition to political authority and the various institutions of the state has always been articulated in religious terms.<sup>12</sup> Whether dealing with the oppression of the Mughal state in the eighteenth century or the economic exploitation of British colonial rule, the Sikhs have always responded with social movements mediated through religion.

Thus the Sikhs have no language of politics free of religion. The categories of thought, the heroic figures, the symbols, the costumes which have motivated Sikhs to react to the demands of the state or come to grips with ongoing social transformations have been of a purely religious nature. The most important qualification for a political leader among the Sikhs is his understanding of Sikh scriptures and his ability to expound on their meaning. It is no coincidence that Bhindranwale, the most important political leader of the Sikhs in the 1980s, belonged to a seminary which instructed Sikh students in the art of exegesis. Politics among the Sikhs is always explained and internalized by referring to the religious history of the panth or by quoting from the writings of the Sikh masters. The vocabulary of political discourse and the goals of society are rooted in perceived Sikh experience. What happens outside that experience is unimportant. It is not from classical models of structural change – the French or the Russian revolution – that inspiration is sought. Nor is there an echo of the Indian struggle for freedom from colonial rule. Rather, political mobilization and the search for justice is solely based on Sikh texts and semantics. In recasting the world, Sikh militants today look to the emergence and consolidation of the Sikh movement for their theory and practice.

But it would be wrong to draw from all this the conclusion that the rise of Sikh fundamentalism was inevitable and a logical result of the Sikh past. Much as it would be oversimplistic to ascribe the rise of Nazism to German tradition, similarly Sikh tradition by itself is no explanation for the formation of Sikh fundamentalism. Fundamentalism is a modern ideology, and while it voraciously appropriates the past, the success of Sikh fundamentalism is to be traced to the massive crisis in contemporary Indian society.

The discourse of Sikh fundamentalism is no longer simply rooted in the material conditions of the Punjab. Although these conditions continue to sustain it, fundamentalism is quickly maturing as an ideology and now offers seemingly attractive solutions for the everyday life of both the weak and the powerful. In relating to contemporary struggles, fundamentalism tackles lasting questions of freedom, responsibility, morality, will, faith, righteousness, and collective discipline. It envisions a state of its own, where it would reign supreme in both the private and the public sphere and remake polity, economy, and society.

# Notes

- 1 This article was originally published in Martin E. Marty and F. Scott Appleby (eds) *Funda*mentalisms and the State: Remaking Polities, Economies, and Militance (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993) and has been abridged by the author.
- 2 On how the term 'fundamentalism' came to be used in the United States and what it encompasses, see Marsden (1980).
- 3 In a review, Trilochan Singh (1988) states: 'The Sikhs are very tolerant and liberal in all matters but they are not so insensitive and stupid dunces as to go on remaining silent in the face of such nasty and malevolent attacks on Sikh historical traditions, doctrines and scriptures on the basis of ... compulsive skepticism [read critical historical and textual scholarship]'.
- 4 I first explored the millenarian and prophetic aspects of current Sikh fundamentalism in my article 'Two Poles of Akali Politics' (Oberoi 1983).
- 5 This puzzle is generally attributed to Master Tara Singh. See *Spokesman*, 1961, 11(27): 10, quoted in B. R.Nayar (1966: 102).
- 6 For details, see Brass (1974: 277–366); Pettigrew (1980); and Jeffrey (1986: 36–45).
- 7 I base this statement, and the following observations on Dal Khalsa thinking, on my reading of Satnam Singh's deposition before a Pakistani judge in the case of a hijacking of a plane to Lahore on 29 September 1981. Satnam Singh was a founding member of the Dal Khalsa and also a member of its executive committee. The transcript of his lengthy deposition is reproduced in Dilgeer (1989: 130–96).
- 8 Figures from *Link*, 10 August 1990; and Gill (1988a: 2167).
- 9 These figures are based on Gill (1988a: 2168).
- 10 Punjab da Kisani Masla (in Punjabi), 13 March 1984, cited in Gill (1988a: 2167),
- 11 Interview with M. J. Akbar (1985: 185).
- 12 For the following observations I am indebted to Lewis (1988).

# References

Azad, Kirpal Singh (1988) Sikh Mulvad Bare (Regarding Sikh Fundamentalism), Chandigarh.

- Brass, Paul (1974) Language, Religion and Politics in North India, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Dilgeer, Harjinder Singh (1988) Khalistan di Tawarikh (The History of Khalistan), Oslo: Guru Nanak-Institute of Sikh Studies.
- (1989) Sikh Hijacker (in Punjabi), Oslo: Guru Nanak Institute of Sikh Studies.
- Gill, Sucha Singh (1988a) 'Contradictions of Puniab model of growth and search for an alternative', Economic and Political Weekly, 23.

- (1988b) 'Development crisis in agriculture and its political implications: an enquiry into the Punjab problem', in Paul Wallace and Surendara Chopra (eds) *Political Dynamics and Crisis in Punjab.* Amritsar: Department of Political Science, Guru Nanak Dev University.

- Herring, Ronald J. (1983) Land to the Tiller: The Political Economy of Agrarian Reform in South Asia. New Haven: Yale University Press.
- Jeffrey, Robin (1986) *What's Happening to India?* London: Macmillan.
- Lewis, Bernard (1988) 'Islamic Revolution', New York Review of Books, 34: 46–50.

Mann, K. S. (1989) 'Compilation of Punjabi poetry', Sikh Review, 37: 57.

- Marsden, George M. (1980) Fundamentalism and American Culture: The Shaping of Twentieth-Century Evangelicalism, New York: Oxford University Press.
- Narang, A. S. (1983) Storm over for Sutlej: The Akali Politics, New Delhi: Gitanjali Publishing House.
- Navar, B. R. (1966) *Minority Politics in the Punjab*, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.