# **8 The Soviet Great Leap Forward: II. Industry, Labour and Finance**

An adequate history of the first five-year plan has yet to be written. Official Soviet accounts overstressed the achievements, dwelt endlessly on the 'pathos of construction'. The positive features seem also to be overstated in novels of the period. As for anti-Soviet writers, for them the years 1929-33 are composed exclusively of coercion, hunger, shortages and inefficiency, and the achievements are mentioned only as a kind of apologetic afterthought. Here it will be necessary to dwell on many negative features, which are an integral part of the story. Yet so are the achievements which must be seen against a background of appalling difficulties.

# Optimism Runs Riot

In the previous chapter we noted the adoption of a high 'optimal variant' of the five-year plan. This was speedily followed by super-optimal variants of the most fantastic kinds. The upward revision of the 'optimal' targets began very soon after their adoption. The year 1928-9 proved quite successful in industry, and this caused, in the decree of 1 December 1929, an upward amendment of the plan for the economic year 1929-30. On 5-10 December 1929 a congress of 'shock brigades' adopted a call to fulfil the five-year plan in four years. This became official policy, and in the end the five-year plan was deemed to have run its course on 31 December 1932 instead of 30 September 1933, nine months ahead of schedule, it having been decided (in 1930) to make the economic and the calendar year coincide. Of course,

this of itself was an upward revision. Others followed. The sixteenth party congress resolved to review the machinery plans in order 'decisively to free industry, and the national economy from dependence on foreign countries'. This last point may be said to be inspired by military-strategic considerations, but it would be incorrect to assert that military expenditure as such was responsible for the acceleration of the heavy-industry plans: military spending remained modest, the Red Army's reequipment lay still some distance ahead.

The net effect was that during 1929 and 1930 the five-year plan (now a four-year plan) was altered, as the following selection of figures shows:

|                         | 1927-8 | 1932-3<br>('optimal') | 1932<br>(amended) | i932<br>(actual) |
|-------------------------|--------|-----------------------|-------------------|------------------|
| Coal (million tons)     | 35.0   | 75.0                  | 95-105            | (64.0)           |
| Oil (million tons)      | 11.7   | 21.7                  | 40-55             | (214)            |
| Iron ore (million tons) | 6.7    | 20.2                  | 24-32             | (12.1)           |
| Pig iron (million tons) | 3.2    | 10.0                  | 15-16             | (6.2)            |

*(Sources:* **S. Bessonov,** *Problemy ekonomiki,* **No. 10-11 (1929), p. 27 and planfulfilment report.)** 

Still wilder figures were encountered in 1930-31. Stalin himself spoke on 4 February 1931 of fulfilling the plan 'in three years in all the basic, decisive branches of industry'.<sup>1</sup> In the same speech he declared: 'It is sometimes asked whether it is possible to slow down the tempo somewhat, to put a check on the movement. No, comrades, it is not possible. The tempo must not be reduced! On the contrary, we must increase it. . .'<sup>2</sup> It was then that he made the justly famous prophecy: 'We are fifty or a hundred years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this distance in ten years. Either we do so, or we shall go under.' 1941 was ten years away.

But a sense of coming danger is no excuse for attempting the impossible. The extent of the upward amendments in annual plans may be illustrated by the table on p. 191, which also shows the downward amendment of the textiles targets, i.e. the shift in mid-plan in the relative priorities of heavy as against light industry.

Needless to say the new targets were far beyond practical possibility. The rush, strain, shortages, pressures, became intolerable, and caused great disorganization. Naturally, supplies of materials, fuels, goods wagons, fell short of requirements.

| Index numbers $1930-31 \ (1927-8 = 100)$ |                     |                  |  |  |  |  |
|------------------------------------------|---------------------|------------------|--|--|--|--|
|                                          | Original<br>$Plan*$ | Amended<br>Plan  |  |  |  |  |
| Producers' goods, all                    | 196.3               | $349-9$          |  |  |  |  |
| Coal                                     | 155                 | 202.5            |  |  |  |  |
| Oil                                      | 166                 | 266              |  |  |  |  |
| Ferrous metallurgy                       | 176.8               | 207.7            |  |  |  |  |
| Machinery, total                         | 198.8               | 482.1            |  |  |  |  |
| Agricultural machinery                   | 222.8               | $552-6$          |  |  |  |  |
| Electro-technical ind.                   | $235-8$             | $59^{\circ} - 5$ |  |  |  |  |
| Basic chemicals                          | $252-3$             | 390.0            |  |  |  |  |
| Consumers' goods, all                    | 161.9               | 163.1            |  |  |  |  |
| Textiles                                 | 148.3               | 121.2            |  |  |  |  |
| Food                                     | 149.8               | 166.2            |  |  |  |  |
| All industry, total                      | 176.7               | $244-5$          |  |  |  |  |

\* According to five-year plan, optimal variant. (Source: A Koldovsky, Problemy ekonomiki, Nos. 4-5 (1930) p. 109.)

It was then that the government, by stages, imposed upon the economy its own priorities, by ever-tightening control over resource allocation, physical output, credit. The 'Stalin' model was created in the process of trying to do the impossible, and therefore by facing every day the necessity of assuring supplies to the key projects or 'shock-constructions' (*udarnye stroiki*), at the expense of others regarded as of lesser importance.

Plans were born of a conflict between specialists and keen comrades convinced that revolutionary elan would perform miracles. One old oil expert, given what he regarded as an absurd order to increase production, is said to have written to the central committee as follows: 'I cease to be responsible for the planning department. The [plan] figure of 40 million tons I consider to be purely arbitrary. Over a third of the oil must come from unexplored areas, which is like cutting up the skin of a bear before it is caught or even located. Furthermore, the three cracking plants

which now exist are to be turned into 120 plants by the end of the five-year plan. This despite the acute shortage of metal and the fact that the highly complex cracking technique has not been mastered by us .. . I stand for high tempos, but duty demands ... ' and so on. To this, according to the writer, a young woman replied: 'We do not doubt the knowledge or goodwill of the professor .. . but we reject the fetishism of figures which holds him in thrall. .. We reject the multiplication table as a basis for policy.'<sup>3</sup>

This possibly imaginative reconstruction described a common enough situation. Much waste of effort inevitably resulted, but it could be argued that more was achieved in the end than if 'sound' advice had been taken. The resultant chaos has been described by many writers. Here is the future Minister of Tractors and Agricultural Machinery remembering the birth of the Stalingrad tractor works:

Even one who saw those days with his own eyes finds it hard to picture today how things then looked .. . One chapter of a book of the period is headed: 'Yes, we smashed lathes.' This chapter was written .. . by a worker who came to the Volga from a Moscow factory. Even he was full of wonder at the American lathes without belt transmission, with their own motors. He could not handle them. What is one to say of the peasants fresh from the villages? They were sometimes illiterate - it was a problem for them to read and write. Everything was a problem in those days. There were no spoons in the canteen - and this matter was dealt with when Ordzhonikidze arrived at the factory and demanded that things be put right. There was the problem of bugs in the workers' huts - and the secretary of the young communist central committee, Kosarev, made us get rid of them. The first director of the factory, Ivanov, wrote as follows: 'In the assembly shop I talked to a young man who was grinding sockets. I asked him how he measured, and he showed me how he used his fingers. We had no measuring instruments!' Now, after fifty glorious years, we must remember all this in detail, remember how this industry was created, which now produces the largest number of tractors in the world, how and in what conditions the first great tractor-works in the country was built in a year and working to full capacity a year later. All this was done in a country where as late as 1910 over two thirds of the ploughs were wooden.<sup>4</sup>

Such facts, quotations, examples, could be multiplied many times.

Vast projects got under way. While some were the work of forced labour (the Volga-White Sea canal, for instance), there is no doubt that there was enthusiasm too. There was, for instance, the story of Magnitogorsk. A great new metallurgical centre was created in the wilderness, and the workers and technicians worked under the most primitive conditions, yet many seemed to have been fired by a real faith in the future and in their own and their children's part in it (though we now know that some of the builders were also forced labourers). There were, especially in later years, all too many examples of phoney official superlatives, which gave rise to widespread cynicism. So it is all the more necessary to stress that thousands (of young people in particular) participated in the 'great construction projects of socialism' with a will to self-sacrifice, accepting hardship with a real sense of comradeship. Statistics will also be cited to show that others had very different attitudes to their work, not only prisoners or deportees but also peasants fleeing the collectives.

# Achievements of the First Five-year Plan

The key figures of plan fulfilment were as shown on p. 194.

Before proceeding to interpret the table, it is most important to stress the limitations of the statistics. In brief, these limitations are as follows:

(1) All aggregates (indices of national income and industrial output in particular) are liable to statistical 'inflation'. For reasons to be examined, costs rose sharply during the plan period, and the nominal 'constant 1926-7 prices', in which the indices were computed drifted upwards, causing a significant exaggeration of the volume index.

(2) This is particularly noticeable in the machinery sector. Thus it is surely decidedly odd that the plan for machinery was supposed to have been very greatly over-fulfilled, whereas both metal and fuel output lagged far behind plan. Construction (another big metal-user) exceeded its plan too. Imports rose thus 1.3 million tons of steel sheet was imported in 1931 — but shortages persisted. It is not, as some imagine, that the critics

|                                               | 1927-8<br>(actual) | 1932-3<br>(plan) | 1932<br>(actual) |
|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------|------------------|------------------|
| National income (milliard 1926-^7<br>roubles) | 24.4               | $49-7$           | $45-5$           |
| Gross industrial production (milliard         |                    |                  |                  |
| 1926-7 roubles)                               | 18.3               | $43-2$           | 43-3             |
| Producers' goods (milliard 1926-7             |                    |                  |                  |
| roubles)                                      | 6.0                | 18.1             | 231              |
| Consumers' goods (milliard                    |                    |                  |                  |
| 1926-^7 roubles)                              | 12.3               | 251              | 20.2             |
| Gross agricultural production                 |                    |                  |                  |
| (milliard 1926-7 roubles)                     | 131                | 25.8             | 16.6             |
| Electricity (milliard kWhs)                   | $5-05$             | 22.0             | $'3-4$           |
| Hard coal (million tons)                      | $35-4$             | 75               | 643              |
| Oil (million tons)                            | 11.7               | 22               | 21.4             |
| Iron ore (million tons)                       | $5-7$              | 19               | 12.1             |
| Pig iron (million tons)                       | $3 - 3$            | 10               | 6.2              |
| Steel (million tons)                          | 4.0                | 10.4             | 5-9              |
| Machinery (million 1926-7 roubles)            | 1,822              | 4,688            | 7,362            |
| Superphosphates (million tons)                | 0.15               | $3-4$            | 0.61             |
| Wool cloth (million metres)                   | 97                 | 270              | 93-3             |
| Total employed labour force                   |                    |                  |                  |
| (millions)                                    | ".3                | $15-8$           | 22.8             |
|                                               |                    |                  |                  |

(Sources: 1932 figures from Sotsialisticheskoe stroitePstvo (1934) and the fulfilment of first five-year plan. For sources of other figures see table on page 145.)

claim that metal and machinery production ought to expand at the same rate. The point is that, if much less metal is produced than was planned, then major metal-using industries must be cut back. Yet there is no sign of this in the figures. The most probable explanation is that many machines were priced high, and were entered in the '1926-7' price index at a large sum in roubles. In part this is a weighting problem; the few machines which were made in Russia in 1926-7 were indeed expensive, and so the index would look much less favourable if a later Soviet price pattern, or Western prices, were used. But few types of machines made in, say, 1932 were being made in 1926-7, or only existed as prototypes. Since plan fulfilment was measured in '1926-7' roubles, it paid all managers to strive for the acceptance of the highest possible '1926-7' price. Official statisticians, under pressure to show good results and high growth rates, would hardly be in a strong position at this time to resist.

(3) There was the fate of handicrafts, small workshops, domestic production of many kinds. Ample evidence exists for the proposition that these categories were in a decline, squeezed out as part of the drive against the Nepmen, and also by the prevailing shortages of materials and fuel. Private workshops were closed, private craftsmen forced into producers' cooperatives, but the latter were frequently suspected of being mere disguises for Nepmen and there were numerous instances reported of their being dissolved for this reason. The net effect was, despite the contrary provision of the five-year plan draft, a marked decline in the numbers of artisans of all kinds. There was also some replacement of domestic production by factory production: less bread-baking in the home and more bakeries, less domestic spinning, and so on. There had been a tendency to understate the output of the artisans and omit the purely domestic production, and so this decline did not find its proper reflection in statistics. This can help explain the paradox that is shown in the above table: output of consumers' goods was supposed to be rising rapidly at a time of most acute privation.

(4) The effects of rapid urbanization, in Russia as elsewhere, tend to cause an increase in measurable output much greater than any real increase in consumers' welfare.

But though the claims in their totality are dubious, there is no doubt at all that a mighty engineering industry was in the making, and output of machine-tools, turbines, tractors, metallurgical equipment, etc. rose by genuinely impressive percentages. The fuel group did well, though falling short of the targets (very short of the absurd super-targets referred to on p.190). The metallurgical group was far short of its goals, and the report on plan fulfilment frankly admitted that the possibilities of so speedily constructing and equipping iron and steel-works had been greatly overestimated. However, a great deal was achieved in the Urals, the Kuzbas, the Volga, and the Ukraine. Engineering works in the Moscow and Leningrad areas were expanded and modernized. The gigantic Dnieper dam was built speedily, and provided power for more industries. Apart from developing new production in 'traditional' industrial areas, such as Moscow, Leningrad and the Donbas, and in the Urals area, industrialization began to touch the more backward national republics: a textile mill in Central Asia, mining in Kazakhstan, engineering in Georgia. Achievements were sometimes very great, sometimes very patchy. Chemicals targets were, with the exception of synthetic rubber, not fulfilled. Stalin' began to listen to the voices of advisers who told him that agronomic panaceas (the *travopolye*  rotation scheme advocated by Vil'yams) would enable great savings to be made; mineral fertilizer would be unnecessary.

Textile output tended to fall rather than rise. This was due partly to the low priority of consumers' goods in the investment programme, but most of all to the balance of payments situation. These were years of depression in the 'capitalist' world, and prices of raw materials and food were falling much faster than prices of machinery. Thus the Soviet government found itself having to export more in order to obtain from the 'capitalists' the machinery and equipment needed fpr the new factories, and this made the strain worse. Imports of cotton and especially of wool had to be cut. At the same time wool production in the USSR itself was adversely affected by the drastic reduction in the number of sheep. The cotton-growing areas were pressed to increase acreage, but there was resistance, at a time when staple foodstuffs were so short and cotton prices were unfavourable (they were greatly raised in 1934). So a shortage of raw materials was the principal bottleneck in the textile industries. Therefore the combination of three factors caused the low living standards of these years: excessive investment in heavy industry, the consequence of collectivization in agriculture, and the worsening terms of trade. One should also mention the transport difficulties. Much had to be done to enable the railways to carry greatly increased freight, since there were few roads or vehicles, and rivers and canals froze in winter. The Turksib line, linking Siberia with Alma Ata, and the important line to the Karaganda coalfields, were built in these years, and many single-track lines converted to double-track. But the plan envisaged the completion of 16,000 kilometres of new railway, while in fact only 5,500 were built. There was a grave shortage of railway equipment of all kinds.<sup>5</sup>

Because the global industrial output figures looked satisfactory

the government was able proudly to announce success. The fiveyear plan had been fulfilled by the end of 1932, ahead of schedule. A careful look at the table (p.194) shows that only in the (statistically suspect) machinery and metal-working group was the plan over-fulfilled, and in most important industrial sectors, not to speak of agriculture, the shortfalls were significant. This is not to deny that a leap forward had been achieved, and that the successes which were to be reported in the years 1934-6 were due in a large part to the completion of projects begun in the first five-year plan period. However, 1932, and still more 1933, were years in which strain and disorganization reached their highest point, and the hardships of the population were severe even if they were not publicly admitted.

How can one measure these strains, which were the cost of what had been achieved? The increase in forced savings is indicated by the rise of the share of capital accumulation in the national income, from 19.4 per cent to 30.3 per cent in 1932.6

There are several other highly relevant indicators. Let us begin by looking at productivity and labour plans.

# Labour Problems

According to the plan-fulfilment report, the increase in numbers actually employed was as follows:

| 1927-8                                          | 1932-3<br>$(\text{plan})f$ | $r_{\mathbf{Q}} \mathbf{3}^2$<br>(actual) |
|-------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
|                                                 |                            |                                           |
| 11.350                                          | 151764                     | 22.804                                    |
| of which: Census'industry* (thousands)<br>3,086 | 3,858                      | 6.411                                     |
| 625                                             | 1.880                      | 3.126                                     |
|                                                 |                            |                                           |

\* Excludes small-scale industry and handicrafts.

t Optimal variant.

(Source: Calculated from Pyatiletnii plan, nar. khoz. stroiteFstva, SSSR (Moscow, 1930), Vol. 2, pp. 165-71, and Fulfilment of first five-year plan, p. 186.)

The urban population in 1932 was estimated by the plan to be 32.5 million. It was actually 38.7 million.

On the credit side, the original plan had expected that substantial unemployment would continue, whereas it had been eliminated from the towns by 1932, and labour shortage was a fairly widespread phenomenon. Also on the credit side was the introduction in these years of a seven-hour day, though the citizens' enjoyment of leisure was complicated by the introduction, beginning in the autumn of 1929, of the 'uninterrupted' *pyatidnevka,*  or five-day week. This is not to be confused with a 'real' five-day week, i.e. a free long weekend. The idea was that factories should work every day, with a fifth of the personnel off on any one day (four days' work, one day free). This led to problems. Thus maintenance was neglected, key personnel were liable to be away when wanted and members of families seldom had the same day off. On 21 November 1931 the work 'week' was somewhat lengthened, being turned into five days on, one day off, with some fixed dates at which the works would be closed. All this eliminated Sunday as a regular day of rest, which, at a time of anti-religious excesses, was doubtless one of the objects of the exercise. We shall see that a seven-day week (with Sunday the normal free day) was restored in 1940.

However, the main point was that the productivity estimates of the plan were over-optimistic. Outside the (suspect) machinery and metal-working sector, the productivity gains were very far below expectation and on occasion even negative. Vast numbers of peasants coming in from the country, sometimes as refugees from collectivization, immensely complicated the problems of elementary labour discipline, time-keeping, training. The planned expansion of the labour force called for great efforts to teach new skills, to increase the inadequate numbers of engineers and technologists, to expand educational establishments. This proved extremely difficult to achieve in practice, and mere statistics cannot measure the hasty mass-production of semi-qualified personnel which was rushed into the breach. For this purpose normal secondary education was totally disrupted for a few years (through mass conversion into emergency 'technicums'), as the following figures show:

Numbers in secondary schools

| 1928-9  | 977,787   |  |
|---------|-----------|--|
| 1929-30 | 1,117,824 |  |
| 1930-31 | 383,658   |  |
| 1931-2  | 4,234     |  |
| 1932-3  | 1,243,272 |  |
| 1933-4  | 2,011,798 |  |

*(Source: Kulturnoe stroitel'stvo SSSR* (Moscow, 1956), p. 81.)

But of course training schemes could barely touch the millions who were recruited, or fled, from the countryside. Soviet leaders and novelists now freely admit that much damage was done by sheer clumsiness: expensive imported machines were smashed by inexperienced labourers or unqualified substitute-engineers. Too often in the prevailing atmosphere there was suspicion of sabotage.

A considerable number of foreign specialists and skilled workers came to the USSR in these years; some were under contract with foreign firms to help erect the new factories and teach their Russian colleagues. Others went to Russia as idealistic volunteers, or because of the growth of mass unemployment in the West as the depression deepened. In some cases, these men too fell under suspicion. In 1933 there took place the 'Metro-Vickers trial', in which British specialists employed in Russia by this firm were found guilty of sabotage.

The troubles of Soviet industry and construction were intensified by a phenomenally high labour turnover. The peasantworkers, bewildered by their new surroundings, often short of food and adequate lodging, rootless and unsettled, wandered about in search of better things. Not for them the 'pathos' of the great construction of socialism. The table given on p. 200 tells its own tale.

These figures mean that the average worker in the coal industry, to take the worst example, left his employment almost three times during 1930. No wonder Stalin saw the need to discourage free movement and encourage the acquisition of skills.

Many workers already in jobs had retained close family links with their villages, and one effect of collectivization was to cause

| Labour turnover, all large-scale industry (per too employees) |       |       |       |       |       |       |      |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|------|
|                                                               | 1929  | 1930  | 1931  | 1932  |       |       |      |
| Entered employment                                            | 122.4 | 176.4 | 151.2 | 121.1 |       |       |      |
| Left employment                                               | 115.2 | 152.4 | 136.8 | 135.3 |       |       |      |
| Labour turnover, coal industry (per too employees)            |       |       |       |       |       |       |      |
|                                                               | 1928  | 1929  | 1930  | 1931  | 1932  | 1933  | 1934 |
| Entered employment                                            | 140.4 | 201.6 | 307.2 | 232.8 | 185.4 | 129-2 | 90.7 |
| Left employment                                               | 132.0 | 192.0 | 295.2 | 205.2 | 187.9 | 120.7 | 95.4 |
|                                                               |       |       |       |       |       |       |      |

*(Sources: Sotsialistkheskoe stroitefstvo SSSR* **(1936), p. 530;** *Trud v SSSR* **(1935), p. 109.)** 

many of them, miners in particular, to rush home to see to their families' situation. This caused some short-term disruption in these years, and explains why 1930 shows the worst figures.

The great influx of extra labour into industry and building had a number of consequences.

(1) Housing and amenities in towns were greatly overtaxed. Trams (there were few alternative means of urban transport then) were packed to suffocation. There was a shortage of water, shops, catering facilities. The plan had envisaged an increase of the housing space in cities from 160 million to 213 million square metres (optimal variant). It was recognized that this would provide only a small increase in the very inadequate living space, from 5.7 to 6.3 square metres per head. But housing was cut to make room for an increased factory-building programme, and/or because of shortage of materials. The total housing space in 1932 proved to be not 213 but only 185 million square metres, an increase of 16 per cent not 33 per cent. Thus the urban population rose by much more than planned, housing space by much less, and overcrowding became worse than ever. Neglect of maintenance made conditions even less bearable. No Soviet citizen is likely to deny that lack of space, shared kitchens, the crowding of several families per apartment, often divided rooms, were the lot of the majority of the urban population for over a generation, and that this was a source of a great deal of human misery.

(2) There was a particularly large increase in the employment of women, with far-reaching social consequences. Certain professions, notably medicine and teaching, became almost wholly feminine preserves, while tough ex-peasant women provided a large part of the unskilled labour force.

(3) The great increase in employment had, along with other factors, the effect of making nonsense of the plan's cost estimates, and so contributed to inflation (whose manifestations will be described in the following pages).

It must also be mentioned that in this period prisoners and deportees, especially the latter, emerged as significant factors in the economic life of the country. For example, only a small portion of the inhabitants of the new town of Karaganda went there of their own volition. And much worse was to come.

# Inflationary Pressures

A considerable contribution to inflation was also made by the very large increase in the volume of investments. Due partly to expensive errors and partly to underestimation of costs, as well as to upward amendment of earlier plans, total state investments amounted in four and a half years to 112 per cent of the five-year plan, while heavy industry's were 145 per cent of the plan. Of course, these figures too were probably affected by statistical 'inflation', especially of the value of installed machinery. However, the very large excess number of building workers, shown in the table on p. 197, together with the known fact that new projects were added to the plan and others speeded up, would be consistent with an 'over-fulfilment', though a downward allowance must be made for disinvestment (unplanned) in the private agriculture and handicrafts section. 'Heavy industry' investments have the effect of increasing incomes without any corresponding rise in output of consumers' goods and services.

Another major cause of inflationary pressure (and partly caused by this pressure) was the rise in wages. Demand for labour rocketed, as planners and managers tried to achieve the impossible. They drew in extra labour to make up for inefficiency or planners' over-optimism, they bid against each other for whatever labour was available. In the face of a drive to fulfil plans in time

'at any cost', financial controls were ineffective. Wage bills rose high above expectations. Costs, naturally, rose too. The original plan envisaged, as was shown on p. 144, a reduction in costs, also in wholesale and retail prices. The average wage of workers in large-scale industry was planned to rise from 66.90 (1927-8) to 98.28 roubles per month (1932-3, optimal variant), i.e. by 46.9 per cent, but prices were to fall by 10 per cent, so real wages would increase by about 52 per cent. The actual real wages will be examined later on. It is enough at present to note what happened to money wages: in 'census industry' they reached 123 roubles per month per worker in 1932. Over the entire economy, average wages exceeded plan by 44 per cent, and the total payroll exceeded expectations by much more than this (since the numbers in employment increased very rapidly). True, many peasants suffered a loss in income because of the consequences of collectivization. However, money incomes in total far exceeded plan, but goods and services available were less than had been hoped for.

More will be said later about how the plan was in fact financed. For the present, let us briefly examine the government's price policies, and the effect of these on our task of assessing the impact of the events of the time.

It has already been pointed out that the government, in launching the plan, made much of the need to reduce prices, or at least to oppose price increases. Rationing had been introduced in cities in the winter of 1928-9, and ration prices were kept at low levels. It extended to ever more commodities, including textiles and clothing, as shortages grew more acute. As for industrial materials and fuels, these were strictly price-controlled, and, as costs rose, subsidies were paid out of the budget. Almost every industrial producer's good came under ever stricter control on the part of the planners, as part of the effort to give priority to the heavy-industry projects which were regarded as the keys to the success of the entire plan.

Demand for materials and fuel could, in principle, be kept down by administrative allocation, though over-taut planning did cause frequent supply and transport difficulties. However, the people had increasing sums of money in their pockets, and less to spend it on. A black (or 'jgrey') market duly flourished, despite efforts to suppress it, and decrees (e.g. on 22 August 1932) speak of the 'greater frequency of cases of speculation'. Peasant bazaars were at times closed (or their opening made conditional upon meeting the state's procurement quotas), at other times tolerated. As food shortages became acute, off-ration prices in this limited free market became exceedingly high, varying greatly from place to place because of the elimination of a (legal) professional trading class, and shortages of transport. The invaluable Malafeyev has given us important data on this period, and the next pages are based largely on his evidence (he quoted liberally from archive material which was not otherwise accessible).

# Prices, Taxes and Purchasing Power

We have already noted that by 1929 a wide gap had opened between official prices and those charged by private traders. It should be added that until 1933 at least cooperatives in fact were able to evade price control, and even state enterprises found that they could make up for some of their excess wages bills by overcharging.

In early 1929 bread rationing had been introduced, and by 1932 40 million persons were supplied with bread from 'centralized sources', another 10 million were rationed out of local resources. Rationing spread by the end of 1929 to almost all foodstuffs, and then gradually to the rapidly disappearing manufactured consumers' goods. On 11 October 1931 a price committee attached to STO (on 1 April 1932 renamed 'committee for commodity funds and the regulation of trade') was to liquidate the remnants of 'private traders' speculation' and fix prices in the state and cooperative sector, 'aiming at a gradual price reduction'.<sup>7</sup> So the myth of falling prices was still alive, and in fact a few prices of rationed or scarce commodities were cut on 16 February 1930. But prices generally had already then begun to rise, and the state's urgent need for revenue led, on 2 September 1930, to the adoption of a decree on tax reform. Turnover tax came into operation on 1 October of that year, replacing a multitude of excise and *ad hoc* taxes. Price increases thereafter were to a great

extent a function of increases in this tax (of which more will be said later on). It became a major means of mopping up surplus purchasing power, arising out of the large increase in incomes and the consequences of high investment expenditure and the disasters of agriculture. Turnover tax was included in the supply price *(otpusknaya tsena)* at which state industry 'released' products to non-official consumers.

However, the government at first tried to cushion the shock, and so ration prices were held at low levels for a time. By the middle of 1931, the resultant acute shortages even of rationed commodities led to the supply of some goods by *ordery* (authorization). The spread of rationing and administrative allocation (even of trousers to stated individuals) led, as in the period of war communism, to the spread of what Malafeyev calls iiquidationist attitudes to trade, money, and finance . .. There arose the absurd and harmful theory of the need to abolish money and to shift to direct products exchange. The supporters of this theory considered that our money is already close to becoming work tokens and really has become a merely nominal unit of account, that within the socialized sector it is already not money, while within the private sector it just "seems to be money".' There were cases of unofficial exchange of products, as when a Moscow factory 'exchanged iron and wire for clothing and furniture' with other enterprises.<sup>8</sup>

It is worth briefly dwelling on this odd resurgence of extreme leftism which swept the country during the great leap forward. It affected much more than monetary theory. It led to a neglect of cost considerations generally, and to idealization of communal living even when, as so often happened, this was the inevitable consequence of overcrowding. These attitudes affected the view taken of economics in general, and even of statistics. After all, statistics is the study of random, unplanned, uncontrolled magnitudes. Such a word, so it was held, was unsuitable for the new circumstances of all-round, all-inclusive planning. So the central statistical administration was placed under Gosplan in 1930, and in December 1931 solemnly renamed the 'Central administration of national-economic accounting' (TSUNKH U was the abbreviation in common use). Note the stress on accounting, in line with

Lenin's thoughts of 1917 vintage. It was not renamed 'statistical' until 1941. In line with the same philosophy, when the Commissariat of Trade was divided in 1930 its internal activities were placed under a Commissariat of 'Supplies', avoiding the tainted word 'trade'.<sup>9</sup>

To return to trade and prices, the government, in and after 1931, began to take strong measures against evasion of price controls and against unofficial product exchange, insisting on its own powers over resource allocation. On 10 May 1931 the cessation of rationing of manufactured consumers' goods was decreed, with, however, the continued use of *ordery* (authorizations) for clothing and footwear. By April 1932 food rationing was confined to bread, grains, meat, herrings, sugar, and fats. The share of state as distinct from cooperative trade rose sharply.

The practice of selling some state goods at high prices, which was originally unauthorized or illegal, became a means of increasing the state's own revenue. While the practice grew particularly rapidly in 1931 and 1932, it began as early as 1929, the first instance being the sale at high prices of 16 tons of sugar in July and October 1929.<sup>10</sup> Such sales became known as 'commercial', and in the next few years they grew,to substantial dimensions. Special 'commercial' shops were opened on a large scale in 1932, and these sold rationed and scarce unrationed goods of many kinds at prices far above official prices, the difference going to the budget in the form of a special 'budgetary addition' over and above turnover tax.

There were then a number of different prices in existence for the same commodities, to wit:

(1) Retail prices of the 'normal urban fund' of goods mainly sold on ration coupons.

(2) Prices of the 'commercial fund', supposedly freely sold to all buyers, much higher than the 'normal'. These in turn were divided into 'average commercial' and 'higher commercial'. They were supposed to be available to any buyer who could afford them, without coupons, but 'in 1930-32 .. . some of the scarcest commodities which were available for sale at commercial prices were frequently sold only on special authorizations (ordery), thus becoming in effect rationed. In the case of such exceptionally

scarce items as good-quality cotton and wool fabrics, footwear, etc. consumers employed by various enterprises were temporarily attached to particular commercial shops, and they were issued with a kind of entry permit into this shop, with a limit on purchases.'<sup>11</sup> This refers to 'closed' shops, available only to specially favoured groups of the population. Such groups included workers of factories deemed to be important for the economy. So-called 'closed workers' cooperatives' were set up to supply them, and a contemporary writer emphasized the desirability of linking supplies by this route with the fulfilment of production plans and 'the struggle against absenteeism and flitting'.<sup>12</sup>

(3) There were also sales of both foodstuffs and manufactured goods 'in working-class areas' at what were described as 'average increased prices' *(srednepovyshenye tseny),* below commercial and above ration prices. (One can imagine the length of the queues!)

(4) From 1933 there were also 'model general stores' *(univermagi),* with prices higher than commercial prices.

(5) *Torgsin* shops sold goods only for precious metals and foreign currency, both urgently needed for balance-of-payments reasons.

(6) Free-market prices, either quasi-legal (open bazaars for peasant foodstuffs) or semi-illegal or black-market. The kolkhoz markets were at first (1931) supposed to observe 'the Soviet price policy', but this attempt to control prices did not work, and was abandoned in 1932.

AH these categories had local variations, since, as can well be imagined, distribution was poorly organized.

Prices rose rapidly in 'commercial' trade, more rapidly still in the free market. It was not until 27 January 1932 that there was a (very sharp) general increase in retail prices of all (including rationed) goods. But the government, in its anxiety to appease the workers and in its evident indifference to peasant interests, fixed most prices in rural areas at 'commercial' levels. Thus at the beginning of 1932, i.e. before the big rise decreed in January, official retail prices had risen by 75 per cent in towns, 42 per cent in the country, since 1928.<sup>13</sup> By the first half of 1932 the prices charged in state and cooperatives had reached a level 76 per cent above 1927-8 levels, while 'private market' prices were 769 per cent of

#### **Prices, Taxes and Purchasing Power 207**

1927-8 and rising very rapidly, particularly for foodstuffs, reflecting the general scarcity of practically everything. In the three months March to June 1932 rye flour increased in price by 45.7 per cent, rye bread by 35 per cent, meat by 125 per cent, potatoes by 66.7 per cent. The following table shows the general rise:<sup>14</sup>

|              |      |      |                       |      |           |                | 1932                  |
|--------------|------|------|-----------------------|------|-----------|----------------|-----------------------|
|              |      |      | Private market prices |      |           | Official price | Free price            |
|              | 1928 | 1929 | 1930                  | 1931 | June 1932 |                | (kopeks per kilogram) |
| Rye<br>flour | 100  | 225  | 350                   | 525  | 2,303     | 12.6           | 89.5                  |
| Potatoes     | 100  | 160  | 280                   | 520  | 1,552     | —              | —                     |
| Beef         | 100  | 125  | 359                   | 663  | 1,264     | in             | 414                   |
| Butter       | 100  | 201  | 602                   | 979  | 1,078     | 502            | 1,146                 |
| Eggs         | 100  | 134  | 330                   | 572  | 868       | —              | —                     |
| Rye bread    | —    | —    | —                     | —    | —         | 10.5           | m.<br>o               |

In 1933 matters grew worse. 'Normal-fund' (i.e. ration) prices were sharply increased again on 1 January, and in many instances the rise again hit the villages hardest (e.g. kerosene, which in 1932 cost 18 kopeks a litre in towns and 30 kopeks in villages, was further increased in price by 27 per cent, for villages only).<sup>15</sup> Among the largest price increases were 116 per cent for vegetable oil (51 per cent in rural areas), 95 per cent for sugar (163 per cent in rural areas), 20 per cent for bread, and so on. There were increases also in state 'commercial' prices, and particularly severe increases in those prices of manufactured goods sold in rural areas, which had fallen behind the rise in commercial prices (e.g. wool cloth by 77 per cent, thread by 210 per cent). There were further substantial increases in official prices of foodstuffs in 1933: bread by 80 per cent (less in rural areas), butter by 55 per cent, eggs by 80 per cent, etc. Also the general cost of living rose because of an increased share of'commercial' trade, at higher prices, in the total, from 12.9 per cent of the total 'planned commodities' in 1932 to 26.9 per cent in 1934. In 1933 a number of basic foodstuffs were sold at greatly increased 'commercial' prices, at which supply and demand did balance. In May 1933 the 'commercial' price of rye bread was 20 times above the official ration price, and was thus close to the real free-market price. This was the so-called 'fund of free sales', i.e.

sales unencumbered by informal rationing restrictions. At the same date, the commercial price of sugar was 6 times the ration price, sunflower oil 14 times.<sup>16</sup>

Free-market prices continued to rise, and in 1933 were 48.2 per cent above the average of 1932 (bread and grains, potatoes and vegetables by over 60 per cent).<sup>17</sup> But the very substantial increases in 1933 in prices of rationed and other scarce commodities, a policy continued in 1934 when the rye bread price was doubled, reduced the gap between the various price categories and so prepared the way for the ultimate abolition of rationing and of the endlessly confusing multi-price system.

The proper assessment of living standards at this time is rendered almost impossible not only by the existence of rationing, price differences, and shortages, but also of queues, decline in quality, neglect of consumer requirements: 'It is well known that the closed shop system and rationing was frequently associated with a marked worsening in service to consumers, the widespread tendency to impose "compulsory" products, etc. The attitude of the sales staff... to the customer could be characterized by the slogan "take what you are given, do not hold up others in the queue, do not prevaricate and fuss".'<sup>18</sup>

Therefore any figures comparing wages and prices are bound greatly to understate the decline in living standards. The party's official history prefers to overlook any decline, and for the statistically worst year, 1933-4, o n e looks in vain for any overall price index in any Soviet source. Malafeyev was allowed to publish only certain facts. He did calculate an index for 1932, for state and cooperative trade only. This came to 255 (1928 = 100), while average wages rose to 226. Thus the real wage index based on the above would come to 88.6.<sup>19</sup> But in 1932, as we have seen, free-market prices had risen very much more rapidly. The correct real wage index, if we only knew it, would therefore be well below 88.6. Malafeyev here faced a problem with which one can sympathize. On the one hand, there is a clear indication that real wages had fallen, and this called for explanation, which he duly gave: 'This is understandable. In the period of industrialization of our country .. . the working class, the entire Soviet people, spared neither effort nor resources, and consciously made sacri-

flees, to drag the country out of its backwardness.'<sup>20</sup> On the other hand, he felt compelled to assert that there were no sacrifices, since 'in the period 1928-32 national income rose by 82 per cent, and the consumption fund in 1928-31 rose by 75.5 per cent'. This, it seems, proves the 'baselessness' of the assertion 'that socialist industrialization subordinates consumption to investment, or that [the party] applied in practice the Trotskyist slogan of primitive socialist accumulation which it rejected in theory'.<sup>21</sup> Of course, Malafeyev, for whose pioneering work on prices we must be grateful, was well aware that the figures just quoted were totally misleading, but could not say so. (More will be said in the appendix about recent recomputations, e.g. by G. Khanin.)

In order to facilitate the mobilization of the working class for the 'great tasks of building socialism', and so as to avoid any organized protest about living standards or working conditions, the trade unions were turned 'face to production', i.e. were instructed to act primarily as organizers and mobilizers in the interests of plan fulfilment. Their old leaders, Tomsky and his friends, were dismissed as 'right-wing deviationists'. The protective role of the unions was greatly reduced. If their face was to production, their back was to their members. For many years there was not even the pretence of elections, and the all-union Trades Union Congress failed to meet at all in the period 1932-49. When, with the disappearance of unemployment, it was decided to wind up the People's Commissariat of Labour (in 1934) the trade union centre took over some of its functions and administered social insurance. It thus became for all practical purposes a branch of government. We shall see that not until after Stalin's death was there a revival of its more representative and protective functions. In the thirties the nominal powers of the unions to enforce protective legislation were little used.

What was the contemporary reaction to the harsh conditions of the time? The press and speeches made virtually ignored them altogether. Stalin, speaking in January 1933, calmly claimed that (money) wages had risen by 67 per cent since 1928, omitted all mention of prices, and asserted: 'But we have unquestionably

attained a position where the material conditions of the workers and peasants are improving from year to year. The only ones who can have doubts on this score are the sworn enemies of the Soviet regime.'<sup>22</sup> To put it mildly, such language did not encourage independent research on standards of living!

The inclusion in the picture of the peasants would certainly make it worse, in particular in the period 1928-34. Nothing can better illustrate the meaninglessness, in any real terms, of the claim to an increase in the 'consumption fund' by 75 and more per cent. Admittedly, correction must be made for the elimination of unemployment, and for the fact that many of the poorer peasants were earning more as unskilled workers than they had as peasants, so that a falling real wage-level does not necessarily imply that all wage-earners were earning less than before. Social services did grow, too. Factory canteens provided inexpensive meals on a large scale. There was a big expansion of private cultivation on the outskirts of towns. Rents stayed very low. But many corrections require to be made in the opposite direction also. The fact still seems to be clear: 1933 was the culmination of the most precipitous peacetime decline in living standards known in recorded history. Mass misery and hunger reached dimensions whose demographic consequences have already been remarked upon.

Agricultural procurement prices remained very low. Thus prices paid by the state for wheat in the Ukraine reached 8.05 roubles per quintal (100 kilograms) in 1928-9 and remained unchanged through to 1934. In 1935 there was a 10 per cent increase. Prices paid for beef in 1931—2 were actually below the 1928-9 level, pork prices were a little above. Yet all goods purchased by peasants had their prices very greatly increased. However, some peasants were able to benefit from very high free-market prices. This was indeed 'primitive socialist accumulation'. In 1934, however, a notably different policy for industrial crops was introduced: thus cotton prices were raised from 30 to 115 roubles per centner. This was doubtless a necessary consequence of the rise in food prices, since the Central Asian peasants could not be expected to specialize on cotton unless they could eat.

# Incentives and Inequality

To get results a settled labour force was indispensable. A campaign was launched to penalize materially 'flitters' and absentees.

A series of rules and decrees between 1930 and 1933 punished absenteeism (common enough as a result of the habit of drink) by dismissal, eviction from factory housing and loss of various benefits. This led to a marked decline in absenteeism.<sup>23</sup> In 1931 Stalin made his famous critique of 'egalitarianism' *(uravnilovka)*  in wages. The object was to reward those who chose to stay put and acquire skills. The result was a new wage-scale which made the difference in tariff rates between least skilled and highly skilled workers as high as 3.7:1. This had some economic justification at a time when skilled labour was exceedingly scarce. Stalin also encouraged a policy of higher pay and privileges for industrial cadres, and abandoned the old rule, established by Lenin, that party members should not earn more than a skilled worker did. Success would be achieved, in his view, by much greater material incentives. This would bring nearer the day of communist abundance. Until then, the slogan of egalitarianism was, in his view, 'petty-bourgeois'.

But non-material incentives were needed too. So there was greater emphasis than ever before on 'shock workers', 'shock brigades', the Red Banner, honours, 'socialist emulation'. Thus, for example, on 28 April 1930 there was a party declaration on 'shock workers', approving the 'shock' *(udarnyi)* movement, but warning against the tendency, which proved chronic, to 'bureaucratize' the movement by such things as 'chasing the formal fulfilment of plan figures, declaratory showmanship', and so on.<sup>24</sup> Workers and factories were thus urged ever onwards to new efforts, and rewarded both financially and morally.

Privileges, whether for selected categories of workers or for officials, tended at this period to take the form of 'perks': access to 'closed' shops, allocations of tolerable housing, a permit to buy a good suit, and so forth. Under conditions of universal shortages, money alone could not do much, without that something extra which authority could provide or allow. In this sort of situation

abuses were quite unavoidable, and the entire relationship between officialdom and the citizenry was adversely affected. It was therefore entirely right to endeavour to abolish rationing and to bring prices up to a proper supply-and-demand balancing level, as was done in 1934-5, as> apart from greatly simplifying trade and price control, the opportunities for rackets of all kinds greatly diminished in scope. However, as shortages of necessities and luxuries alike were very severe, prices had to be very high in relation to the (inflated) wages. But this will be examined in the next chapter.

# Financing of Growth

It is time to turn to finance. How was the vast investment plan financed? In part by the sales of bonds, which became by this time almost compulsory, in that a recalcitrant citizen who failed to volunteer to buy bonds might well suffer unfortunate consequences. And then there was the printing press. Money in circulation increased as follows:

| 1928 | 1929 | 1930 | 1931 | 1932<br>(milliard roubles, i January) | 1933 | 1934 |
|------|------|------|------|---------------------------------------|------|------|
| 1.7  | 2.0  | 2.8  | 4.3  | 5.7                                   | 8.4  | 6.9  |

*<sup>(</sup>Source:* Malafeyev *Istoriya tsenoobrazovaniya v SSSR* (Moscow, 1964), p. 404.)

The fall in 1934 is surprising, and receives no explanation. The rise was resumed in subsequent years.

Last but not least, there were taxes. Little was obtained in these years by direct taxation of workers and employees, and while there was some revenue from penal taxes designed to drive individual peasants into the kolkhozes, and individual craftsmen into cooperatives, once there they were taxed fairly lightly. The bulk of revenue, after the tax reform of 1930, came from turnover tax, and to a lesser extent from the profits of state enterprises.

'Turnover tax' is a term which covered (and covers) some very different species of taxation, including in 1930-35, the following:

**(1) Increased** excise **duties, especially on vodka, but** also **on**  salt, matches, etc.

(2) Taxes included in the industry's selling (disposal) price, on **a** wide range of industrial consumers' goods, from textiles to sewing machines. These taxes were particularly high in these years on goods destined for 'commercial' sales. There were also 'budget additions' of various categories, so-called *natsenki,* which were added to the price of some goods when allocated for retail sales.

(3) The tax which arose out of the difference between the low procurement price of agricultural produce and the much higher price at which raw or processed foodstuffs were ultimately sold to the consumers (after allowing, of course, for transport and handling charges). Thus in 1933 the grain procurement organization (Zagotzerno) paid roughly 5.70 roubles for a centner of rye, and sold this rye to state flour mills at 22.20 roubles, the budget benefiting from the difference. After a series of retail price increases the situation at the end of 1934 was as follows: the Zagotzerno "selling price of rye was 84 roubles per centner, of which 66 roubles was turnover tax. The price cited for wheat was 104 roubles, with turnover tax taking an even higher proportion, 89 roubles. The price of coarse wheat flour was 216 roubles per centner, of which turnover tax took 195.50 roubles.<sup>25</sup> Anti-Soviet propagandists have made much of the very high percentage of the tax ('tax on necessities' of astronomic dimensions), but this is to miss the point, which is the very low level of payments to the peasant producers. The burden of tax was primarily on them: compulsory procurements at low prices contained a substantial element of tax, which showed up in the budget as part of turnover tax revenue. Its importance may be demonstrated by the fact that in 1935 procurement organizations contributed 24 milliard roubles to the budget,<sup>26</sup> within a turnover tax yield of 52.2 milliards, out of a total revenue in that year of 75 milliards. Agriculture thus made a decisive contribution to the financing of the plan.

Very serious difficulties faced the government in finding the means to finance purchases from abroad. As already mentioned, terms of trade moved sharply against the Soviet Union, in common with other primary producing countries, as the Great Depression developed in the West. Exports of wheat were

resumed, and other foodstuffs were exported, including butter (31,000 tons in 1932), despite acute shortages at home. Accusations of dumping, boycotts, protests against Soviet timber because of forced labour, obstruction of Soviet oil sales, all handicapped the efforts of Soviet salesmen. Every attempt was made to obtain credits from abroad, and, with the depression in full swing, Russian orders were very welcome. So a certain amount of aid was rendered from the 'capitalist' West, in the form of loan finance as well as know-how, though of course aid was not the motive of these transactions. In his interview with Walter Duranty, Stalin stated that in 1931 total Soviet indebtedness on various credit accounts amounted to 1,400 million roubles. Assuming that this was expressed in the then official exchange rate, this amounted to 721 million dollars. These were short-term credits, and every effort was made to repay them quickly. By the end of 1933 the sum of only 450 million roubles was outstanding.<sup>27</sup> But these repayments required sacrifices. Apart from exporting essentials badly needed within Russia, it proved necessary to sell art treasures, to encourage the people to disgorge any stocks of gold and foreign currency (via the *Torgsin* shops, see p. 206) and so on. Individuals suspected of hoarding gold *were forced* to disgorge it by threats and imprisonment.

# Reorganization of Planning

It is now necessary to take a brief look at the *organizational changes* which accompanied the first five-year plan.

Firstly, the nature and situation of the enterprises were fundamentally altered. On 5 September 1929 the principle of one-man management was asserted in a decision of the central committee. The factory party organization was told not to interfere with the director's responsibility, the trade unions were to be 'energetic organizers of production activity and of the initiative of the labouring masses', even while upholding 'the everyday cultural, amenity and economic needs of the workers'. The director was, in principle, in sole charge. On 5 December 1929 a further decision (still by the central committee, a *de facto* legislator in economic affairs, now and later) laid down that the enterprise was to be 'the basic unit of administering industry', and the principle of *khozraschyot* (economic or commercial accounting) was to be based on the enterprise, which was to have appropriate financial autonomy and a legal personality. This followed the logic of a decision taken on 29 June 1927 to increase the powers of the enterprise, a decision which was successfully resisted by the trusts. Now the trusts lost their direct powers over enterprises, and were told to concentrate on 'technical direction, rationalization and reconstruction'. VSNKH'S industrial glavki were abolished, and their functions in controlling industry were transferred to so-called *obyedineniya* (associations) which were supposed to be based on the wholesaling 'syndicates'. A similar change had already been made in the textile industry in 1927 (see p. 95).

In the years that followed, the immense new burden of work which fell upon the central planning organs caused repeated further reorganization, some 'legal', some *ad hoc*. A very large number of decisions emanated from the central committee and its officials, or were taken by its plenipotentiaries on the spot. Control over resources allocation became ever more complicated, and the need to systematize it led to a re-examination of the relative functions of VSNKH and Gosplan. The latter was no longer engaged only in prognosis and the drafting of 'control figures', since plans had become orders to act. On 23 January 1930 the central statistical administration was placed under Gosplan. Gosplan came directly under the Council of People's Commissars (not the STO) by decree of 3 February 1931. Gosplan increasingly took over the function of planning from VSNKH.

VSNKH meanwhile was undergoing a painful internal transformation. The thirty-five associations set up in December 1929 were supposed to 'plan production, plan and control investment, technical policy, supplies and disposals, commercial and financial activities, labour, training and distribution of cadres, appointment and dismissals of managerial staffs'.<sup>28</sup> Some of these associations had as their sole task the full control of enterprises and trusts of all-union significance, but some of them controlled enterprises

which were within the competence of the republics or local Soviets. Confusion arose over the question of responsibility of the associations both with regard to republican organs and in respect of the presidium of VSNK H itself, which retained a wide range of powers. It exercised them with the advice of a reorganized and strengthened version of Promplan, the clumsy title of which was: 'Central planning-technical-economic administration.' As the extent of the planning grew, and industry became more complex and difficulties accumulated, this structure became unworkable. Some of the associations controlled far too many enterprises: thus *Soyuzlesprom,* the association responsible for timber, had under it one thousand production units. So a process of subdivision started. The number of associations grew. VSNKH' S coordinating and controlling function was rendered ever more difficult. By the end of 1930 the newly appointed head of VSNKH , Ordzhonikidze, decided to reorganize it yet again. This time there grew up a series of 'sectors' (e.g. Metallurgical, Chemical, Fuel, etc.), within each of which there were several associations. The 'Central planning-technical-economic administration' was abolished, and in its place there were created 'functional sectors': for plans, accounting and auditing, finance, supplies and disposals, cadres, labour, investments. The functional departments interfered directly with the activities of enterprises and trusts, thereby causing much crossing of wires; this was later denounced as the disease of 'functionalism' *(funktsionalka).* In 1931, industrial 'sectors' of VSNK H began once more to be called glavki. But all this relabelling of the same officials did not save VSNKH . On 5 January 1932 its work was divided. The largest part was to be handled by the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry. Other industrial commissariats took over light industry and timber and woodworking. Food and sugar production had already been handed over to the Commissariat of Internal and External Trade on 17 June 1930.<sup>29</sup> By 1932 this had been split, and the food and sugar industry found itself within the Supplies Commissariat (Narkomsnab), which also ran internal trade. Later on in the thirties, as we shall see, the number of these People's Commissariats greatly increased by subdivision.

Chief departments (glavki) within the commissariats acquired

direct powers over planning and administering 'their' enterprises, either directly or through republican organs. By the end of 1932 the *obyedineniya* (associations) had become superfluous and had almost wholly vanished from the scene. So was born the 'ministerial' system of industrial administration (People's Commissariats were renamed Ministries in 1946), which survived with few changes, other than growth by subdivision, until 1957. As a result of the fact that no one body at this level now covered all industry, Gosplan's role as coordinator naturally increased, and became the key element in the planning system under the authority of the party and government. A more detailed analysis of the planning system in the thirties must be left to the next chapter.

There was also a reform of credit and banking. As we have seen, in the NEP period state trusts could make agreements and grant credits with one another on their own initiative. In 1930-33 there were cases of 'products exchange' between state enterprises. Evidently, no effective control over the activities of sub-units of the state economy would be possible so long as they could obtain and spend money in unplanned ways. So on 30 January 1930 a decree introduced 'direct bank credit' through the State Bank, and abolished inter-enterprise and inter-trust credits. On 23 May 1930 came a decree on 'a unified financial plan' incorporating the finances of 'all financial resources of the socialized sector of the economy'. On the same day it was decided that investment allocations from the state budget to socialized enterprises were to be non-returnable, these being distinguished from short-term credits granted by the Bank to cover temporary needs for funds (e.g. to cover the gap between outlays and receipts of payment for goods). A series of further measures during 1931<sup>30</sup> tightened up control over bank credits, linking them more closely with both the output plan and with contracts signed with the customers designated by the plan. A more thorough distinction was made between 'own' working capital and that financed by bank credits. This was 'control by the rouble', but in the peculiar circumstances of 1929-33, both the expansion of short-term credits and budgetary grants (in the form of subsidies to cover operating losses) helped to finance inflationary increases in wages.

# **The Party's Rule and Methods**

A word is necessary about the rule of the party, its plenipotentiaries, its direct interventions. An example may be taken from the railways and agriculture. Here, for instance, is Postyshev at the seventeenth party congress:

Repressions were, in these decisive years, the effective method of 'leadership' in many party organizations of the Ukraine. To characterize these .. . I will give the following example, typical of very many regions of the Ukraine. In the Novograd-Volynsk region, as in other regions, there was set up the operational *troika* for sowing, consisting of the secretary of the regional [party] committee, the plenipotentiary from the central committee and the head of the regional OGPU, with the participation at the troika meetings of the regional procurator, the head of militia and of the control commission. Here is an extract of the minutes of a meeting of the troika: 'Remove and send for trial the chairman of the retail cooperative. Kondratiev to select a new chairman, and the militia commander to arrange *\oformii<sup>1</sup> -* in proper form] for the trial. Dismiss the chairman of the village soviet and put him on trial. Members of the village soviet and all rural organizations to be severely reprimanded through the press. Deprive Kolkhoz No. 2 of all favourable treatment. Remove the bureau of the [party] cell.' .. . This is the undisguised arbitrariness which in these decisive years became the predominant form .. . 31

Voroshilov, in his speech, referred to similar arbitrariness by the heads of the political departments *(politotdely)* on the railways: 'When we read that [a politotdel man] arrived at the depot, sacked some, appointed others, moved wagons, chased out locomotives, it becomes both funny and sad. If this is to be the normal work of politotdely, if they will replace the men in charge, then we will not put transport right, we will further disorganize it.'<sup>32</sup> An example of the (positive) effect of central committee intervention was mentioned at the congress by Zimin: 'Before the decision of the C.C.,... there were a mere fourteen engineers and 141 technicians to work on repairs to all the rail wagons of our country. After the C.C. decisions there were thrown *(brosheno)* there 450 engineers and 1,550 technicians. $^{133}$  And Voroshilov ended *his* speech by declaring: 'Since Comrade Stalin has now taken up transport questions, then, comrades, joking is superfluous.<sup>34</sup>

No account of economic affairs in these years would be complete without a reference to the changed 'tone'. The general coarsening of life went far beyond merely bad language, table-thumping by boorish commissars, overcrowded communal dwellings and the like. There was a decline not only of living standards but also in standards of discussion, and in the substance as well as the form of orders given. In the twenties too, needless to say, politics and economics were interlinked and strong words were used in argument. But by the early thirties real argument ceased, to give way to abuse. Thus two unfortunates called Vol'f and Kovarski expressed views in 1933 favouring greater autonomy for farms, thus 'underestimating the role of the proletariat in collectivization and the leading role of the state in kolkhozes'. Perhaps they were wrong. But in a leading academic journal they were accused of being enemy agents, wreckers, of 'infecting horses with meningitis'.<sup>35</sup> Another example is worth citing at length. It concerns rail transport, which, as already stated, proved unable to cope with the vast increase in traffic, in 1933 in particular. This led to a major reorganization and the appointment as commissar of Kaganovich, the very embodiment of the 'trouble-shooter', and 'shooter' is to be taken literally in this instance. 'Political departments' were set up to 'unmask and smash sabotage'. The crisis on the railways was real enough. In the first half of 1933 only 85.5 per cent of the traffic plan had been fulfilled and the tonnage carried had fallen compared with the analogous period of 1932. Oil and coal could not be moved, contributing to an acute fuel crisis. Among the causes were shortages of spare parts, lack of time for maintenance, lack of skilled men.<sup>36</sup> But above all, sabotage was suspected. The trials in 1930-31 of an alleged 'Industrial party', a 'Peasant party', a 'Menshevik bureau', all spread a feeling of insecurity and fear, particularly of sabotage, and placed almost all specialists under suspicion. Stalin asked for the rapid training of reliable specialists of unimpeachable origins, urged communists to 'master technique'. Meanwhile the following appeared in a leading article in the organ of Gosplan - hardly a rabble-rousing publication:

Until now 'many party cells show class blindness and do not unmask class enemies who creep into me railways and attempt to wreck and disrupt'. As a result, class enemies, white-guardists, kulaks, still have the opportunity here and there on the railways to creep into 'modest' and 'insignificant' jobs, like those of greasers, and, 'silendy sapping', they carry on their wrecking, becoming organizers of crashes and accidents, destroying essential parts of the railway and disorganizing its work. Those who openly disrupt the carrying through of essential party and government decisions are direct collaborators and agents of the class enemy .. . Direct trickery by saboteurs of party and government [measures] reaches the proportions of a pillar of Hercules, as is quite clearly shown by the case of degenerative and criminal eyewash by trade-union falsifiers at the Osnova station of the Southern railway line, who in one night [wait for it!] fabricated twenty-four false reports of workers' meetings, supposedly organized to carry through the decisions [of the party] on transport. To raise the level of watchfulness over the class enemy which has crawled into transport, to show up and unmask every kind of open and hidden saboteurs so that, with every available means which only the proletarian dictatorship possesses, their criminal activities can be ended, that is the duty of every communist ... " [and so on, *ad nauseam].* 

This purple passage is not reproduced here as a piece of anticommunist propaganda, or for a cheap laugh. It was typical of the time, and this pattern of thought and action deeply affected economic administration at all levels. To omit this is to leave out a significant part of history, an essential part of the politicalsociological background to the great purge.

The same language extended to economics, and, as already pointed out, measures against alleged saboteurs extended also to the economists. The same issue of the journal from which the above passage was quoted contains an abusive 'review' of a work by Strumilin, who was a leading party economist. He was accused, *inter alia,* of apologetics for Trotskyism and Bukharinism, and it seems lucky that he was not swept away with so many others, and had in fact lived to celebrate in honour his ninetieth birthday in 1968. The critics accused him of 'failing to unmask the bourgeois wrecking nature of the [modest] first drafts of the five-year plan'.

These were 'deliberate minimalism of the wrecker-planners'. That they could have made honest mistakes is out of the question: 'The class nature and tactics of the wreckers are analysed superficially by the author, and do not in any way arm the party and workers in its battle against wreckers.' Even exceedingly ambitious plans were deliberate wrecking, according to the reviewer, the object being 'to create deep and artificial disproportions'. And so on. Therefore, since Strumilin allowed for the possibility of error and real difference of opinion, his book was 'harmful .. . vulgar, opportunistic from beginning to end', the author is a 'purveyor of anti-Marxist theories', etc.<sup>38</sup> Many eminent and less wellconnected economists found themselves pilloried as enemy agents and were never seen again.

It is perhaps clear by now that serious discussion was hardly possible. We have already seen Stalin's own contribution to its suppression in his totally false statements on living standards. He took time off his numerous duties in 1931 to write a slashing attack on the 'rotten liberalism' of the editors of a leading party journal for allowing discussion of wrong and harmful ideas.<sup>39</sup> The semi-literate name-callers whom I have quoted were following the party line to the best of their doubtless limited ability. As a psychological fact, the lack of ability explains much. After a cultural meeting in Leningrad, in which a literary commissar (Averbakh) had used tough and uncompromising language, the excellent humorist Zoshchenko said to the (then young) novelist Kaverin: 'Such devilish energy. If only there was talent! But there is no talent, and hence the other qualities.'<sup>40</sup>

### **Return to Sober Planning**

In 1932 the sky was still the limit. On 30 January the seventeenth party conference met, and adopted Kuibyshev's proposals as a basis for a second five-year plan. The table on p. 222 shows the targets for 1937, with the actual 1937 figures in brackets.

The second plan, when finally adopted, was more modest, as we shall see. By then the fever had abated. The terrible events of 1933 may have had their influence, by a kind of shock therapy.

| Electricity (milliard kWhs) | ico       | (36)    |
|-----------------------------|-----------|---------|
| Pig iron (million tons)     | 22        | $(H-5)$ |
| Coal (million tons)         | 250       | (128)   |
| Oil (million tons)          | $80 - 90$ | (28)    |

1933 saw a sharp (unplanned) reduction in investments; these were 14 per cent below 1932 levels. The slogan 'consolidate' was adopted. Consolidate collective farms, increase productivity and yields, learn, become more efficient, improve quality, pull up the lagging consumers' goods industries. 'Technique decides everything.' The worst was over. In 1934 agricultural output, and the livestock population, began its painful climb upwards. Freemarket prices began to fall from the astronomical heights of 1933, and some state commercial prices could at last be reduced. In 1935 rationing of foodstuffs was abolished, by stages, though the new prices were very high. Stalin launched the slogan: 'Life has become better, comrades, life has become more joyous.'

In January 1934  $^{\text{tne}}$  seventeenth congress met,<sup>41</sup> the so-called 'congress of victors'. Over whom, it may be asked? Over the bourgeoisie, petty and less petty. The peasants were nearly all collectivized. A great new industry was being built, and appropriate statistical presentation emphasized the successes and slurred over failures. Livestock losses were admitted, but ascribed to kulak ferocity. Living standards? Well, people are living better. The monolithic party greeted Comrade Stalin and his report with tumultuous applause. And yet — as is now becoming clear - there may have been a move to reduce Stalin's powers, to relax the terror, to bring forward S. M. Kirov, himself an earthy and tough party official, as a symbol of a new mood. To prove this point is not part of an economic history. But the effect of the harsh years seems to have been to predispose the party, while maintaining a unanimous facade to the world, to change to a different gear.

The seventeenth congress was notable for the appearance of members of various oppositions, who were penitent and appealed to everyone to support the great Comrade Stalin. Among them was Preobrazhensky, the principal theoretician of Trotskyism, the popularizer of the theory of primitive socialist accumulation'.

After the compulsory praises of Stalin and criticisms of the defeated oppositionists, he came to the key point of his speech:

You know that my chief error consisted in .. . elaborating the law of primitive socialist accumulation .. . I thought that by exploiting the peasants, by concentrating resources of the peasant economy in the hands of the state, one could build a socialist industry and develop industrialization. This was a crude analogy with the epoch of primitive capitalist accumulation .. . Events totally disproved my ideas, and those prognoses triumphed which Lenin made and which the party made reality under the leadership of Comrade Stalin. Collectivization, that was the point! Did I anticipate collectivization? I did not... Collectivization of the peasants is the greatest of our conquests .. . You know that neither Marx nor Engels, who wrote a great deal about problems of socialism in the village, had any definite idea how the transformation would come about. You know that Engels thought that this would be a fairly lengthy evolutionary process. In this question, what was needed was the greater far-sightedness of Comrade Stalin, his great courage in the formulation of new tasks, the greatest hardness in carrying them out, the deepest' understanding of the epoch and of the relationship of class forces .. . This was the greatest of the overturns *(perevorotov)* known to history.<sup>42</sup>

Preobrazhensky was surely expecting at least some of his audience to see the point. Stalin had 'exploited the peasants by accumulating the resources of the peasant economy in the hands of the state'. Of course he had! But Preobrazhensky had not seen *forced* collectivization as a way out. He did, as is documented, advocate collectivization, but he took it for granted, as Engels had done, that it would be 'a fairly lengthy evolutionary process'!

Tomsky, speaking for the penitents of the right opposition, made a valid point with a certain amount of dignity. 'We did not see that the revolution should take place other than on the basis of NEP, on the basis of concessions [to kulaks, etc.], on the basis of market relations .. . We saw only the assimilation, and reeducation of the kulak, i.e. that crude but apt phrase which Bukharin had used: the growing of the kulak into socialism.'<sup>43</sup>

The majority of the congress booed the ex-oppositionists, and affirmed their faith in the achievements of the past years. They

may well have felt a great sense of relief that the dreadful job had been done, that now things would have to get better. Kirov in his speech expressed a mood of genuine confidence and exultancy: 'Our successes are really immense. The devil take it, to speak frankly, one so wants to live and live! After all, look and see what is going on around us. It's a fact!'\*<sup>4</sup>

Before the end of the year, Kirov was to be assassinated, and soon the wave of terror would sweep over Russia; it would engulf most of the delegates to 'the congress of victors'.

Finally, looking back at the years of the great leap, the following are some observations.

The errors were vast, the cost immense. Could it have been done otherwise? In one sense, the answer must be 'yes'. No one can seriously assert that all the mistakes, crimes, excesses of the period were inevitable and unavoidable. But, so far as industrial planning is concerned, one could with some reason resurrect Lenin's argument about 'Port Arthur' (see page 116). Under Stalin's leadership, an assault was launched against the fortress, defended by class enemies, and on objective obstacles to rapid industrial growth. The assault succeeded in part, failed in some sectors, but failures could be said to be inherent in the process of learning. The later improvements in planning technique were based on lessons learnt in the course of storming the heavens.

Stalin could also bring up in his own defence the need to create military-industrial capacity as quickly as possible. Thus the Urals-Kuznetsk combine was very expensive, and required a great deal of capital, but where would the Russian army have been in 1942 without a Urals-Siberian metallurgical base?

However:

(1) The attempt to go much too fast went altogether too far. The sacrifices imposed were on a scale unparalleled in history in times of peace. The resultant bitterness, disloyalty, repression, also involved a heavy cost, including a military cost. Some soldiers had no difficulty in surrendering, some villages greeted the Germans as deliverers from tyranny (until they learnt better).

(2) The excesses in policy and in plan were in large part due to the deliberate suppression of all opposition, and in particular the strong tendency to regard warnings against overdoing it, whether coming from fellow-communists or non-party specialists, as right-wing deviation at best, or maybe wrecking and diversionism. Sound advice from imaginative economists and other specialists was ignored, the advisers too often dismissed or imprisoned.

(3) Collectivization had disastrous effects on agriculture, and on life generally in and out of the village, from which recovery was slow and painful. The deportation of the bulk of skilled and ambitious peasants did great harm, perhaps never undone. No other communist country followed this practice. Justified on the plea of danger from the terrible kulaks, the hostility of the state made the kulaks into enemies, and so this was a kind of selffulfilling prophecy. As Lewin put it, the kulak who tried to escape his fate by merging himself in the kolkhoz was 'not an inveterate agent of capitalism, but a frightened desperate creature'. Treated as pariahs, deported, robbed, their families left destitute when not deported with them, their children expelled from school, who should be surprised if some of them tried to kill commissars? (A colleague who visited the Ukraine as late as 1936 told me that he saw two children starving, apparently dying, in a village. He asked about this. 'Kulak children', he was told, indifferently.) It was an odd class struggle, rather one-sided.

(4) The administrative methods which were devised, in towns and country alike, were brutal and went hand in hand with increasing police terror.

Yet a great industry was built. It should be added that morale in Russia itself, and the impact of her achievements internationally, were affected by the co-incidence of the Great Depression. Russia was growing, the Western capitalist system was apparently collapsing, with massive unemployment and social disruption, culminating in America with the paralysis of 1932—3, in Germany with six million unemployed and the triumph of Hitler. The worst period of Russia's own crisis coincided with crashes and bankruptcies in the 'capitalist' world, and at least Russia's troubles could be seen as growing pains. It is as well to remember that the West was no sort of model for Russia or anyone else to follow in the years we have been describing and analysing.