CHAPTER 30

# **ASYMMETRIC FEDERALISM**

## LOUISE TILLIN

### **I. INTRODUCTION**

THIS chapter provides a comprehensive overview of the legal architecture by which the Indian Constitution grants differential rights to certain States and groups therein. It focuses on the legal status and consequences of the asymmetrically federal provisions included in the Indian Constitution and amendments over time with regard to autonomy arrangements in India's Northeastern region; the 'special status' of Jammu and Kashmir; the administration of tribal areas under the Fifth and Sixth Schedules; and provisions intended to mitigate intra-State inequalities in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Karnataka. A major contribution of the chapter is its comprehensive analysis of Supreme Court judgments relating to the asymmetric features of the Constitution. The body of case law is relatively small, but provides insights into the way in which States—and citizens—have sought to test the possibilities, limits, and boundaries of autonomy arrangements. The chapter assesses the role of the courts in upholding asymmetrical provisions and protecting the rights of territorially concentrated minorities in the context of the wider political environment. While many of the Constitution's asymmetrical provisions are the outcome of negotiated political settlements, the longer-term protection of autonomy arrangements—which, by their nature, apply to groups who are minorities on the national political stage—may not be assured through democratic politics alone.

#### **II. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ASYMMETRIC FEDERALISM IN INDIA**

Asymmetry—the granting of differential rights to certain federal sub-units, and the recognition thereby imparted for distinct, territorially concentrated 'ethnic' or 'national' groups—is a common feature of federalism in pluri-ethnic or pluri-national settings. By providing some federal sub-units with greater powers of self-governance, asymmetrical devices allow territorially concentrated cultural groups or nationalities to achieve a degree of self-determination within a federal set-up.<sup>1</sup> Asymmetrical constitutional arrangements typically arise either in response to demands from mobilised nationality groups, or when a new entity is guaranteed certain privileges or protections at the time of joining an existing federation.<sup>2</sup>

The normative case for asymmetric federalism builds heavily on the work of Charles Taylor on the 'politics of recognition' and that of Will Kymlicka, who have been at the forefront of debates about asymmetry in Canada with respect to the status of French-speaking Quebec.<sup>3</sup> Kymlicka draws a distinction between 'nationality-based' units, which are home to national minorities, and 'regional units', which are better seen as sub-divisions of a national majority community. $\frac{4}{3}$  As Requejo argues, 'To equate national minority communities with mere regions, or to treat them exactly the same as

federal subunits that are controlled by members of the national majority, is intrinsically inegalitarian, both in substantive and procedural terms.<sup> $5$ </sup> Some scholars go as far as to argue that almost all successful multinational federations are asymmetrical.<sup>6</sup> But asymmetry that meets the normative expectations outlined above can be hard to achieve in practice because of objections from regional politicians within those units without special arrangements.<sup>7</sup>

Asymmetry is an essential characteristic of Indian federalism, and its approach to the accommodation of ethnic diversity.<sup>8</sup> Stepan, Linz, and Yadav describe asymmetry as central to India's ability to cohere as what they define as a 'State-nation' as opposed to 'nation-state' by recognising multiple modes of belonging in India and providing constitutional protection to differential layers of autonomy within the federal system.<sup>2</sup> The post-colonial Indian State has attempted to overcome the 'assimilationist individualism' inherent in a liberal conception of citizenship by embracing a 'differentiated citizenship' and by creating States on an ethno-linguistic basis. $\frac{10}{10}$  But not all of these States have been created on a legally asymmetric footing: the linguistic reorganisation of State boundaries in southern and western India in the 1950s was a largely symmetric reform. It created States with similar rights to self-governance, although it recognised significant de facto asymmetries with regard to languages and culture.  $\frac{11}{1}$  Yet in some parts of the federation, explicit use has been made of asymmetrical devices as a mode of conflict resolution and the accommodation of distinctive national histories and aspirations. It is these de jure devices, and their legal status, that are the subject of the chapter.

There is a degree of Centre–region bargaining inherent in the negotiation of asymmetrical arrangements which are, in practice, frequently an adaptive or reactive element of constitutional settlements rather than an original feature. As Robert Agranoff states: 'Asymmetry depends upon… a polity which is sufficiently flexible, accommodative, and innovative to incorporate complex differences and identities which have political salience.<sup> $12$ </sup> In India, asymmetric features of the Constitution reflect improvisation over time in response to evolving challenges in different regions, rather than being a pristine element of the 1950 Constitution. In the earliest instance, this involved working out a transitional constitutional structure for Jammu and Kashmir, which was in the midst of conflict at the time of the Constituent Assembly. Subsequently, separate agreements were reached with Nagas and Mizos that were enshrined within Article 371 via constitutional amendments. Mechanisms for managing inequalities within States became pressing during the linguistic reorganisation of State boundaries when regions that had previously fallen under different jurisdictions were amalgamated at varying levels of economic development. These situations gave rise to new sections of Article 371. A separate arrangement was also reached governing the accession of Sikkim to the Indian Union in the early 1970s.

The Indian experience with asymmetric measures counters some of the earlier pessimism of Charles Tarlton, the first scholar to write explicitly about asymmetry in federal settings.<sup>13</sup> Tarlton raised concerns about the 'secession potential' created by asymmetrical arrangements. Many scholars now argue the opposite—that it is the denial of asymmetry that is more likely to fuel secessionist bids.<sup>14</sup> Yet there is considerable concern in India of a different kind, namely that autonomy arrangements have been substantially eroded over time, and that this has happened with the approval of the courts. This concern is raised particularly with regard to the status of Jammu and Kashmir. The extension of very numerous constitutional provisions to Jammu and Kashmir via Presidential orders has reduced the extent to which Article 370 has actually functioned as a form of ethnic conflict management. The Article has been severely undermined as a feature of the Constitution that could

provide recognition or protection to the legitimate autonomy claims of the Kashmir Valley.<sup>15</sup>

Furthermore, there are concerns that asymmetrical provisions generate new kinds of tension, and may not ultimately achieve the ends for which they were established. For instance, asymmetric arrangements which offer differential autonomy for territorially concentrated ethnic or nationality groups frequently do little to protect the rights of minorities within those sub-units, or the rights of inter-State migrants (even if the migrants had special status or access to affirmative action measures within their State of origin). For such reasons, as has been seen in India's Northeast, the agreement of asymmetric constitutional status for certain territorially concentrated groups has fed into cascading claims for autonomy from groups who sit outside these State-sanctioned regimes of recognition.<sup>16</sup> Tensions between constitutionally protected group rights and the rights of individuals to equal treatment within particular territories—in terms of access to educational institutions, political representation, and public employment—have frequently been subjects of legal dispute. On the whole, the Supreme Court has upheld the constitutionality of asymmetric arrangements that allow for the protection of group rights in certain territories such as Article 371D with reference to the Telangana region of Andhra Pradesh, and Article 371F with regard to Sikkim. Yet, as the history of Telangana's demand for separate statehood suggests, these legal protections for intra-State equity were insufficient in practice to stem complaints of unfair treatment, which propelled further demands for self-governance.

As well as the one-off provisions designed to respond to particular mobilised demands, wider asymmetric provisions—especially those designed for the governance of areas inhabited by tribal communities—reflect official developmental ideologies. Articles 370 and 371—which contain the largest number of asymmetrical provisions—sit within Part XXI of the Constitution, 'Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions'. The words 'temporary' and 'transitional' are significant. Many asymmetric measures were explicitly envisaged as transitional devices to protect 'backward' areas, home to vulnerable populations not ready for 'full' democracy or seen as vulnerable to exploitation. The enshrining of special provisions for tribal populations recognised the unevenness of capitalist development, and the fact that this was overlaid by cultural differences. This developmentalism went hand in hand with State building, especially in Northeast India.<sup>17</sup>

Flowing from the protective—and transitional—impulses governing asymmetric devices, in many instances they provide substantial powers to the Union government (in the person of the President) or appointees of the Centre (principally Governors), in the States concerned. This has become especially problematic in the case of Jammu and Kashmir, due to features of Article 370, which have enabled extensive revisions to Jammu and Kashmir's status by Presidential order. They lead Khosla to question whether Article 370 has even emerged as asymmetric in the opposite sense to that intended, since it has given the Union greater powers with regard to Jammu and Kashmir than it has with other States.<sup>18</sup> In the case of Sikkim, the President was given the power—within two years of the State's accession—to amend or modify any laws in force before the Constitution to align them with constitutional provisions; and according to Article 371F(l), 'any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law'.<sup>19</sup>

An additional constitutional issue raised by asymmetric arrangements in general is the situation that arises when representatives within an autonomous unit are able to vote in the national parliament on issues that do not concern their region, while representatives from elsewhere cannot vote on the same issues within the autonomous unit. This is perhaps most well known as the 'West Lothian' question in the United Kingdom with regard to Scotland, but in principle it also applies to India, where States

such as Nagaland and Mizoram have the power to restrict the application of laws in their territory. Yet the asymmetrical character of representation within Parliament mitigates this potential complaint in India. Unlike many other federations, India's States have unequal representation in the Rajya Sabha (Council of States), based on their population size. Thus those small States which have asymmetrical constitutional status have weak representation in Parliament overall and do not have a disproportionate influence on all-India legislation. This has helped reduce the extent to which asymmetrical provisions have become a subject of Union-level controversy. But the structure of political representation in the federal second chamber in which small States have very weak representation also underlines the extent to which the effective long-term operation of asymmetric arrangements depends on their constitutional and legal status rather than finding protection within political institutions themselves.

#### **III. CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS FOR ASYMMETRYIN INDIA**

India's Constitution contains two principle forms of asymmetry: first, specific arrangements permitting higher degrees of autonomy and self-governance for individual States and regions (Fifth and Sixth Schedules; Article 370 relating to Jammu and Kashmir; 371A relating to Nagaland; and 371G relating to Mizoram), and secondly, provisions that mandate some States to operate positive discrimination measures to mitigate inter- or intra-State inequality (Article 370; parts of Article 371). There are also more basic differences with regard to the governance of States and Union Territories, with the latter subject to greater central control. The distinctions between States and Union Territories replaced the earlier more complex demarcations between different types of State at Independence— Parts A, B, and C States—that reflected varying historical arrangements under British colonialism. In addition to these special provisions, the Constitution also makes it clear that different arrangements can be adopted with respect to particular States and not others. Article 2 makes provision for Parliament to 'admit into the Union, or establish, new States on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit'. A ruling by a constitutional bench of the Supreme Court in 1993 held that although these terms and conditions must be compatible with the 'basic features' of the Constitution, this does not mean that the conditions need to be the same as those that govern all other States. $\frac{20}{1}$  Thus—as upheld by a subsequent constitution bench—the asymmetrical features of the Constitution are part of a single legal order, which permits differential treatment of regions and groups.<sup>21</sup> They are not representative of legal pluralism.<sup>22</sup> But, as will be shown, several benches have also asserted that certain asymmetrical provisions legitimately supersede the fundamental rights.

The section that follows documents the constitutional origins of India's asymmetric federal features, and goes on to look at their legal status by considering a developing body of case law. It first covers the main forms of asymmetry included in the Constitution as initially agreed by the Constituent Assembly: Article 370, and the Fifth and Sixth Schedules. It then goes on to look at the subsequent additions to the Constitution as a result of negotiated settlements under Article 371.

# **1. Article 370 and the Special Status Granted to the State of Jammu and Kashmir**

Jammu and Kashmir is the only State in the Union which negotiated special terms of entry to the Union at the point of accession, and which today has its own Constitution. On the eve of Independence and the partition of the subcontinent, there was uncertainty about the future of this former Princely State with a Muslim majority but under Hindu rule, situated on the border between India and Pakistan. While almost all other Princely States acceded to India, Jammu and Kashmir held out. It finally acceded to India in October 1947 under duress, in return for military aid during an uprising against the maharaja in Poonch. The new Indian and Pakistani armies were drawn into their first conflict, resulting in an eventual ceasefire in January 1949, which established the present-day 'Line of Control' between Pakistani and Indian Kashmir. $\frac{23}{5}$  From this point on, the terms of Kashmir's accession and its status within the Indian Union have been deeply contested.

Jammu and Kashmir's Instrument of Accession was clear that it did not commit the State to acceptance of any future constitution of India. The Governor-General's letter of acceptance of the accession stipulated that 'as soon as law and order have been restored in Kashmir and her soil cleared of the invader; the question of the State's accession should be settled by a reference to the people'.<sup>24</sup> Except for Kashmir, every other Princely State had accepted the uniform provisions for governance of former Princely States under Part B of the Constitution of India under the Indian Independence Act  $1947.25$  Jammu and Kashmir declared its intention to have its own constitution drafted by its own Constituent Assembly. Initially, the State only acceded to India in foreign affairs, defence, and communications.

Article 370 was debated for over five months by Nehru and Sheikh Abdullah, the National Conference leader to whom Maharaja Hari Singh had handed over power after his accession. As eventually approved by the Constituent Assembly in October 1949, the Article exempted the State from constitutional provisions governing other States. Parliament's legislative powers over Jammu and Kashmir were restricted to the areas of defence, foreign affairs, and communications (as per the original Instrument of Accession). Under the Article, Parliament could only have legislative powers in any other areas on the specification of the President, and with the 'concurrence' of the State government. 26

The Article also gives the President the power to cease the operation of Article 370 or to amend it, but only on the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State. Ordinary processes of constitutional amendment do not apply. Because the Indian Constitution was promulgated before the convening of a Constituent Assembly in Kashmir (which took place only on 31 October 1951, lasting until November 1956), Article 370 was explicitly intended as an 'interim arrangement' until the Assembly met. The interim nature of the arrangement was made clear by N Gopalaswami Ayyangar in the Constituent Assembly of India.<sup>27</sup> As Noorani argues, once the Constituent Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir had dispersed, after adopting the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir in 1956, the only authority to amend Article 370 to alter the nature of federal arrangements for the State had disappeared, and 'all additions to Union powers since then are unconstitutional'.<sup>28</sup>

Writing while Jammu and Kashmir's Constituent Assembly was sitting, legal scholar Paras Diwan described:

The picture of the new Kashmir which is unfolding itself gradually and slowly is of a Kashmir possessing wide autonomy, a member of the Indian Union, a Republic within the Indian Republic; and a Kashmir whose defence, foreign affairs and communications will be ruled by the Indian Union, and for the rest it would be sovereign of its own fate, builder of its own destiny.<sup>29</sup>

Yet very quickly such optimism about the extent of asymmetry protected by the Constitution was challenged. Nehru, who sought Kashmir's closer integration with India, and Sheikh Abdullah, who sought to protect its autonomy, developed a working relationship in the years after Independence. They forged the Delhi Agreement in July 1952 recognising Jammu and Kashmir's autonomy. But by early 1953, relations had soured. Divisions within the top leadership of Abdullah's National Conference came to the fore over Abdullah's increasingly pro-Independence stance. On 9 August 1953, Abdullah was dismissed as Prime Minister of Jammu and Kashmir and arrested under the Public Security Act. Sheikh Abdullah's dismissal and imprisonment marked a deterioration in relations between the Union government and the State of Jammu and Kashmir. It also opened a phase in which the sanctity and spirit of Article 370 has been consistently undermined.

In 1954, the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order was issued, extending numerous provisions of the Indian Constitution to the State, with the approval of the Constituent Assembly then in session. The order gave the Union government the right to legislate in the State on the majority of items on the Union List; gave the Supreme Court full jurisdiction in Jammu and Kashmir; put the State's financial and fiscal relations with the Union government on a par with other States; and extended the fundamental rights to Jammu and Kashmir with the caveat that they could be suspended in the interests of 'security' and without judicial review. $\frac{30}{10}$  In 1956, the State's new Constitution was promulgated—in Sheikh Abdullah's continued absence. The most important provision of the Constitution was for an elected Head of State (in contrast to a Governor appointed by the Union government as in other States), the *Sadar-i-Riyasat* who was to be elected by a majority of the State Assembly and would in turn appoint a Prime Minister. The Constitution also gave the State legislature the ability to define permanent residents of the State (which was important to the ability of the State to maintain special provisions around landownership); and introduce a State flag (unlike other States).

In the forty years after 1954, however, as many as ninety-four of ninety-seven entries in the Union List, and 260 of 395 articles of the Constitution, were extended to Jammu and Kashmir under Presidential Orders.<sup>31</sup> This has included the replacement of the elected Head of State—the *Sadar-i-Riyasat—*by a Governor appointed by the Centre, and a Chief Minister—in line with other States. 32

## **2. Legal Status of Article 370: Case Law and Ongoing Disputes**

Important areas of dispute with regard to the constitutional settlement—or uncertainty—under Article 370 have hinged on the question of whether amendments to the status of Jammu and Kashmir made after the disbanding of the Constituent Assembly are legal. In other words, how far should the Article be seen as a living part of the Constitution, legitimately subject to ongoing amendment over time as Jammu and Kashmir's situation evolved?

These are sensitive political questions. The Legislative Assembly of Jammu and Kashmir in 2000 demanded the implementation of a State Autonomy Committee report which called for the restoration of the State's pre-1953 status, since Article 370 had been 'emptied of its substantive content' as a result of Presidential Orders since then.<sup>33</sup> The State Autonomy Committee report called for a new Article to supplant Article 370 to establish a fresh compact between the Union and the State. Article 370, it wrote, 'has acquired a dangerously ambiguous aspect. Designed to protect the State's autonomy, it has been used systematically to destroy it.<sup>34</sup> The Bharatiya Janata Party, in power at the

Centre when the State Autonomy Committee report was published, takes the opposite position. Its official party policy, reiterated in manifesto commitments, calls for the abrogation of Article 370 altogether—a position that sees the increasing integration of Kashmir with India as legitimate. Some commentaries see Article 370's survival of regime changes in New Delhi and within, in the context of 'democratic elections and federal arrangements', as representing the fact that Jammu and Kashmir has come to enjoy a form of 'federal autonomy'.<sup>35</sup> Yet such an interpretation glosses over the extent of change in Kashmir's constitutional status over time.

The Supreme Court's first ruling on Article 370, *Prem Nath Kaul v State of Jammu and* Kashmir,<sup>36</sup> upheld the interpretation that the temporary provisions of Article 370 were based on the assumption that the 'relationship between India and the State should be finally determined by the Constituent Assembly of the State itself<sup>".  $\frac{37}{2}$ </sup> The bench ruled that 'the continuance of the exercise of powers conferred on Parliament and the President by the relevant temporary provisions of Article  $370(1)$  is made conditional on the final approval by the said Constituent Assembly'.<sup>38</sup> President Rajendra Prasad in 1952 had himself stated his own conclusion that 'Clause (3) of Article 370 was not to be used from time to time as occasion required.<sup> $39$ </sup>

However, two subsequent Supreme Court benches, first in *Sampat Prakash v State of Jammu and Kashmir*, <sup>40</sup> and then in *Mohd Maqbool Damnoo v State of Jammu and Kashmir*, <sup>41</sup> marked a sharp break in the Supreme Court's view of Article 370.<sup>42</sup> In the first case, the Supreme Court rejected the argument that 'modifications made by the President in exercise of powers under this Article, subsequent to the enforcement of the Constitution of the State, would be without any authority of law.<sup>'43</sup> The case related to provisions for preventive detention which had been repeatedly extended under Presidential Orders. The bench found that the President's discretionary powers under Article 370 remained operative, since the Constituent Assembly had not recommended the cessation of Article 370, and the material circumstances that had given rise to the Article had not altered. $\frac{44}{1}$  The bench also stated that it was bound to follow a previous ruling under *Puranlal Lakhanpal v President of India*. <sup>45</sup> The petitioner in this case had objected to a provision included in the first 1954 Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, to replace the direct election of members of the Lok Sabha from Jammu and Kashmir with their indirect election by the State Assembly. He described this as a 'radical alteration' that was not justified as a 'modification' under Article 370. In this case, the Court found that the term 'modification' in Article 370 should be subject to the widest possible interpretation. It stated that:

The object behind enacting Article 370(1) was to recognise the special position of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and to provide for that special position by giving power to the President to apply the provisions of the Constitution to that State with such exceptions and modifications as the President might by order specify.<sup>46</sup>

The later *Mohd. Maqbool Damnoo v State of Jammu and Kashmir* case upheld a similar line of reasoning. In this case, the petitioner had challenged the constitutionality of the replacement of the *Sadar-i-Riyasat* with a Governor. The Court held that the Governor is the successor to the *Sadar-i-Riyasat* and is able to give the State Government's concurrence to any amendments under Article 370. Thus we can see that the Court has, over time, helped to strengthen the role of the President as guardian of the spirit of autonomy, rather than acting itself to protect Jammu and Kashmir's differential autonomy from political intervention on the basis of its distinctive constitutional settlement.

## **3. Fifth and Sixth Schedules**

The other principal area of asymmetry incorporated at the time of the Constituent Assembly was for special measures for governance in areas inhabited by 'indigenous communities' or 'Scheduled Tribes' under the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution. The Fifth Schedule, which operates in majority tribal districts outside the Northeast gives the Union government, under the representation of the Governor, somewhat greater powers to intervene in the interests of the socio-economic development of Scheduled Tribes. Each State with Scheduled Areas is supposed, under the Constitution, to establish a Tribes Advisory Council to advise on matters pertaining to the 'welfare and advancement' of the Scheduled Tribes as may be referred to them by the Governor. The Governor is given the power to declare that particular acts of Parliament or the relevant State legislature are not to apply in Scheduled Areas, as well as to make regulations with regard to land sales by Scheduled Tribes and the operation of moneylenders who lend money to members of Scheduled Tribes. Subsequent legislation, including the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act 1996 has been adopted only for Scheduled Areas. This Act gives *Gram Sabhas* in Scheduled Areas statutory rights over the management of land and some natural resources.

In the Sixth Schedule areas of the Northeast, more extensive powers of self-governance were granted to autonomous district councils (ADCs). At the time of writing of the Constitution, autonomous councils were established for 'hill tribal' communities in Assam, including Nagas. As a result of the subsequent reorganisation of Assam, ADCs are now to be found in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, and Mizoram. There is a total of ten ADCs under the Sixth Schedule, and a further five autonomous councils and five ADCs in the hill areas of Manipur, which were created in non-Sixth Schedule areas.<sup>47</sup> Under the Sixth Schedule, district councils were given the powers to make laws with respect to: land use and allotment (but not to override the compulsory acquisition of land for 'public purpose' by the government); forest management (except reserved forests); irrigation; regulation of shifting cultivation; establishment of village or town councils; inheritance of property; marriage and social customs. ADCs have some rights to raise revenue, and to regulate moneylending and trading by non-tribals, but overall rely heavily on State Governments for their finances. More extensive powers were granted to some councils subsequently via constitutional amendments to the Sixth Schedule, as 'plains tribals' also sought constitutional recognition of their community rights within Assam, including through the Bodoland movement, which resulted in the Bodo Accord of 1993, and provision for a Bodoland Territorial Council. By contrast to these Sixth Schedule provisions, as Jyotirindra Dasgupta suggests, the Fifth Schedule offers more 'protection than autonomy'.  $\frac{48}{1}$ 

Ambedkar noted in the Constituent Assembly that the autonomous councils in Sixth Schedule areas had been partly inspired by measures adopted in the United States for Native Americans. The difference between the Fifth and Sixth Schedules, he outlined, was driven by an attempt to recognise the cultural difference and autonomy of tribal communities in Assam:

The tribal people in areas other than Assam are more or less Hinduised, more or less assimilated with the civilisation and culture of the majority of the people in whose midst they live. With regard to the tribals in Assam that is not the case. Their roots are still in their own civilisation and their own culture … Their laws of inheritance, their laws of marriage, customs and so on are quite different from that of the Hindus. I think that is the main distinction which influenced us to have a different sort of scheme for Assam from the one we have provided for other territories.<sup>49</sup>

The Sixth Schedule also demonstrates continuity with British colonial approaches to governing parts
of the Northeast, which established protective legal regimes for the social customs and traditions, religious practices, land, resources, and property ownership of tribal communities.<sup>50</sup> As Baruah notes, the 'ethnic homeland subtext' evident in these constitutional provisions today is influenced by 'colonial efforts to create protected enclaves for "aborigines" where they could be allowed to pursue their "customary practices" '.<sup>51</sup> These provisions reflect paternalistic approaches to governing tribal areas.

The Sixth Schedule provisions were never accepted by Naga nationalists, who had instead asserted their right to self-determination, and called for recognition of their sovereignty as independent from the nascent Indian State.<sup>52</sup> In June 1947, the Naga National Council had reached an agreement with the then Governor of Assam, Hydari, which in theory had recognised the right of the Nagas to selfgovernance, and a right to review the agreement after ten years. Yet the Bordoloi Sub-committee which made recommendations to the Constituent Assembly on the 'Tribal and Excluded Areas' of the North-East Frontier (Assam) did not honour this separate arrangement reached with the Nagas. Rather, the Naga Hills were treated as a part of Assam and offered the same form of self-governance under ADCs offered to other hill areas.<sup>53</sup> The Naga National Council therefore viewed the Sixth Schedule as a betrayal of earlier commitments. They proceeded to hold a plebiscite on independence from India in 1951, to boycott the first parliamentary elections in 1952, and the 'Naga independentists' subsequently turned to armed struggle. $\frac{54}{4}$  As will be outlined below this eventually resulted in a more far-reaching autonomy beyond the Sixth Schedule for a new State of Nagaland.

The Sixth Schedule was not unanimously embraced by members of the Constituent Assembly either, some of whom expressed their desire for a more assimilationist approach, highlighting concerns that the special provisions exacerbated the likelihood of separatism. Kuladhar Chaliha, a member from Assam, averred: 'If you see the background of this Schedule you will find that the British mind is still there. There is the old separatist tendency and you want to keep them away from us. You will thus be creating a Tribalstan just as you have created a Pakistan.<sup>55</sup> But countering this view, Dr KM Munshi (with whom Dr Ambedkar indicated his agreement), stated:

We want that the Scheduled Tribes in the whole country should be protected from the destructive compact of races possessing a higher and more aggressive culture and should be encouraged to develop their own autonomous life; at the same time we want them to take a larger part in the life of the country adopted.<sup>56</sup>

### **4. Case Law on Fifth and Sixth Schedules**

A major area of legal dispute under the Fifth and Sixth Schedules has concerned rights to the land and natural resources in tribal areas, and the extent to which the autonomy arrangements under these schedules restrict private economic activity by non-tribals in areas often rich in forests and minerals. In a historic ruling in *Samatha v State of Andhra Pradesh*, <sup>57</sup> a constitutional bench of the Supreme Court held that land in government or private hands could not be transferred for mining purposes to non-tribals in Fifth Schedule areas. In the judgment, the bench stated:

The Fifth and Sixth Schedules constitute an integral scheme of the Constitution with direction, philosophy and anxiety to protect the tribals from exploitation and to preserve valuable endowment of their land for their economic empowerment to elongate social and economic democracy with liberty, equality, fraternity and dignity of their person in our political Bharat.<sup>58</sup>

The ruling meant that all mining leases granted to non-tribal private businesses in Scheduled Areas of

Andhra Pradesh were considered illegal. This gave rise to complaints that the ruling undermined industrial activity in Scheduled Areas, and calls were made to amend the Fifth Schedule to effectively nullify the judgment. An amendment was not enacted, but subsequent benches have adopted a more liberal approach to the subject of land use and industrial activity in Scheduled Areas, and explicitly questioned the *Samatha* ruling. In *Balco Employees Union v Union of India*, 59 the Court expressed strong reservations about the earlier ruling, and held that the granting of a mining lease to BALCO in a Scheduled Area of Chhattisgarh was permissible because it was governed by the law of Madhya Pradesh, not Andhra Pradesh. 60 In another earlier ruling on a Sixth Schedule area, *District Council of United Khasi and Jaintia Hills v Sitimon Sawian*, 61 the Court also ruled that the district council acted beyond its jurisdiction in passing a law governing the 'transfer' of land to non-tribals, since the Schedule only reserved rights over 'land use, occupation and allotment' not its transfer.

In addition to land, the rights of district councils over forests and natural resources have also been contested. In *District Council of the Jowai Autonomous District vs Dwet Singh Rymbai*, 62 the Supreme Court ruled that while the district council has the right under the Sixth Schedule to levy taxes on lands and buildings, it had no right to extract royalties on timber from private forests on land under its jurisdiction. In a 2013 judgment on mining in the Niyamgiri Hills of Orissa, the Court held that the State Government had been correct to rule that the State:

[H]as the ownership over the mines and mineral deposits beneath the forest land and that the STs [Scheduled Tribes] and other TFDs [traditional forest dwellers] cannot raise any claim or rights over them… the State Government has the power to reserve any particular area for bauxite mining for a public sector corporation.<sup>63</sup>

But it recommended that the *Gram Sabha* be directed to consider whether the bauxite mine affects the religious rights of Scheduled Tribes and other forest dwellers.<sup>64</sup> The judgment is largely concerned with the implications of the 2006 Forest Rights Act and the 1996 Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act; the latter applies in areas under the Fifth Schedule. These rulings imply that as the exploitation of natural resources intensifies, there are limits to the status of provisions that had originally been framed with the more paternalistic intention to protect Scheduled Tribes from economic exploitation.

Finally, in a significant 2005 ruling a constitutional bench of the Supreme Court gave an instructive ruling as to the legal standing of asymmetrical features within the Constitution more generally. In *Pu Myllai Hlychho v State of Mizoram*, <sup>65</sup> the Court ruled that the Sixth Schedule is not a 'constitution within a constitution'. The case revolved around the rights of the Governor to dismiss members of the district council on his discretion rather than on the advice of the Council of Ministers, who are supposed to aid and advise the Governor in the exercise of his functions as per the provisions of Article 163 applicable to all States. As Khosla remarks, 'the argument being put forward [by the claimant in this case] is that the Schedule is not a site of asymmetric federalism, where a single legal order may treat two constituent parts differently; rather, there are two different legal orders at work'.<sup>66</sup> In rejecting the argument, the Court effectively established that the Sixth Schedule is not an instance of legal pluralism.<sup>67</sup> Yet in a ruling the following year, a separate bench of the Supreme Court offered a slightly different interpretation, without reference to the *Pu Myllai Hlychho* case. It ruled that:

The tribal areas of Assam are governed not by the relevant provisions of the Constitution which apply to other constituent States of the Union of India but by the provisions contained in the Sixth Schedule. These provisions provide for a self-contained code of governance of the tribal areas forming part of Assam and they deal with all the relevant topics in that behalf.<sup>68</sup>

This ruling struck down a complaint that the exclusion of Christians from election as customary chiefs, or *Dolloi,* contravened Article 15—a fundamental right prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion. The bench held that the exclusion was neither 'unreasonable nor arbitrary', since the *Dolloi* performed both administrative and religious functions, and Christians could not perform the latter. Thus there continues to be a degree of legal ambiguity around the extent to which the Sixth Schedule supersedes basic provisions of the Constitution.

## **5. Special Provisions for Other States: Articles 371 to 371J**

| Article 371  | Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat                                                     |
|--------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Article 371A | Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland                                                                     |
| Article 371B | Special provision with respect to the State of Assam                                                                        |
| Article 371C | Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur                                                                      |
| Article 371D | Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh                                                              |
| Article 371E | Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh                                                                       |
| Article 371F | Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim                                                                      |
| Article 371G | Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram                                                                      |
| Article 371H | Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh                                                            |
| Article 371I | Special provision with respect to the State of GoaArticle 371J Special provisions with respect to the State of<br>Karnataka |

In the decades after the promulgation of the Constitution, additional special provisions have been included for numerous States under clauses of Article 371. As Dasgupta remarks, '[l]ike all dynamic institutional designs, the one for federalizing the Indian political system left a lot to gradual learning from practice'.<sup>69</sup> It was within Article 371 that much of that gradual learning was expressed. The provisions within this Article deal principally with special arrangements for new States that have been created or admitted since Independence as a result of two processes: the reorganisation of State boundaries which gave rise to concerns about intra-State equity in newly merged regions; and the resolution of ethnic conflicts in the Northeast.

# a. *Intra-State Equity Provisions and their Legal Standing*

In the first instance, following the linguistic reorganisation of State boundaries between 1953 and 1960, constitutional amendments addressed concerns about how the new States would be integrated in order to achieve equitable development across sub-regions with different histories of administration. Article 371 initially made special provisions to support intra-State equity across both (a) the Telugu-speaking regions of Andhra Pradesh, particularly addressing the integration of the Telangana region of the former Princely State of Hyderabad with parts of erstwhile Madras province; and (b) Maharashtra and Gujarat. Provision was made for the establishment of separate development boards for each of the sub-regions of the new States; for the 'equitable allocation of developmental expenditure'; for equitable arrangements for technical and vocational education, and public employment across the sub-regions. Again, the Governor is responsible for oversight of these

provisions. A considerably more recent constitutional amendment in 2012 introduced Article 371J, which makes similar provision in Karnataka for the development of the Hyderabad–Karnataka region, including the reservation of a proportion of educational seats and State government posts for 'persons who belong to that region by birth or by domicile'. $\frac{70}{2}$ 

In the case of Andhra Pradesh, Article 371 offered a degree of constitutional backing to the 'Gentleman's agreement' signed in Delhi in 1956 by representatives from Telangana and Andhra on safeguards for Telangana when the regions were amalgamated. However, these original safeguards went beyond what was initially included in Article 371. They included guarantees that revenues raised in Telangana would be spent in the region; protections for local recruitment from within Telangana to State public services; restrictions on the sale of agricultural land to outsiders; and protection of the status of the Urdu language.<sup>71</sup> As tensions persisted between *mulkis* (Telangana residents) and non-*mulkis* over recruitment to State public services in the Telangana region, the Union government introduced the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Rules, stating that fifteen years' continuous residence would be required for appointment to government jobs in Telangana.

When the State Government sought to enforce these residence restrictions on public employment, the rules were challenged in the courts and declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in March 1969 in *AVS Narasimha Rao v State of Andhra Pradesh*. <sup>72</sup> The Court held that they contravened a fundamental right—Article 16 on the equality of opportunity in public employment. Thus, at this stage, Article 371 was not recognised as providing legal grounds for differential treatment of one region's residents over those of another.

Discontent around the non-enforcement of these provisions played into the 1969 agitation for separate statehood for Telangana. In 1973, following the agreement of a 'six-point formula' by leaders of Andhra Pradesh, a constitutional amendment introduced the separate clauses of Articles 371D and E (with effect from 1 July 1974) covering new and more extensive provisions for intra-State equity in Andhra Pradesh following the Telangana agitation.<sup>73</sup> Article 371D gives the President the power to compel the State Government to make special provision for access to public employment and education for residents of different regions of the State; as well as the power to establish an administrative tribunal to address grievances about civil service appointments.<sup>74</sup> Several Presidential Orders were subsequently enacted covering admissions to educational institutions and recruitment to public employment. By and large, the Supreme Court has since upheld the asymmetric character of the intra-State equity provisions contained in Article 371D, and even strengthened them against interventions by the State Government.

There have been at least a dozen Supreme Court judgments relating to Article 371D, making it the most contested asymmetrical provision of the Constitution. In a significant ruling, *P Sambamurthy v State of Andhra Pradesh*, the Supreme Court ruled that clause 5 of Article 371D was unconstitutional, since it violated a 'basic and essential feature of the Constitution', the 'rule of law' or the separation of powers.<sup>75</sup> Clause 5 had given the State Government the power to modify or annul orders by the Administrative Tribunal set up to adjudicate on grievances related to the appointment, allocation, or promotion to civil posts. Under *P Sambamurthy*, the State Government was prevented from challenging judgments by the Administrative Tribunal. Subsequent rulings have followed this interpretation of clause 5 as unconstitutional. This weakened the ability of the State Government to overrule the Administrative Tribunal intended to oversee matters of public employment and strengthened the independence of the Tribunal to oversee the implementation of intra-State equity provisions along asymmetrical lines within the State. The Court has confirmed that other clauses of Article 371D were constitutional.<sup>76</sup>

The other main litigation dealt with by the Supreme Court in relation to Article 371D has related to the enactment of provisions that allow for recruitment to public employment or admission to universities on the basis of residence within particular regions of the State. The Supreme Court has upheld the provisions of Presidential Orders issued under Article 371D permitting recruitment within public sector employment to be undertaken within specified zones within the State. But benches have not wholly agreed on these provisions. In two judgments in 1989 and 2000, the Supreme Court overturned rulings by the Administrative Tribunal that residential restrictions applied for promotion, as well as recruitment. The Court held that, in these instances, the State Government did have the power to override provisions under the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Organisation of Local Cadres and Regulation of Direct Recruitment) Order 1975 on the principle of 'public interest and administrative exigencies'. <sup>77</sup> However, the bench in *V Jagannadha Rao v State of Andhra Pradesh* found these earlier judgments to have been incorrectly decided.<sup>78</sup> It held that special rules framed by the Governor under Article 309 on recruitment and conditions of service in public employment were unconstitutional in light of the *non-obstante* clause of Article 371D. Other rulings related to educational institutions have confirmed that judgments which restrict the ability of medical colleges to impose residence requirements do not apply to Andhra Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir.<sup>79</sup> Yet such legal interpretations of the asymmetric content of Article 371D did not offer succour to the proponents of separate statehood for Telangana, which was eventually granted in 2013—and not on a legally asymmetric basis.

### b. *Autonomy Arrangements and Ethnic Conflict Resolution in Northeast India*

The second major group of provisions under Article 371 relate to the resolution of ethnic conflicts in India's Northeastern region, which have involved the embedding of differential forms of autonomy for some States in recognition of their distinctive culture and majority tribal communities. These provisions have underlined 'Northeast India's exceptionalism' through their recognition of special rights for certain tribal groups.  $\frac{80}{10}$  The first of these new provisions came about as a negotiated settlement with 'Naga accommodationists', who sought a political solution to the ongoing conflict in the region. This culminated in the creation of Nagaland as a separate State in 1963 and accompanying special provisions under Article 371A which set out guarantees for Nagaland's autonomy. Later, in 1986, Article 371G introduced a similar asymmetrical status for the newly created State of Mizoram. Mizoram had also been an autonomous district under the Sixth Schedule, but from the 1960s a more conflictual relationship with the Government of India emerged. The Mizo National Front (MNF) led by Laldenga launched an armed rebellion in 1966 for an independent Mizoram government. The proximate trigger for the rebellion had been the slow response of the Assamese government to a famine in 1958–59 in the Lushai Hills inhabited by the Mizos.<sup>81</sup> The rebellion, and massive counterinsurgency efforts in response to it, continued for two decades until the signing of the Mizo Peace Accord under which rebel leader Laldenga became Chief Minister of a new State, special autonomy provisions were enshrined in Article 371G, and the MNF agreed to lay down arms. As Stepan, Linz, and Yadav argue, the 'innovative offer … of extreme asymmetrical federalism with large guarantees

of cultural autonomy' was a critical component of the peace accord reached in the Mizo conflict.  $\frac{82}{ }$ 

Articles 371A and G provide that unless the State Legislative Assembly so decides, no act of Parliament applies in Nagaland and Mizoram related to the religious and social practices of Nagas and Mizos respectively, customary law, and administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to customary law. In both States, the Legislative Assembly also has the power to restrict the application of any law related to the ownership and transfer of land, but only in Nagaland does that provision also extend to 'land *and its* resources'. 83 In addition, the Constitution (Fiftyseventh Amendment) Act of 1987 provided for the reservation of the overwhelming majority of seats in the State Assemblies of Nagaland, Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Arunachal Pradesh for Scheduled Tribes.<sup>84</sup> The Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act of 1992 made similar provisions for reservations in Tripura as part of a Memorandum of Settlement with the Tripura National Volunteers, to provide for a 'greater share of tribals in the governance of the state'.

Article 371F deals with the terms of the accession of the small State of Sikkim to the Union in 1975. This constitutional provision allows for the continuation in force of any laws in place before Sikkim's accession unless amended or repealed by 'a competent Legislature or other competent authority'. The Article also allows for the President to reserve seats in the Legislative Assembly for different sections of the population. This led to the reservation of twelve seats for Sikkimese of Bhutia-Lepcha origin and one seat for the Sangha (Buddhist monasteries) of a total of thirty-two seats. Sikkim was also able to maintain the category of 'Sikkimese subject' to distinguish historical residents from newer immigrants, allowing the State Government to discriminate in favour of historical residents.<sup>85</sup>

Significantly, the Supreme Court has ruled that Article 371F allows the continuation in force of previous laws, even where they are in conflict with fundamental rights. In other words its *nonobstante* clause offers protection from Article 13, which declares that all laws in force before the operation of the Constitution will be declared void if they contradict the fundamental rights. This interpretation was confirmed by the Supreme Court in *State of Sikkim v Surendra Prasad Sharma. 86* In *RC Poudyal v Union of India*,  $\frac{87}{2}$  the Court upheld the constitutionality of departures from the 'oneperson-one-vote' principle in Sikkim, where seats were reserved for some communities beyond their proportion of the population. A constitutional bench in the case also ruled that:

Article 2 gives a wide latitude in the matter of prescription of terms and conditions subject to which a new territory is admitted. There is no constitutional imperative that those terms and conditions should ensure that the new State should, in all respects, be the same as other states of the Indian Union. However, the terms and conditions should not seek to establish a form or system of government alien to and fundamentally different from those the Constitution envisages.<sup>88</sup>

### c. *Frontiers of Asymmetry: Land and Natural Resource Governance*

To date there has been no major litigation around either Article 371A or G. But, as Hausing delineates, important debates are taking place in Nagaland around constitutional interpretations which test the extent of the sovereignty over land and natural resources reserved for Nagaland under Article 371, and may see future legal challenge.  $\frac{89}{2}$  These add to the kind of conflicts seen earlier with the *Samatha* ruling with regard to the Fifth Schedule.

In July 2010, Nagaland took the major step of declaring all Union laws governing 'petroleum and natural gas' inapplicable in Nagaland, and set about framing its own policies for oil block

development and regulation.<sup>90</sup> Petroleum and natural gas were discovered in Nagaland in the 1970s by the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), a Government of India undertaking, which had been granted a petroleum exploration licence. ONGC's rights to oil exploitation have, however, been increasingly contested by local landowners.<sup>91</sup>

The Nagaland Assembly resolution asserted that: 'No Act of Parliament governing Petroleum and Natural Gas shall be applicable to the State of Nagaland and all such Acts shall be deemed to have become inapplicable to the State from the date of enactment of Article 371A(1)(a) of the Constitution of India regardless of previous acts of commissions and omissions.' The State Government proceeded to announce its own policies to govern oil exploration and invited interested companies. The new conditions were reported to include stipulations that any product would need to bear the prefix 'Naga', 16 per cent of earnings would be shared with the State Government, and if the company in question had activities in States with boundary disputes with Nagaland, this would be a factor in their appointment.<sup>92</sup>

Despite a Petroleum Ministry confirmation in response to a parliamentary question in March 2011 that Article 371A did cover the exploitation of natural resources, the Union government has subsequently reversed this stance. The Petroleum Ministry now argues that the move of the Nagaland Legislative Assembly was unconstitutional on the grounds that Article 371A only provides the State Government 'negative powers' to declare a law does not apply; it does not have 'positive powers' to legislate or regulate areas that are under central control. $\frac{93}{2}$  As Hausing suggests, this dispute represents an important test-case of the full potential of Article 371A: 'The controversy… highlights that despite its federal credentials, the actually existing centralist federal framework in India is inadequate to accommodate Naga exceptionalism and negotiated sovereignty under Article 371A.<sup>294</sup>

#### **IV. CONCLUSION**

The Indian Constitution contains many examples of asymmetric federalism. These features are a crucial part of the architecture governing the expression and capaciousness of the promise of differential membership within the Indian Union as a means of providing recognition to the multiple identities and nationalities across the breadth of its territory. Yet the legal standing of these measures has not previously been closely analysed. The role of the Supreme Court is particularly significant in the governance of autonomy arrangements over the long term. As we have seen, many asymmetrical features of the Constitution have emerged as a result of politically negotiated settlements to individual conflicts. The courts have a critical role to play in ensuring that asymmetrical federal mechanisms offer on-going protection from majoritarianism for territorially concentrated minorities despite changes of political dispensation at the level of either State or Union government.

This chapter has demonstrated that the Supreme Court has played a mixed and somewhat inconsistent role with regard to constitutional asymmetry. It has effectively permitted the weakening of Article 370 regarding Jammu and Kashmir over time, legitimising ongoing revisions to the Article that have extended much of the Constitution to the State. However with regard to the Fifth and Sixth Schedules, and elements of Article 371, Court interventions have strengthened the asymmetric content of these provisions over time. Successive benches of the Supreme Court have upheld the fact that the Sixth Schedule and Article 371F (related to Sikkim) supersede the fundamental rights and, for instance, allow for positive discrimination on the grounds of religion. They have also, on paper,

strengthened the role of the Administrative Tribunal in Andhra Pradesh under Article 371D to police the operation of positive discrimination on the basis of residence in matters of public employment. However, this was not sufficient to ensure compliance on the ground or ultimately to resolve a demand for statehood by the Telangana region.

The legal frontiers of autonomy arrangements are still being tested, as recent disputes in the context of economic liberalisation have made clear. Some of the most vociferous disputes concern the extent to which the Fifth and Sixth Schedules, and Article 371A, provide local, Scheduled Tribe communities with the right to manage the exploitation of natural resources within their jurisdiction. These are likely to remain areas of struggle and debate into the future as States and their citizens seek to test the possibilities and limitations inherent in the asymmetric federal architecture of the Constitution. The other area of ongoing contestation relates to the rights of minorities that are not subject to constitutionally protected special rights. Groups who sit outside these regimes of recognition have themselves frequently mobilised to make their own demands for recognition either as Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes depending on their location, or for separate statehood.<sup>95</sup> These pressures on the political and constitutional architecture of Indian federalism arising from within changing structures of political economy throw light on its adaptive qualities, while also raising questions about who is the ultimate arbiter of autonomy.

<span id="page-16-2"></span><sup>1</sup> Michael Burgess, *Comparative Federalism: Theory and Practice* (Routledge 2006) 209–25; Will Kymlicka, 'Is Federalism a Viable Alternative to Secession?' in Percy B Lehning (ed) *Theories of Secession* (Routledge 1998) 111–50; Alfred Stepan, Juan Linz, and Yogendra Yadav, *Crafting State-Nations: India and Other Multinational Democracies* (Johns Hopkins University Press 2011).

<span id="page-16-1"></span><span id="page-16-0"></span> $2$  John McGarry, 'Asymmetry in Federations, Federacies and Unitary States' (2007) 6(1) Ethnopolitics 105.

<sup>3</sup> Will Kymlicka, *Politics in the Vernacular: Nationalism, Multiculturalism and Citizenship* (Oxford University Press 2001); Charles Taylor, *Multiculturalism and the Politics of Recognition* (Princeton University Press 1992); see also Louise Tillin, 'United in Diversity? Asymmetry in Indian Federalism' (2007) 37(1) Publius: The Journal of Federalism 45.

 $\frac{4}{5}$  Kymlicka (<u>[n](#page-16-0) 3</u>).

 $\frac{5}{5}$  Ferran Requejo, 'Federalism in Plurinational Societies: Rethinking the Ties Between Catalonia, Spain and the European Union' in Dimitrios Karmis and Wayne Norman (eds) *Theories of Federalism: A Reader* (Macmillan 2005) 302.

 $\delta$  Alfred Stepan, 'Toward a New Comparative Politics of Federalism, Multinationalism, and Democracy: Beyond Rikerian Federalism' in Edward L. Gibson (ed) *Federalism and Democracy in Latin America* (Johns Hopkins University Press 2004) 40.

<sup>7</sup> McGarry [\(n](#page-16-1) 2); Christina Isabel Zuber, 'Understanding the Multinational Game: Toward a Theory of Asymmetrical Federalism' (2011) 44(5) Comparative Political Studies 546.

<sup>8</sup> Kymlicka (<u>n 3</u>); Stepan [\(n](#page-16-0) 1); Rekha Saxe[n](#page-16-2)a, 'Is India a Case of Asymmetrical Federalism?' (2012) 47(2) Economic and Political Weekly 70.

 $\frac{9}{2}$  Stepa[n](#page-16-2)  $(n_1)$ .

 $\frac{10}{2}$  Rajesh Dev, 'Human Rights, Minorities and Relativism in North-East India' (2004) 39(43) Economic and Political Weekly 4747.  $\frac{11}{1}$  Tilli[n](#page-16-0) (n 3).

<sup>12</sup> Robert Agranoff, 'Power Shifts, Diversity and Asymmetry' in Robert Agranoff (ed) *Accommodating Diversity: Asymmetry in Federal States* (Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft 1999) 22.

 $\frac{13}{2}$  Charles Tarlton, 'Symmetry and Asymmetry as Elements of Federalism: A Theoretical Speculation' (1965) 27(4) Journal of Politics 861.

 $\frac{14}{1}$  McGarry (<u>n 2</u>).

<sup>15</sup> Tillin [\(n](#page-16-0) 3); AG Noorani, *Article 370: A Constitutional History of Jammu and Kashmir* (Oxford University Press 2011); Sumantra Bose, *Kashmir: Roots of Conflict, Paths to Peace* (Harvard University Press 2003) 70.

<sup>16</sup> Sara Shneiderman and Louise Tillin, 'Restructuring States, Restructuring Ethnicity: Looking Across Disciplinary Boundaries at Federal Futures in India and Nepal' (2014) FirstView Modern Asian Studies.

 $\frac{17}{2}$  Bérénice Guyot-Réchard, 'Nation-Building or State-Making? India's North-East Frontier and the Ambiguities of Nehruvian Developmentalism, 1950–1959' (2013) 21(1) Contemporary South Asia 22.

<sup>18</sup> Madhav Khosla, *The Indian Constitution* (Oxford University Press 2012) 75.