# **African Americans**<sup>1</sup>

#### **Eric J. Bailey**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

"Black" Americans, "Blacks", Afro-Americans and Afro-Caribbeans.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

In 1996, 53% of African Americans lived in the South, making up 19% of that region's population. Nationwide, 55% resided in the central cities of metropolitan areas. The 10 counties with the most African American residents on July 1, 1996, were Cook, Illinois (1.4 million); Los Angeles (1.0 million); Kings, New York (900,000); Wayne, Michigan (900,000); Philadelphia (600,000); Harris, Texas (600,000); Bronx, New York (500,000); Queens, New York (500,000); Dade, Florida (400,000); and Baltimore City, Maryland (400,000) (U.S. Census Bureau, 1998).

With regard to linguistic affiliation, African Americans' primary language pattern is English. English is in the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family. Yet similar to all American populations, African Americans adapted their language patterns and dialects according to their sociocultural environment. African Americans' language patterns reflect influences from Africa, Britain, Creole populations, the Caribbean islands, rural, urban, southern regions of the United States, and Canada.

Often identified with such terms as African American English, "Black" English, "Black" English Vernacular, Ebonics, and, most recently, "Spoken Soul," African American language patterns are a reflection of their dynamic culture. The languages and dialects regularly spoken in the African American community are: Spoken Soul (considered by some a dialect of American English, and by others a language distinct and separate from American English); the U.S. Language of Wider Communication (LWC), a.k.a. "Standard American English"; Non-standard American English; and Arabic, Spanish, Swahili, Creole (and other foreign languages, but these are the main ones) (Rickford & Rickford, 2000; Smitherman, 2000, p. 20).

Depending on time, place, setting, and audience, all or some of the various languages and dialects may be used in the African American community. Most middleclass and professional African Americans speak the LWC, as well as some aspect of Spoken Soul at least some of the time. Most working-class African Americans speak varying degrees of the LWC, Non-standard English, and Spoken Soul (Smitherman, 2000, p. 20).

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

The African American family as a unit has a historical continuity that began not with the American experience but in Africa, long before the intrusion of Europe into the continent. In the process of adapting to their new environments, West Africans merged their cultural traditions with European and Native American traditions. Although some of the cultural traditions have changed or been Americanized, the family unit remains constant.

The characteristics of the African American family today include a bilateral orientation—an equal recognition of the male and female lines of descent but favoring the mother's kin; extended kin groups; respect for elders; and a high value placed on children and motherhood (Aschenbrenner, 1973; Stack, 1974). Other cultural characteristics include: individual moral "strength" as a human quality; an emphasis on family occasions and rituals; strong belief in spiritualism (Aschenbrenner, 1973; Stack, 1974); reliance upon extended familial network for social, economic, and health care issues; strong orientation toward religious beliefs, activities, and organizations; outwardly expressed emotions; emphasis on nurturing children and participating in many rites of passage; preference for group activities as opposed to individual activities; preference for oral communication and oral history to share news and information; admiration of art, dance, and music; and preference for women and men sharing roles and responsibilities.

As early as the 1500s and 1600s, the ancestors of African Americans were forcibly transported to South America, the Caribbean, and North America. African Americans are primarily descendants of West African people who mostly shared a common history, place of origin, language, food preferences, values, and health beliefs. With regard to health beliefs and health care practices, African Americans are believed to have retained many of the preventive and treatment practices associated with indigenous West African cultures, primarily because these methods were perceived to be most useful. Jacques (1976), Jordan (1975), Jackson (1985), Baer (1985), Spector (1985), Goodson (1987), Mbiti (1975), Harvey (1988), Tinling (1967), and Tallant (1990) all contend that African Americans continued to utilize folk and herbal medical practices as a result of communication difficulties with Europeans and the fears of European physicians.

There is documented evidence that traditional West African health beliefs and herbal remedies were handed down and maintained by various African American populations throughout North America (Bailey, 1991a; Spector, 1985). For example, oral histories of former slave women from all over the South contain frequent and sometimes elaborate descriptions of the wide variety of plants that constituted the material base from which the slave medical practice operated (Goodson, 1987, p. 200).

Specifically, female African American slave doctors used drugs derived from plants to prevent and cure worms, malaria, croup, pneumonia, colds, teething, and measles. Sometimes, they used the root, and other times they selected the leaf, bark, fruit, or gum resin to boil into a tea or make into a poultice or wear in a bag around the neck (Goodson, 1987, p. 200). Not only did African American slave doctors have this medical knowledge of plants, but also many other slaves knew how to diagnose and treat illnesses. In fact, a number of medicine chests have been discovered filled with the popular preparations of the day: calomel, blue mass pills, castor oil, ipecac, tarter emetic, and various tinctures (Ewell, 1813; Postell, 1951).

During the 1700s and 1800s in the United States, African American health beliefs and practices continued to show similarities with the West Africans' health beliefs and practices. As more African Americans migrated to northern cities during the mid-1800s and early 1900s, they carried a repertoire of health care beliefs and practices. African American health beliefs and practices became a composite, containing elements from a variety of sources: European folklore, Greek classical medicine, modern scientific medicine, vodoun religion, Christianity, and particularly African folklore (Bailey, 1991a; Hill, 1976).

To better understand the relationship between culture and health care issues associated with the African American population, we must examine the current social, economic, and demographic data from the U.S. Census. Although recently there has been much discussion on the lack of reporting and inaccuracy of the U.S. Census data and the fact that many African Americans are very skeptical of any governmental data agency, the sociodemographic data show some very intriguing and positive trends associated with the African American population.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau (1998) on October 1, 1996, there were an estimated 33.7 million African Americans in the United States, constituting 12.7% of the total population. The African American population is young, with an estimated median age on November 1, 1997, of 29.8 years, nearly 8 years younger than the median for the non-Hispanic "White" population. It is projected that the African American population will grow more than twice as fast as the European American population between 1995 and 2050. By the middle of the next century, the African American population should nearly double its present size to 61 million (U.S. Census Bureau, 1998).

To critically assess the health status and health issues associated with African Americans, one must use a culturally relativistic approach. This entry defines African American culture, highlights the cultural historical origins of their health beliefs and values, examines their cultural health-seeking patterns, and discusses the impact of alternative and complementary medicine on African Americans' ethnomedical beliefs.

The persistence of traditional African American health beliefs and practices provides a meaningful alternative to mainstream formal medicine for many African Americans because of its role in maintaining a sense of ethnic identity. It also indicates a pattern of adaptation to social and economic conditions both within the African American community and in the larger society.

## **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Medical anthropologists are trained to view the health status of each individual and population from a

#### **The Context of Health 547**

biopsychosociocultural perspective. Our approach is holistic; that is, medical anthropologists believe that all factors contribute to the well-being or sickness of a person/population. In order to understand how this holistic approach applies to African Americans, I will: highlight the culture of African Americans and then discuss how culture relates to African American health; examine the major cultural, historical, and political issues that may have had an impact on the health-seeking process of the African American population; and examine psychosocial environmental issues such as religion and caregiving and how these factors relate to African American health.

African Americans learn certain health beliefs and practices from their extended familial networks. When a health care crisis occurs, African Americans tend to seek health care information from their extended familial networks or a lay health professional first, and then opt for professional care.

African Americans are acutely aware of nonverbal body language that indicates that a health care provider is comfortable or not comfortable in treating an African American person. If the African American patient perceives the nonverbal language as positive, he or she will most likely return for care. However, if the African American patient perceives the nonverbal body language as negative, he or she will most likely not return for care and not adhere to the prescribed regimen.

Like all Americans, African Americans are connected to the social, economic, political, and health care fabric of U.S. society. Yet once an economic or health care crisis occurs in U.S. society, African Americans often are affected first, primarily because a third of the population is considered the working poor.

Culture adds meaning to reality. African Americans respect and honor those who train, graduate, and serve in the health professional fields. Often, African American health care professionals feel a commitment to serve their community. Because of the low numbers of African American physicians and health care specialists, African Americans frequently choose to work in underserved minority communities as opposed to communities with relatively low numbers of minorities. African Americans' commitment to work and to serve those who are underserved adds meaning to their profession in the health care field.

Culture is differently shared. African Americans perceive health and the health care system differently. Although African Americans have many common traits and patterns, there remains a high degree of diversity within the African American population. For instance, intragenerational health care issues differ among African Americans as they relate to perceptions of the health care system and health belief system. Additional sociodemographic factors—such as gender, region of the country, income level, and educational level—may also cause differing perceptions of health care issues in the African American population.

### **Cultural History**

Another component of the comprehensive, holistic approach to health is cultural history. The cultural historical approach helps us to better understand issues such as African Americans' past health-seeking process; African Americans' current perceptions of the national and local health care systems; African Americans' lack of participation in clinical trials; and African Americans' alternative medical practices.

The significance of the cultural historical approach can best be illustrated in an article entitled, "African American Suspicion of the Healthcare System is Justified: What Do We Do about It?" Dula (1994) uses historical and contemporary examples of health care issues that contributed to the mistrust and suspicion that many African Americans have for the U.S. health care system. According to Dula (1994), real abuses in experimentation have contributed greatly to the high level of distrust within the African American population for decades.

Suspicion of the medical system in the United States has its origin in slavery medical practices. Dula (1994) states that slaves were sources for medical experimentation and research by doctors, instructional material for medical students, and that enslaved albinos and Siamese twins were displayed as freaks at medical society meetings. African Americans contributed to scientific progress, usually without consent or benefit to themselves, and sometimes without benefit even to science (Dula, 1994, p. 348).

Another cultural historical case is the Tuskegee experiment. Dula (1994) states that the Tuskegee experiment (1932)—in which 400 African American men participated in a government-sponsored study to find the effects of untreated syphilis—was the ultimate proof that European American health policy-makers, indeed, deserved mistrust. Jones (1981) and Dalton (1989) support Dula's claim. Thomas and Quinn (1991), who stated the following, also support Dula: "The history of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, with its failure to educate the participants and treat them adequately, helped to lay the foundation for Blacks' pervasive sense of distrust of public health authorities today" (p. 1499).

### **Religion and Spirituality**

Another important factor in the holistic approach to health is the psychosocial component. For the purpose of our discussion, this section refers to psychosocial factors in a broad-based sense, encompassing such issues as mental health, religiosity, and spirituality. In particular, religiosity and spirituality play a significant role in the well-being of the African American population.

The church, one of the symbols of religious involvement, has long been one of the major social and cultural institutions that define how people should see themselves and direct their behavior (Berry & Blassingame, 1982). Taylor and Chatters (1991) emphasize that the teachings of the church regarding human nature and human relationships may foster either mentally healthy attitudes or destructive, neurotic attitudes in its members. Inevitably, a church teaches its members, either directly or indirectly, how to deal with aggression, anger, pride, sexuality, competition, social relations, child-raising, and marital relations (Taylor & Chatters, 1991).

Within the African American community, the significance of the church to community life may be attributed, in part, to the church's position as one of the few indigenous institutions in African American communities—that is, built, financed, and controlled by African Americans. Moreover, African American churches serve as an outlet for social expression, a forum for the discussion of political and social issues, and a training ground for potential community leaders (Chatters, Levin, & Ellison, 1998; McRae et al., 1998; Neighbors, Musick, & Williams, 1998).

In 1991, Taylor and Chatters reported the results from a National Survey of Black Americans (*N*-2,094) with regard to their religious affiliations. Taylor and Chatters (1991) found results such as: 40 different religious affiliations were reported; one half of the respondents indicated that they were Baptist (52.1%); 11% were Methodist; 6% were Roman Catholic; 3% were Holiness; 2% were Jehovah's Witness; 15% identified one or more of the 35 remaining denominations; one out of ten respondents indicated no religious preference; and eight respondents indicated that they were either atheist or agnostic.

In a study to examine the significance of religiosity and health outcomes among African Americans, Picot, Debanne, Namazi, and Wykle (1997) conducted face-toface interviews with 136 African American and 255 European American caregivers of community-dwelling elders. Results revealed that African American caregivers perceived higher levels of rewards from participating in religious services than did European American caregivers. Additionally, the relationship between race and perceived rewards was mediated by comfort from religion and prayer. African Americans are taught to depend on a supreme being, the Lord, and to take their burdens to the Lord and leave them there (Picot et al., 1997). Picot et al. (1997) emphasized the importance of religious beliefs and health outcomes among all groups, particularly the effects within the African American population.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

The types and sources of treatment actions among African Americans are likely to vary according to gender, class, region of the United States, and degree of assimilation into mainstream society. In the United States, most ethnic groups have the option of selecting from a variety of sources: (1) self; (2) alternative or native health practitioners; and (3) formal health professionals.

If the illness is perceived as naturalistic (i.e., due to inadequate rest, poor nutrition, or germs), African Americans tend to use initially one and/or a combination of the following treatment actions: self-care, alternative (indigenous) health practitioner, and formal health professionals (Jackson, 1981; Jacques, 1976; Leininger, 1985; Spector, 1985). A discussion of self-care will presented be later in this entry.

In addition to the variety of home remedies or patent medicines practiced among African Americans, there are primarily two types of alternative indigenous health practitioners serving the African American community: (1) independent practitioners and (2) cultic practitioners (Baer, 1985, p. 327). These two types of alternative indigenous health practitioners operate as individuals or are affiliated with some sort of occult-supply store, either as the owner, an employee, or someone who rents office space. The cultic practitioner is affiliated with a religious group and practices in both public and private settings. The multiplicity of African American alternative

#### **Medical Practitioners 549**

indigenous health practitioners today stems from the role adaptability of traditional African American healers of the past (Bailey, 2000a,b).

For instance, one type of African American alternative indigenous health practitioner, the neighborhood prophet/Old Lady, does not dispense medicine but merely advises clients about concocting herbal medicines. Rather than selling or giving a herbal remedy, the Old Lady tells the client to use it in varying proportions to treat the perceived illness. In addition, she gives advice on various emotional, personal, and domestic problems. She does not receive monetary gifts for her service, only gifts of food or expressions of gratitude (Jordan, 1979, p. 38). The neighborhood prophet/Old Lady treats the individual's mind, body, and spirit in an attempt to return the individual to harmony with nature.

This indigenous alternative health practitioner, as well as many others, have successfully matched their holistic approach to treating illness/disease with the model or perception of treating illness/disease among many African Americans. Although there are no specific utilization data to document the total number of African Americans seeking care from these alternative indigenous health practitioners, their presence and growth within the alternative health delivery network can no longer be denied and overlooked.

Formal health practitioners are referred to as licensed medical doctors (MDs) and doctors of osteopathic medicine (DOs) in licensed allopathic (MD-staffed) and osteopathic hospitals. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1986) regularly documents the number of physician contacts by the general public. Interestingly, the national health care utilization data have always showed a distinctive difference between African Americans' and European Americans' use of formal health practitioners. For example, African Americans sought care from a doctor's surgery less (47%) than did European Americans (57.7%). African Americans were also less likely to contact a doctor by phone (9.2%) than were European Americans (13.4%). Yet, African Americans were reported to have experienced more physician contact in hospital outpatient departments (21.4%) than European Americans (13.7%) and to have more physician contact at home (5.8%) than European Americans (2.5%) (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1986).

Most health care researchers would contend that an obvious explanation for the difference in physician utilization between African Americans and European Americans is economics. There is no doubt that the cost of seeking care and a lack of health insurance cause many African Americans to delay or not seek care from formal health practitioners. However, some researchers contend that there are other social and cultural factors that have truly caused the disparity in seeking care from formal health practitioners.

In particular, Blendon, Aiken, Freeman, and Correy's (1989) study of 10,130 persons living in the continental United States found that even African Americans above the poverty line have less access to medical care than their European American counterparts. The researchers contend that ethnic-related differences in health care arrangements and lifestyle were the most significant factors in the disparity between African American and European American health care utilization.

For example, African Americans are more likely than European Americans to report that during their last visit, their physician did not inquire sufficiently about pain, did not tell them how long it would take for a prescribed medicine to work, did not explain the seriousness of the illness or injury, and did not discuss tests or examination findings. In addition, fewer than three-fifths of African Americans were completely satisfied with the care provided during their last hospitalization, compared with over three-fourths of European Americans (Blendon et al., 1989). It is apparent that there are differences not only in access but also in the perception of the care provided for African Americans and European Americans. African Americans seem to adhere to ethnomedical beliefs and practices, and they use alternative health care therapies more extensively than do European Americans (Blendon et al., 1989).

Unnatural illnesses are perceived to be caused by a supernatural spirit, magic, sorcery, voodoo or some other personalistic agent (Bailey, 1991a; Hill, 1976; Snow, 1974). The literature on African American illness causation suggests that the African American healing tradition considers the universe a place where the forces of good and evil, God and Satan, struggle for control (Gregg & Curry, 1994, p. 522). Therefore, unnatural illnesses are perceived to be a struggle between the forces of good and evil.

Within this belief system, religion or spirituality is of utmost importance to illness perceived to be caused by unnatural means. Even though religion and spirituality are most commonly reported as important sources of social support for African Americans, they can also be used for dealing with unnatural illnesses in a more positive way (Ford, Tilley, & McDonald, 1998; Gregg & Curry, 1994; Jackson, Jackson, & Nixon, 1970; Stolley & Koenig, 1997; Taylor & Chatters, 1986). Taylor and Chatters (1986), Stolley and Koenig (1997), and many other researchers have shown that African Americans' use of religion and spirituality for natural as well as unnatural illnesses is their particular method of treating an illness/disease within their health belief system.

Another means of treating an unnatural illness and sometimes natural illness is with voodoo "rooting." As a form of religion, voodoo is a complex of African belief and ritual governing, in large measure, the religious life of African natives (Jordan, 1975). Harvey (1988) states that "as a belief system which combined historical conceptions with practices that were acceptable in a hostile social environment, voodoo is a striking example of a cultural adaptive mechanism used by members of an oppressed group as a survival technique."

The first is the mystic component, which deals with the supernatural such as spells and spirits. The second component is that part of voodoo that deals with psychological support of the individual, and the third part is herbal and folk medicine. African American voodoo prospers, particularly in the South, primarily because it fills a void left by inaccess and denial of medical care by formal American health practitioners (Jordan, 1979, p. 38).

In conclusion, African Americans tend to consult alternative indigenous health practitioners for unnatural and natural causation of illnesses primarily because of their attempt to cope with health problems within the context of one's resources and social and cultural environment; their belief that alternative indigenous health practitioners have some control over the forces that cause illness/diseases in a person's life, whereas Westernized medical physicians cannot heal certain cases of illness and misfortune; and lower monetary expense associated with such treatments (Cockerham, 1986, p. 88; Hill, 1976, p. 14).

## **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

### **Health**

African Americans' perception of what constitutes "healthy" encompasses a relatively high tolerance of discomforts from symptoms (Jackson, 1981). Studies have shown that African Americans often ignore minor discomforts as backache, upset stomach, or headache until they reach such proportions that they interfere with the business of living (Jackson, 1981). In fact, African Americans, particularly the elderly, often perceive their health status as "poorer" than do European Americans (Manuel, 1985). Furthermore, since one's self-esteem, sanity, and survival are at risk, in a state of health (good or bad), one becomes adaptive, flexible, alert, and able to use a wide range of strategies effectively to endure and reach his/her optimal potential. In other words, until the degree of discomfort impairs daily activities or is acknowledged by the individual's sociocultural network, seeking health care, particularly from mainstream health care facilities, is not warranted.

### **Illness**

Illness is defined as sickness of body or mind; disease is defined as a harmful departure from the normal state of a person or other organism (Green & Ottoson, 1994, p. 697). Illnesses are classified as either naturalistic or personalistic (Snow, 1974). Naturalistic agents identify what caused an illness, whereas personalistic agents recognize who caused the illness (Chino & Vollweiller, 1986). Such impersonal agents as inadequate rest, poor nutrition, and germs cause illnesses. The etiology of illnesses falls into three general categories: environmental hazards, divine punishment, and impaired sociocultural relationships.

In some cases, serious and life-threatening illnesses are perceived to be sent by God (personalistic agent) or some other personalistic agent as punishment for sin (Hill, 1976; Snow, 1974). For example, many African Americans who suspect they have a terminal illness, may delay medical diagnosis. During this delay and/or denial period, many African Americans turn to powers considered greater than themselves to fathom the reason for the disease, thereby accepting terminal illness as "God's will" and believing that nothing more can be done.

Examples of naturalistic and personalistic causative agents are described in the following studies. First, a study investigating the treatment patterns of hypertension among 285 African Americans in the Detroit metropolitan area contended that African Americans' beliefs about the etiology of hypertension were based on naturalistic agents (Bailey, 1991b). Bailey reported that informants considered inadequate rest, poor nutrition, weather disturbances,

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 551**

and imbalances in hot and cold properties as naturalistic agents affecting their blood pressure. Informants described "richy" foods such as heavily salted greens, pork, and sweets as naturalistic agents. Moreover, cold weather was described as a naturalistic agent that can affect the viscosity of one's blood pressure (Bailey, 1991b, p. 294). These findings were directly comparable with those of other studies on folk symptomatology (Blumhagen, 1982; Dressler, 1982; Garro, 1986; Snow, 1974).

Second, a study investigating the narratives of 26 African American women with advanced breast cancer found that these women attempted to relate the meaning of their cancer to an indigenous model of health and disease (Mathews, Lannin, & Mitchell, 1994; Lannin et al., 1998). The women interviewed ranged in age from 39 to 83 years, with the majority being over the age of 50.

Cancer was seen by patients to be the worst of all diseases because they believe it is always fatal and is essentially incurable. Consequently, for many of the women interviewed, cancer resembled illnesses that did not respond to conventional categories or cures in the indigenous medical system (Mathews et al., 1994, p. 795). Thus, the only likelihood of finding a cure for cancer was "to turn it over to God." One of the informants said the following: "Cancer is a horrible disease. It just eats you up. The only one powerful enough to overcome it is the Lord. You just have to trust in Jesus to do battle for you and save you from this horrible affliction" (Mathews et al., 1994, p. 795). Mathews et al. contend that here the battle metaphor is used to portray a struggle between God, as the all-powerful force for good, and cancer, as consummate evil.

Interestingly, Mathews et al. (1994) suggest that too often in the past health care professionals have assumed that patients who delay seeking treatment for cancer or who fail to utilize the screening services available either lack knowledge, are too poor to access services, deny reality, or are excessively fatalistic. In actuality, these patients have well-worked-out ideas about their own health and about their disease (p. 799). Patients, in this case African Americans, also have well-worked-out ideas about treatment strategy depending on whether the illness is perceived as naturalistic or personalistic.

### **Self-Care**

Self-care includes positive steps taken by individuals to either prevent disease or promote general health status through health promotion or lifestyle modification; medical self-care for the identification or treatment of minor symptoms of ill health or self-management of chronic health conditions; and steps taken by laypersons to compensate or adjust for functional limitations affecting routine activities of daily living.

The use of home remedies or herbs is an example of a self-care strategy. The basic assumption behind the use of herbs/home remedies links the natural organic properties of herbs with the natural healing capabilities of human beings. Herbalists use these organic substances in an effort to neutralize or eliminate one's body of harmful substances that impair its power to heal itself (Lust, 1974, p. 8). According to herbalists, any herb, if mixed and used properly, can effectively treat any natural illness.

Herbs from the woods are used in many ways. Herb teas are prepared to treat pain and reduce fevers. Sassafras tea frequently is used to treat colds, and placing raw onions on the feet and wrapping them in warm blankets is used to break a fever (Lust, 1974, pp. 196–197).

Spector (1985) has identified some African American home remedies as successful in the treatment of disease. A few selected examples are: a method for treating colds is hot lemon water and honey; when congestion is present in the chest and the person is coughing, the person can be wrapped with warm flannel after his/her chest is rubbed with hot camphorated oil; hot toddies are used to treat colds and congestion (these drinks consist of hot tea with honey, lemon, peppermint, and a dash of brandy or whatever alcoholic beverage the person likes and has available); and Vick's vapor rub is swallowed.

In general, self-care strategies such as home remedies and herbs are convenient and effective sources of therapy (Davis, 1977). The three major reasons for their continual use in the African American community are that folk remedies may be the only alternatives to costly treatment of acute illness by the health care system; folk remedies have been given the stamp of approval by generations of African American caregivers; and the loving care, attention, and overall nurturance that accompanies the use of remedies cannot be overlooked (Davis, 1997, p. 433).

Furthermore, Davis (1997) states that employing folk remedies in treatment follows closely the culture of a particular group of people and is replete with memories, comfort, and familiarity. In fact, folk remedies may be so enmeshed in tradition that not to perform them is tantamount to sacrilege.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

According to the Committee on the Status of "Black" Americans of the National Research Council (1989), birthrates among teenage African American women have been dropping since 1960s. However, because the total number of African American adolescent women has increased by 20%, there were substantial increases in the total births to African American teenagers, despite the declining birthrates. In addition, because birthrates to African American teenagers remain two to three times higher than those for European Americans, a higher proportion of all African American births occur among teenage mothers; in 1984, 20% of all African American births were to teenagers, compared with 11.1% among European Americans (National Research Council, 1989, p. 412). Interestingly, African American teenage women represent only 14% of the U.S. adolescent female population whereas European American adolescent girls have the overwhelming majority of all teenage births.

The higher birthrate for African American teenagers can be accounted for by earlier initiation of sexual intercourse (on average two years earlier than European Americans); less use of contraception; less likelihood of abortion; and the almost universal decision to keep and rear children who are born, rather than offer them for adoption (National Research Council, 1989, p. 412). This pattern of keeping and rearing children is reflected in U.S. Census data.

For example, in 1993, about four in ten African American preschoolers were cared for by grandparents or other relatives besides their fathers while their mothers worked, compared with only about two in ten European American children. Care by grandparents was especially important to African American families, accounting for one-fifth of all arrangements used for preschoolers (U.S. Census Bureau, 1998).

### **Infancy**

In 1991, the mortality rate for African American infants (17.6 per 1,000 live births) was 2.4 times that for European American infants (7.3 per 1,000 live births). Between 1970 and 1991, the mortality rate decreased more for European American infants (59%) than for African American infants (46%), widening the gap in infant mortality between the two populations.

#### **552 African Americans**

The national average figures for infant mortality do not show all the disparities between African Americans and European Ameircans in infant mortality rates across the United States. African American infant mortality rates show considerable variation by region. For example, during 1982–1984, the African American infant mortality rate was lowest in the Mountain and Pacific states (15.4 and 16.2 deaths per 1,000 live births, respectively), and highest in the East North Central states (21.7), particularly Illinois (23.3) and Michigan (23.7) (National Research Council, 1989, p. 399).

The marked gap in infant mortality rates between European Americans and African Americans mirrors the more than twofold difference in the rates of low birthweight and very low birthweight between the two groups. African Americans are twice as likely as European Americans to have low-birthweight infants: the African American rate is 12.4 per 1,000 live births, and the European American rate is 5.6 (National Research Council, 1989, p. 400).

### **Childhood**

In 1996, there were 8.1 million African American families, 46% of them married-couple families. The majority of African American families (57%) had children. Families with children averaged two children apiece (U.S. Census Bureau, 1998).

Overall, African American children have benefited from the impressive health gains for all American children since 1950 (National Research Council, 1989, p. 405). The rate of death from all causes for children aged 1–4 was 139.4 per 1,000 live births in 1950 and 51.4 per 1,000 live births in 1985. For children aged 5–14, the comparable rates were 60.1 per 1,000 live births in 1950 and 26.3 per 1,000 live births in 1985 (National Center for Health Statistics, 1997, p. 80). However, African American children have not shared equally in the overall health gains, and their death rates are much higher than those for European American children.

Interestingly, the leading cause of death among children is injury. Accidents cause three times as many deaths than do either of the next two leading causes of childhood death (cancer and congenital anomalies). For African American children, the highest rates of injuries occur in or near the home (National Research Council, 1989, p. 405). The National Research Council states that injuries are related to socioeconomic status: poor children are very likely to live in areas in which heavy

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 553**

traffic patterns lead to pedestrian injury. Within the house, unrepaired stairwells and inadequate or absent screens or window guards expose children to the risk of falls. Missing smoke detectors along with defective heaters and other household appliances pose fire hazards. Poor homes are also more likely to contain toxic substances, such as chemicals for pest control, or peeling lead paint (National Research Council, 1989, p. 406).

### **Adolescence**

**Females.** Adolescence is a period of significant life transition, during which children cross the bridge into adulthood (Adams, Scholenborn, Moss, Warren, & Kann, 1995). Behaviors established during this period are often carried into adult life. Adams et al. (1995) state that health behaviors established prior to adulthood can significantly influence health and longevity, both in the short term and later in life.

In 1992, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention conducted the National Health Interview Survey—Youth Risk Behavior Survey (NHIS—YRBS). The NHIS—YRBS was a collaborative effort of the Division of Health Interview Statistics, the National Center for Health Statistics, and the Division of Adolescent and School Health of the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Of the 13,789 youth identified as eligible for the NHIS—YRBS, 10,645 completed questionnaires, representing an estimated 77.2% of eligible respondents (Adams et al., 1995).

With regard to weight control, Adams et al. (1995) found that African American adolescent females (36%) were less likely than European American adolescent females (46.1%) to perceive themselves as being overweight. In addition, African American female teens (41.5%) were less likely than European American females (59.5%) and Hispanic females (55.1%) to report any attempt to lose or keep from gaining weight in the past week. Overall, the data show that proportionately, fewer African American female and male youths considered themselves overweight compared with European American female and male youths.

The importance of these national health data on the perceptions of weight control among African American adolescent females relates to the issue of obesity and its health consequences. Obesity rates among African American women are significantly higher than for European American women (Kumanyika, 1994). Moreover, chronic disease profiles of minority populations indicate that African Americans have higher than average cardiovascular disease-related mortality (Kumanyika, 1991; Otten et al., 1990). These health trends and mortality suggest an urgent need for obesity prevention programs for African American adolescent females.

**Males.** Much of what has been written and researched about African American adolescent males' health and social behavioral outcomes has been negative and downright gloomy. The health and social data that are often cited in the literature and reported in the media are the rates of homicide and sexually transmitted diseases.

According to the National Center for Health Statistics (1997), the homicide rate for African American males (72.5 per 100,000) were eight times higher than for European American males (9.4 per 100,000) and nearly five times higher than for African American females (13.9 per 100,000) as for European females (3.0 per 100,000). Among African American youth, the homicide rate (77.9 per 100,000) is eight to nine times that for European American (9.6) and Asian American youths (8.8) (National Center for Health Statistics, 1994, p. 29). The cause of this disparity in homicide rates is multifaceted—in other words, factors such as personal situational issues, societal discrimination, cultural historical racism, persistent unemployment, peer pressure, and lack of formal education all contribute to the high rate of homicide among African American adolescent males.

With regard to African American male sexual behavior and the risk for HIV infection, the cause for the high prevalence rate of HIV infection is also multifaceted. Whitehead (1997), for example, found that broader historical and sociocultural issues associated with African American adolescent males and middle-aged men contributed to the disproportionately high rate of HIV infection.

According to Whitehead, adolescent African American males need a masculinity transformation primarily because the existing constructs of ideal masculinity transformation fragment masculinity. In other words, the process of becoming a male in our gender-based society is incorrect. Our society teaches young males inappropriate ways of achieving adulthood.

The goal of masculinity transformation is to achieve a sense of masculine gender identity as a whole (Whitehead, 1977, p. 436). Masculine transformation is a strategy of empowerment that moves away from notions of masculinity that focus on gaining economic capacity to achieve social (with male peers) or economic status. Furthermore, Whitehead states that masculine transformation emphasizes community service, goal-setting, and discipline in achieving goals, and integrates body, mind, and spirit.

The cultural relativistic strategy resulting from Whitehead's masculinity transformation involves peer training in which older, more mature males, including low-income males, work with preadolescent and adolescent boys and young adult men. It helps men on their road to masculine wholeness and works to help younger men overcome their fragmented masculinity (p. 437). Thus, Whitehead recommends masculine transformation, along with the usual HIV/AIDS materials, to effectively address HIV/AIDS among African American adolescent males in low-income American communities.

### **Adulthood**

According to the National Center for Health Statistics (1997), the 10 leading causes of death (from highest incidence to lowest) for African Americans in 1995 were diseases of the heart; malignant neoplasms (cancers); cerebrovascular diseases (stroke); human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV); unintentional injuries; homicide and legal intervention; diabetes mellitus; pneumonia and influenza; chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases; and certain conditions originating in the perinatal period (National Center for Health Statistics, 1997, p. 117). African American men and women, however, differ in the order and rank of the leading causes of death.

For example, HIV infection ranked third among leading causes of death for African American men. With regard to African American women, cerebrovascular disease and diabetes mellitus ranked third and fourth, respectively, among leading causes of death. Moreover, ranking ninth for leading causes of death among African American women were nephritis, nephritic syndrome, and nephrosis (lupus).

### **The Aged**

African American elders are a diverse group, and it is important to recognize this group's heterogeneity (Brangman, 1995). No typical African American elder exists. They can vary from an elder living in the rural South to an elder in an urban area in the Northeast. They may have been born in the northern or southern parts of the United States or be members of a subgroup, as are immigrants from various parts of the Caribbean, such as Jamaica or Haiti. Their history, religious, educational, socioeconomic, and marital statuses, and cultural backgrounds must be taken as a starting point for understanding the individual while avoiding overgeneralizations and stereotypes (Brangman, 1995, p. 16; Mouton, Johnson, & Cole, 1995).

Alzheimer's disease (AD), also called primary degenerative dementia, is a deterioration of mental capacity. AD accounts for over half of all dementias. Death rates from AD increase with age. For Americans aged 65–74 years, the death rate is nearly 10 deaths per 100,000 people (National Center for Health Statistics, 1996). Age-adjusted rates are nearly two times higher for the European American population than for the African American population.

To determine the medical, social, and cultural pattern of AD among African Americans, Gorelick et al. (1994) studied 113 African American AD patients and 79 African American vascular dementia (VaD) patients in Chicago. They found that the typical demographic and background profile of their African American AD and VaD patients was that of a woman born in the southern portion of the United States who had lived on a farm until her midteenage years before moving to Chicago. These women currently lived in a house or apartment with other family members, were retired, widowed, and Protestant, and had some form of medical insurance. AD patients were generally older than VaD patients (76.4 vs. 71.8 years) and remained in their state of birth for a greater length of time before moving to Chicago than VaD patients (26.3 vs. 18.8 years). This study represents one of the few research initiatives that exclusively targeted African American patients with AD and VaD. Moreover, Martin and Panicucci's (1996) study of 40 elderly African American women's health behaviors and beliefs highlighted the difference in this study's results versus stereotypical beliefs associated with elderly African American women. Findings revealed that Southern, community-living African American older women generally have a high level of adherence to commonly recommended health promotion/disease prevention habits.

Martin and Panicucci stipulated that the most likely explanation for the high level of adherence may stem from cultural and religious doctrines that discourage

#### **References 555**

certain unhealthy practices such as excessive alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, and ineffective coping outlets. Because study findings indicate that African American older women want to maintain their health, increased attention must be directed to the importance of primary prevention behaviors as an assertion of control over one's future health, well-being, and quality of life (Martin & Panicucci, 1996, p. 47).

Martin and Panicucci (1996) suggest that nurses must set into place interventions that enhance perceptions of relevance regarding the lifestyle practice of regular exercise. Regular community-based exercise classes in churches, residential settings, senior centers, or other frequently attended community sites would increase the likelihood of regular participation in exercise.

Finally, it is clear that more and more African Americans are living longer and are in better health. It is imperative that health care administrators develop and plan culturally sensitive health care services for older African Americans from various social and cultural backgrounds.

### **Dying and Death**

Through the legacy of slavery, segregation, and discrimination, African Americans have developed a perspective on death that is unique to this ethnic group (Mouton, 2000). End-of-life decision-making practices draw on religious characterizations of death. The majority of African Americans adhere to a Christian belief system, with 83% claiming a Protestant affiliation (the majority being Baptist) and 14% claiming Catholic affiliation (Ellison & Sherkat, 1990). These religious beliefs recognize a transcendent soul that rises to heaven upon death. African Americans also have a strong belief in a heaven not of this earth. Furthermore, most African Americans subscribe to an African American theology, a religious doctrine that views God as the fighting God of the Old Testament. It is important to realize that not all African Americans view death from a religious construct. However, religion does seem to play a significant role in African Americans view of death and dying (Mouton, 2000, pp. 74–75).

As a whole, African Americans are less likely than European Americans to approve of euthanasia. For example, in a study comparing attitudes toward life-prolonging treatment among 139 patients from a general medicine clinic, only 63% of African Americans approved of stopping life-prolonging treatments compared with 89% of European Americans (Caralis, Davis, Wright, & Marcial, 1993).

African American attitudes to postmortem issues also are drawn from their shared historical, religious, and social experiences (Mouton, 2000). Overall, African Americans are less likely than European Americans to agree to organ donation. Most have a strong belief in the resurrection of the body, and this belief inhibits their willingness to donate organs because they will need their bodies to be intact on Judgment Day (Mouton, 2000, p. 80).

The effects of history and religious views, combined with individual life experiences and beliefs, influence African Americans' attitudes about the end of life. Clinicians need to bring to the table a degree of cultural sensitivity to eliminate some of the mistrust and fear that some African Americans might have when making end-of-life decisions. Addressing these issues might alleviate some of the apprehension that African Americans feel concerning end-of-life care (Mouton, 2000, p. 80).

## **NOTE**

1. Excerpts from this article are reprinted from Eric Bailey's book, *Medical Anthropology and African American Health*, with permission from Greenwood Publishing.

## **REFERENCES**

- Adams, P., Scholenborn, C., Moss, A., Warren, C., & Kann, L. (1995). *Health-risk behaviors among our nation's youth: United States, 1992*. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
- Aschenbrenner, J. (1973). Extended families among Black Americans. *Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 4*, 257–268.
- Baer, H. (1985). Toward a systematic typology of black folk healers. *Phylon, 43*, 327–343.
- Bailey, E. (1991a). *Urban African American health care*. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
- Bailey, E. (1991b). Hypertension: An analysis of Detroit African American health care treatment patterns. *Human Organization, 50*, 287–296.
- Bailey, E. (2002a). *Medical anthropology and African American health*. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Bailey, E. (2002b). *African American alternative medicine: Using alternative medicine to prevent and control chronic diseases*. Westport, CT: Praeger.
- Berry, M., & Blassingame, J. (1982). *Long memory: The black experience in America*. New York: Oxford University Press.