# **Emerging Infectious Diseases**

#### **Vinh-Kim Nguyen**

### **INTRODUCTION**

Epidemics emerge from specific, local concatenations of biological *and* social processes. Through the prism of culture, medical anthropologists have sought to understand how social processes both constrain and shape infectious diseases. In an era of self-conscious globalization, anthropologists have moved beyond the realm of "traditional" culture to examine how the cultures of biomedicine and of transnational institutions interact with local forms of knowledge, practice, and power. This makes anthropologists well-placed to examine the cultural dynamics of the interface between global and local social relations and, from this viewpoint, examine the biosocial processes underlying emerging infectious diseases today. Advances in the application of molecular biological techniques to the study of epidemics promise to deepen understanding of these biosocial processes. Coordinated mapping of biosocial processes through ethnographic and molecular methods holds the potential to make a substantial contribution to the emerging discipline of emerging infectious diseases.

Most commentators agree that the 1992 publication of an expert committee report on emerging infections was a seminal moment that set the stage for subsequent efforts to address this issue. The committee defined emerging infections as "new, re-emerging, or drug-resistant infections whose incidence in humans has increased within the past two decades or whose incidence threatens to increase in the near future" (Institute of Medicine, 1992, p. 3; see also Woolhouse & Dye, 2001, p. 981). This definition sets out a distinction between three microbial causes of new epidemics: new pathogens, old pathogens that have resurged, and pathogens that have changed through the acquisition of drug resistance. Research on emerging epidemics has described an ever-expanding array of pathogens and their effects, largely using epidemiological and laboratory methods (Krause, 1998; Thompson, 2000; Woolhouse & Dye, 2001). Examples of new pathogens include HIV, of course, but also prions the cause of "mad cow disease"—and Hepatitis C virus

(HCV). Tuberculosis has re-emerged as a serious threat to public health in many parts of the world, riding on the coattails of the HIV epidemic. A large part of this threat comes from the creation of drug-resistant tuberculosis resulting from inadequate tuberculosis (TB) control mechanisms. To this medically induced, or iatrogenic, epidemic we may add the continuing evolution of drug-resistant strains of other common bacterial species; for example, methicillin-resistant staphylococciae (MRSA), penicillinresistant neisseriae gonorrhoea (PRNG), and vancomycinresistant enterococciae (VRE).

This biomedically inspired classification is a useful first approach, but only hints at the processes that trigger such epidemics. This taxonomy of pathogens (new, re-emerging, transformed) points to their historical dimension, that is, to how their ability to produce epidemics differs through time. The anthropology of emerging infectious diseases investigates the processes by which new or old pathogens produce infectious disease epidemics. In other words, rather than being a "surface" science concerned with describing the distribution of epidemics across a geographical landscape, anthropologists pose archeological questions, concerned with recovering the myriad social processes that sediment as epidemics in different social and geographical contexts. In seeking to explain differences between epidemic scale and intensity in different localities in terms of their social context, anthropologists are concerned both with unearthing "root causes" of epidemics, as well as accounting for the full social dimension of their impact on societies and individuals. These tasks call for both an ethnographic approach devoted to understanding everyday life in all its complexity, and a historical approach that traces the biosocial genealogies of epidemics (Inhorn & Brown, 1997; Kiple, 1993).

As more anthropologists research emerging infections, the full comparative potential of this research will become more visible. By working across cases, the anthropology of emerging infectious diseases aims to identify common "deep" biosocial processes that register on the epidemiological surface, at the same time as it ing infectious diseases, which highlight the unexpected consequences of social inequality, the plight of the world's poor, and the shortcomings of global public health in today's globalizing world, has made medical anthropology an increasingly politicized discipline (Farmer, 1999; Whitman, 2000).

### **THEORETICAL HERITAGE**

Anthropological engagements with non-Western and Western medical systems has left a rich theoretical heritage that is drawn on studies of emerging epidemics. Three theoretical frameworks for analyzing health and illness phenomena in a cross-cultural perspective have emerged from these engagements. A *realist* framework explains local variations in disease phenomena as culturally driven deviations from a biological universal; this use of biology as the ontological ground of disease phenomena is a resolutely *modernist* position. In contrast, a *relativist* framework examines how scientific discourses, practices, and institutions "construct" the biological world as objective and manipulable phenomena; the use of such *social constructivist* explanations for local variations has a *postmodernist* sensibility. Finally, a *radical constructivist* framework focuses on how biological and social processes are historically and geographically contingent and intertwined; these processes are understood to co-produce disease phenomena in variable ways. This is an *a-modernist* position that grants ontological privilege neither to the biological nor the social world. The significance of these three frameworks for consideration of emerging infectious diseases will now be explored in order.

Although anthropology was not overtly concerned with health issues in the tropical climates where it cut its ethnographic teeth, the engagement with "primitive culture" left a theoretical legacy that shapes anthropological approaches to emerging infections to this day. Anthropologists examining indigenous medical systems sought to understand how these achieved healing outside of a Western, biomedical framework. To do this, two options were available to anthropologists. The first was to assume that non-Western medical traditions had biological

efficacy because of their ability to manipulate physiological states through the use of biologically active substances or the psychological manipulation of body states; in short, herbs and trances. This modernist approach was also *realist*, in that it was committed to a universal biology as the yardstick for measuring therapeutic outcome. It remains germane to contemporary attempts to reinforce the role of traditional medical practitioners in the response to infectious diseases such as AIDS and sexually transmitted infections, as well as with medical anthropologists sympathetic to a biomedical basis for understanding, and responding to, epidemics.

As historians have pointed out, epidemics are social events that require understanding not only how disease is produced in bodies, but also how it is reproduced in social relations (Ranger & Slack, 1992). Similarly, anthropological examinations of emerging infections seek to extend our understanding of them beyond the biology and epidemiology of these diseases in order to demonstrate how epidemics are embedded in economic relations and anchored by social systems of meaning. This social dimension furnishes the conditions of emergence of epidemics in space and time. Social relations configure exposure to risk, transmission, and susceptibility, as the 19th-century pathologist and father of social medicine, Rudolph Virchow, first taught us. Epidemics are caused by pathogenic social relations, whether in the case of tuberculosis amongst South African mineworkers, cholera outbreaks in refugee camps, or epidemics due to hamburger meat or water being contaminated by *Escherichia coli* O:157.

Within this realist framework, several approaches to elucidate the social pathways of disease causation have been drawn by anthropologists, archeologists, medical geographers, and epidemiologists. Political–economic approaches have stressed how economic structures perpetuate social inequalities that increase the risk of disease amongst the disadvantaged, while culturalist approaches have emphasized the role of local beliefs and practices in modifying risk of exposure, impacting transmission, and shaping susceptibility to pathogens. Both draw attention to the nature of power and how it is exercised in society, leading anthropologists to focus on how individuals are enacted through, negotiate, and resist power relations to modify their own health.

The second explanatory framework, which can be glossed as relativist, sought to situate the therapeutic effect of non-Western medicine in operations that constructed medical objects and therapeutic effects within a selfvindicating, cultural system. Sociologists of science applied the skeptical stance of anthropological approaches to non-Western medical systems to biomedicine. Not to do so, they argued, was to succumb to an a-symmetrical and a-sociological program. Biological claims of efficacy could no longer be privileged over social explanations in a symmetrical program of investigation. These critical scholars of science, often referred to as "social constructivists," inspired anthropologists' attempts to examine biomedicine—and the question of therapeutic efficacy—in social and cultural terms. If biomedicine works, then, a broad corpus of anthropological studies of biomedicine argue, it is because biomedicine is able to harness the symbolic and material means necessary to achieve healing. Therapeutic efficacy is neither a matter of just herbs and trances, nor drugs and surgeries, but requires power, access to economic resources, and the ability to fashion meaning.

Drawing on this framework, these studies emphasize that pathogens themselves are socially constructed. Sociologists of science have argued convincingly that pathogens are invisible outside of the plethora of laboratory techniques that visualize and represent them in scientific documents, making them into social actors that "act" through social practices and "speak" through scientific discourses. In addition, scientific knowledge is driven by political, economic, and institutional concerns that frame the questions that get asked, researched, and published. This is not to say that pathogens are to be dismissed as figments of a fertile social imagination. Pathogens are real *precisely because* the effects they engender in bodies and societies are mediated through scientific practices. Without epidemiology and molecular virology, for example, the HIV epidemic would be less "real" precisely because we would not have the scientific instruments that allow us to see it and to understand it as the common denominator across multiple registers, whether embodied or social.

More recently, a third theoretical framework has emerged from critical consideration of the knowledge garnered from advances in biotechnology, namely the increasingly detailed epidemiological maps afforded by global surveillance programs, and cross-cultural research on disease entities (Diamond, 1997; Ruffié & Sournia, 1984). This view, which I call the radical constructivist view, argues that *social relations can change pathogens themselves*, as well as the representations we have of them. In short, biology is *local* rather than *universal* (Lock, 1993). The notion of genetically engineered pathogens so feared by bioterrorism experts is a dramatic example; a far more mundane one is the creation of drugresistant organisms through irrational prescribing practices. Drug-resistant bacteria and viruses such as HIV are different organisms from their drug-sensitive ancestors, not only in genetic make-up but also, in some cases, in terms of their biological behavior. Social relations can change pathogens by impacting the environments within which these evolve—the "fitness" landscapes that drive evolution one way or another.

The radical constructivist view is most strongly supported by molecular biological studies of emerging epidemics. Many emerging infections are caused by pathogens derived from a-virulent organisms that did not cause epidemics previously. Biologists concerned with the conditions of emergence focus on how such organisms become pathogenic. The organisms most likely to trigger epidemics are those with the most plastic—changeable—genomes. The simplest, and most mutable, pathogens are RNA viruses;—indeed, almost all new epidemics have been caused by RNA viruses, from AIDS to West Nile Virus (Burke, 1998). The biggest reservoir of potential new pathogens is not humans, but animals. Almost all the major infectious diseases of humans came from zoonotic, or animal, reservoirs (with the notable exceptions of polio and smallpox). Culture and social relations are powerful determinants of the relationship between humans and domesticated animals. Trypanosomiasis—African sleeping sickness emerged as a major public health problem in colonial Africa largely because the colonial economy disrupted existing agricultural and animal husbandry practices. Cultural beliefs acted as a public health system by dictating the separation of herds from human settlements, which prevented transmission of the parasite from the tsetse fly to human populations (Ford, 1971). The zoonotic origins of emerging epidemics identifies a constellation of human practices that have the potential to condition exposure to new pathogens. These may impact exposure directly, as in the case of animal husbandry, hunting, or pet-keeping, or indirectly, as in the case of shifting agricultural and economic practices that transform the habitats of these zoonotic reservoirs (Hardin, 2001).

All three frameworks agree that the material effects of epidemics far surpass our ability to grasp them through epidemiological surveys and laboratory investigations. These material effects include the production of disease in bodies, certainly, but also a diverse range of representations, practices, and technologies deployed to understand, prevent, and treat disease. Mass vaccinations, public health campaigns, media stories, rumours, and gossip are powerful social mechanisms through which pathogens act on society. The rubric of culture allows these phenomena to be grouped together as an object of anthropological analysis. In this view, pathogens are like onions, and anthropologists have sought to peel back the cultural skins that envelop the biological pathogen and charge it with its social valence.

In summary, anthropological approaches allow a broader consideration of how epidemics, and pathogens themselves, are deeply socialized. This tells us that emerging infectious diseases cannot be taken for granted as "natural" phenomena—they are part of larger biosocial processes that play out both at the "micro" and "macro" levels. The potential of these theoretical approaches to deepen our insight into the emergence of infectious diseases has been underutilized, as anthropologists have largely served as "cultural interpreters and 'troubleshooters' … brought into projects to anticipate, or to provide post-hoc explanations of, negative community responses" (Inhorn & Brown, 1997, p. 12).

## **CLASSICAL METHODS: FROM EPIDEMIOLOGY TO CULTURE**

Ethnography is the close study of everyday life, the representations that are drawn upon in the conduct of social relations, and the practices through which these are reproduced. These qualitative insights can prove crucial to understanding how epidemics emerge. Ethnography and epidemiology have been most closely linked in forensic investigations, familiar to us from numerous accounts depicting public health sleuths hot on the trails of a new outbreak (see, e.g., McCormick & Fischer-Hoch, 1996). In approaching emerging infectious diseases, these methods have been widely used by clinicians, biologists, and astute public health practitioners, as well as by anthropologists. After all, ethnography is much like private detective work. Both require a keen sense of observation, familiarity with social worlds different from one's own, a certain street-wise character, and an intuition for both the mundane and the exceptional.

What is often regarded as medical anthropology's greatest triumph, the discovery of the cause of the slow degenerative disease called *kuru* among the Fore people of Highland New Guinea, was accomplished by biologist Carleton Gajdusek's painstaking marriage of biological and ethnographic research. Gajdusek was faced with a perplexing situation: the terrible disease followed a peculiar epidemiological pattern, affecting only young children and older women—a pattern that could not be explained if the disease was genetic or transmitted like known infectious agents. However, pathological evidence of similar brain lesions and cultural evidence concerning funereal practices involving endocannibalism led to the hypothesis that an infectious agent was being transmitted from the brains of deceased victims to the living through the preparation of bodies for funeral rites. Gajdusek's work ultimately demonstrated that *kuru* is caused by infectious protein particles called prions. Such funereal practices were not always practiced among the Fore, but were borrowed from neighboring tribes (Lindenbaum, 1979, p. 22), an example of how even in apparently isolated societies, diffusion of cultural practices can play a role in social change.

The case of *kuru* illustrates how an emergent epidemic can result from the juxtaposition of a random event (in this case, a genetic mutation generating a pathogenic, infectious protein) and a particular social practice. Cultural practices accounted for the epidemiology of the disease, explaining why certain individuals were affected while others were spared, and why the disease was confined to a specific cultural group.

*Kuru* in the New Guinea Highlands and sleeping sickness in colonial Africa highlight the biosocial nature of emerging epidemics. On one side, evolutionary mechanisms produce biological variation and, occasionally, a newly virulent pathogen. On the other, a key, culturally driven practice provides the crucial link between, or separation of, pathogen and host. However, in considering how these two processes come together, it is difficult to separate the biological from the social. Biological variation can be driven by social changes that shift local disease ecologies and the "fitness landscapes" within which evolution occurs. Novel biological phenomena can themselves drive social change, as countless historical examples of the reaction to epidemics can attest.

The critical potential of anthropology became most visible with the HIV epidemic, where a new, lethal pathogen has emerged over the last three decades to claim over 15 million lives, and infect upwards of 40 million more. The epidemic has resuscitated anthropological

#### **New Methods: From Molecular Biology to Social Change 387**

concern with biosocial processes. Biological and medical anthropologists had long been interested in processes of bio-cultural adaptation; the AIDS epidemic demonstrated that such processes could have acute relevance. Initially, however, anthropologists were slow to take up the biological dimension of this biosocial event, as it involved consideration of the epidemic's origins and, in the early years of the epidemic, the question of "causes" and "origins" was heavily freighted with blaming and victimization. At the time, critical anthropologists denounced lurid theories advanced by other anthropologists, journalists, and scientists alike as more indicative of a propensity to accuse the victims than as a constructive engagement with a serious public health issue (Farmer, 1992). In the response to the epidemic, realist positions have prevailed, largely because of the overwhelming toll of the epidemic. Social constructivist positions have been acknowledged in attempts to overcome stigma and in the activist goal to achieve empowerment through knowledge, with those that doubt that HIV causes AIDS relegated to a marginal fringe.

Thus, initial anthropological work on AIDS concentrated on representations of the disease and pitted culturalist accounts of disease spread against more political analyses. For the former, the spread of HIV was best understood in terms of specific cultural practices, ranging from sanguinary religious rites to sexual behaviors. A more political–economic view has argued that AIDS spreads along the "fault-lines" of society, striking the poor and socially excluded whose vulnerability makes them most likely to be afflicted. Epidemiological research has largely supported the latter view, while pointing to the need for an ethnographic thick description—and the engagement with diverse communities this requires to give a more finely grained picture of an increasingly heterogeneous epidemic.

Significantly, this debate has revealed weaknesses in epidemiology as an analytic science of epidemics. Its power in detecting associations and temporal patterns makes it a clumsy tool for explaining the rare events that trigger epidemics. Epidemiology is not a predictive science of epidemics. This is not surprising, given that epidemiology is a quantitative, descriptive science that is able to generate hypotheses but is weak at validating or invalidating them outside the social laboratory of the clinical trial or the case–control study. In the "real world" outside of the laboratory, epidemiological methods are unable to manage the presence of myriad known—or

unknown—confounding factors that can account for an epidemic having emerged in one place but not another.

The landmark case of *kuru* demonstrated the importance of cultural beliefs in accounting for the contingency of biological phenomena such as epidemics. A growing body of evidence on HIV/AIDS has reinforced this view, showing that epidemics are constrained by social forces and local configurations of culture, political economy, and power. In this sense, it can be advanced that the science of emerging epidemics will be a medical anthropology that includes a dialogue across biological and social disciplines, and is reflexive; that is, takes account of the politics inherent in the production of knowledge.

## **NEW METHODS: FROM MOLECULAR BIOLOGY TO SOCIAL CHANGE**

The cause of multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis (MDRTB) has always been assumed to be a social one: that is, patients not taking their medications properly. Unfortunately, rarely were the causes of that "non-compliance" investigated; blaming patients remained the most comfortable option. Farmer and his group marshalled the diagnostic power of Harvard University hospitals to investigate an outbreak of MDRTB in the shantytowns of Lima, Peru. This research demonstrated the importance of new biotechnologies to understanding emerging biosocial phenomena, and of establishing a dialogue across the biological and social disciplines. Interestingly enough, as this case illustrates, biological knowledge demonstrates the role of large-scale social forces in producing epidemics.

The investigation used molecular epidemiological techniques to identify the distribution and evolution of drug-resistant TB strains over time in the Peruvian community where they were working. They were able to disprove the prevailing view that this epidemic was due to poor adherence to treatment. Farmer and colleagues, ethnographically attuned to local realities, were skeptical of this claim, as it did not reflect their experience with the community. Aware that the inaccessibility of health care was leading to careless antibiotic usage, they suspected that patients were being infected by TB strains that were already resistant to one or two drugs. This meant that subsequent treatment with the standard three-drug regimen in public TB control clinics would be inadequate, as only one or two of the drugs would be active against the bacteria. These investigators hypothesized that TB control

programs were generating a multi-drug-resistant epidemic by treating individuals with already partially resistant TB.

This hypothesis was borne out by molecular resistance testing of bacteria isolated from patients. Development of drug resistance was attributed to the breakdown in curative public health services and the partial availability of antibiotics in the private sector. This is a product of social inequalities increasingly visible throughout the developing world, where a lucky few turn to private health care, creating a market for biomedicines. As a result, the poor are able to gain access to antibiotics through the informal economy; however, that access is partial and fragmented and leads to improper use and, consequently, the risk of drug resistance. The evolution of MDRTB is tied to growing social inequalities and the "privatization" of global health care through policies elaborated far from the communities where they have their impact. Privatization was due to economic structural adjustment programs mandated by Washington-based Bretton Woods institutions. These required that cash-strapped Third World governments slash social spending—and public health programs—in order to meet the conditions for further loans. However, in a world where knowledge of the efficacy of biomedicines is truly globalized, it is difficult to scale back the expectations of the sick, even when they are poor (Kim, Irwen, Millen, & Young et al., 2000).

The pathogenic potential of the conjugation of pathogenic socio-economic shifts with biomedical globalization is visible in the outbreak of MDRTB in the former Soviet Union. There, in the aftermath of communism, social insecurity, coupled with growing social inequality, has been blamed for skyrocketing crime. Increased crime has led to increased incarceration rates; the inability of the criminal justice system to hear the cases means that thousands are incarcerated while awaiting trial. Simultaneously, breakdown of the public health system has been implicated through drug shortages—in the emergence of MDRTB epidemics. The Russian prison system plays an important role in amplifying the epidemic, as the cramped and overcrowded conditions favor the spread of already-resistant TB from ill inmates. The pathogen is then spread back into the community as prisoners are released (Farmer, 1999; Hous, 1999; Kimmerling, 2000; Shilova & Dye, 2001). The Peruvian experience has been used as a model to develop an ambitious control program for Russia that has garnered impressive international support, demonstrating the potential for medical anthropology to lead the way in the development of programs to control emerging infections.

Farmer's Peruvian research was innovative because it used molecular biological evidence in dialogue with ethnographic data. It also broke new ground by emphasizing social *change*—rather than immobile cultural practices, such as funereal rituals—as the key process on the cultural side of the bio-social equation. Consonant with the anthropological understanding of culture prior to the 1980s, studies of *kuru* and other earlier epidemics often assumed a timeless, unchanging quality to culture and, as a result, social practices. What social change was observed was assumed to result in adaptation and acculturation.

The case of MDRTB indicates that anthropologists could no longer be content to attribute the phenomena at hand to timeless cultural structures, nor to assume that the sphere of analysis did not extend beyond the local. The dramatic scope of the MDRTB epidemic in the former Soviet Union only too clearly illustrates how "macro" transformations in political economy—and the large-scale social forces that drive them—register at the "micro" level of everyday practice and patterns of resort. Increasingly, the "culture" that explains pathogen emergence and transmission is not the "traditional" culture so prized by classical anthropologists, but the "culture" of international institutions that enact and regulate global economic policy and public health implementation.

### **CULTURES OF BIOMEDICINE**

Biomedicine plays an important role in mediating the emergence of new infectious diseases for four, linked reasons. Hospitals and clinics are places where the sick congregate in search of treatment, and as a result they concentrate pathogens and multiply the chances of crosscontamination. Secondly, the biomedical repertoire includes practices that represent exceptional powerful interventions into the biological realm, and thus have unprecedented power to change organisms and modify disease ecologies. Thirdly, biomedical efficacy requires extensive infrastructure—working hospitals, laboratories, and public health bureaucracies—in order to ensure the effectiveness of its biological interventions. This infrastructure is extraordinarily resource-hungry—a fact that motivated the move to less expensive and, it was hoped, more sustainable primary health care in developing countries in the 1970s. In an era of decreased expenditure on

#### **Cultures of Biomedicine 389**

health care, the "downsizing" of public health has made under-funded hospitals dangerous places. Finally, confronted by the global public's desire and need for curative biomedical services, a vast private—and largely unregulated—private market for biomedical services and bio-commodities (from pharmaceuticals to organs) has proliferated around the world. This private market has led to increasingly irrational use of biologically active substances, further increasing the risk of emerging epidemics.

The iatrogenic potential of biomedicine can be seen both in settings of poverty and wealth. In Africa, lack of sterilizing equipment has most dramatically been implicated in outbreaks of Ebola; however, anecdotes of improper sterilization practices and re-use of injection equipment are legion and are widely believed to have played a role in spreading blood-borne pathogens such as HIV and Hepatitis C. In wealthy countries, increasingly invasive procedures on sicker patients has led to greater instrumentation of patients whose immune systems are less robust. As a result, intensive care units have become breeding grounds for drug-resistant "super-bugs" such as MRSA and VRE. Spread to other patients is enhanced when overworked staff do not have the time to ensure proper hygiene. Both in wealthy and poor countries, the iatrogenic potential of biomedicine is evident although, in conditions of poverty, the consequences are far more devastating.

Perhaps more worrisome has been the unwitting implication of earlier public health campaigns in the propagation of unrecognized pathogens. It has been hypothesized that the HIV epidemic was triggered by the administration to over a million Africans in the 1960s of batches of an experimental oral polio vaccine that was inadvertently contaminated with HIV's simian ancestor, SIVcpz (Hooper, 1999). While this is unlikely, it does point to the potential for large-scale use of biologicals to unwittingly transmit pathogens, a potential that has been acknowledged in other hypotheses about the epidemic's origins (see Weiss & Wain-Hobson, 2001). In Egypt, it appears that 15% of the population has been contaminated with Hepatitis C as the result, it is believed, of earlier campaigns to eradicate schistosomiasis using parenteral treatments with inadequately sterilized injection equipment (Frank et al., 2000). Data on Hepatitis C from developing countries is still sparse, but it is not unreasonable to expect that re-use of injecting equipment in the past has spawned a major epidemic across the world that may, in time, come to dwarf the HIV epidemic.

Ethnographic studies of the therapeutic itineraries resorted to by the ill, as well as examinations of the everyday life of the clinical encounter, illuminate how the individual experience of illness is negotiated through cultural frames, enacted in social relations, and constrained by political and economic conditions. As a result, they describe how biomedicine is deployed according to local circumstances and offer crucial insights into how biomedical practices may inadvertently contribute to the emergence of epidemics, as in the case of the Peruvian and Russian MDRTB epidemics. Ethnographies of public health in developing countries have painted a devastating picture of breakdown in public health and the consequences of power struggles over increasingly meagre resources (Hours, 1985). From the point of view of preventing drug-resistant epidemics, too little biomedicine is worse than none at all. However, with the globalization of biomedical commodities and desires, the "nothing" option does not exist. *Too much* biomedicine can also lead to difficulties, as in the case of drug-resistant epidemics fanning out from intensive care units demonstrates.

Because biomedicine has become an increasingly important mediator of the global disease ecology, the conditions that compromise or distort its impact (such as partial antibiotic use) may set the stage for emerging epidemics. Close attention to biomedical practices—or those that are inspired by biomedicine's modernist promise of healthy living—in different geographical and social contexts provides important evidence for understanding how patchiness in the implementation of biomedicine textures the disease landscape. In an era of intensified and accelerated global exchanges of peoples and goods, both organic and inorganic, this patchwork biosocial landscape offers new opportunities for new pathogens to spread, as well as new breeding grounds for existing pathogens such as tuberculosis. New infections such as HIV, Hepatitis C, or West Nile virus are known examples; however, increases in genetic manipulation and in the circulation of biologicals—already cited in evaluations of the threat of bioterrorism—raise concern for the future. As we have seen in the case of MDRTB, medical anthropology has an important role to play, as a critical examination of the conditions under which biomedicine is both globalized and localized, and as a critique of the institutional practices and representations that inform global health policy.

### **FUTURE DIRECTIONS**

Growing interest in the link between globalization and health has stimulated anthropological research on how large-scale social forces and transnational movements produce local cultural forms. Local inadequacies in public health infrastructure, local disease ecologies that explain differences in exposure to pathogens, and local variations in biology have all been identified by medical anthropologists, and other researchers, as factors influencing the emergence of epidemics. Given the disproportionate impact of biomedical practices in influencing the disease ecology, this has been a good place to start.

However, anthropological attention must be paid to the impact on infectious diseases of global processes, whether they be ecological (as in the case of global warming) or socioeconomic (as in changes in agricultural production or forms of social inequality). For instance, deadly outbreaks of *E. Coli* O:157 epidemics have occurred, and have been linked to inadequate treatment of water and food. This underlines the potential of transformations in the industrial production of food to play a role in generating and/or spreading epidemics. The most dramatic example is the epidemic of new variant Creutzfeld–Jacob disease (vCJD), the modern form of *kuru*. "Mad cow disease" (Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, or BSE) led to an epidemic of vCJD in humans, because sporadic genetic events that produced disease-producing prions were amplified though industrial food production processes. Afflicted animals were "recycled," their carcasses used in the production of feed for other cows, in effect cannibalizing them. This introduced the pathogen into the bovine food chain as animal flour, spreading the disease to other cows and, eventually, to the humans that ate them. Debate over genetically modified foods (GM foods) has cited the BSE epidemic as a warning.

In the past, medical anthropologist have worked alongside public health practitioners to promote healthy dietary habits and encourage the adoption of hygienic measures to reduce the risk of water-borne infectious diseases (Nichter, 1989). As cultural diagnosticians, anthropologists adapted public health interventions to be congruent to local beliefs, and worked to ensure that public health interventions could be adopted to maximum effect—for example, by designing interventions to "sell" ORS as a treatment for childhood diarrhea. Morbidity and mortality from such water-borne infections remains a major health, challenge, increasingly because clean water is no longer affordable for the poor, who must purchase it from privatized urban water systems. However, the increasing burden of morbidity and mortality due to TB, HIV, and respiratory diseases (as smoking increases and air quality decreases in the sprawling cities of the Third World where more and more of the world' s population is concentrated) indicates that anthropologists cannot be content to intervene post facto, but have a role to play in addressing these social ills upstream, before they crystallize as epidemics.

The lessons are clear. While understanding of microsocial processes, such as the beliefs and practices that inform everyday behavior, offers important insight, these must be complemented by social analysis that understands how local and micro-social processes are constrained by, or proliferate from, large-scale social forces. Medical anthropologists increasingly will be called upon as partners in public health and biomedical interventions targeting the "modern plagues" of HIV, MDRTB, and Hepatitis C. Ensuring the success of vaccine trials and anti-microbial treatment programs should not detract from the critical dimension of understanding inequities in access to these interventions, and understanding the processes that contribute to these inequities, as they furnish important insights into the biosocial processes that can crystallize as epidemics.

With the phenomenal advances in biotechnologies that allow us to track the molecular origins of epidemics with increasing accuracy, medical anthropologists have been furnished with powerful new tools for tracking the inscription of the social in the natural realm. Molecular epidemiology furnishes a biological archive that can be brought into dialogue with the historical record to answer important questions about the emergence of epidemics, as has been done with MDRTB and could be done with HIV and other emerging infections. This dialogue will be an important step to developing a global science of emerging epidemics.

### **REFERENCES**

- Burke, D. (1998). Evolvability of emerging viruses. In A. M. Nelson & C. R. Horsburgh, J. (Eds.), *Pathology of emerging infections* 2.
- Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology. Crosby, A. W. (1986). *Ecological imperialism: The biological expansion*
- *of Europe, 900–1900*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Diamond, J. (1997). *Guns, germs and steel: The fates of human societies*. New York: Norton.

#### **References 391**

- Ewald, P. W. (1994). *Evolution of infectious disease*. London: Oxford University Press.
- Farmer, P. (1992). *AIDS and accusation: Haiti and the geography of blame*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Farmer, P. (1999). *Infections and inequalities: The modern plagues*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Ford, J. (1971). *The role of the trypanosomiases in African ecology: A study of the tse-tse fly problem*. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
- Frank, C., Mohamed, M. K., Strickland, G. T., Lavanchy, D., Arthur, R. R., Magder, L. S. et al. (2000). The role of parenteral antischistosomial therapy in the spread of Hepatitis C virus in Egypt. *The Lancet*, *355* (9207), 887.
- Hardin, A., with P. Auzel. Wildlife Utilization and the emergence of viral diseases. In *Hunting and Bushmeat Utilization in the African Rainforest*. Advances in Applied Biodiversity Sciences (2): 85–92. Washington, DC.: Center for Applied Biodiversity Science at Conservation International.
- Hooper, E. (1999). *The river: A journey to the origins of HIV and AIDS*. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
- Hours, B. (1985). *L'État sorcier: Santé publique et société au Cameroun*. Paris: l'Harmattan.

Hous, (1999). Stalking a killer in Russia's prisons. *Science*, *286*, 1670.

- Inhorn, M. C., & Brown, P. J. (Eds.). (1997). *The anthropology of infectious disease: International health perspectives*. Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach.
- Institute of Medicine. (1992). *Emerging infections: Microbial threats to health in the United States*. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- Karlen, A. (1996). *Man and microbes: Disease and plagues in history and modern times*. New York: Touchstone Books.
- Kim, J. Y., Irwen, A., Millen, J., & Young, J. (Eds.). (2000). *Dying for growth: Global inequality and the health of the poor*. Boston: Common Courage Press.
- Kimmerling, M. (2000). The Russian equation: An evolving paradigm in tuberculosis control. *International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease*, *4*(12), S160–S167.

- Kiple, K. F. (1993). *The Cambridge world history of human disease*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Krause, R. M. (Ed.). (1998). *Emerging infections: Biomedical research reports*. New York: Academic Press.
- Lindenbaum, S. (1979). *Kuru sorcery: Disease and danger in the New Guinea highlands*. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
- Lock, M. (1993). *Encounters with ageing: Mythologies of menopause in North America and Japan*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lupton, D. (1994). *Medicine as culture: Illness, disease and the body in western societies*. London: Sage.
- McCormick, J. B., & Fischer-Hoch, S. (1996). *The virus hunters: Dispatches from the frontline*. London: Bloomsbury.
- Nichter, M. (1989). *Anthropology and international health: South Asian case studies*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
- Ranger, T., & Slack, P. (1992). *Epidemics and ideas: Essays on the historical perception of pestilence*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Rosenberg, C. (1992). *Explaining epidemics and other studies in the history of medicine*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Ruffié, J., & Sournia, J. C. (1984). *Les épidémies dans l'histoire de l'homme: Essai d'anthropologie médicale*. Paris: Flammarion.
- Shilova, M. V., & Dye, C. (2001). The resurgence of tuberculosis in Russia. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B356*, 1069–1075.
- Thompson, R. C. A. (2000). *Molecular epidemiology of infectious diseases*. London: Arnold.
- Weindling, P. (Ed.). (1995). *International health organisations and movement, 918–1939*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Whitman, J. (2000). Political processes and infectious diseases. In J. Whitman, (Ed.), *The politics of emerging and resurgent infectious diseases* (pp. 1–14). London: Macmillan.
- Woolhouse, M. E. J., & Dye, C. (Eds.). (2001). Biology [Special issue]. *Philosphical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 356*.

# **Genetic Disease I: History and Mechanisms**

#### **Larry Leon Mai**

A genetic disease may be defined as any condition caused or influenced by a malfunctioning gene or cytogenetic (chromosome) error that affects an organism's capacity for adaptation. Excepting lethal defects and sterility, genetic diseases display certain familial modes of inheritance and exhibit morbidity and mortality patterns that may compromise direct fitness. Genetic diseases have been called "inborn errors of metabolism," molecular defects, hereditary diseases, and familial diseases (Mai, Young Owl, & Kersting, 2004). Synonyms for "disease" in this context include anomaly, condition, morbid effect or defect, deficiency, disorder, and syndrome.

Some sources restrict discussions of genetic disease to defects of single genes; others include polygenic disorders and the cytogenetic defects as well (Habener & Williams, 2001; King, Rotter, & Morulsky, 1992).<sup>1</sup> This entry touches on all three manifestations of mutation.

Worldwide, more than half of all conceptions, and about 7% of all live-born children, are affected by some form of genetic disease.