# 5

# Urban Sociology

Sharit K. Bhowmik\*

## **Status of Urban Studies**

Urban sociology has had a very long tradition in India. In fact, it is the oldest subdiscipline of sociology in India. This may sound surprising since it is a know fact that most sociologists in the earlier phase have studied rural society. However, one should also know that the first sociology department in the country—at the Bombay University1 —started as a centre for urban studies in 1919. Besides being the first university department to teach sociology, it was also the first post-graduate department of the University. Incidentally, the University of Mumbai, along with its sister universities of Kolkata and Madras, celebrated its sesquicentennial year (150th anniversary) in 20072 . Sir Patrick Geddes—a sociologist and town planner from New Zealand—set up the sociology department at the University of Bombay. It was called the Department of Civics and Sociology. Since Geddes was totally committed to studying the urban environment (although he was a botanist by training) and the integration of slums in urban areas, he laid emphasis on urban sociology.

In the initial post-independence phase, the study of rural society, especially village communities, took precedence over other sub-branches of sociology. Urban sociology represented a branch which dealt with only a small section of the country's population. In the 1950s, the urban population was below 20 per cent of the total. While the teaching of urban sociology began in the 1920s, sociological

\*This chapter reviews the articles published in different journals. The author also relied on the abstracts and reviews published in the *ICSSR Journal of Reviews and Abstracts*, though it must be said that the Journal did not maintain its regularity. An extensive search was done of the journals *Sociological Bulletin*; *Contributions to Indian Sociology*; and *Economic and Political Weekly* to locate articles on urban sociology. Book reviews in these journals were studied in order to locate the relevant books. Libraries were scanned to find books which were not reviewed and hence might have been missed.

After making brief notes on each book and article published during the period, they were grouped into common areas. There were a few books on the city as a whole. These were grouped in one section titled 'The city and urban communities'. Similarly, other works were grouped according to themes. This made it possible to assess the number of studies conducted in each area. Also covered are works of 'non-sociologists' who have made significant contributions to the growing field of urban sociology.

research in urban sociology gained momentum in the late 1950s, and its focus remained on the urban settlements of western India. The researches over the recent decades have produced varied findings which have in fact helped to promote the 'Indian' or indigenous perspective in urban studies. The studies presented in this chapter bear testimony to this rich contribution.

### **The City and Urban Communities**

The present survey we will begin with a selection of works which deal with the city and the urban communities. The studies include those that look at the city as a whole, those that deal with different communities in the city, and those that look at conflict among communities. The first part of this section will discuss the studies on cities followed by an account of the research on communities.

#### *Research on Cities*

Ravi Kalia (1994) provides a critical account of Orissa's new capital, adjacent to the old temple town of Bhubaneshwar. As in the case of Chandigarh,3 the new Bhubaneshwar was designed by a European—a German architect, Otto Koenisberger—who tried to embody in the new settlement a vision of modern India. However, the city was conceived differently from Chandigarh in many ways. The design and construction of the city remained in the hands of the state PWD which was headed by Julius Vaz. Vaz adapted the architecture to local conditions. Kalia's work describes the relationship between Otto Koenisberger—the architect—and Julius Vaz—the head of the PWD—to highlight the dilemma of being modern and yet remaining faithful to what is conceived as an enduring Indian building tradition.

Different aspects on life in Calcutta (now Kolkata) can be found in two volumes edited by S. Chaudhuri (1995). The first volume is on the city's past while the second has studies on the present and the future.

One of the more important collections on urban problems can be found in Sujata Patel and Alice Thorner's (1995) book on Bombay. It contains thirteen chapters which are grouped in three sections, namely, labour and enterprise, claims on land, housing and health, and politics, populism and violence. The first section examines the social and economic aspects of the city's development into India's premier manufacturing and financial centre. This section contains studies on labour and enterprise. The second section brings together papers dealing with land use and land distribution, the history of city planning, efforts at slum development, and relations between space and health. The third section has studies on the politics of the city. There are two important though somewhat contrasting papers on the Shiv Sena and the municipal administration. This is one of the most comprehensive books on Mumbai.

M.D. David's (1996) book on Mumbai along with the previously cited volume, represents a good attempt at understanding the problems of the city. This book contains 28 papers which were presented at a seminar. Unfortunately, most of the papers are written by bureaucrats or technocrats engaged in the municipal corporation or the urban development department. Their papers are informative but descriptive, lacking in the critical appraisal that forms the basis of academic work. Only a handful of academics have contributed to this volume and their contributions are of better quality.

Voilette Graf (1997) presents selections of contemporary scholarship on the history and culture of Lucknow. The studies deal with diverse issues such as politics, music, poetry, architecture, history, culture, and education. The book is divided into two parts. The first part contains articles which have a historical perspective (mainly eighteenth and nineteenth-century Lucknow), while the second part covers the major events and movements in the twentieth century. The papers collectively present a holistic picture of the city.

L.K. Jain (1998) documented the establishment of Faridabad as a city in the outskirts of Delhi. He discussed how and why the experiment failed. Faridabad was developed as a township which would house 30,000 refugees coming from the North-West Frontier Province of what had become Pakistan. They were settled in Faridabad as part of an experiment in the cooperative movement. The refugees were encouraged to form cooperatives in the areas of housing, civic amenities and income generation activities. In the first part of the book Jain recounts the promise of this settlement which was started in 1949. The second part of the book deals with how this city of hope for the refugees turned out to be a city of despair because of the poor functioning of the bureaucracy. The cooperative experiment was directed towards dignity and self-respect through emphasis on their own abilities. This went counter to the expectations of the bureaucracy, as the officers felt that it would undermine their importance. Even the politicians felt the same way. Both the bureaucrats and the politicians got together to scuttle the entire project and the experiment failed miserably.

Rajkishor Meher (1998) studied the growth and degeneration of Rourkela—a city in Orissa. Rourkela was the first planned steel city in the country. It was planned to cater to the needs of the Rourkela Steel Plant. It looked good in the beginning because of the orderliness of the layout. However, after four decades, the author found that the planning process had not taken into account the needs of the poor, especially those in the informal sector. These included cycle rickshawpullers, porters or head loaders, sweepers, and domestic workers. There was no standard regulation of work or wages for these people. Hence we have, on the one hand, permanent well-paid workers and officers of the steel plant, and on the other side, the rapid growth of the unorganized sector workers. This is perhaps a natural outcome of the process of urbanization. The high growth and employment potential attracts not just the better qualified people for well-paid jobs but also the rural poor who find such areas as potential sources of employment in the unorganized sector. Urban planning has to take into account the needs of both sections.

The growth of Chandigarh is depicted in a study by Kavita Sharma et al. (1999). The first part of the book looks at the factors that led to the building of the city. Partition of the country divided the state of Punjab, and the capital of the state—Lahore—went to Pakistan, and the Indian part of Punjab urgently needed a new capital. Rather than making any other city the capital of the state, it was decided to set up a new township. The challenge was to make a better-designed and well-planned city. The second part of the book describes the resistance offered by the village folk whose lives were to be disrupted by the new city. The contributors describe the lives of the villagers and their fight for compensation for their losses. The third part outlines the growth of the city since its existence. It examines government policies in planning the expansion of the city. The last section describes the problems faced by the people and their views on urban development and governance.

R.N. Sharma and K. Sita (2001) have edited a volume which deals with the problems and prospects of Navi Mumbai (New Mumbai). The plan to set up this satellite city started in 1970. The objective was to draw the crowds away from Mumbai and ease its population density. The city was expected to have a population of two million and around 500,000 new jobs. The studies in this book have tried to evaluate the situation after 30 years of the city's existence. Most of them provide a grim picture. The population of the city has increased mainly because of the high land prices in Mumbai. This has driven the middle class not just to Navi Mumbai but also to other satellite cities like Thane, Kalyan-Dombivili, etc. The promise of jobs in Navi Mumbai did not materialize and offices, especially those of the government, did not move there. Hence Navi Mumbai has remained, as some of the studies have labelled it, a 'bedroom community': people go to work in Mumbai and return to Navi Mumbai to sleep.

The book contains informative papers on different aspects of Navi Mumbai. These include urban planning, housing and slums, and other aspects of the city infrastructure. Some of the papers have been written by bureaucrats or leaders of industry and commerce, which border on propaganda. But the rest of the papers are well researched.

Sanjay Mitra (2002), in his paper on the case of New Town, Kolkata, attempts to present an alternative model for urbanization and associated infrastructure provision by the state. Existing wisdom, which that has long emphasized a diminished role of the state and an unfettered operation of market forces, ignores the many imperfections that may exist. But in this innovative approach, which has worked so far in the New Town of Kolkata, it has been possible to bring together an 'activist' state and market-oriented efficiency while keeping intact the concerns for the poor, many of whom have been offered a chance to take part in the construction activities. Their views are regularly solicited during the rehabilitation work.

#### *Urban Communities*

Studies on communities are quite common in urban sociology in developed societies. These studies help analyze urban processes and ethnic relations. The studies on urban violence too could be included in community studies but it was felt that communal violence needed a special mention because of its different features.4 In this section the studies done on communities will be discussed. They are not too numerous but they cover a wide range of issues.

S.M. Michael (1989) did a study on two regional communities in Mumbai, namely, Tamils and Malayalees. It is based on extensive fieldwork on the two communities in the city. Michael critically examined the adjustment of these two groups in Mumbai. His emphasis was on the cultural factors that help or impede the process of adjustment in an urban environment.

Samita Manna's (1989) paper on patterns of recreation highlights recreational activities in an urban setting. She conducted a detailed study of different modes of recreational activities such as cultural and religious activities, sports, mass media, clubs, libraries, and others. The paper also deals with the way in which the various features of recreation work orient the life of people in a small town.

Rajesh Gill (1991) analyzed social change in two villages situated in the urban periphery. One village is in the outskirts of Chandigarh and the other near Ludhiana. She found that there was no simplistic relationship between urbanization and urbanism. In other words, urbanization and social change are not always identical. There are several intervening factors, such as the functional type of the neighbourhood city, caste and religious composition of the local community, historicity of the settlements, which that play a significant role in demographic and social change in the settlements on the urban periphery.

K.P. Kumaran (1992) conducted a study on Telugu-speaking people living in the city of Pune. These people have been migrating to the city since the eighteenth century. They have formed close settlements in parts of the city. These close settlements have encouraged the continuance of traditional institutions such as caste panchayats. These institutions are preserved despite the process of industrialization and urbanization.

Smita Sengupta (1993) wrote about the nature and extent of the marginality and segregation of the Chinese population in Kolkata. She highlights the historical process of development of this community and the impact of multidimensional factors arising out of the socio-political environment in the urban setting. The distinct physical features, skin colour, language, dietary habits, etc., of the Chinese immigrants act as hurdles in their mingling with the local population. In fact, their relationship with the outside world is mainly in the economic sphere and no other factor has succeeded in breaking their isolation. Apart from social and cultural marginalization, the Chinese also suffer from political marginalization. They suffered most during the Sino-India war in 1962 when their loyalties were suspect. A large number of Chinese became stateless. As a result, many among the youth are emigrating to other countries such as Australia and countries in Europe.

Some important contributions to the study of urban communities can be found in the third volume5 of *Social Structure and Social Change* (A.M. Shah et al. 1996). There are three papers which study the different aspects of urban communities. Y.B. Damle, examined the changes in social structure by studying *wadas*, *chawls*, bungalows, and apartments in the city of Pune. The changes taking place in Pune are found to be organic in nature; the changes in social structure have brought about changes in the physical structure. Victor S. D'Souza and Rajesh Gill (1996) studied a small town in Punjab and found that in spite of the commercialization of the urban economy, there is continuity in the caste structure. The third paper, by Harshad Trivedi (1996), presents a theoretical framework to understand 'semi-urban pockets' as part of the process of urbanization.

Rajesh Gill (2000) discussed the conceptual connotations of 'ethnicity' and analysed the mechanisms through which both de-ethnicization and re-ethnicization persist simultaneously in urban societies.

The problems of the low-caste Hindus, who are a part of the middle class in Hyderabad, are discussed by Minna Saavala (2001). Her paper enumerates some religious means which socio-economically mobile low-caste families employ to identify themselves as 'middle-class people' in the urban setting. Her study shows that new middle-class people seek to create a 'middle-class Hinduism' devoid of caste. These people lay emphasis on 'auspiciousness', rather than 'purity and pollution'.

#### **Urban Policies and Processes**

This section deals with researches concerned with policies. Some of the studies quoted are done by geographers but these do have a bearing in sociology.

The National Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA 1988) published a book on the state of India's urbanization, which is regarded as the first detailed demographic profile of India's urbanization. Some of the aspects the text covers are an overview of the urbanization process; an over-urbanization thesis and its application to India; urban poverty and slums; and social change. The book also has four annexures which contain detailed district- and city-specific urban population data.

Amitabh Kundu (1988) conducted several meaningful studies on urban processes. Some of his studies will be discussed in other sections. His paper 'National Commission on Urbanization: Issues and Non-issues' is a critical analysis of the commission's report. He holds the view that though the commission is eloquent about the problems of the urban poor, its proposed solutions would increase inequalities in the existing urban systems. The solutions, if implemented, would increase the flow of resources in favour of the rich.

The policy of decelerating the pace of urbanization in favour of rural development was similarly criticized by A.N. Sachithanandan (1989). He argued that employment potential in rural areas was limited and the development areas needed high levels of investment. In this situation, trying to control the growth of cities would be unsuccessful. He felt it would be more practical to increase the employment scope of the cities through industrial growth. The real problem, he felt, was the management of urban growth, which required the integration of the national urban policy with economic planning.

B.C. Aldrich and R.S. Sandhu (1990) broadened the focus on housing in Asia with the consideration of a wide variety of forms of government, culture, history, level of economic development, etc., which might be related to the provision of housing. It revealed the facts related to housing in Asia while dealing with an Asian situation in the larger comparative context. It further brought out the fact that some countries have improved their housing and increased its supply while others have not, and that some processes which have worked in the West have not worked in Asia.

Suhita Chopra studied Khajuraho (1990) to explore the factors behind the growth of urbanization through tourism. Based on field observations, the paper worked out the urbanizing potential of tourism in Khajuraho.

Two books on urbanization in north-east India deserve mention. Most of the researches in this area have dealt mainly with tribal or rural problems. Hence studies on urbanization represent an important but neglected facet of this region. A.C. Sinha et al. (1993) edited a book on the cities of this region, covering a wide range of topics. During the 1980s existing towns in this region grew rapidly. Some of the papers in the anthology are studies of land relations and the growth of urbanization in the north-east.

J.B. Ganguly (1995), also deals with the theme of urbanization in north-east India. His book contains a wide variety of papers dealing with almost all aspects of urbanization in the region. Some of the papers study the impact of urbanization on the tribal people while others deal with urban poverty and the urban poor. Other papers cover migration, urban administration, and settlement patterns.

Amitabh Kundu (1994) tried to pool together research on urban India. The focus of his book is on analysing the trends and patterns of urbanization in India and identifying the factors influencing change at the regional level. Apart from chapters dealing with some of the important aspects of urbanization, such as housing and water supply, the book also has a chapter on an exhaustive survey of literature on urban research in India. The in-depth analysis of trends and patterns of regional and rural linkages and agricultural development provides interesting insights.

Kundu has also done a study of the problem of migration along with Shalini Gupta (Kundu and Gupta 1996). They analysed migration patterns using data on male migrants from the census. Their analysis shows that there has been a slowing down of population mobility over the decades since independence. The article focusses on the dynamics of migration and urbanization in the context of the changing structure of economic development.

Urbanization and change in Tamil Nadu is the theme of a paper by R. Rukmani (1994). The paper examines the pattern of urbanization in Tamil Nadu during 1990–91. It attempts to identify the factors underlying the observed pattern of urbanization. It identifies the different stages of urbanization, the distinctive characteristics of each phase, and the socio-economic factors underlying these changes.

B.C. Aldrich and R.S. Sandhu (1995b) have addressed the subject of urban housing for the urban poor in developing countries. Their edited volume contains rich data, meticulously documented with detailed case studies of the policies and practices adopted in tackling housing for the poor in 16 developing countries. The editors warm that housing cannot be isolated from the national and global economic milieu. They hold the view that housing for the poor is a critical issue for economic development. They point out that slums and squatter settlements built with cast-off materials and own labour subsidize the formal sector. Further, they argue that the provision of housing and basic urban services for the urban poor cannot be left entirely to the free market. According to them, the trajectory of the path to a solution to the slum problem is remarkably similar in all the developing countries. They are of the view that the solutions advocated have shifted from uprooting to urban renewal, which provide site-and-service facilities to in situ upgradation which is now considered the most cost-effective and a feasible solution.

Annapurna Shaw (1996) has tried to develop an analytical frame for reviewing urban policy in India. She has argued that without an analytical frame we cannot get a clear understanding of why the policy was fashioned in the way it was. She has also tried to draw policy lessons which could be useful for the future.

Sanjoy Chakraborty takes a critical look at the mega city programme of the Government of India (Chakraborty 1996). The first major urban policy initiative, announced after the Government of India began the economic liberalization process was the Mega City Programme directed by the ministry of urban affairs and employment. It was an attempt to shore up infrastructure in five of the six largest metropolitan regions in India, namely, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Bangalore. This was to be done by using innovative financing mechanisms and by emphasizing on cost recovery. After detailing the political economic background of the programme and its implementation, Chakraborty raises the following three questions: (i) Is the amount of money being invested too little and has it come too late to turn the situation around? (ii) Is the programme being targeted to the wrong cities? (iii) Will the elite continue to remain the beneficiaries and the urban poor continue to be neglected? The answers to these questions raise doubts about the Mega City Programme. Since the reforms will have to succeed in the cities (if they are to be durable), urban development policies must be considered with a view to sustaining efficient and especially equitable urbanization patterns.

The case of urbanization in West Bengal is covered by Pabitra Giri (1998). Giri discussed the urbanization process in West Bengal during 1951–91 with reference to the changes in the workforce structure and the urban rural productivity gap. In general, the relative industrial stagnation and the population pressure determined the urbanization process in the state during the post-independence period. Moreover, agricultural growth and the changing political scenario since the late 1970s (with the election of the Left Front government) influenced the process.

R.P. Misra and Kamlesh Misra (1998) edited two volumes which contain studies on different aspects of India's million-plus cities. The books contain 42 studies by experts on urban affairs.

Sharit Bhowmik (2000) examined the various perceptions about street vendors, especially those of the civic authorities, sections of the urban population, and the hawkers themselves. Much of the data is based on the preliminary results of a study of hawkers in eight cities conducted by the National Alliance of Street Vendors of India.

R.N. Sharma (2000) examined the role of street vendors. He observed that their traditional role in the subsistence economy of rural India, or the bazaar economy of the old towns, has undergone significant structural changes.

R.S. Sandhu, Sarup Singh, and Jasmeet Sandhu's (2001) edited book on the Asian experience of sustainable human settlements contains studies by scholars from countries like Australia, Iraq, Sri Lanka, Japan, the Netherlands, and India. The volume has five sections dealing with the planning for sustainable urban settlements, urban poverty, social segregation, gender in human settlements, and the migration of and human settlements. All these sections present a varied picture of the problems and issues related to the functioning and performance of human settlements.

Yogesh Atal (2001) has attempted to underline the efforts made at the international level during the last decade of the last millennium to review the progress that humanity has made and to identify the deficiencies in the development. The clear message the author has derived is that new development paradigm must focus on reaching the un-reached and on saving both the natural and the cultural environment. Atal also suggests that while shedding one's urban bias one needs to reorient ourself to the village. He finally observes that the last century was the century of science and technology; the twenty-first century will be the century of the social sciences and in this context the social scientists will have to make their presence felt by assuming the leading role in the years to come.

In 1992, the Government of India circulated a 'model rent legislation' to state governments with a view to reform state legislation so that investment in housing could be encouraged. Maharashtra is one of the four states that responded to this initiative and evolved a new rent legislation. Kiran Wadhva (2002) examines the strengths and inadequacies of the Maharashtra Rent Control Act of 1999.

Subrata Dutta (2002), has attempted to seek a relationship between urbanization and the development of small rural firms by studying the case of West Bengal. Dutta's is a critical study of rural industrialization in West Bengal. Low industrialization was found to be directly related to the degree of urbanization. The study noted a clear urban concentration of small enterprises in West Bengal. The author suggested that government investment on rural infrastructure was essential to promote the rural non-agricultural sector in the backward districts. This has led to the neglect of rural areas and non-farm employment.

Probir C. Bhattacharya (2002) discusses some of the major issues surrounding the process of urbanization in developing countries. His paper reviews the broad trends in urbanization, discusses the emergence and growth of very large cities, and then focusses on urban primacy. This is followed by a discussion of the contribution of rural-to-urban migration to urban growth. In the latter part of the papar, the author discusses how the informal sector plays a role in absorbing the unemployed migrants from rural areas. The easy entry to this sector, because of its requirement of low skills (along with low wages), makes it possible for these migrants to get a livelihood in the cities. The author explains that not only does this sector provide employment to the low-skilled poor migrant, it also contributes to the national economy.

#### **Urban Poverty**

This section discusses the studies done on urban poverty. Studies on slums and on housing have been excluded because these issues will be covered in other sections. Urban poverty has been dealt with separately because the issues concerned are different. Though the poor reside in slums, the researches on slums are more concerned with housing and urban land and not with poverty per se.

Sumita Chaudhuri (1990) conducted a study of beggars in two areas of Kolkata: the Kalighat temple area, and the Howrah station area. Besides examining how the beggars have preserved or constructed society and culture in the limited economic and social setting, an effort has also been made to discover the special adaptive norms and activities that sustain them under the typical situation. This study is important because it is perhaps the only one to deal with the social structural aspects of the urban poor.

Meera Bapat and Nigel Crook (1992) did a longitudinal study on droughtaffected migrants to Pune from the Marathwada region of Maharashtra. In the early 1970s, families fleeing from the Marathawada drought arrived in Pune and were involved in a struggle for survival. This was basically an interactive process between individuals, households, and the local economy. The data, collected from seven slum settlements, vividly tells the story of their struggle for survival from the mid-1970s to the late 1980s.

Arup Mitra (1992) examined the relevance of the 'trickle down mechanism' of the growth of poverty in the urban context in India. Supporters of the 'trickle down' effect assert that development of the city can be efficient only if market forces are allowed to operate and there is little regulation from the state. Though the rich may benefit from such policies, the poor too would get new forms of employment. This is the trickle-down effect. In other words, free enterprise and absence of state regulation would benefit all sections of the urban population, including the poor. Mitra's empirical evidence does not support this view. He finds that very little of the income generated from the manufacturing and tertiary sectors actually benefits the poor as there are few jobs created for them. In fact, he finds that the best way to ease urban poverty and provide for the gainful employment of the poor is through rapid industrialization which is oriented towards growth of employment. This in turn would presume that state intervention in encouraging industrialization is needed rather than an operation of the market.

Sanjay Roy (1993), has tried to understand the nature of the dialectical relationship between the ruling classes and the urban poor. He based his study on data collected from three slums in Kolkata each of which has distinct sections of workers, all working in the informal sector. Using a Marxist framework, he analysed class formations within these slums and counterpoised them with the classes of the employers. Roy concluded that the position that the state takes in supporting the class determines the nature of the relations between the classes.

Pradeep Maiti and Manabendu Chattopadhyay (1993) examined changes in the absolute levels of living of different groups of the population. They also examined the incidence of urban poverty over a period spanning almost four decades.

Amitabh Kundu (1993) did a significant study on the access to basic amenities by the urban poor. He discusses at length issues such as shelter, water supply, sanitation, health care, and the public distribution system. He suggests that despite specific programmes to serve the poor, in actual practice high- and middle-income groups corner a substantial portion of those benefits. According to Kundu, 35 to 40 per cent of the total urban population continues to live below the poverty line. He also worked out estimates of the amount of money required to provide, housing, drinking water, and other basic amenities. He arrived at the conclusion that more than resources bureaucratic delays, mismanagement, and deficiencies in the distributional network are some of the factors responsible for the failure of government policies. Local self-governments suffer from lack of resources. Consequently, even after decades of planning, basic urban services have not covered the entire urban population.

R.S. Sandhu, in his paper on housing for the urban poor (1996), highlights the fact that poverty in urban areas is due to societal injustice and inequalities on the one hand, and poor planning and inept management of the urban resources on the other. He argues that the poor are mainly dependent on the state, but the performance of the government remains dismal. He concludes that the present situation is created by the lack of political will. In another paper, Sandhu (2000) discusses the idea of 'housing poverty'. He argues that it is necessary to distinguish between income poverty and housing poverty. While the former affects only the poor, the latter includes those in the middle classes as well; they too, like the poor, cannot afford decent housing.

Joop W. de Wit (2002)—a Dutch social scientist—studied a participatory urban poverty alleviation project in Bangalore. While discussing the problems of the urban poor, de Wit found that concepts like empowerment, participation, and enabling frameworks are fashionable but not applicable because of lack of conceptual clarity and practicality of their application**.**

Amitabh Kundu's paper 'Globalization, employment, and poverty' examines the case of Gujarat. The author states that both proponents and critics of new development strategies agree that there would be high urban growth in the postliberalization phase. The critics of liberalization policies, however, argue that this growth would be associated with low productive employment and poverty, which, in turn, would have a negative effect on the urban quality of life. Kundu regards it as important to assess empirically the impact of economic liberalization on the nature and pattern of urban growth. He himself attempts an analysis of the trends and patterns of urbanization in Gujarat, which is a rapidly industrializing state. He takes into account the changes in the labour market and those in the systems of urban governance, land management, and the commercialization of basic civic services.

#### **Urbanization and Health**

There have been a few studies on urban health issues during the period under study. The plague epidemic in certain parts of Gujarat gave a fillip to research on health.

Radhika Ramasubban et al. (1991*)* focus on the health problems of people in Bombay (Mumbai). The first nine chapters of their book are devoted to the common health problems faced by ordinary people living in Mumbai—lack of sanitation, nutrition, immunization, cold and cough, typhoid, leprosy, tuberculosis, and air pollution. The book provides interesting information and the findings are written in a clear, lucid style, devoid of academic jargon. This is because, before publication, the researchers had shared their findings with the common people of the city, for whose benefit this research was done. The publication evolved from these efforts.

Ritu Priya (1993) examined the impact of the planning process and ideas of modern town planning on the living environment of the urban poor. The study was carried out in the capital, Delhi, a city where planned development has ostensibly been aimed at ensuring public health. She attempted to understand the overall context and purpose of town planning, the place of the poor in it, the place of public health in it, the methods of implementation of plans and their implication in terms of the relationship between the poor citizen and the state.

Soon after the outbreak of the plague in Surat in September 1994, three faculty members of Jawaharlal Nehru University's Centre for Community Health and Social Medicine (Qadar et al. 1994) did a reconstruction of the epidemic. They tried to portray the dichotomies in public health in order to provide lessons for the future. They found that the classical approach, which stresses on the role of sanitation, reduces epidemics to an endemic status. If public health is to go beyond this truncated objective, then it calls for a systemic understanding of the problem, which would require developing a multi-pronged strategy firmly entrenched in the socio-economic context.

Archana Ghosh and Sami S. Ahmed (1996) did an intensive study of plagueridden Surat. Their book brings out the shortcomings of urban governance in the city. They focus on the major programmes initiated by the municipal corporation and the state's Urban Development Authority for better environment conditions. The study shows that the city did not have the necessary infrastructure to meet the excessive population influx. Slums and colonies of migrant workers gradually became high-density population areas, putting pressure on the already depleted sanitary and health facilities of the town. Surat gradually became susceptible to communicable and water-borne diseases.

Ghanshyam Shah's study (1997b) on the same subject shows that with the capital inflow and labour, Surat has grown into an unwieldy city having more migrants than natives. Along with the growth of the service sector there has been a rapid rise in the number of slums, causing congestion and increasing garbage. Government's inability to contain these issues made the city vulnerable to plague. After the outbreak, lack of segregation policies by the authorities and panic emigration due to rumours of poisoned drinking water added fuel to the fire. Shah evaluates the damage control methods used by the authorities, concerned citizens, and doctors to effectively deal with the problem and make Surat a model of cleanliness. He strongly believes that the plague in Surat was only a reflection of the urban malaise. He makes a significant contribution by suggesting measures to check the spread of epidemics in cities following a multidisciplinary approach.

The aftermath of the plague in Surat showed that the city had the determination to rise from the ashes. It rose from being one of the dirtiest and most unhygienic cities in the country to a city that has become a model of cleanliness. A lot of the credit for this dramatic change was given to the administration, especially the dynamic municipal commissioner. Shah (1997a) examined how this change came about. What kind of interventions made this change possible? Besides cleanliness, what other changes took place in the sphere of sanitation and hygiene? Finally, he raised the question: Can a bureaucracy-driven change last for long? What happens when the commissioner is transferred? Shah stressed on the need for the leadership of democratically elected people and citizens' forums as there are the bodies that will sustain such an experiment which, only then, will become people-oriented.

Ramamani Sundar and Abhilasha Sharma (2002) examined the extent to which the urban poor benefit from health services. The 'urban bias' in public spending has been pointed out in a number of studies. The authors found that even within urban areas, especially in big cities, the slum population is particularly underprivileged. This study examined the patterns of morbidity and health-care utilization by the urban poor living in slums and resettlement colonies in Delhi and Chennai and compared the health status of the two segments.

#### **Urban Violence**

Cities in India have periodically witnessed violence. The most common form of collective violence is communal violence which has plagued the country's urban environment since independence. Caste, community, and regional ties also cause tensions leading to violence. There are other types of urban violence which are not necessarily collective but witnessed in everyday life. Sociologists have tried to examine these situations and analyse the factors responsible for them. Unfortunately, such studies are not many in number. One would have expected more sociologists to take up this issue of urban violence.

Ratna Naidu studied (1990) Hyderabad city with a focus on the frequent communal riots there. These usually originate from the inner city. Like most other walled cities in India, the inner city of Hyderabad is also known for its decay. The author was interested in examining the relationship, if any, between urban decay and communal riots. The data for this study was obtained from both primary and secondary sources, keeping in view the historical perspective. The core of the study was a sample survey of 1,031 households. A greater part of this survey dealt with the issues of urban decay: its historical causes and present condition. As a background to the understanding of the Hindu-Muslim conflict, the study provides a good comparative picture of the two communities in the city.

Sujata Patel (1993) discussed the intricate relationship between urbanization and communalism. She argued that communal violence in India and the politics of communalism have to be analysed within the context of the emerging economic relationships peculiar to urban growth in India, the crisis of the nation, and, specifically, of the distribution of property and power as it is manifested in urban India. According to her, communal violence in India is a response to, and a reaction against, the breakdown of the system and the inability of the ruling groups to create a new one which can accommodate the aspirations of all.

As mentioned earlier, all forms of urban violence are not communal or collective. There is violence every day in the private sphere of the home or within the family. This is a more lasting phenomenon. Somen Chakraborty and Geeta Rana (1993) analysed the causes of violence in everyday life in Delhi's slums. They found that men become victims of violence caused by the police in the form of harassment, and by the self-styled slum leaders (*Dadas*). Violence against women is even worse. It comes in the form of eve-teasing (sexual harassment), wifebeating, and even rape. The authors concluded that the basic cause of the slum problem lies in the system itself.

D. Parthasarathy (1997) analyses the prosperous city of Vijaywada in coastal Andhra Pradesh using the paradigm of collective violence made popular in the West. The study acknowledges the role of political movements in organizing urban formations. It puts together information regarding demography, land use, growth of peasant castes, and their subsequent migration to expanding urban areas, with an analysis of the structure of Vijaywada's economy. Parthasarathy evaluates the cultural roots of violence, the gangs, and the mafia. He examines patterns of collective violence in the city.

#### **Slums**

Slums are a common feature of all urban centres. They are treated as aberrations in urban development. However, slums play a positive role in the city's economy. They provide cheap housing for the working poor which helps in reducing labour costs.

R.S. Sandhu's (1988) study on savings and indebtedness amongst the poor revealed that more than two-fifth of slum dwellers save regularly for their social obligations and emergency needs, and they keep their savings in post offices/ banks or use them to buy gold ornaments or improve their houses. The study further showed that the major sources of borrowing for those who do not save are not moneylenders but relatives and friends. One-third of those taking loans use the borrowed money to meet social obligations and/or for production purposes.

V. Vijay Jagannathan and Animesh Haldar (1989) studied pavement dwellers in Kolkata. The authors have focussed on the family characteristics of the pavement dwellers. Based on data collected by the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, the study related family and demographic characteristics to socioeconomic factors. The authors came to the conclusion that poverty alleviation programmes by-pass the urban poor.

H.U. Bijlani (1989) examined the Hyderabad slum improvement project, the objective of which was not to view the slum as a physical structure but also as a human fabric comprising men, women, and children for whom the slum is a way of life. A number of studies were done as part of this project, which focussed on different problems of the slum population. The common theme in all the studies was the importance of combining social, health, and educational aspects with a wide range of infrastructural investments as part of the slum improvement programmes.

R.S. Sandhu (1990) did a comparative study of slum dwellers of Amritsar and Delhi so as to understand the specificities of slums in metropolises and small cities. The study found that the slum dwellers in Amritsar enjoy better housing conditions than Delhi's poor. Furthermore, a detailed study of slum dwellers in Amritsar found them to be more literate than their counterparts in Delhi. The Delhi slum dwellers had migrated from a similar cultural region for historical circumstances rather than for economic reasons.

A.R. Desai and S. Devdas Pillai first edited a volume on slums in 1970. It was regarded then as one of the most comprehensive volumes on the problem. Nineteen years later, they brought out the second edition (Desai and Pillai 1989) which was in many ways an improvement on the original. This edition has 14 new chapters in addition to the 37 in the first edition, and covers every aspect of this social phenomenon. There are theoretical articles by Mumford, Engels, Anderson, and others. The largest section is on Indian slums. The contributors have covered the slums in the cities of Bombay (Mumbai), Madras (Chennai), Calcutta (Kolkata), Delhi, Ahmedabad, Poona (Pune), and Chandigarh. Owen Lynch presents a case study of the Adi-Dravidas in Dharavi. S.S. Jha and Neera Desai have separately written on women in slums. Sandeep Pendse studied politics in depth at the national and regional levels and traced its connections with a slum in a metropolis. There are several other interesting and informative articles in the collection.

Shabir Ali (1990) has dealt with an interesting phenomenon in urban poverty. He explored a slum within the slum. Normally slums emerge in spaces which are close to the workplace. However, Ali found that the new squatters have found places that are not near any known work place or any well-to-do localities where they could get work as domestic servants. They have, in fact, taken up open spaces which exist around the resettlement colonies of slum dwellers. In this sense, they form a slum within a slum. The inhabitants of these squatter settlements subsist on the services they provide to the slum residents. Ali found that these people are the worst-off sections of the urban poor; their situation is worse than that of pavement dwellers.

In a study of slum housing in Chennai, Chetan Vaidya and K. Mukundan (1990) found that the houses of families living in slums are frequently sub-let to others. This is an additional source of income for these families. The authors found subtenancy in 45 per cent of the slum houses. The rents received constituted 15 per cent of the family income. On the basis of this evidence the authors recommended that sub-leasing should be permitted under the Slum Improvement Programme as this provides cheap housing for the tenant and supplements the owner's income.

Vandana Desai (1994) who studied three slums in Mumbai described the migration and labour characteristics of the slum dwellers. She showed how communities, over time, become internally differentiated owing to market dynamics in the realm of housing. She also discovered that community-based politics is influenced more by state interest and state manipulation than by attributes of settlers, or by settlement types.

Desai's extensive work on these slums is documented in her 1995 book, in which her focus is on community participation in the slums in terms of meeting communities' minimum needs for shelter and basic services. The study identified three important actors: (i) the slum dwellers who participate mainly through their leaders and elected local representatives; (ii) the government officials and specialists whose bureaucratic culture makes for a top-down co-option of the slum dwellers to control rather than empower them; and (iii) the NGOs trying to mediate between the two with partial success. It is only when people see that participation yields some results in terms of meeting their basic needs and giving them a sense of control over their situation that it becomes a real commitment and not merely a token involvement.

P.K. Das and Gurbir Singh (1995) take a critical look at the Afzalpurkar Report on providing free houses to four million slum dwellers in Mumbai. The Shiv Sena–BJP government in the state had mooted this idea. It had also fixed 1995 as the cut-off date for recognition of slums. In other words, the occupants of only those slums that came into existence before 1995 were regarded as bonafide slums and their residents were entitled to free rehabilitation.

The authors note that the report did not clearly work out the procedures of transit accommodation for the displaced. There was no commitment on the part of the state towards infrastructural development. The scheme generated a lukewarm response among the builders and invited opposition from slum dwellers themselves.

Biswaroop Das' (1997) paper on slums in Surat provides data on the sociodemographic aspects of slum dwellers. Based on a census of the population living in the slums of the city, the paper brings to light several features and issues which have policy implications.

S. Geetha and Madhura Swaminathan (1996) conducted a survey based on the anthropometric indicators of children aged five and below in Mumbai. Their findings reveal a high prevalence of under-nutrition, especially among girls, underlining the lack of adequate civic amenities in the slum communities of Mumbai.

Uttara Chauhan and Niraj Lal (1999) studied a slum development programme in Ahmedabad which was promoted jointly by the government and the private sector. They found that such partnerships are difficult to maintain as there are many difficulties in working with the government. However, they concluded that despite the odds, such partnerships have more chances of success than other schemes mooted solely by the government or the private sector.

Chandan Sengupta (1999) studied aspects of community environmental management in selected slum communities in the Howrah area of Kolkata. He is of the view that the interface between urban poverty and environmental degradation is not an issue to be grasped at the slums or squatters level alone. Understanding it involves analysis of the broader urban context as well as the interrelations among various levels, i.e. the household, inter-household and communal exchange network levels, the state, the intermediate sector of non-governmental organizations, etc.

Based on her findings from Mumbai and Delhi, Rukmini Bannerji (2000) argued that a new and flexible approach to the schooling of children of the urban poor is imperative. Field studies in Mumbai and Delhi have yielded the insight that the reason for so many slum children not being in school has less to do with their families' economic circumstances than with the shortcomings of the school system. Available evidence also suggests that the amount of learning the average pupil from a slum family in India acquires in primary school falls far short of what may legitimately be expected.

Lancy Lobo and Biswaroop Das (2001) did a case study of life in the slums of Surat. Their book deals with the various ways in which slum dwellers cope with problems in their everyday life. These include livelihood issues, entertainment and celebrations, and also communal riots. This is one of the few ethnographic studies that deals with how the poor live. It has rich data and the analysis is insightful.

The case of slums in Bangalore has been taken up by Dutch and Indian scholars working on a research project under the Indo-Dutch Programme on 'Alternatives in Development' (Hans Schenk 2001). Besides case studies presented by the research collaborators, the volume also carries macro data on slums in the city. The study analyses the socio-economic position of approximately one million inhabitants who live in slums. It views their social problems in relation to the broader urban society.

Whether people benefit by migrating from rural to urban areas is a question which has loomed large in development literature. Based on a primary survey carried out among slum dwellers in Delhi, Indrani Gupta and Arup Mitra (2002) examined the links between the duration of migration, the distance of migration, occupation, and the incidence of poverty. With experience migrants are more likely to move from low income and casual jobs to high income and regular jobs, and thus undergo an improvement in their standards of living.

#### **Urban Infrastructure**

This section will cover those works dealing with infrastructure, including studies on transport, housing (apart from slum housing), communications, sanitation and water supply, etc. Some of these studies are by architects and other professionals but they have been included as they are of relevance to urban sociology.

Meera Mehta and Dinesh Mehta (1989) studied the housing market in Ahmedabad. This study is different from other studies on housing because the authors have looked at the problem in its entirety. Other studies concentrated on specific income groups or on slum housing. The book provides an overview of urban housing policies pursued by the Union government since the first Five-Year Plan. It also provides a comprehensive background of the economic base, occupational structure, and residential mobility in Ahmedabad and it discusses the housing problem in this light.

Cedric Pugh (1990) did an intensive study on housing and urbanization in India. His book is an outcome of his researches in India during 1986–87. The scope of this study is largely confined to an analysis of the urban housing markets in India and the housing policy. Pugh's aim was to formulate a framework for a housing theory rather than just present elaborate statistics. The housing markets of four large metropolitan cities were used as empirical cases to underscore the interpretations of the author.

Hanumantha Rao's (1990) paper on urban transportation is critical of the government's policies, or lack of them. He says that in the absence of adequate public transport, the well-to-do sections of society have opted for personal modes, as they can afford them. Despite their not using it, the number of people depending on public transport is so large that the supply is totally inadequate in comparison to the demand in most cities. The author observes that in a situation where a large section of the population has low purchasing power, it is necessary for government to increase investment in public transport. The share of public transport should rise according the size of the cities.

Rakesh Mohan (1992) brought to light the massive efforts needed to tackle the housing problem in urban areas in the 1990s. He noted that during the previous four decades, the population of India had doubled, but its urban population had quadrupled.

Bidyut Mohanty (1993) edited a useful collection of essays on urban infrastructure. The book covers the experiences of developing countries including India. A paper on Delhi slums highlights the importance of recognizing the importance of local needs. There is a paper on the relevance of fiscal and distributive areas. A strong case in favour of community participation, decentralization, and privatization, is presented in another paper. An important contribution, however, lies in the unveiling of structural deficiencies of the municipal authorities in India.

In an evaluative study of the Environmental Improvement of Urban Slums (EIUS) Programme in Ludhiana, Sandhu (1995) found that the programme did not lead to real improvement of slums but to the improvement of many middle class areas which were developed by speculators in violation of the corporation's bye-laws; they were declared slums by the municipal corporation under certain political pressure. This happens because the definition of a slum is vague and is applied arbitrarily by the officials concerned to help people of their own class at the cost of those who really need the EIUS Programme.

Hemlata C. Dandekar and Shashikant B. Sawant (1998) studied the housing of a newly developing suburb in Pune. The authors surveyed three localities in that area. The study revealed the segmented utilization of livelihood opportunities, services, and facilities by the residents of the region. It showed that the area developed rapidly because it was able to meet the housing needs of the upwardly mobile middle classes living in the congested part of the city. Moreover, due to its low infrastructure costs it was able to attract the retired middle-class families from Mumbai.

Minar Pimple and Madhuri Kamat (1998) looked at the economic and political context in which the issue of housing is located. Their paper details the struggles of people against de-housing and outlines the future action agenda for the fulfilment of the right to housing.

A paper by Amitabh Kundu et al. (1998) on urban amenities strongly critiques the approach of the World Bank and other institutions that put forth the view that privatization of services will improve urban systems. Moreover, these institutions also recommend that development of infrastructure should be cost effective with the curtailment of subsidies. On the other hand, the authors show that the present system of allowing bureaucrats (municipal authorities and urban development officers) to usurp the powers given to elected bodies has not served the purpose. The bureaucrats, being specialists, were presumed to have the expertise to improve the urban environment. What happened in reality was that they systematically drained these urban municipal bodies of their resources and made them more dependent on government aid for their survival. The authors are critical of both approaches, namely, the privatization of public resources approach of international institutions such as the World Bank and the bureaucrat-led development. They argue that the powers of the urban bodies should be decentralized to the elected members. According to the authors the solution lies in allowing democratic decentralization, as envisioned in the 74th Amendment of the Constitution of India.

In contrast to Kundu et al. (1998), Malcom Harper (2000) discusses the need for greater privatization of services. He says that while privatization is stopped at the macro level, there are great possibilities of privatization at the micro level. One is familiar with some cases such as PCOs and railway catering. But there is a whole range of activities that have been privatized. He offers 24 cases where services have been successfully privatized. These include urban services, utilities, health and sanitation, welfare services, education, parking, and transport. Eleven of these cases are from India.

Marie-Helene Zerah (2000) has evaluated Delhi's erratic water supply, To understand the Delhi situation with regard to the water supply, she provides a view of the water infrastructure in the cities of the developing countries as well as the research carried out in various parts of the world on the quality of public water systems. Like any other sector, Zerah maintains that the water supply sector is confronted with a number of problems like price, subsidy, cost recovery, losses, and poor maintenance. In most cases, the statistics on the percentage of population with access to portable water do not take into account the quality of services provided.

Peeyush Bajpai and Laveesh Bhandari (2001) also discuss the water problem in urban households. Their paper deals with how urban households obtain water for their requirements. They conclude that poor access is accompanied by low levels of expectations of the people. They stress that there is a need for a substantial consumer awareness campaign before starting any improvement programme.

#### **Conclusion**

This chapter is based on the published research on urban sociology. The attempt has been to cover the widest number of published studies but no matter how much one tries or how thorough one wants to be, there is always a possibility that some studies will slip through the net. While this is unfortunate, it was that this was not intentional.

On the whole, research in urban sociology does not seem to be as popular as industrial sociology. There were fewer studies in this field. One of the reasons could be that despite several decades of development, India is still largely a ruralbased country. The proportion of urban population is small compared to the total population. At the time of independence, the urban population comprised only 17 per cent of the total population. The 1991 Census showed that 25 per cent of the population lived in urban areas; and ten years later, the 2001 Census recorded that the percentage of the urban population had risen by only 2 per cent. Most of the countries in Africa have a higher proportion of urban population.

At the same time urbanization in India shows several contradictory trends. Though only 27 per cent of the population resides in urban areas, the country has 28 cities which have more than one million residents each. It is estimated that in the next decade India will have the largest number of million-plus cities in the world though there will not be a substantial change in the composition of the rural-urban population. Nevertheless, the concentration of urban population in large cities raises several interesting research questions. These include improvement of urban infrastructure, but more importantly, new types of urban planning which will include the urban poor as an integral partner in development and sustainability of cities. Exclusion of the poor has created acute infrastructure problems for cities.

Besides the million-plus cities there are the mega cities that have population of over 10 million. The rapid growth of these large cities indicates that the urban population is concentrated in the larger cities. This concentration raises several interesting questions for research. For example, most of these cities do not have the proper infrastructure to accommodate the growing number of people. They also do not have any plans which cater to the needs of the poorer sections. There is a growing degree of mob violence in cities, which are frequently based on caste, regional or religious lines. There is a need to study these trends and analyse them. For example, what are the factors that cause riots between different sections of the urban poor? Are they instigated by vested interests, political parties or other countries or, do their roots lie in the political economy of urban development? What effect does the rapid shift from working in the organized sector, which provides job security and social security, to working in the unorganized sector, where none of these privileges exist, have on the urban workforce? Does their vulnerable position make them find solutions through communal or regional riots?

Globalization has led to the idea of the global city. Every mega city in the country is trying to become a global city which would display the same features of cities like Singapore and Shanghai. It would appear that as cities in India, like in most developing countries, try to emerge as showpieces of perfect global cities, they create more problems than they can solve. For example, what happens to the poor whose cheap services are required to decrease costs? Do these cities have provisions for them or do the high-rise buildings and shopping malls blacken the harsh reality of slums and street vendors? Hence what we need is world-class cities for all. This would imply inclusive planning for the urban working poor.

It is to be hoped that these problems will be studied in the future. There is a healthy trend in the study of the information technology sector and its impact on urban planning. There have been two published studies on Bangalore, but more studies are needed on other cities, where these trends are analysed and the emergent problems will be studied. The present author strongly feels that urban sociology, like industrial sociology, has a good future provided sociologists and other social scientists settle down to studying the relevant social issues and trends in the urban population.

notes

- 1. Recently renamed the University of Mumbai when the government decided to revert to the old name of the city.
- 2. These universities were set up 1857. It was after 62 years of the establishment of the Bombay University that the subject of sociology was introduced. Seen this way, sociology is a relatively younger discipline in India compared to other subjects.
- 3. Chandigarh—the joint capital of Punjab and Haryana, but itself a Union Territory was designed by the famous Swiss architect Le Carbousier.
- 4. These studies are covered in this volume in the paper chapter on political sociology.
- 5. These volumes were in honour of M. N. Srinivas.

## bibliography

- Aldrich, B.C., and R.S. Sandhu (eds.). 1990. *Housing in Asia—Problems and Perspectives*. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
- ———. 1995a. 'The global context of housing poverty'. In B.C. Aldrich and R.S. Sandhu (eds.). *Housing in Asia—Problems and Perspectives.* Jaipur: Rawat Publications, pp. 17–33.

———. (eds.). 1995b, *Housing the Urban Poor: Policy and Practice in Developing Countries*. New Delhi: Vistaar Publications; London and New Jersey: Zed Books Ltd.

Ali, Shabir. 1990. *Slums Within Slums*. Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.

Atal, Yogesh. 2001. 'Human settlements and habitat agenda in Asia'. In R.S. Sandhu, Sarup Singh, and Jasmeet Sandhu (eds.). *Sustainable Human Settlements: The Asian Experience*. Jaipur and New Delhi: Rawat Publications.

———. 2002, *The Poverty Question: Search for Solutions,* Jaipur and New Delhi: Rawat Publications.

Bajpai, Peeyush and Laveesh Bhandari. 2001. 'Ensuring access to water in urban households', *Economic and Political Weekly*, 36(39).