#### **Background 493**

- Murphy, J. M. (1976). Psychiatric labeling in cross-cultural perspective. *Science, 191*, 1019–1028.
- Murray, C. J. L., & Lopez, A. D. (1996). *The global burden of disease: A comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from diseases, injuries, and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020* (Vol. 1). Cambridge: Harvard School of Public Health.
- National Human Rights Commission (1999). *Quality assurance in mental health*. New Delhi: National Human Rights Commission of India.
- Nichter, M. (1981). Idioms of distress: Alternatives in the expression of psychosocial distress: A case study from South India. *Culture, Medicine & Psychiatry, 5*(4), 379–408.
- Ni Nuallain, M., O'Hare, A., & Walsh, D. (1990). The prevalence of schizophrenia in three counties in Ireland. *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 82*(2), 136–140.
- Obeyesekere, G. (1985). Depression, Buddhism and the work of culture in Sri Lanka. In A. Kleinman & B. J. Good (Eds.), *Culture and depression: Studies in the anthropology and cross-cultural psychiatry of affect and disorder* (pp. 134–152). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Odejide, A. O., & Olatawura, M. O. (1979). A survey of community attitudes to the concept and treatment of mental illness in Ibadan, Nigeria. *Nigerian Medical Journal, 9*(3), 343–347.
- Orley, J., & Wing, J. K. (1979). Psychiatric disorders in two African villages. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 36*, 513–520.
- Patel, V. (1998). *Culture and common mental disorders in sub-Saharan Africa*. East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
- Patel, V. (2000). Poverty, inequality, and mental health in developing countries. In D. Leon & G. Walt (Eds.), *Poverty, inequality, and health* (pp. 247–262). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Patel, V., Araya, R., de Lima, M., Ludermir, A., & Todd, C. (1999). Women, poverty and common mental disorders in four restructuring societies. *Social Science & Medicine, 49*, 1461–1471.
- Raguram, R., Weiss, M. G., Channabasavanna, S. M., & Devins, G. M. (1996). Stigma, depression, and somatization in South India. *American Journal of Psychiatry, 153*, 1043–1049.

- Scheper-Hughes, N. (1979). *Saints, scholars, and schizophrenics: Mental illness in rural Ireland*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Seligman, C. G. (2000). Temperament, conflict and psychosis in a Stone-Age population. In R. Littlewood & S. Dein (Eds.), *Cultural psychiatry & medical anthropology: An introduction and reader* (pp. 98–113). London: Athlone Press.
- Skultans, V., & Cox, J. (2000). *Anthropological approaches to psychological medicine: Crossing bridges*. London: Jessica Kingsley.
- Susser, E., Varma, V. K., Malhotra, S., Conover, S., & Amador, X. F. (1995). Delineation of acute and transient psychotic disorders in a developing country setting. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 167*, 216–219.
- Susser, E., & Wanderling, J. (1994). Epidemiology of nonaffective acute remitting psychosis vs. schizophrenia: Sex and sociocultural setting. *Archives of General Psychiatry, 51*, 294–301.
- Ustun, T. B., & Sartorius, N. (1995). *Mental illness in general health care: An international study*. Chichester: Wiley.
- Waxler, N. E. (1979). Is outcome for schizophrenia better in nonindustrial societies? The case of Sri Lanka. *Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, 167*, 144–158.
- Weiss, M. (1997). Explanatory model interview catalogue (EMIC): Framework for comparative study of illness. *Transcultural Psychiatry, 34*, 235–263.
- Weiss, M. G., Cohen, A., & Eisenberg, L. (2000). Mental health. In M. Merson, B. Black, & A. Mills (Eds.), *Introduction to international health* (pp. 131–177). Gaithersberg, MD: Aspen.
- Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., Faravelli, C., Greenwald, S., Hwu, H. G. et al. (1996). Cross-national epidemiology of major depression and bipolar disorder. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 276*, 293–299.
- World Health Organization. (1979). *Schizophrenia: An international follow-up study*. Chichester: Wiley.
- World Health Organization. (2001). *Mental health: New understanding, new hope*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

# **Mental Retardation**

#### **F. John Meaney**

## **BACKGROUND**

Perhaps no phrase in any language produces in sum more anxiety, controversy, fear, hopelessness, and stigma, at least in Western societies, as "mental retardation" or a similar phrase for intellectual disability. We live in a world that cultivates and sells perfection, and while this might be fine for some outcomes of concern, it fosters and reinforces the attitudes of people in many cultures and societies that are less than accepting of individuals with physical and mental disabilities. Although in general most societies have progressed with respect to the concerns of individuals with disabilities, advances in our knowledge and legislated changes have still not overcome the

prevailing sense that differences are not fully acceptable among all in society. Deficits in intellectual functioning place individuals who so vary among the groups in our societies that are marked by such descriptors as race, cultural background, language, socioeconomic status, sexual preference, and body habitus, among others.

More than a decade ago, Groce and Scheer (1990) opened their introduction to a collection of papers on cross-cultural approaches to disability and chronic illness with the statement "Few areas in social science and medicine can benefit more from the contribution of an anthropological perspective than research on physical and mental disabilities" (p. v). This remains true as we move into the 21st century, and perhaps increasingly so with the impacts of such scientific endeavors as the Human Genome Project, the ever-increasing attention to cultural factors in the assessment of disability and the provision of services for individuals with disabilities, and the knowledge that we can no longer think in terms of "nature or nurture" but rather in terms of all diseases and traits reflecting the interplay between the underlying genetic factors and environmental exposures in all their complexity. The unique perspective of anthropology from both the biological and cultural contributors to human variability places the discipline in a position of tremendous utility in sorting through the various viewpoints and policy decisions that confront our society with respect to the future applications of this knowledge base.

Groce and Scheer (1990), among others (Longmore, 1987), stressed that the concept of disability is a sociocultural construct rather than a biological one (and, I might add, is therefore just like the concept of "race"). Thus the approaches of cultural anthropology, and especially medical anthropology, are useful in disentangling the sources of cultural variation in how people view individuals with disabilities and the latter view themselves. From the perspective of the late 1980s, Groce and Scheer (1990) were able to state that ethnographic literature on disability was beginning to emerge, albeit slowly. Furthermore, they added that before the 1970s, references to disability in the anthropological literature were few and far between. Currently we are seeing more attention being paid to the need for culturally competent services for individuals with disabilities, as a body of data has developed to demonstrate marked variability among cultures in their interpretations of disability and the practices that emerge as a result of the cultural beliefs and attitudes (Groce, 1999). At the same time, disciplines other than anthropology are coming to the fore, such as multicultural approaches in psychology (American Psychological Association, 1990), and in the fields of education, communication, and counseling.

The important point about cultural considerations is that culture pervades all of our thinking about disability, defining the ways we assess intellectual disability, influencing the methods through which we provide intervention and services, and determining the attitudes and behaviors with which we respectively perceive and act with respect to people with disabilities. An emerging literature has developed in the last two decades, particularly concerning differences among cultures in attitudes toward people with disabilities, including mental retardation (Westbrook, Legge, & Pennay, 1993). Likewise, there is recognition of the importance of language as the communication aspect of cultures and therefore correlated with the way disabilities are perceived by society at large and among cultures. The extended recognition is the ongoing need for cultural sensitivity to the variation in terminology for disability over time (Devlieger, 1999) and among cultures today (Fernald, 1995).

Similar to the lack of studies of disability by anthropologists is the neglect by historians in tracing from the historical perspective how people with disabilities have lived and interacted with society at large. Longmore (1987) described the situation, which he labeled the "hidden history of disabled people," as "nearly untouched terrain" awaiting "excavation by historians" (p. 363). By the late 1990s the terrain was being populated with works that in their totality stressed the diversity of experiences through time of individuals with mental disabilities (Brockley, 1999).

## **DEFINITION AND DIAGNOSIS OF MENTAL RETARDATION**

Defining mental retardation (MR) given its sociocultural context is the most difficult of tasks. In an attempt to standardize the way MR is defined and classified in the United States, the American Association of Mental Retardation (AAMR) has published since 1908 a series of volumes defining MR. The 10th edition, titled *Mental Retardation: Definition, Classification, and Systems of Supports* (AAMR, 2002a), has been released recently. The AAMR defines MR as follows: "Mental retardation is a disability characterized by significant limitations both in intellectual functioning and in adaptive behavior

#### **Definition and Diagnosis of Mental Retardation 495**

as expressed in conceptual, social, and practical adaptive skills" (AAMR, 2002b). Two of the five assumptions the AAMR considers essential to the application of the definition are of relevance to considerations of the sociocultural context of the definition. They are that "1) limitations in present functioning must be considered within the context of community environments typical of the individual's age, peers and culture, and 2) valid assessment considers cultural and linguistic diversity as well as differences in communication, sensory, motor, and behavioral factors" (AAMR, 2002b). In general the definition considers both cultural and linguistic factors. The problem has been in the criteria and decision rules used to assess MR.

Previous editions of the AAMR definition have been lauded on the basis of their having rejected typological thinking with an appreciation of individual differences in intellectual functioning (Gelb, 1997) or having satisfied the view that some ambiguity in the definition supports the notion that there really is no "true" definition of the term (Reiss, 1994). They have been criticized by others (MacMillan, Gresham, & Siperstein, 1993) on the basis of decision rules not being reliable in their employment by researchers and clinicians. Another underlying flaw in such attempts to define MR is the reliance on tests of intellectual functioning, such as IQ tests that are well known to be culturally biased. The aforementioned assumptions attempt to address this shortcoming, but have not been applied consistently in the assessment of intellectual functioning across the broad cross-section of populations of the United States and elsewhere.

The existence of individual variation among individuals with MR, even within a condition such as Down syndrome, is fundamental to the rejection of "typological thinking," a view that de-emphasizes individual differences within a group and stresses an underlying "unique essence" or "essential type" (Gelb, 1997). Gelb argues that this sort of thinking went by the wayside with the emphasis on "population thinking," essentially the importance of individual differences, by evolutionary biologists such as Ernst Mayr, among others, during the latter half of the last century. He provides evidence that "typological thinking" continues to persist in certain sectors of the biological and social sciences and pervades the work of investigators in the field of MR. Some of this approach can be attributed to the lack of accurate, objective data on behavioral characters in many syndromes that involve MR and the need to make statistical comparisons among groups using reliable instruments for measuring characteristics such as temperament (Nygaard, Smith, & Torgerson, 2002). However, given the fact that genetic data have demonstrated for some time that the vast amount of variation is among individuals as compared with groups such as racial populations, there is a need for the application of this knowledge in the study of individuals with disabilities.

There are two areas in the assessment of MR that have received much attention during the past 10–15 years and are of direct relevance to the concerns of medical anthropologists. One is the growing evidence for the influence of sociodemographic factors on the outcomes of assessments of MR among different ethnic and racial populations. The evidence regarding over-representation of children in minority populations among those with MR has been reviewed by Donald Oswald and his colleagues and new data presented (Oswald, Coutinho, Best, & Nguyen, 2001). The studies reported by Oswald et al. demonstrate that the disproportionate representation of African American children with mild MR is reduced (Yeargin-Allsopp, Drews, Decouflé, & Murphy, 1995) or disappears (Halfon & Newacheck, 1999) once sociodemographic variables such as age, gender, race, family characteristics, and socioeconomic level are taken into account. These and other studies reviewed by Oswald and his group suggest that poverty is the major contributor to the differentials in identification rates among ethnic groups. Data from South Africa (Slone, Durrheim, Lachman, & Kaminer, 1998) suggest a similar primacy for socioeconomic contributors to the differentials in referral patterns for assessment of MR. The data from the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights reported by Oswald et al. offer further support for the importance of both characteristics of individual students and the sociodemographic characteristics of school districts in predicting identification with MR, but the impact may differ according to groupings by gender and ethnicity. These data suggest that this is an area of disability research that is ripe for the input of anthropologists.

The second area is the growing literature on the development of culturally and linguistically competent assessment tools with applicability across cultural groups. Tombokan-Runtukahu and Nitko (1992) reported on an English language instrument used in the United States to measure adaptive behavior in individuals with MR that they had revised for use in Indonesia. The investigators concluded that the instrument could be applied in an Indonesian population and had psychometric characteristics very similar to the original version. However, the instrument basically addressed only one aspect of Indonesian culture through translation into Bahasa Indonesian, although it was assessed for applicability in Indonesian cultures. Similarly, tests of intelligence and overall functioning have been modified and standardized for usage in testing people with MR in other cultures with reasonable results, such as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale for China (Ryan, Dai, Paolo, & Harrington, 1992) and the ABILITIES Index, a measurement instrument that measures functioning in children with disabilities (Simeonsson, Chen, & Hu, 1995). More recently Gonzalez-Gordon and colleagues have tested a Spanish version of the Psychiatric Assessment Schedule for Adults with Developmental Disability (PASADD-10) and found it to have limitations in terms of predicting psychiatric disorders in individuals with intellectual disability (Gonzalez-Gordon, Salvador-Carulla, Romero, Gonzalez-Saiz, & Romero, 2002). Plank (2001) presents from the view of a psychologist "in the trenches" the problems and potential solutions in testing cognitive functioning in American Indian children and adolescents. The data to date suggest that much work remains to be done in adapting instruments to cultures other than those in which they were developed.

## **THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF MR**

It is critical at the onset of a discussion of the epidemiology of MR to remind ourselves again that we are dealing with a concept that is culturally based. How we define MR and the tools we use to determine if an individual is considered to have MR are by and large determined by the majority culture in any society. Therefore, when we conduct surveillance and epidemiological research, we are assessing an outcome that is administrative in nature in the sense that we are usually bound by the measurement tools that we know have cultural biases. This is the ultimate limiting factor in any population studies of MR.

### **Prevalence**

Routine surveillance systems for the collection of population-based data from which to estimate prevalence rates for MR are still not abundant across the world. However, advancing computer technology and new possibilities for record linkage and data handling by Internet websites are likely to improve epidemiologic studies of MR in the future (Leonard & Wen, 2002). In the United

States, the only ongoing system has been the Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Study (now the Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Surveillance Program – MADDSP) based in the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (Yeargin-Allsopp, Murphy, Oakley, Sikes, & the Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Study Staff, 1992). This system has been in existence since 1984 and targets MR as well as cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and vision and hearing deficiencies. The program identifies cases of children 3–10 years of age in a six-county area that comprises metropolitan Atlanta. The CDC summary of data reported from these surveillance systems is that the prevalence of MR in school-aged children is 12 per 1,000 (CDC, 2002). Rates reported by age, race, and sex for the 1991 reporting period have varied from 5.2 per 1,000 children to 16.6 per 1,000 (Boyle, Yeargin-Allsopp, Doernberg, Holmgreen, Murphy, & Schendel, 1996). In these data, severe MR accounted for about one third of all the cases. The National Health Interview Survey Disability Supplement (NHIS-D) of the U.S. Census Bureau uses a household survey method to collect data on individuals with MR and/or developmental disabilities and has produced an estimated prevalence of MR of 12.2 per 1,000 in a slightly older age interval of 6–17 year olds (Institute on Community Integration, University of Minnesota, 2000).

The most comprehensive recent review of prevalence data worldwide by Leonard and Wen (2002) includes data on prevalence of severe and mild MR in children of school age from Roelevard, Zielhuis, and Gabreels (1997) and several recent studies reported after their review. The rates of severe MR in studies reported 1960–2002 suggest a prevalence of 3–4 per 1,000 children, with a range of rates from about 1 to 7 per 1,000 (Leonard & Wen, 2002). Rates for mild MR were much more variable (2–80 per 1,000), with an average prevalence of about 33 per 1,000 for the same time span.

A prevalence of 8.3 per 1,000 in a cohort of children born between 1980 and 1990 has been reported for Western Australia (Bower, Leonard, & Petterson, 2000). Rates of severe MR have been reported in an Italian population of 6–13-year-old schoolchildren at 3.4 per 1,000 (Benassi, Guarina, Cammarata, Cristoni, Fantini et al., 1990) and in a 20–29 year-old cohort in Northern Ireland ranging from 4.07 to 6.37 per 1,000 according to the health district reporting (Mallon, MacKay, McDonald, & Wilson, 1991).

In general, rates will vary with age, geographic location, sex, and ethnic/racial group when studies take these

#### **The Epidemiology of MR 497**

factors into account. The problem in making comparisons among different populations have to do with varying definitions of and methods of assessment for MR, differences among systems of collecting data, variability in the resources available to do population-based surveillance, and varying capacities in the application of computerized record linkage and databases.

### **Etiology**

Mental retardation has been described in some recent epidemiological reviews as a "heterogeneous group of conditions" or "disorders" (Murphy, Boyle, Schendel, Decouflé, & Yeargin-Allsopp, 1998) or "group of conditions" (Leonard & Wen, 2002). Current thinking about human diseases stresses the need to move away from the old ways of viewing "nature versus nurture" or some disease entity as the result of "genetics or environment" toward a view that emphasizes that all diseases are likely to be both genetic and environmental (Khoury, 1998). This way of thinking gets us away from the typological thinking that seems to beset categorization of MR into groups of conditions of prenatal, perinatal, or postnatal origin as used currently. Applying this current view, perhaps MR is best defined as an outcome of variable causes that can be assessed along multiple dimensions, but is typically evaluated through measures of cognitive or intellectual functioning. In this manner, we can consider MR in general as a multifactorial outcome for which multiple genes and gene complexes are involved and numerous environmental exposures interact with the underlying genetic factors. Mental retardation is associated with numerous syndromes for which genetic causes have been identified and/or environmental exposures that at least theoretically are thought to interact with genetic factors to produce the outcome.

Another aspect to this thinking about MR is that we apply the concepts so eloquently presented by Richard Lewontin and his colleagues several decades ago (Feldman & Lewontin, 1975; Lewontin, 1974). In a series of publications in which the heritability of IQ was considered, Lewontin reminded us that we cannot estimate what percent of a person's phenotype, such as height, is the result of genes and what percent is environmental. Lewontin stressed that these traits are studied in populations when we are attempting to assess how much of the variation in a trait is the result of variability among genetic backgrounds, namely genotypes, and how much is of environmental origin. Similarly, we cannot say that the entire deficit in cognitive functioning of a child with Down syndrome is the result of the child's chromosomal abnormality of trisomy 21. We might expect, however, that a large proportion of the cognitive deficiency in a population of Down syndrome individuals would be the result of the chromosomal involvement and the remainder to environmental factors.

The etiological data on MR are vast and a thorough account of what is known about the causes of and risk factors for MR is beyond the scope of this review. However, brief overviews of what is known about genetic and environmental causes of MR will be presented in the next two major sections.

### **Population Differences**

Whenever population comparisons are made for the prevalence of MR, the methods by which populations are delineated must be carefully considered. Most studies of population differences for MR represent attempts to use existing categorizations of populations, for example racial and ethnic groups, such as those by the U.S. Census Bureau, to compare rates of occurrence. At best these populations represent a mix of underlying genetic and environmental-based factors that are difficult to decipher as to their contributions to the group differences.

Recent studies in the U.S. populations have demonstrated higher prevalence rates of MR for children of African American ancestry than for other groups (Croen, Grether, & Selvin, 2001; Murphy, Yeargin-Allsopp, Decouflé, & Drews, 1995; Yeargin-Allsopp, Drews, Decouflé, & Murphy, 1995), even after taking into account certain socioeconomic and demographic variables in one study (Yeargin-Allsopp et al., 1995). Similar betweenpopulation variation in rates of MR have been seen elsewhere (e.g., in Australia—Leonard & Wen, 2002). Explanations for population differences have been summarized by Leonard and Wen (2002) and include the possibility of confounding variables, community factors such as segregation and social disadvantage, cultural differences that result in variable behavior among groups and use of assessments of intellectual function that are not appropriate, and prenatal or postnatal factors such as maternal conditions that could increase the risk of MR in specific groups. When making any cross comparisons among populations, such as international comparisons, issues involving the methods used among systems to obtain data also need to be considered (Durkin, 2002; Leonard & Wen, 2002).

## **GENETIC FACTORS IN MR**

The genetic causes of MR have been reviewed recently in Murphy et al. (1998) and Leonard and Wen (2002). The former consider causes to be "well-defined events or insults to the fetus or child that result in a high probability of MR" and give the example of Down syndrome. Studies vary, but according to several reported by Murphy et al. (1998), genetic conditions account for the largest percentage of known causes of MR (30–40%) and 7–15% of all cases of MR. Up to 30% of severe MR and 4–8% of mild MR in which cause is identified are the result of chromosomal abnormalities according to one study (Schaefer & Bodensteiner, 1992). In several studies reported by Leonard and Wen (2002), Down syndrome is the single genetic condition reported most frequently. Its prevalence is generally considered to be about 1 in 1,000 live births. The study with the largest population base reported that Down syndrome accounted for more than 82% of all chromosomal abnormalities (Hou, Wang, & Chuang, 1998). In the same study, Fragile X syndrome, the most common form of X-linked MR, had the next highest occurrence among the chromosomal conditions. The prevalence of Fragile X is about 1 in 1,000 males and 1 in 2,000 females.

An interesting new line of research into the genetic etiology of MR is the investigation of chromosomal rearrangements in the ends of the chromosomes or telomeres. Genome wide telomere screening with fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) probes has been reported for a number of populations of individuals with MR. The frequencies of subtelomeric rearrangements have ranged from 2% to 10% depending on the population studied (Baker, Hinton, Callen, Altree, Dobbie et al., 2002; Rio, Molinari, Heuertz, Ozilou, Gosset et al., 2002). These studies suggest that the role of chromosomal abnormalities as a cause of MR might be substantially larger than has been thought (Chris Cunniff, personal communication).

Less than seven years ago over 500 genetic conditions were reported by Flint and Wilkie (1996) to be associated with MR. A recent search (October 2002) of the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) for genetic conditions in which MR was observed produced 1,076 entries (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/). The number of conditions for which genes are identified is likely to grow in light of the rapid pace of discoveries in human molecular genetics and continuing advances in biotechnology and its applications. If anything, the knowledge bases around many genetic conditions for which information on genetic causes was not clear 10–15 years ago indicate that the genetics is more complex than we had ever imagined. Examples include genomic imprinting in which the expression of genes depends on whether the chromosome of concern is maternal or paternal in origin. This phenomenon has been observed in two conditions, Prader–Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome, in both of which MR is a major feature. These two conditions were the next most prevalent to Down syndrome and Fragile X syndrome in the study by Hou et al. (1998).

Not only are there more genetic conditions with associated MR, but the number of reported studies for specific conditions is also increasing at a rapid pace (Dykens & Hodapp, 2001). Using the Medline database, Dykens and Hodapp (2001) found that the number of publications for conditions such as Fragile X syndrome and Prader–Willi syndrome doubled from the 1980s to the 1990s. For some conditions, such as Angelman syndrome, there were 3–14 times more publications in the 1990s. The breadth and depth of research is also increasing. Many of the studies reported by Dykens and Hodapp (2001) reflect more detailed investigations of genetic etiologies, but also an expansion of research on genotype–phenotype relationships; detailed evaluation of phenotypes, especially behaviors; interventions in specific conditions; and family issues. The 1990s have also been a period of growth in terms of the development of standards of care for genetic conditions through organizations such as the American Academy of Pediatrics and the availability of information on genetic conditions for both specialists in medical genetics (e.g., OMIM) and practicing physicians (http://www.geneclinics.org).

## **ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN MR**

The literature on environmental etiologies and risk factors for MR is vast and can only be touched upon here. This section will concentrate on the data from epidemiology regarding environmental factors and recent work regarding cultural factors as they relate to families coping with MR in a family member and their role in families adapting.

### **Epidemiological Data**

When dealing with the etiologies or risk factors for MR, epidemiologists will generally categorize them by the

#### **Environmental Factors in MR 499**

time period during which they originated. Murphy et al. (1998) review the etiological data on MR by grouping causes and risk factors according to their having originated prenatally (including genetic factors and intrauterine exposures such as infections), perinatally (including factors such as low birth weight), and postnatally (including environmental exposures such as lead and infections).

Prenatal exposures include those associated with maternal behaviors as well as various environmental exposures during the pregnancy. Several studies have assessed the effect of maternal smoking (Murphy et al., 1998), with one finding increased risk of MR in the child with increasing level of maternal smoking (Drews, Murphy, Yeargin-Allsopp, & Decouflé, 1996). The latter investigators have suggested an effect of maternal smoking independent of its contribution to low birthweight. Alcohol exposure in utero is another well-described risk factor for MR through the research on fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) or less severe conditions such as alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder. A recently published prevalence study suggests that this entirely preventable cause of MR remains at levels previously described (Miller, Tolliver, Druschel, Fox, Schoellhorn et al., 2002). Murphy et al. (1998) suggest that intrauterine infections might be diminishing in importance as a causal factor of MR. However, recently analyzed data from the U.S. National Collaborative Perinatal Project demonstrated the risk of MR or developmental delay is elevated in children of mothers who had a third trimester urinary tract infection (McDermott, Daguise, Mann, Szwejbka, & Callaghan, 2001). And in the low-income nations of the world infection continues to be a major risk factor for MR and other developmental disabilities (Durkin, 2002).

Perinatal conditions for which there are data to support increased risk of MR include infections, asphyxia, low birthweight, preterm delivery, intrauterine growth retardation, and twinning (Murphy et al., 1998). Murphy and her colleagues, and Leonard and Wen (2002), provide comprehensive reviews of the most recent data. Low birthweight is the risk factor that has been studied in the greatest detail according to Leonard and Wen (2002). The most recent study of MR of unknown etiology in a large population demonstrated that low birthweight was the single most predictive risk factor for both mild and severe MR (Croen et al., 2001). Generally the data on perinatal risk factors suggest a complicated network of factors operating to influence brain growth and development, and therefore contributing to risk for MR.

Finally, Murphy et al. (1998) review the data on postnatal risk factors, which include exposure to environmental contaminants such as lead, methylmercury, and polychlorinated biphenyls; infections such as bacterial meningitis; and head trauma as a result of accidents (e.g., motor vehicle injuries, near drownings) or child abuse. The CDC estimates that the occurrence of postnatal causes of MR in children ranges from 3% to 15% (CDC, 1996).

Few of the epidemiological studies consider the contribution of cultural factors into the array of environmental risk factors for MR. One notable exception is the work of Yeargin-Allsopp et al. (1995) who suggest that cultural differences such as culture-based behavioral variation and tests of intellectual functioning that are not appropriate across cultures could contribute to an increased likelihood of mislabeling with respect to MR. More recently, Leonard and her colleagues have attempted to sort out culture-based contributing factors to identification of Australian indigenous children with MR (Leonard & Wen, 2002).

### **Cultural Factors**

Culture is certainly an important factor in how families cope with having a member with MR and eventually adapt through modification of individual and familial behaviors. A rich literature has developed during the last 15 years concerning the stress experienced by families in multiple cultures when a family member has a developmental disability such as MR. Psychological stress and depression, and their correlates, have been studied in Hispanic families (Blacher, Shapiro, Lopez, Diaz, & Fusco, 1997; Magaña, 1999), Chinese families of a child with Down syndrome (Cheng & Tang, 1995), Malaysian mothers of children with MR, including some of Chinese ethnicity (Ong, Chandran, & Peng, 1999), and African American, Hispanic, and European American mothers of children with disabilities (Mary, 1990). These data demonstrate substantial evidence of the influence of cultural values and behaviors in adjustments of families. Mary (1990) reported more feelings of self-sacrifice among Hispanic mothers and more instances of spouse denial in this group. Magaña (1999) showed that some aspects of familism, an array of family caregiving, social support, and obligatory behaviors, were protective of the emotional well-being of Puerto Rican mothers of an adult with MR. Blacher et al. (1997) suggested that it was problems in the functioning of families that were the best predictors of depression among Latino mothers in Los Angeles. The study by Cheng and Tang (1995) reported that Chinese mothers of children with Down syndrome were more distressed than the fathers. Interestingly Ong et al. (1999) found that Chinese ethnicity predicted stress as did mother's unemployment.

How individuals with MR and their families adjust to the numerous life stresses has been studied in a number of cultures. Frison, Wallander, and Browne (1998) found that cultural factors that measured areas such as identification with one's ethnic group and church support were protective against certain types of maladjustive behaviors for which adolescent African Americans with mild MR are known to be at risk. A study of Hispanic and non-Hispanic families having a member with MR was reported by Heller, Markwardt, Rowitz, and Farber (1994). Family interview data showed that Hispanic families, primarily of Mexican American ancestry, had a decreased sense of burden in caring for a family member with MR and increased acceptance and coping through religious experiences than did the non-Hispanic, European American families. More recently Skinner, Correa, Skinner, and Bailey (2001) reported a more detailed study of religion as a strong coping mechanism among Latino families of Mexican and Puerto Rican origins. Using both qualitative and quantitative data, Rogers-Dulan (1998) has reported similarly positive contributions of personal and familial religious experiences and church support mechanisms among African American caregivers with a mentally retarded child. Finally, Miltiades, and Pruchno (2002) have produced an elegant study in which they have tested a model of how coping through religion relates to caregiving. Interviews were done on African American and European American women of age 50 or more who had an adult child with MR. The two groups were matched on socioeconomic indicators so that racial membership no longer would predict socioeconomic status and any group differences could be interpreted as cultural in origin. African American women had a higher likelihood of using religion as a coping mechanism than did European American women. In addition, the study found a positive association between religious coping and satisfaction with caregiving, but not with the burden of caregiving. African Americans were more satisfied with caregiving but experienced higher levels of burden as a result of poor health.

The importance of these studies is in the application of this knowledge in improving the professional competencies with which service providers deal with families of individuals with MR. This will be dealt with briefly in the next section.

## **ISSUES IN INTERVENTION AND SERVICES FOR MR**

Several issues concerning intervention and services for individuals with MR have come to the fore during the last 20 years as societal attitudes have changed generally and legislative efforts have worked specifically to eliminate barriers and problems, and ensure quality lives for individuals with developmental disabilities. The following, of necessity, is a brief review of the burgeoning literature on international efforts toward intervention and provision of services as well as research that emphasizes population comparisons and cultural responses to services. An overarching theme is the increased attention that has been paid to cultural diversity in all aspects of intervention and the need to incorporate cultural competence into the delivery of services and supports for individuals with MR and their families and caregivers. What always continues to impress is the continuing need for ethnographic data, especially in the area of disability, to support the education and training necessary to achieve standards of cultural competence among service providers.

### **Family Supports**

The family supports movement has seen great progress in the last 20 years and continues to be a major emphasis in the activities and funding concerning services for families of individuals with developmental disabilities. Evaluation studies of interventions with families have appeared in the literature of the 1990s (e.g., Davis & Rushton, 1991), including evaluation specifically for early intervention programs (Guralnick, 1997). The Davis and Rushton (1991) study is of interest in that it was cross-cultural, including both English-speaking (presumably of British ancestry) and Bangladeshi families in London and used randomly assigned controls. The study demonstrated positive effects for both families and children of a home-based, family counseling intervention, with more marked effects in the Bangladeshi families, who presumably benefited greatly from the counseling by same-culture parent advisors.

A number of studies have appeared that review the experiences of different cultural groups with family support activities. Shapiro and Simonsen (1994) reviewed

#### **The Search for Genetic–Environmental Interactions 501**

the needs and experiences of a family support group for Latino families of Mexican origin who had a child with Down syndrome. More recently Bailey, Skinner, Correa, Arcia, Reyes-Blanes et al., (1999) reported data on interviews with 200 Latino parents of Mexican and Puerto Rican origin who had a child under 6 years old with MR or a developmental disability. These data did not demonstrate a unique "Latino style" (as the authors put it) of needs and supports and a number of predictor variables describing family characteristics did not account for much of the total variance in the domains that reflected needs and supports among these families. Finally, Shin (2002) has attempted to model the variables that contribute to maternal stress among American and Korean families (by location) of children with MR. These data showed that American mothers received higher levels of both informal (e.g., family, friends) and professional (e.g., teachers, healthcare providers) support than mothers in Korea and the latter experienced more stress.

### **Disparities in Services**

It has become apparent that healthcare for individuals with developmental disabilities, as well as other services, is not on a par with services for the non-disabled population. The U.S. Surgeon General's recent report (U.S. Public Health Service, 2001) highlights the multiple problems in this regard in the United States. The disparities cover the entire lifespan, including in the United States residential care/assisted living and nursing homes (Howard, Sloane, Zimmerman, Eckert, Walsh et al., 2002). The sense among those who work in the developmental disabilities fields in other nations, even those with national healthcare systems, is that there are gaps in the delivery of healthcare services for individuals with developmental disabilities. For example, Bollard (1999) has reviewed the situation in the United Kingdom with respect to primary healthcare delivery and concludes that the community learning disability teams in collaboration with practicing nurses could address some of the gaps in services.

Increasingly there are studies being done regarding the costs of services for individuals with developmental disabilities. A recent analysis of the Hawaii Medicaid feefor-service program demonstrated that profound MR was among the 10 leading diagnostic categories in terms of payments for healthcare (dollar volume for FY1999), ranking fourth (Loke, Kang-Kaulupali, & Honbo, 2001). Studies like these underscore the sense of cultural dissonance between the developmental disabilities communities and society-at-large as seems to exist for birth defects between those affected and public health (Meaney, 2001).

### **International Data**

There is a growing literature on key issues in developmental disabilities from an international and multicultural perspective. These issues include such areas of concern as transition to adulthood, social integration, quality of life (QoL), and education, among others. There are many signs of changing attitudes and perspectives on an international basis. New initiatives in the special education system in China toward integrating children with developmental disabilities into mainstream classes in local schools (Deng & Manset, 2000) are a prime example of these changes. Transition from late adolescence to early adulthood is probably an area in need of more research from a multicultural perspective. Recently Blacher (2001) has stressed the need for more research to evaluate successes in this difficult transition period and the variables that provide the strongest prediction of success, including cultural attitudes and beliefs. Social integration of individuals with MR from a cultural perspective has been assessed at both the community (Calvez, 1993) and national levels (Pedlar, 1990). Both studies point to limitations in the achievement of full integration into society. Finally, measures of QoL for individuals with developmental disabilities, including more subjective realms of assessment, have received much attention during the 1990s. An international comparison of individuals with MR from a northern Italian community with a sample from an Australian community as well as samples from the general populations of both communities (Verri, Cummins, Petito, Vallero, Monteath et al., 1999) showed that scores on a standard index of QoL were similar among the groups. The data did confirm that individuals with milder MR could report on subjective QoL quite adequately. More research is needed along these lines, as well as increased international comparisons and multicultural research on important issues in developmental disabilities.

## **THE SEARCH FOR GENETIC–ENVIRONMENTAL INTERACTIONS**

Our thinking about the ancient nature–nurture issue has evolved over the years. Plomin and Petrill (1997) wrote about swings of the nature–nurture "pendulum" and presented a figure depicting these swings in the direction of nature or nurture as the predominant explanation for human behavior and other traits by the decade of the 20th century in which they occurred. Current ideas in the fields dealing with human diseases have taken us away from "nature or nurture thinking" and replaced this misconception with conceptualizations that see human diseases, as well as all human characters and traits, as the products of the interplay of both nature and nurture, that is genetics and environment (Khoury, Burke, & Thomson, 2000). If we are dealing with the outcomes of human disease, then this becomes even more apparent.

Some of the most exciting current work in genetic epidemiology is the search for and reporting of gene– environment interactions. As Khoury (1998) has put it: "The nature versus nurture controversy is being replaced by systematic evaluation of nature–nurture interaction." With the work of the Human Genome Project and advances in human molecular genetics in general has come the identification of many new genes and their mutations associated with diseases. This coupled with advances in the collection of environmental data have led to an unprecedented surge in the evidence for gene– environment interactions in such subfields of human genetics as pharmacogenetics and genetic epidemiology.

The search for evidence of specific gene–environment interactions for MR is still in its infancy. A recent Medline search by the author (October 2002) combining MR and the phrase "gene–environment interaction" produced one publication. However, current research suggests that this will be one of the major areas of expansion in medical genetics during the next 15–20 years. Dykens and Hodapp (2001) provide a comprehensive review of research in MR focusing on a number of genetic conditions (Down, Fragile X, Prader–Willi, and Williams syndromes). These conditions are arguably the ones that demonstrate the greatest increase during the 1990s in research that will eventually shed light on gene–environment interactions in health outcomes and health, educational, and other interventions. An innovative example of the latter is the research on Fragile X syndrome reported by Dyer-Friedman, Glaser, Hessl, Johnston, Huffman et al. (2002). This study examines both genetic and environmental factors that predict cognitive outcomes, such as IQ, in 120 children with the full mutation for Fragile X

syndrome. Interestingly both genetic and environmental factors predicted intellectual functioning in these children, but there were clear gender differences in the patterns observed. Among girls, the mean parent IQ was the strongest predictor, with some variation resulting from the quality of the home environment. In contrast, the boys' home environment accounted for more variation in IQ than it did among the girls, and the levels of a specific gene product, the FMR1 protein, was associated with one measure of IQ (Full Scale). This study provides a model for this sort of research through the emphasis on the interplay between genetic and environmental factors in determining a specified outcome as well as the statistical methods (hierarchical regression analysis) utilized to assess the effects of the predictor variables.

## **SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES**

The need remains for more research from an anthropological perspective on disabilities such as MR. Current research supports the concept of disability as a sociocultural construct. Progress has been made in recent years in considering cultural variation as a key factor in how families react and cope when a member has MR and how to implement effective interventions and services. Research into the causes of MR continues to make tremendous progress through both epidemiological and genetic studies that promise to contribute to improvements in the prevention and treatment of MR.

Parmenter (2001) has recently contributed an interesting overview of the contributions of scientific studies to developments in community inclusion for individuals with MR. From his assessment of the literature over the last 25 years or so, he perceives "a growth in multiparadigmatic thinking and a less rigid way of conceptualizing the nature of reality" (p. 191). In his view, the challenge to the community of researchers for the next century "is for a greater collaboration between researchers, policy planners, and the people most deeply affected—the persons with an intellectual disability, their families and carers" (p. 191). The call for researchers to collaborate more intensively comes at a time when, if anything, subspecialization in the sciences has intensified and at least within scientific communities the ease with which such collaboration gets done has all but disappeared in some university communities as competition and scarce

#### **References 503**

resources and time create major difficulties for the scientist who wishes to build broad, collaborative approaches to some problem. However, it has to be accomplished if we are to engage the support of policy-makers in creating the necessary resources for such work and accomplish a true sense of priorities for the people most affected by the science.

It could very well be that the collaborative efforts for which Parmenter calls will come when we have accomplished a revolution in our thinking about developmental disabilities. In this author's view that major step will come when the comprehension of the genetic *and* environmental contributors to disease and outcomes becomes a reality for a broad cross-section of the biomedical, behavioral, and social sciences, as well as the public at large. In this vision, it is not simply a matter of getting across the theoretical underpinnings of what is meant by the interplay between genetic and environmental factors, or gene–environment interaction, but also the notion that "one size fits all" should be totally abandoned in the interventional services such as education, medical treatment, and so forth. This is happening first in the medical sciences through the influences of breakthroughs in pharmacogenetics, primarily, but also through examples of gene–environment interaction in the risk for multifactorial conditions and diseases such as birth defects, cancer, and cardiovascular disease. Such interactions will be increasingly observed for developmental disabilities during the next two decades as the genetics of MR, autism, and other conditions is elucidated. It is predicted that the next phase will then be the application of this knowledge to the evaluation of interventions and services. Only then, when we understand more completely the underlying genetic susceptibilities and gene–gene interactions, as well as the environmental contributors, will we be fully capable of assessing what works best and why. That will be the brightest day for the hopes and aspirations of "the people most deeply affected," for we will be ever so much closer to really understanding what we are doing when we intervene in their lives.

## **ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

This work was supported in part by grant # 90DD0532/01 from the Administration on Developmental Disabilities. The author would also like to acknowledge the assistance provided by Mary M. Meaney and Carolyn Henley in tracking down references and commenting on earlier drafts of the paper. The manuscript benefited immensely from the critical eye of Chris Cunniff, M. D. Any errors in factual knowledge despite the assistance are the sole responsibility of the author.

## **REFERENCES**

- American Association on Mental Retardation (2002a). *Mental retardation: Definition, classification, and systems of supports*. Washington, DC: Author.
- American Association on Mental Retardation (2002b). Definition of mental retardation. http://www. aamr.org/Policies/faq\_mental\_ retardation.shtml
- American Psychological Association (1990). *Guidelines for providers of psychological services to ethnic, linguistic, and culturally diverse populations*. Washington, DC: Author
- Bailey, D. B., Jr., Skinner, D., Correa, V., Arcia, E., Reyes-Blanes, M. E., Rodriguez, P. et al. (1999). Needs and supports reported by Latino families of young children with developmental disabilities. *American Journal on Mental Retardation, 104*, 437–451.
- Baker, E., Hinton, L., Callen, D. F., Altree, M., Dobbie, A., Eyre, H. J. et al. (2002). Study of 250 children with idiopathic mental retardation reveals nine cryptic and diverse subtelomeric chromosome anomalies. *American Journal of Medical Genetics, 107*, 285–293.
- Benassi, G., Guarino, M., Cammarata, S., Cristoni, P., Fantini, M. P., Ancona, A. et al. (1990). An epidemiological study on severe mental retardation in Bologna, Italy. *Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 32*, 895–901.
- Blacher, J. (2001). Transition to adulthood: Mental retardation, families, and culture. *American Journal on Mental Retardation, 106*, 173–188.
- Blacher, J., Shapiro, J., Lopez, S., Diaz, L., & Fusco, J. (1997). Depression in Latina mothers of children with mental retardation: A neglected concern. *American Journal on Mental Retardation, 101*, 483–496.
- Bollard, M. (1999). Improving primary health care for people with learning disabilities. *British Journal of Nursing, 8*, 1216–1221.
- Bower, C., Leonard, H., & Petterson, B. (2000). Intellectual disability in Western Australia. *Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health, 36*, 213–215.
- Boyle, C. A., Yeargin-Allsopp, M., Doernberg, N. S., Holmgreen, P., Murphy, C. C., & Schendel, D. E. (1996). Prevalence of selected developmental disabilities in children 3–10 years of age: The Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Surveillance Program, 1991. *Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 45*, 1–14.
- Brockley, J. A. (1999). History of mental retardation: An essay review. *History of Psychology, 2*, 25–36.
- Calvez, M. (1993). Social interactions in the neighborhood: Cultural approach to social integration of individuals with mental retardation. *Mental Retardation, 31*, 418–423.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (1996). Postnatal causes of developmental disabilities in children aged 3–10 years—Atlanta, Georgia 1991. *Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 45*, 130–136.

- Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2002). How common is mental retardation? http://www. cdc.gov/ncbddd/dd/ddmr.htm.
- Cheng, P., & Tang, C. S. (1995). Coping and psychological distress of Chinese parents of children with Down syndrome. *Mental Retardation, 33*, 10–20.