## **ANNEXURE-3**

Extracts of Report of Supreme Court Appointed Commission on AFSPA Headed By Justice Santhosh Hedge

- The continuous use of the AFSPA for decades in Manipur has evidently had little or no effect on the situation. On the other hand, the 6 cases, which have been shown to be not real encounters, are egregious examples of the AFSPA's gross abuse.
- Terrorism in India today is much more about unemployment than ideology though militancy tends to take on an ideological colour. But modern technology reduces rather than increases over-all employment and the market exacerbates inequalities. By contrast, terrorism creates much employment both in the underground groups and the police, CDO(Commando - Manipur Police) and other formations set up to combat these groups. With a burgeoning, restive, youthful population only proactively inclusive governance can hope for some social stability. Tripura has realized this to its considerable advantage. Manipur should be given the best chance to do the same. The Jeevan Reddy Committee to Review the Armed Forces (Special) Powers Act found that AFSPA had become "a symbol of oppression, an object of hate and an instrument of discrimination and high-handedness". The commission also agrees the same.

## **A3.2 Annexure-3 • Extracts of Report of Supreme Court Appointed Commission...**

- There are strong indications that people by and large have had more than enough of strife and violence. Civil Society in the State notably has a palpable presence but has raised the level of social consciousness well above the average in the country. It is time therefore to progressively de-notify more areas of the State under Section 3 of AFSPA. The progressive withdrawal of Section 144 CrPC will accompany the de-notification. If at any stage of the de-notification there is a serious and continued regression in the law and order situation, it should be open to the appropriate Government to reconsider the options available to it. Any extension of the provisions of AFSPA should necessarily be placed before the State legislature, drawing an analogy from Article 356 (3) of the Constitution.
- The Honourable Supreme Court in Naga Peoples Movement for Human Rights (supra) had laid down that the Do's and Don'ts of the Army Headquarters are binding and any disregard of the same will be punishable under the Army Act. The commission recommends for the statutory status for the above said. It also laid down guidelines for deployment of armed forces in aid of civil authority should be followed by the security forces in letter and spirit.
- The Manipur administration has to be made more sensitive, proactive and responsive. The police and policing have to be made more people-friendly. A sensitive, proactive and responsive administration including people friendly policing would go a long way in normalizing the situation and winning the confidence of the people.
- CDOs cannot be allowed to terrorize people at will as they appear to be doing presently. There is a need to clearly define the role, duties and responsibilities of the CDOs. There has to be a clear command-and-control structure and their functioning has to be closely monitored by the Superintendent of the district and higher Ups in the hierarchy of the police department. The commission analysed that there is nothing to show that any such thing is happened at present.
- The commission recommended that a District Police Complaints Authority on the lines of the judgment of the Honourable Supreme Court in Prakash Singh vs. Union of India (2006) 8 SCC 1, with at least one representative from civil society be constituted in all the districts. This Authority should be activated forthwith. Wide publicity must be given to the creation and functioning of the Authority. At present the Authority is meant to look into the complaints of misbehaviour, non-registration of cases etc. by the police.
- The commission recommends that the District Police Complaints Authority be also authorized to look into public grievances against police, AR and other Para-military forces deployed in Manipur regarding disappearance of persons. If the authority finds any truth in any of the complaints made to it, it shall communicate the same to the district concerned or the Commandant of the armed force of the Union of India, for necessary legal action against the concerned. A copy of such report of the Authority shall be given to the complainant. All the concerned should be asked through a government order to co-operate with the Authority in its enquiries.

- The State level police complaint authorities should also have at least 1 member from the civil society and must review the functioning of the District Level Police Complaint Authority on a quarterly basis.
- The Commission recommends that all cases of encounter resulting in death be investigated by the CID, by officers not below the rank of Dy. SP/ASP. For this purpose the CID Manipur has to be suitably strengthened within a stipulated time of six months. That is, the sanctioning and filling of posts, the provision of office accommodation, vehicles etc. have to be accomplished in 6 months. The CID also has to be provided with other necessary infrastructure, and funds to discharge its duties effectively and efficiently.
- Special investigation teams should be formed to investigate all cases of UAPA. The Commission also recommends that in the District and the State Police Control Rooms, a separate cell be opened with a separate phone and computer for receiving complaints/information over phone/e-mail about extortion etc. A record should be made of all the complaints/information received and action should be taken immediately. Wide publicity should be given to this phone number and this facility.
- The investigation of the cases of encounter being handled by the CID shall be reviewed every month by an officer not below the rank of DIG of CID. After the first 3 months reasons shall be recorded in writing by the JO seeking permission to continue, with investigation. The reviewing DIG mentioned above shall take a decision and pass a speaking order permitting or refusing continuation of investigation.
- The DGP Manipur may also be directed to issue remedial detailed instructions to prevent the kind of irregularities and to introduce modern methods of investigation in his Police force.
- The commission proposed that all cases of encounter resulting in death be reviewed once in three months by a Committee chaired by the Head of the State Human Rights Commission with Principal Secretary Home and DG of the State as members. This review will be confined to seeing if there are valid grounds to continue the investigation.
- The Commission proposes that cases of encounters resulting in death be tried by a Special Court constituted for this purpose. The number of such Courts can be decided by the State Government and the High Court of the State depending on the number of cases pending. This will ensure quick disposal of the cases.
- The Commission has noticed some serious lapses on the part of police during their operations and the investigation. The Commission, therefore, recommends the following measures:-
- i. The post mortem in encounter cases should be conducted as quickly as possible after the incident.
- ii. The post mortem in encounter cases should invariably be video graphed. During the post mortem, the hand wash of the deceased must be taken

## **A3.4 Annexure-3 • Extracts of Report of Supreme Court Appointed Commission...**

and sent for forensic analysis. This is necessary because in many cases it is contended by the security forces that the deceased had fired at them.

- iii. During the Inquest, fingerprints of the deceased should be taken for proper identification as well as comparison with the fingerprints found on the weapon allegedly used by the deceased.
- iv. It is seen that the seized articles are sent to the FSL after considerable delay, sometimes, after years. The seized articles should be sent to FSL within a week from the seizure. The FSL examination should also be done expeditiously and reports sent to the Investigating Officer.
- It is clear to the Commission that the Manipur State police on its own are grossly inadequate to face the challenges before it. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that the Manipur Government draw up and implement a five year plan for strengthening, equipping and. training of the civil police in the State so as to altogether do away with the deployment of Union armed forces in aid of the civil power. The Central Government must generously contribute to the means and expertise necessary for this endeavour. Nothing would sooner normalize Manipur than confining Union armed forces to combating foreign enemies.
- No charge sheet can be filed against the armed forces personnel without prior approval of the Central Government under Section 6 of AFSPA. If the case and the circumstances demanded there was no bar to the drawing up of an FIR and an investigation against them by the local police against specific complaints. These provisions must be made known to armed forces personnel, the Manipur Police and people of the State to reduce the possibility of misuse of authority under the false cover of Section 6 of AFSPA.
- The Commission recommends that the Central Government be given a reasonable time limit to pass order under Section 6 of the AFSPA, preferably within three months from the date of its receipt of the request of the prosecution, failing which its sanction shall be presumed.