# **LEGISLATIVE COMPETENCE**

*the Union and the States*

## V NIRANJAN\*

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

ON 14 November 1946, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council convened to hear oral argument in a case that would prove to be one of the last Indian appeals of significance to come before that august body: *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee v Bank of Commerce Ltd, Khulna*. <sup>1</sup> The Board's advice in that case, alongside three other important judgments<sup>2</sup> given during this period, should have definitively settled the Indian law of legislative competence. Yet, a cursory glance at the law reports reveals that this topic—perhaps more than any other part of Indian constitutional law—continues to defy rationalisation. The thesis of this chapter is that this is because of a failure in subsequent cases to distinguish between two distinct concepts that are at the heart of Part XI of the Constitution of India: the *existence* of legislative power ('competence') and the *exercise* of legislative power ('repugnance').

These topics—competence and repugnance—encapsulate the legislative relationship between the States and the Union and are the main concern of this chapter. Section II provides a brief overview of the framework of legislative relations under the Indian Constitution and its legislative history. Section III considers the nature of legislative power under the Indian Constitution and explains that the failure to separate competence and repugnance is responsible for the mysterious emergence of new 'doctrines' in India (notably the aspect theory) which, on closer examination, are actually indistinguishable from pith and substance. Section IV distinguishes repugnance from competence, and revisits a long-standing controversy in Indian law about the applicability of Article 254(1) to legislation outside the Concurrent List. Section V draws the threads together and concludes.

## **II. LEGISLATIVE COMPETENCE IN THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION: AN OVERVIEW**

Much of Indian law has English roots.<sup>3</sup> Constitutional law is no exception. A striking difference, however, is that Indian Parliament, unlike (at least in theory) its British counterpart, is not sovereign, <sup>4</sup> and this proposition must be the starting point of any analysis of its legislative competence: Parliament's power to legislate is located in, and limited by, the provisions of the Constitution. These provisions, principally Articles 245, 246, and 254, are themselves derived from sections 100 and 107 of the Government of India Act 1935 ('the 1935 Act'), and it is to that legislation that one must turn in order to understand why the Constitution adopts this model.

## **1. Constitutional Framework and Legislative History: An Outline**

When it was decided in the early 1930s that British India would become a Federation, legislative competence was naturally a subject that occupied the minds of the legislators. In 1932, the British Government presented a White Paper to Parliament entitled 'Proposals for Indian Constitutional Reform' ('the White Paper').<sup>5</sup> The proposals made in the White Paper were examined by a Joint Select Committee ('JSC'), which submitted a report in 1934 ('the JSC Report').<sup>6</sup> In these documents lie the seeds of what is today Part XI of the Constitution of India.

The framework adopted by the JSC—and later by the 1935 Act and the Constitution—was in some respects unprecedented because it did not precisely correspond with either of the two models of legislative distribution that were popular at the time. Common to both models was the allocation of a specific list of enumerated powers to one legislature and the residue to the other: in the Australian model, the residuary power was with the Provincial legislature and in the Canadian, with the Federal legislature.<sup>7</sup> Although the JSC Report was closer to the Canadian than to the Australian model, it was perhaps the first attempt to enumerate legislative fields as *exhaustively* as possible, <sup>8</sup> which the Canadian Constitution (the BNA Act 1867) did not do. Thus, the 1935 Act—as does the Constitution —divided the fields of legislation into three Lists, with essentially local subjects in Lists II and III, and pan-Indian subjects in List I.

This model was adopted in the belief that it would avert some of the contentious litigation about legislative competence and residuary power that had already come before the Canadian and Australian courts. Not everyone agreed it would do this: during the debate in the House of Commons, Eric Bailey, a Conservative MP, cuttingly observed that the House 'shall, at any rate, be doing a wonderful thing for the legal profession'.<sup>9</sup> As this chapter shows, Bailey has been proved right. Whether that is because of the model itself or its use by the courts is a matter I leave for the reader to judge.

#### **III. COMPETENCE: POWER AND REPUGNANCE DISTINGUISHED**

A central argument of this chapter is that the courts have, with respect, fallen into error in repeatedly conflating the question 'Does this legislature have the *power* to enact this law?' with 'Does this *law* conflict with a law enacted by the other legislature?': in short, not distinguishing between questions of *vires* and questions of repugnance. As the following sub-section explains, the use of the expression 'with respect to' in Article 246 shows that this distinction is at the heart of Part XI.

#### **1. Questions of** *Vires***—The Expression 'With Respect to'**

Article 246 gives each legislature the power (either exclusively or otherwise) to make laws 'with respect to' 'matters enumerated' in the respective Lists. It is this expression that marks a clear divide between competence and repugnance, because it shows that the test of *vires* is to be applied to the legislation as a whole, and not to *individual* provisions in it. The significance of this is that a law which 'as a whole' is 'with respect to' a matter in the appropriate List does not become *ultra vires*

simply because it contains provisions which may also be validly enacted by the other legislature.

One may ask what happens if an *intra vires* Central law contains a provision which is inconsistent with an *intra vires* State law. The answer is that the inconsistency does not affect the *competence* of either legislature but is resolved by applying the provisions of the Constitution that deal with *repugnance*. Indeed, this is the answer the courts gave in the early years although, as we shall see, these insights have been obscured by a series of later Supreme Court decisions.

#### a. *The Early Skirmishes in the Moneylending Litigation*

The moneylending litigation is the best illustration of the proposition that the same *provision* may be validly enacted by two different legislatures under different legislative entries. The 1935 Act had placed 'money-lending and money-lenders' in the Provincial List and 'promissory notes' and 'banking' in the Federal List.<sup>10</sup> If the argument advanced here about the meaning of 'with respect to' is correct, it should follow that the same provision (eg, regulating the rate of interest payable on a promissory note) can be validly enacted by *both* legislatures, in the case of the Union as part of legislation dealing with promissory notes which happen to involve agriculturists, and in the case of the States as part of legislation dealing with agricultural loans which happen to be secured by promissory notes.

Both laws—including the provision about interest rates—would be *intra vires* because both (as a whole) are 'with respect to' the appropriate legislative entry. If *individual* provisions are inconsistent (eg, if one law prescribes a higher rate of interest than the other), that is a matter for Article 254, not Article 246. But it would be different if the interest rate provision were to be found in a State legislation dealing *only* with promissory notes or in a Union legislation dealing *only* with agricultural debt because, on that hypothesis, neither legislation is 'with respect to' the appropriate field of legislation.

This is the view that prevailed in the litigation that was to eventually culminate in the widely cited but misunderstood case of *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee*. <sup>11</sup> One of the earliest cases on the point was a decision of a full bench of the Madras High Court in *Nagaratnam v Seshayya* ('Nagaratnam'). <sup>12</sup> The Madras Agriculturist Debt Relief Act 1938 ('the Madras Act') provided that a court could 'scale down' a debt owed to a moneylender by an agriculturist whether the debt had ripened into a decree before the commencement of the Act or not. The moneylenders argued that this law was *ultra vires* the Provincial legislature and alternatively repugnant to sections 32 and 79 of the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881, which provided that an acceptor of a negotiable instrument was liable to pay the amount on maturity according to the apparent tenor of the instrument at the specified rate of interest. I say no more at this stage about the repugnance point than that it is *different* from the '*ultra vires*' point—indeed, it arises only if the *ultra vires* (ie, competence) point fails. As to competence, Sir Lionel Leach CJ held, correctly, that the Madras Act was *intra vires*, deriving from the Privy Council's jurisprudence the proposition that the same provision can be validly enacted by more than one legislature, provided each does so as part of a legislation that it is (overall) competent to enact.

As Lord Hope of Craighead has recently observed, a number of phrases have been coined to describe the principle that Sir Lionel Leach CJ applied, depending upon the fashion of the time: in India, 'the doctrine of pith and substance' is undoubtedly the most popular, but 'true nature and character', 'respection doctrine', and other phrases used in other federal or devolved jurisdictions

embody exactly the same principle. $\frac{13}{2}$ 

The Madras view was not uncontroversial. Meredith J rejected it in *Sagarmal Marwari* ('Sagarmal'),  $\frac{14}{1}$  a case that came before the Patna High Court two years later, reasoning that the doctrine of pith and substance applied by the Judicial Committee in the Canadian appeals could not coexist with the State's legislative power being expressly made 'subject to' the Union's. This conflict between the Patna<sup>15</sup> and the Madras views was resolved in favour of the latter in two momentous cases which, even today, remain the most important judicial contributions to the topic of legislative competence in Indian constitutional law: *Subramanyam Chettiar v Muttuswami Goundan* ('Goundan') <sup>16</sup> and *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee* ('Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee'). <sup>17</sup> Both cases must be closely analysed.

*Goundan* was effectively a challenge in the Federal Court to Sir Lionel Leach CJ's judgment in *Nagaratnam*: as in that case, the moneylender had obtained a decree on a promissory note which the court, at the request of the agriculturist, had 'scaled down'. A crucial feature of the case is that the promissory note had matured into a decree in November 1934, four years *before* the commencement of the Madras Act. In the Federal Court, Sir Maurice Gwyer CJ and Varadachariar J were in the majority, and Sulaiman J dissented on a different point. However, the Court was unanimous in rejecting the Patna view: the Canadian doctrine of pith and substance 'evolved by the Judicial Committee … is *equally applicable* to the Indian Constitution Act'. <sup>18</sup> Sulaiman J's judgment contains the best explanation of *why* the doctrine applies in India: because, said the learned judge, section 100 uses (as does Article 246) the expression '*with respect to'*, which mandates an inquiry into the true nature and character (or pith and substance) of the law as a whole:

On a very strict interpretation of s. 100, it would necessarily follow that from all matters in List II which are exclusively assigned to Provincial Legislatures, all portions which fall in List I or List III must be excluded. Similarly, from all matters falling in List III, all portions which fall in List I must be excluded … *But the rigour of the literal interpretation is relaxed by the use of the words 'with respect to'* which as already pointed out only signify 'pith and substance', and do not forbid a mere incidental encroachment.<sup>19</sup>

In other words, although the same provision—the rate of interest payable by an agriculturist on a promissory note—was in the 1881 and Madras Acts, both were *intra vires* because the provision in the one case was enacted as part of the regulation of promissory notes and in the other as part of the regulation of agricultural debt. This, it is submitted, is correct. But what about the actual conflict between the (*intra vires*) Madras Act and the (*intra vires*) Negotiable Instruments Act? Gwyer CJ held that this was in principle governed by section 107 of the 1935 Act (Article 254 of the Constitution) but that it was unnecessary to decide it because the creditor's cause of action was, on the facts of that case, not the promissory note but the *decree*, which was unaffected by the 1881 Act. Varadachariar J agreed. This course was open to Gwyer CJ only because the promissory note had matured into a decree *before* the commencement of the Act: if it had not, it would have become necessary to decide whether the Madras Act was repugnant to the 1881 Act, but the answer would not have affected the *competence* of either legislature. Sulaiman J thought that the time of crystallisation was irrelevant because the underlying debt was on a promissory note: thus, for him, it became necessary to apply section 107. This chapter considers his analysis of repugnance in more detail subsequently but it suffices at this stage to point out that *none* of the judges thought that legislative competence depended upon the terms of the 1881 Act (the analysis would have been the same even if the 1881 Act had never been enacted) or that the *conflict* was to be resolved by applying the doctrine of pith and substance: for the Federal Court, repugnance and competence were watertight and

mutually exclusive compartments.<sup>20</sup>

#### b. *The Argument of Sir Walter Monckton KC and the Advice of Lord Porter*

This was the state of the law when the *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee* litigation commenced. This too was a challenge to the Bengal Act, but this time the decree had been obtained by the bank *after* the commencement of the Act: so the repugnance question Gwyer CJ had been able to leave open in *Goundan* would now have to be decided. The Calcutta High Court correctly held that this feature of the case made no difference to *competence*, because the Bengal Act was still in pith and substance about moneylending, although it gave rise to a repugnance issue, unlike in *Goundan*. <sup>21</sup> But how could competence be assailed? In the Federal Court, counsel for the Bank did it by boldly challenging the proposition—as Sir Herbert Cunliffe  $KC^{22}$  was to do in the Privy Council—that an incidental encroachment does not affect the *vires* of a legislation and invited the Court to endorse the Patna view in preference to the Madras view that *Goundan* had accepted. Spens CJ <sup>23</sup> declined this invitation and followed Lord Atkin's observations in *Gallagher v Lynn*. <sup>24</sup> He also observed, correctly, that encroachment is *intra vires* only if the legislation as a whole is 'with respect to' a matter in List II: 'in such cases a provincial legislation can, if at all, encroach on List I subjects, *only incidentally*'. 25 However, Spens CJ—perhaps because of a misunderstanding of certain observations of Viscount Maugham<sup>26</sup>—erroneously held that the question whether an encroachment by a State legislature is incidental depends on how far it transgresses into *List I*—that is, a 'substantial' transgression is *ultra vires*.

Applying this test of 'substantiality', the Bengal Act was *ultra vires* (*not* repugnant) because it 'substantially affected'sections 32 and 79 of the 1881 Act by altering the rule there prescribed that an acceptor of a negotiable instrument is liable to pay the amount on maturity according to the apparent tenor of the instrument. This, with respect, is exactly the danger of conflating competence and repugnance: Spens CJ's test cannot possibly have had anything to do with *ultra vires* because it involved comparing the State legislation with a Federal *legislation*, rather than a legislative *entry*. The State law does not cease to be a law about moneylending simply because it is inconsistent with sections 32 and 79 of the 1881 Act. The 'substantial effect' test, on the other hand, is obviously material if the question is whether the Bengal Act is *repugnant* to the 1881 Act because there the *purpose* of the State law is irrelevant: what matters is whether its provisions actually conflict with the provisions of the Central law.

In a powerful argument in the Privy Council that repays study, Sir Walter Monckton KC made exactly this point about this passage from Spens CJ's judgment:

That suggested distinction which is drawn between an Act which affects promissory notes to a substantial extent and one which affects them to a less extent is unsound, and based on a misunderstanding of what was said<sup>27</sup>... There is, however, nothing in the earlier of those two cases to suggest that the *antithesis in the mind of the Board was 'substantial' or 'not substantial*'; the distinction they made was between pith and substance and incidental or ancillary. They were *not measuring the degree of interference*. What really vitiates the decision of the Federal Court in this case was that they assumed that that was the test substantial or not—and applied it mutatis mutandis to the impugned Act. It is submitted that, applying what is found in the two last cited cases, if the impugned Act is in pith and substance a money lending Act, and the Federal Court have so held, and if the provincial legislature had power to deal with promissory notes, then no objection can be taken on the ground that the provincial legislature has dealt with them substantially.<sup>28</sup>

As every Indian lawyer knows, Lord Porter accepted this argument, once again declining Sir Herbert Cunliffe KC's invitation<sup>29</sup> to endorse the Patna view about the inapplicability of pith and substance to the Indian Constitution. Lord Porter said:

[T]he extent of the invasion by the provinces into subjects enumerated in the Federal List has to be considered. No doubt it is an important matter, not, as their Lordships think, because the validity of an Act can be determined by discriminating between *degrees of invasion*, but for the purpose of determining what is the pith and substance of the impugned Act. Its provisions may advance so far into Federal territory as to show that its true nature is not concerned with Provincial matters, *but the question is* not, has it trespassed more or less, but is the trespass, whatever it be, such as to show that the pith and substance of the impugned Act is not money lending but promissory notes or banking? Once that question is determined the Act falls on one or the other side of the line and can be seen as valid or invalid according to its true content.<sup>30</sup>

One may be forgiven for thinking that the clarity—and high authority—of this exposition should have settled this issue for good. Indeed, the Supreme Court of India has endorsed Lord Porter's views including this very passage $\frac{31}{2}$  on innumerable occasions.<sup>32</sup> However, the proposition the Supreme Court has actually accepted in recent years is the 'repugnance fallacy' that prevailed with Spens CJ, not its rejection by Lord Porter.

This fallacy contains two limbs: first, that the *vires* (or competence) of a legislation depends upon the *degree* of invasion of the other List ('the first limb'); and second, that the *repugnance* of a legislation depends upon its *pith and substance* ('the second limb'). Of these, the second limb is the more serious because it has led the courts astray and produced the wrong outcome in a number of prominent cases.<sup>33</sup>

The seeds of the first limb which Lord Porter had so firmly rejected were sown in *Mudholkar*. 34 The question there was whether the State of Gujarat was competent to prescribe Gujarati or Hindi as, subject to certain exceptions, an exclusive medium of instruction. Under Entry 11, List II (as it then was), the State Legislature was entitled to make laws about 'education… subject to the provisions of Entry… 66 of List I'. Entry 66 of List I entitled Parliament to make laws about the 'coordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education'. Shah J, who gave the majority judgment, found that the medium of instruction was part of Entry 66 as well as Entry 11. This may seem a surprising conclusion given that Entry 11 is expressly subject to Entry 66.<sup>35</sup> However, assuming it is correct, it should follow from the argument made in this chapter that a State law about education may incidentally prescribe the medium of instruction while a Union law about the coordination and determination of standards may incidentally prescribe the medium of instruction. Both laws would be *intra vires* and the conflict, if any, would be resolved by Article 254, not Article 246. As there was in fact no Union law prescribing a medium of instruction, the question of repugnance could not have arisen. Shah J recognised the difference between repugnance and competence but held that the State law is *ultra vires* if it 'prejudicially affects coordination and determination of standards … ', <sup>36</sup> *whether or not* a conflicting Union law actually exists: in other words, if Spens CJ's 'substantial effect' test is satisfied. It appears that Shah J was influenced by the submission of counsel that the doctrine of pith and substance is irrelevant to a 'subject to' entry. However, as Subba Rao J correctly pointed out in his dissenting judgment, a 'subject to' entry is different only because its scope (unlike an entry which is not expressly subject to a List I entry) can be limited by the existence of another entry: this is a matter of construction. Once the point of construction is resolved one way or the other, the doctrine of pith and substance applies in the usual way, and the *degree* of interference is irrelevant except insofar as it goes to show what the pith and substance of the impugned legislation really is.

To summarise, it is respectfully submitted that the correct position on legislative competence under Part XI can be formulated in the form of the following five propositions:

(1) Before applying the doctrine of pith and substance, it is necessary to decide what the words of the relevant legislative entry mean. This is a process of construction<sup>37</sup> and entirely independent of the impugned legislation.

(2) Once the meaning of an entry has been ascertained, the doctrine of pith and substance helps the court ascertain whether the impugned legislation is attributable to that entry, so construed. Again, the existence of competing legislation is entirely irrelevant: the impugned legislation is either in the appropriate List, or not, whatever the other legislature may have done.

(3) The fact that the impugned legislation contains individual provisions which fall within an entry in a competing List is also irrelevant unless the nature and context of those provisions show that the legislation is in fact in pith and substance *not* attributable to the appropriate List. Similarly, whether an entry in the competing List has been 'substantially' or 'peripherally' invaded is immaterial except as an index of pith and substance.

(4) If, by applying (1) to (3) above, both legislation are essentially about matters in the appropriate List, both are *intra vires* even if they regulate the same activity or transaction. If common provisions in these legislation factually conflict, Article 254, not Article 246, is the answer. If the provisions do not conflict, or if one of the legislation is not in force, the question of repugnance simply does not arise.

(5) The Supreme Court's failure to accept (3) and (4) above has produced what I call the two limbs of the repugnance fallacy: (i) that '*vires*' depends on the 'effect' of one legislation on the other legislature's field; and (ii) that 'repugnance' depends on the 'purpose' or 'pith and substance' of the impugned legislation. The first limb of the fallacy is exemplified by the judgments of Spens CJ and Shah J in *Kunja Behari* and *Gujarat University*, respectively. The second limb has had more serious consequences, as Section III explains.

# **2. The So-called 'Aspect Theory'**

The failure to articulate the nature of the doctrine of pith and substance is also responsible for the considerable confusion surrounding the supposed existence of the 'aspect theory'. It is respectfully submitted, for the reasons that follow, that there is no such doctrine in Indian constitutional law and that the repeated references to it are founded on a misunderstanding of certain observations in Canadian and English cases. Once this is appreciated, it becomes apparent that what is termed the 'aspect theory' is in fact indistinguishable from pith and substance. $\frac{38}{3}$ 

## a. *The Birth of the 'Aspect Theory'in Indian Law: The Federation Case*

The aspect theory emerged as a 'separate' rule of legislative competence in the *Federation* case ('Federation'). <sup>39</sup> The Federation challenged the *vires* of the Expenditure Tax Act 1987, a Central legislation that levied a 10 per cent tax on expenditure incurred in a hotel in which the room tariff

exceeded Rs 400 per day. The State of Gujarat<sup>40</sup> had enacted the Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act 1977 imposing a tax on 'luxuries' provided by a hotel.

The case was argued by eminent counsel. Palkhivala, who appeared for the petitioners, had two strings to his bow: the Central levy, he argued, was not an 'expenditure tax' because it was imposed on specific items of expenditure rather than on expenditure generally. The Supreme Court rejected this contention—it is submitted correctly—on the ground that there was no reason to limit legislative competence to impose a particular tax to the economist's definition of it. $\frac{41}{1}$  The second argument was that the 1987 Act, in pith and substance, was a luxury tax under Entry 62, List II. In response, the Attorney General, Parasaran, invoked Canadian and Privy Council authority to suggest that one subject matter may have more than one 'aspect', that is, sums expended at hotels may be taxed in their 'expenditure aspect' by the Union and in their 'luxury aspect' by the States. This contention prevailed.

Unfortunately, this has given rise to the belief that the 'aspect theory' is some special rule of Canadian law imported into India by *Federation*, which it is not. 42

#### b. *The So-called 'Aspect Theory'is Indistinguishable from 'Pith and Substance'*

There are at least three indications that the 'double aspect theory' is nothing but pith and substance by a rather more exotic name.

First, a closer analysis of the two judgments in *Federation* confirms that the Supreme Court, in accepting Parasaran's argument, was simply applying the rule that Sir Lionel Leach CJ had applied in *Nagaratnam*—what was the 'true nature and character' of the 1987 Act? In other words, what was its pith and substance? For example:

**31.** Indeed, the law 'with respect to' a subject might *incidentally* '*affect*' *another subject in some way*; but that is not the same thing as the law being on the latter subject. There might be overlapping; but the overlapping must be in law. The same transaction may involve two or more taxable events in its different aspects. But the fact that there is an overlapping does not detract from the distinctiveness of the aspects.

This passage is making the point that the 'true nature and character' (or 'pith and substance') of the 1987 Act was a tax on the *act* of incurring expenditure, which happened to include a luxury, not a tax on luxuries themselves.

Secondly, the authorities from which *Federation* is said to have derived a 'freestanding' aspect theory actually demonstrate the opposite: that it is the same rule as pith and substance. The leading authority is generally considered to be *Hodge v The Queen*, <sup>43</sup> which is cited in the work of Lefroy, to which the Supreme Court referred in *Federation*. In that case, the appellant, who was licensed to run a tavern in Toronto, challenged the *vires* of the Liquor License Act 1877, enacted by the State of Ontario. The Act authorised the imposition of penalties for contravention of the terms of the licence. Hodge said that this was exclusively within the Dominion's competence by virtue of section 91 of the BNA Act ('Regulation of Trade and Commerce'). In support of this contention, Kerr QC, who appeared for Hodge, relied on *Russell v The Queen*, <sup>44</sup> where the Privy Council had upheld the Dominion's competence to enact the Canada Temperance Act 1878, observing that it was not, *in pith and substance*, within section 92 ('Property and civil rights'): its true nature and character was the maintenance of public order and it contained provisions about liquor only incidentally. Their Lordships in *Hodge* then said this:

It appears to their Lordships that *Russell v. the Queen*, when properly understood, is not an authority in support of the Appellant's contention, and their Lordships do not intend to vary or depart from the reasons expressed for their judgment in that case. The principle which that case and the case of the Citizens Insurance Company illustrate is, that subjects *which in one aspect and for* one purpose fall within Sect. 92, may in another aspect and for another purpose fall within Sect. 91.45

Again, this is indistinguishable from pith and substance, though the language of 'aspect' is used. Subsequent Canadian cases  $\frac{46}{9}$  purporting to apply the 'double aspect' theory can be analysed in exactly the same way and illustrate the truth of Lord Hope of Craighead's comment $\frac{47}{1}$  that the same principle is in play in all these jurisdictions, although the nomenclature differs.

Thirdly, it is exactly this passage from *Hodge* that was cited by the High Courts and Federal Court in the moneylending litigation in support of the proposition that the doctrine of *pith and substance* is part of Indian law.<sup>48</sup>

In sum, it is to be hoped that the Supreme Court will take the next opportunity to clarify that aspect should not treated as a 'separate' rule to be applied *after* making a determination about the pith and substance of the impugned legislation.

#### **IV. REPUGNANCE: CONFLICTING** *INTRA VIRES* **LEGISLATION**

Having established that *vires* depends solely on the construction of the legislative entry and the impugned (but not the competing) legislation, I can now turn to the obvious question that arises if this contention is accepted: what if the 'incidental encroachment' is inconsistent with a law passed by the other legislature?

The answer is nominally in Article 254 of the Constitution, but this provision has given rise to a number of difficult questions. $\frac{49}{1}$  Two of the most important, in the light of recent developments, are: (i) is 'actual conflict' between a State and Central law necessary or can a State law be ousted by the *possibility* of conflict? and (ii) does Article 254(1) only apply to conflicting legislation within the Concurrent List or also to conflicting legislation across the Lists? It will be argued that the answers are, respectively, that actual conflict is needed and that Article 254 applies across the Lists. As we will see, the Supreme Court has, with respect, erroneously given the opposite answer to both questions.

#### **1.** *Mar Appraem Kuri* **and Actual Conflict**

If the argument advanced in this chapter is correct, one would expect to find that questions of repugnance can arise only if both laws are *intra vires* and *actually* conflict. If, for example, a State legislature incidentally encroaches on Federal territory in the course of enacting *intra vires* State legislation, and the Federal legislature has not enacted a law covering that field, though it *could* have done so, the question of repugnance cannot arise. This was indeed the law in India between 1935 and 2012, when a constitutional bench decided *State of Kerala v Mar Appraem Kuri*. <sup>50</sup> To make good the submission that *Mar Appraem Kuri* is wrongly decided, it is necessary to briefly explain how this analysis of repugnance came to be as well established as it was before 2012.

The predecessor to Article 254 was section 107 of the 1935 Act. That Act, as Section II has
explained, gave effect to the JSC Report. Section 107 of the Government of India Bill was debated in the House of Commons on 27 March, 1935. In response to a question about its scope, the Attorney General said this:

My hon. Friend asks what 'repugnancy' means—does it mean that on every subject upon which a provincial legislature legislates there will be repugnancy with the Federal legislation? *That is not in the least possible*. The provincial legislature *will be dealing* with some matters for which provision is not made in Federal legislation, but if there is conflict, a means is provided, so far as the concurrent field is concerned, in Sub-section (2) of the Clause.<sup>51</sup>

In other words, section 107 only applies in the event of *actual* conflict: if the Federal legislature has either not legislated in the same field or has done so consistently with the Provincial legislation, the Provincial legislation is not rendered repugnant merely because of the *possibility* of conflict.

The courts had nearly unanimously accepted this proposition until 2012. One of the earliest cases, *Amulya Krishna Basu*, contains a particularly clear exposition of the point. In 1955, a constitutional bench in *Tika Ramji <sup>52</sup>* unequivocally held that repugnance cannot arise in the absence of actual conflict. The petitioners in that case challenged the UP Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act 1953 on the ground of *vires* and alternatively repugnance. The Act made it compulsory for certain sugar factories to purchase sugar cane from the Cane Growers Cooperative Society. The Central law—section 18-G of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act 1951—gave the Centre the power to regulate the supply and distribution of products of scheduled industries, which included sugar. But no order had in fact been made by the Centre under section 18-G in relation to sugar. The petitioners in *Tika Ramji* said that the 1953 UP Act was nevertheless repugnant to section 18-G. The Supreme Court correctly rejected this contention:

Even assuming that sugarcane was an article or class of articles relatable to the sugar industry within the meaning of Section 18-G of Act 65 of 1951, it is to be noted that *no order was issued by the Central Government* in exercise of the powers vested in it under that section and no question of repugnancy could ever arise because, as has been noted above, *repugnancy must exist in fact and not depend merely on a possibility*. The possibility of an order under Section 18-G being issued by the Central Government would not be enough. *The existence of such an order would be the essential prerequisite* before any repugnancy could ever arise. 53

This has since been uniformly followed. $\frac{54}{5}$ 

How was the Supreme Court in *Mar Appraem Kuri* able to reach the contrary conclusion in the light of this overwhelming authority? It may be helpful to first briefly describe the facts. The State of Kerala enacted the Kerala Chitties Act 1975 ('the Kerala Act'), which regulated chit funds in the State of Kerala. Parliament had enacted the Chit Funds Act 1982 ('the Central Act') but this Act had not been extended to the State of Kerala and was not in force there. The case, therefore, was on all fours with *Tika Ramji* and *SIEL*: a Central legislation that *could have been* but *was not* in force in the State whose law was impugned. Yet, Kapadia CJ distinguished *Tika Ramji* by relying on certain observations in *MA Tulloch* which in fact dealt not with repugnance but with the scope of Entry 54, List II—a matter that goes to *competence*. His Lordship then held that the Kerala Act was repugnant to the Central Act because Article 254 uses the words 'law *made* by Parliament' and not '*commencement* of a law made by Parliament'. <sup>55</sup> Because Parliament had 'made' the 1982 Act, although it was not 'in force', Article 254 applied.

With great respect, it must be said that Kapadia CJ's reasoning is not only inconsistent with the authorities described above but fundamentally flawed as a matter of principle, for it fails to distinguish between competence and repugnance. To say that a State law is *ultra vires* on the ground that the law, in pith and substance, is in List I even though Parliament has not itself legislated in that field is understandable: that is a *vires* question and whether Parliament has actually legislated or not is irrelevant. But to say that a State law is repugnant to a Central law *that is not in force* is, with respect, to confuse conflict with powers (or repugnance with *vires*).

#### **2. Article 254(1), the Concurrent List, and** *VK Sharma*

There has been a long-standing—and perhaps not yet definitively resolved—debate about whether Article 254(1) applies only to a law made under the Concurrent List or also to a law made under Lists I and II. The view preferred here, although not the one that has found favour with the Supreme Court, is that Article 254(1) *does* apply across the Lists. I take this view for principally three reasons: (i) the language of Article 254; (ii) perhaps most importantly, its legislative history, which the Supreme Court did not consider in *VK Sharma* or any other case; and (iii) the case law before *VK Sharma*.

## a. *The Language of Article 254(1)*

There is no doubt that the exception in Article 254(2) is confined to legislation in the Concurrent List. As the next sub-section shows, there is a good reason for this. But does it follow, as the Supreme Court has held, that the *general rule* in Article 254(1) is also limited in this way? Consider once again the language of that sub-clause, which can be divided into two branches.

The expression 'law made by the Legislature of a State' is common to both. The first branch ('Branch 1') deals with repugnance between such a law and a 'law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact … ', while the second branch ('Branch 2') deals with its repugnance with 'existing<sup>56</sup> law'. The expression 'with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List' ('the CL Qualification') is found in Branch 2. Branches 1 and 2 are separated by a comma, which is placed after the word 'enact' (the last word of Branch 1). It follows from the rules of English grammar that the Qualifying expression in Branch 2 does not qualify Branch 1. It would have been different (at least on a purely linguistic analysis) if the comma had been placed after the words 'existing law', that is, *after* rather than before Branch 2. It follows that Branch 1 deals with any law which Parliament is 'competent to enact' (ie, under List III *or* List I) and Branch 2 with pre-1950 legislation referable to matters now enumerated in the Concurrent List. Another textual indication that the CL Qualification does not qualify Branch 1 is that the words 'competent to enact' in Branch 1 would otherwise be otiose: that clause could as well have said 'law made by Parliament … with respect to a matter in the Concurrent List'.

This linguistic analysis is not, of course, conclusive: one must still identify the rationale for making Article 254(1) applicable across the Lists. But it shows that there can be no textual *objection* to the view preferred in this chapter: if anything, the language militates against the contrary view.

It is unfortunate that the Supreme Court did not consider the legislative history of Article 254(1) because that makes it quite clear that it was intended to apply across the Lists. Section 107 of the 1935 Act, Article 254's predecessor, *originally did not contain the CL Qualification*: it was inserted during the debate about the Bill in the House of Commons simply to cater for pre-1935 legislation. Nor did the *draft* constitution of 1948 contain the CL Qualification: how it came to be inserted is a matter of some obscurity, but the very fact that it was not originally a part of what is now Article 254(1) shows that Branch 1 was intended to apply across the Lists.

If the formulation in the Government of India Bill had found its way into the Act and then the Constitution, the *VK Sharma* position would have been unarguable because the CL Qualification would not have existed. Why was the CL Qualification inserted into section 107? It was at the behest of the Attorney General, Sir Thomas Inskip, who said this in the House of Commons on 27 March 1935:

I beg to move, in page 64, line 21, after 'enact', to insert: 'or to any provision of an existing Indian law with respect to one of *the matters enumerated in the Concurrent Legislative List*'. The provisions of this Clause are directed to the question of repugnancy in connection with laws which the Federal Legislature is competent to enact. It has been noticed that *no provision is made for repugnancy in the existing law*, and this is the first of four Amendments dealing with the same problem, *really drafting Amendments*, to effect that which, I think, everybody will agree is necessary, namely, to provide that repugnancy in connection with an existing Indian law shall be dealt with in the same way as repugnancy in connection with a Federal law *which may be passed*. 57

It is submitted that Sir Thomas Inskip's explanation of why it was felt necessary to insert the CL Qualification shows beyond doubt that the drafters thought that the Qualification had the effect of making the general rule applicable to pre-1935 legislation; not that the Qualification *altered* the general rule. The view of commentators on the Government of India Act 1935, largely accords with this: section 107, they wrote, applies to a conflict between a Provincial law and a Federal law in any list, or to a *pre-1935* Federal law with respect to a matter in the Concurrent List. 58

### c. *The Case Law Before VK Sharma*

Between 1935 and 1990 (when *VK Sharma* was decided), it had not been firmly established that Article 254 applied to Lists I and II but this was the dominant view. In analysing these judgments, it is important to ascertain whether the particular case was governed by Branch 1 or Branch 2, that is, whether the competing Central legislation was pre-1935/1950 or post-constitutional. Branch 2, as we have seen, applies only to a law under List III, but these cases have sometimes been wrongly treated as authorities about the interpretation of Branch 1. Naturally, as the 1935 Act had just come into force, many of the pre-1950 cases <sup>59</sup> dealing with repugnance, notably *Das <sup>60</sup>* and *Megh Raj*, <sup>61</sup> were Branch 2 cases and are accordingly of little relevance to the construction of Branch 1.

Many Supreme Court decisions in which the statement was made that Article 254 only applies to Concurrent List legislation are similarly distinguishable: they were either Branch 2 cases,  $\frac{62}{ }$  or expressly left the Branch 1 point open,  $\frac{63}{2}$  or found on the facts that there was no repugnance  $\frac{64}{2}$  or happened to deal with what was clearly a List III law anyway.<sup>65</sup> None of these cases can therefore be cited as authority in favour of *VK Sharma*. On the other hand, when the point did arise, although it was not clearly established, the courts appeared to favour the view that *Branch 1* did apply to both

List I and List II.<sup>66</sup> Notable among these is also Varadachariar J's judgment in *Goundan*.

The first case in which the erroneous proposition was accepted as part of the ratio is probably *Bar* Council.<sup>67</sup> A UP legislation prescribing that Rs 250 shall be payable as stamp duty on the issue of a certificate of enrolment to an advocate was challenged as repugnant to the Advocates Act 1961, which was a *post*-Constitutional Central legislation and therefore governed by *Branch 1*. It was also under List I. AN Grover J, relying on *Prem Nath Kaul* (a *Branch 2* case), held that Article 254 was inapplicable because the 1961 Act was under List I, not List III, and distinguished the *Farooqi* case unconvincingly. Soon, the Supreme Court began to treat this proposition as settled  $law, \frac{68}{5}$  notably in *Karunanidhi*<sup>69</sup> and *Hoechst*.<sup>70</sup> But it was definitively established in *VK Sharma*,<sup>71</sup> to which I now turn.

# d. *VK Sharma and the Second Limb of the Repugnance Fallacy*

The Karnataka Contract Carriages (Acquisition) Act 1976 ('the 1976 Act'), enacted under Entry 42, List III, nationalised contract carriage in the State and prohibited the issue or renewal of licences to private operators. The Motor Vehicles Act 1988 ('the 1988 Act'), enacted by Parliament under Entry 35, List III, provided that a licence should ordinarily not be refused to a private operator. There was no doubt that both Acts were *intra vires* and that the 1976 Act had incidentally encroached into Entry 35. It was a classic case for applying Article 254. Sawant J, however, held that Article 254(1) does not apply unless both legislation are enacted under the *same entry* in the Concurrent List. Sawant J also held that one must apply the doctrine of *pith and substance* to resolve a repugnance issue under Article 254. Three passages in the judgment call for close scrutiny:

**37**. It was then contended that when there is a repugnancy between the legislations under Article 254 of the Constitution, the doctrine of pith and substance does not apply …

**39.** … I am of the view that not to apply the theory of pith and substance when the repugnancy between the two statutes is to be considered under Article 254 of the Constitution, *would be illogical when the same doctrine is applied* while considering whether there is an encroachment by the Union or the State legislature on a subject exclusively reserved for the other … *[T]here* is no reason why the repugnancy between the provisions of the two legislations under different entries in the same list, viz. the Concurrent List should not be resolved by scrutinizing the same by the same touchstone. What is to be ascertained in each case is whether the legislations are on the same subject matter or not. In both cases the cause of conflict is the apparent identity of the subject matters. The tests for resolving it therefore cannot be different.

**53.** The aforesaid review of the authorities makes it clear that whenever repugnancy between the State and Central legislation is alleged, what has to be first examined is whether the two legislations cover or relate to the same subject matter. *The test for* determining the same is the usual one, namely, to find out the dominant intention of the two legislations. If the dominant intention, i.e. the pith and substance of the two legislations is different, they cover different subject matters.<sup>22</sup>

It is respectfully submitted that Sawant J's analysis is wrong: indeed, it is the second limb of the repugnance fallacy described in Section II above. It is difficult to understand how the learned judge reached the conclusion that *repugnance* is to be determined by the 'dominant *intention*' of the two legislatures: suppose the Bengal Moneylenders Act had provided that the interest rate shall not exceed 5 per cent, and the Negotiable Instruments Act that the contractual rate of interest shall prevail, the intention of the legislature in each case is plain, but does that assist in deciding which provision should give way? Secondly, if neither provision is to give way, Sawant J's views mean that two contradictory laws can coexist, provided the 'object' of the two legislatures (as will usually be the case) is different. Yet, it was precisely to avert this circumstance that Article 254 was inserted.

Notwithstanding these criticisms, *VK Sharma* has generally been followed in the past two decades, 73 although there are some curious cases $\frac{74}{1}$  that (inconsistently) adopt the correct principle.

In sum, it seems clear that Sawant J's analysis—alongside the first limb of the repugnance fallacy and *Mar Appraem Kuri*—effectively *turns Part XI of the Constitution on its head*: now *competence* is to be determined by a test of 'substantial interference' (*Gujarat University*), *repugnance* by the doctrine of 'pith and substance' (*VK Sharma*), and a law can be repugnant to a law that is not in force (*Mar Appraem Kuri*). With respect, this proposition needs only to be stated to be shown to be false: it is unfortunate that it nevertheless represents the law of India today. One hopes that the Supreme Court takes the next opportunity to overturn it.

### e. *Three Objections to the Argument that VK Sharma is Wrong*

One can make a reasonable argument in favour of the *result* in *VK Sharma* without subscribing to its reasoning. In particular, there are three main objections to the argument advanced in this chapter. This section explains why these are important but ultimately not persuasive.

#### (I) WHAT IS THE RATIONALE FOR BRANCH 2?

It must be conceded that it is difficult to find a convincing reason why the drafters chose to limit Branch 2 to pre-1950 *Concurrent List* legislation: what if a post-1950 State legislation had been repugnant to the Companies Act 1913, the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881, or any other pre-1950 *List I* legislation? Sir Thomas Inskip's speech on 27 March 1935 suggests that the drafters perhaps thought that repugnance with a pre-1935/1950 List I law was only a remote possibility and therefore did not provide for it. This was the explanation favoured by Varadachariar J in *Goundan*.

Whatever the reason for the omission, what is the position when a post-1950 State legislation is repugnant to a pre-1950 Central legislation that is not referable to List III? It would be a mistake to think that this problem is academic now that 64 years have passed since the Constitution was adopted, because some of the most important Central legislation currently in force is 'existing law' as defined in Article 366(28): the Contract Act (1872), the Penal Code (1860), the Evidence Act (1872), and the Code of Civil Procedure (1908), to name but four. The problem was considered at some length by Sulaiman J in his judgment in *Goundan*. It will be recalled that Sulaiman J thought that it was necessary to decide the repugnance point on the ground that the Madras Act, properly construed, dealt with 'promissory notes' whether the note had matured into a decree before the commencement of the Act or not. The learned judge asked if Parliament could really have intended that the States could not override Central legislation in the *Concurrent* List but could do so in the *Union* List? Sulaiman J thought this inconceivable and his solution was to borrow the doctrine of 'occupied field'—a most misleading and imprecisely used expression in Indian law—from Canadian law. By 'occupied field', Sulaiman J meant that incidental encroachment is permitted provided the area of encroachment is not occupied by the legislature *primarily authorised* to make laws in that field.

It is unnecessary for the purposes of the argument made in this chapter to take a view on this controversy: it is enough to suggest that there is something to be said for Sulaiman J's solution, although that should not lead one to think that it is the 'subject to' clause in Article 246 that allows the court to reach this result—to Sulaiman J, it is an *implied* limitation. There is some inelegance, no doubt, in applying this implied limitation to a pre-1950 but not to post-1950 legislation, but it is probably the best that can be done given the obscurity surrounding the reasons for not extending Article 254(1), Branch 2, to pre-1950 List I legislation as well.

#### (II) DOES IT RENDER THE NON-OBSTANTE CLAUSE IN ARTICLE 246 REDUNDANT?

The second major objection to the view that *VK Sharma* is wrong is that the words 'notwithstanding' and 'subject to' in sub-clauses (1) and (3) of Article 246 are rendered redundant. If *VK Sharma* is good law, on the other hand, it is those phrases that result in the invalidation of a State legislation that is inconsistent with a Central legislation under List I to the extent of its incidental encroachment.<sup>75</sup>

It is submitted for four reasons that this objection, although an important one, is misconceived. First, there is Privy Council authority for the proposition that the reason for the insertion of 'notwithstanding' and 'subject to' in Articles 246(1) and (3) was to ensure that legislative *entries* in Lists I and III—not *legislation*—override entries in List II.<sup>76</sup> It is true that this must now be read in the light of the Supreme Court decisions<sup> $77$ </sup> purporting to apply the non-obstante clause to repugnancy, but that view is itself a result of *VK Sharma* and the need to find a constitutional mechanism to resolve a conflict to which Article 254 does not apply.

Secondly, it is submitted that the Privy Council's view is preferable in principle, because what the 'subject to' clause in Article 246(3) qualifies is the State legislature's *power* to enact laws and not the *exercise* of that power. This must mean that the State lacks competence to enact a law if the 'subject to' clause is attracted, and yet it is clear that the law is *intra vires except* to the extent of the incidental encroachment. It is not easy to see how Article 246 can achieve this 'partial' *intra vires*, although Article 254 can.

Thirdly, as a matter of drafting technique, it is difficult to understand why the drafters would have wished to deal with a List I–II conflict in Article 246 but with a List III conflict in Article 254.

Finally, it may simply be that the words were inserted *ex abundanti cautela*, particularly because the contrary view cannot explain the legislative history set out above: if it is correct, there was no constitutional mechanism to deal with conflicting List III legislation *before* Sir Thomas Inskip's amendment on 27 March 1937, but it is clear that this was not the intention of the framers of the 1935 Act.

#### (III) WHAT IS THE RATIONALE FOR CONFINING ARTICLE 254(2) TO THE CONCURRENT LIST?

The last, and it is submitted the least persuasive, objection to the criticism of *VK Sharma* is that there is no reason why the Presidential assent exception in Article 254(2) should be confined to the Concurrent List if the main rule in Article 254(1) applies across the Lists. On the contrary, the White Paper and the JSC Report explain that the Concurrent List was created to allow Parliament to legislate on what are *essentially local subjects*, if it felt that uniformity is required, for example, in dealing with such matters as civil and criminal procedure.<sup>78</sup> But it was thought that the States could be denuded of much legislative power by an 'active Centre' if the Act simply conferred concurrent powers and left it at that. The solution devised was to allow *individual* States to override Central legislation by obtaining Presidential consent, and the reason this option is given with respect to List III but not List I is that *only List III deals with 'essentially provincial subjects*'. 79

## **V. CONCLUSION**

It is fairly clear, even from this chapter's relatively abridged account of this important branch of the law, that something has gone wrong in the analysis of legislative competence in the Indian courts. This chapter has suggested that it is the failure to articulate two underlying principles that form the bedrock of Part XI: competence, which is governed only by Article 246 and the Lists, and repugnance, which is governed by Article 254 but not by Article 246. None of this can be set right below the level of a constitutional bench of the Supreme Court which, it is to be hoped, will begin afresh when the point next arises.

I conclude this chapter with a summary, in the form of six propositions, of what it is respectfully submitted is the correct position of law:

1. Unlike British Parliament, Indian Parliament and the State legislatures *derive* their power to legislate from the Constitution. The Constitution provides two mechanisms to address the inevitable inconsistencies that arise from giving legislative power to two legislatures: first, it attempts to define (as exhaustively as possible) the fields of legislation committed exclusively to each and the fields committed concurrently to both; secondly, it provides a simple rule to identify which *legislation* (not legislature) has priority should two *intra vires* legislation containing inconsistent provisions collide. This chapter has referred to the former mechanism as 'competence' and to the latter as 'repugnance'.

2. The first question that a court must ask itself is whether the legislation is attributable to the appropriate List. This follows from the use of the expression 'with respect to', which is found in all three sub-clauses of Article 246. As Sulaiman J and Lord Porter explained, the question is therefore whether the legislation *as a whole* (and not individual provisions in it) is 'with respect to' the legislative entry in question. The existence of competing legislation is entirely irrelevant at this stage: if a State law is challenged as *ultra vires*, the position is exactly the same whether Parliament has enacted legislation on that subject or not. This is essentially a process of *construction*: is this *legislation*, properly construed, 'with respect to' this legislative *entry*, properly construed?

3. The principle the courts have devised for this process of construction has been given various names in the common law world. The most popular one in India is 'the doctrine of pith and substance'. The result of applying it is that individual provisions referable to the wrong List can be upheld in a legislation that is (as a whole) 'with respect to' the correct List. The *degree* to which the individual provision invades the wrong List is irrelevant except, as Lord Porter and Sir Walter Monckton explained, to the extent it transforms the character of the legislation as a whole; if it does, the legislation is no longer 'with respect to' the correct List and therefore wholly void.

4. Once Principles (1)–(3) have been applied, the impugned legislation will be found to be either within or outside the *competence* of the legislature. If the latter, the inquiry ends and the law is void. If the former, the next question is whether the legislation *actually conflicts* with another legislation (also competently enacted, in accordance with (1) to (3) above). That is governed by Article 254(1). For this inquiry, the *purpose* of the impugned or the competing legislation and the doctrine of pith and substance are irrelevant: if there is no factual repugnance, both legislation are valid. It is a failure to appreciate this that led the Supreme Court astray in *Mar Appraem Kuri*: competence deals with power, and repugnance with actual conflict and not its possibility.

5. Article 254(1) applies across Lists I, II, and III. *VK Sharma* is wrongly decided and should

be overruled. It is wrong for two principal reasons. First, it too holds that repugnance falls to be decided by applying the doctrine of pith and substance, which this chapter has shown is not accurate. Secondly, it did not consider the legislative history of section 107 of the Government of India Act 1935, and notably the debate in the House of Commons on 27 March 1935, which clearly demonstrates that the 'Concurrent List Qualification' was inserted by way of *amendment* to ensure that the basic rule applies to the Qualification, undermining the opposite inference which *VK Sharma* drew.

6. If Points (1) to (5) above are accepted, it would also follow that there is no room for a 'freestanding' aspect theory. What is thought to be a distinct aspect theory is in fact indistinguishable from pith and substance, for the reasons given in Section II of this chapter.

\* I am grateful to the editors of this volume for inviting me to present this paper at a stimulating conference in Delhi, and to them and the participants for the many useful comments that I received. I am also grateful to the librarians at the Bodleian Law Library for providing me with invaluable historical material relating to the Government of India Act 1935, and to Divyanshu Agrawal for research assistance in relation to the doctrine of occupied field.

<span id="page-16-2"></span><span id="page-16-1"></span><sup>1</sup> *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee v Bank of Commerce Ltd, Khulna* (1946–47) 74 IA 23.

<sup>2</sup> *Nagaratnam v Seshayya* (1939) 49 LW 257 (Mad High Court (FB)); *ALSPPL Subrahmanyan Chettiar v Muttuswami Goundan* [1940] FCR 188; and *Bank of Commerce Ltd v Amulya Krishna Basu* [1944] FCR 126.

 $3$  This is quite apparent in private law—indeed, some provisions of current Indian legislation are exact reproductions of observations made in the leading English cases of the day: eg, compare section 70 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 with *Lampleigh v Brathwait* (1615) Hobart 105, 80 ER 255, and section 73 with *Hadley v Baxendale* (1854) 9 Exch 341, 359 (Alderson B). For a brilliant exposition of the (similar) origins of the Indian law of evidence, see JD Heydon, 'The Origins of the Indian Evidence Act' (2010) 9 OUCLJ 1, and on the influence of the common law and equity on early Indian private law generally, see VK John, 'Principles of Equity and their Application to Indian Law' (1928) 28 LW (JS) 29.

<sup>4</sup> See eg, *Special Reference No 1 of 1964* AIR 1965 SC 745 (Gajendragadkar CJ) and *Raja Ram Pal v Speaker, Lok Sabha* (2007) 3 SCC 184 [21]–[22] (Sabharwal CJ).

<sup>5</sup> Foreign Office, *Proposals for Indian Constitutional Reform* (Cmd 4268, 1933).

<span id="page-16-0"></span>6 Joint Select Committee on Indian Constitutional Reform, *Report of Proceedings Vol I* (1934) (JSC Report).

<sup>7</sup> See generally, JP Eddy and FH Lawton, *India's New Constitution: A Survey of the Government of India Act, 1935* (2nd edn, Macmilla[n](#page-16-0) and Co 1938) and the JSC Report  $(n 6)$ .

<sup>8</sup> M Ramaswamy, *The Law of the Indian Constitution: A Legal Interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935* (Longmans, Green & Co 1938) 217.

 $^{9}$  HC Deb 27 March 1935, vol 299, col 1965.

<sup>19</sup> *Gou[n](#page-16-1)dan* (**<u>n 2</u>**) 218 (Sulaiman J).

 $\frac{10}{10}$  In the Constitution, these correspond to Entry 30, List II (moneylending) and Entries 45 and 46, List I (banking and promissory notes, respectively).

<sup>11</sup> *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee* ([n](#page-16-2) 1).

<sup>12</sup> *Nagaratnam* [\(n](#page-16-1) 2).

 $\frac{13}{2}$  *Martin v Most* [2010] UKSC 10 [13] (Lord Hope). This is why, as explained below, the so-called aspect theory is not a distinct rule at all.

<sup>14</sup> *Marwari v Ram* AIR 1941 Pat 99 (Patna High Court).

 $\frac{15}{2}$  Other High Courts had taken this view as well: Patna is chosen here simply as a representative example.

<sup>16</sup> *Goundan* ([n](#page-16-1) 2).

<sup>17</sup> *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee* ([n](#page-16-2) 1).

- $\frac{18}{5}$  *Gou[n](#page-16-1)dan* ( $\underline{n}$  2) 201 (Sir Maurice Gwyer CJ).
- <sup>20</sup> See also *Amulya Krishna Basu* ([n](#page-16-1) 2).
- <sup>28</sup> *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee* ([n](#page-16-2) 1) 29 (emphasis added).

<sup>30</sup> *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee* ([n](#page-16-2) 1) 43, 44 (Lord Porter) (emphasis added).

- <sup>21</sup> *Bank of Commerce Ltd v Kar* (1944) 48 CWN 403 (Calcutta High Court).
- <sup>22</sup> *Prafulla Kumar Mukherjee* ([n](#page-16-2) 1) 32.