# **Ojibwa**

**Linda C. Garro**

# **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

"Anishinaabe; Ojibway, Ojibwe; Chippewa (U.S.); Mississauga or Southeastern Ojibwa (southern, central Ontario), Nipissing, Algonquin, Plains Ojibwa (sometimes known as Bungi); Northern Ojibwa; Saulteaux or Saulteurs (Manitoba); Ojicree or Oji-Cree, Southwestern Chippewa (based on Goddard, 1978, p. 583 cited in Brown, 1997)." Geographically, this entry primarily concerns present-day Canada, particularly Manitoba and Ontario. Anishinaabe (plural Anishinaabeg) is the preferred ethnonym in Manitoba and Ontario (Peers, 1994, p. xvii).

# **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Most of the estimated nearly 50,000 speakers of Ojibwa are found in the area ranging from southwestern Quebec through Ontario, Michigan, northern Wisconsin and Minnesota, southern and central Manitoba, and southern Saskatchewan (Mithun, 1999, p. 334). The eight Ojibwa dialects belong to the Algonkian language family (Rhodes & Todd, 1981). Ojibwa and Cree are linguistically, culturally (Rogers, 1969), and genetically related (Young, 1988, p. 12), with considerable intermarriage starting in the fur trade period.

# **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

Records of Ojibwa contacts with Europeans date from the 1640s (Hallowell, 1992). Within a century after European contact, the Ojibwa began to migrate into southern Ontario and Michigan from a "homeland" located "somewhere within an area extending from the eastern shore of Georgian Bay (Lake Huron), west along the north shore of Lake Huron, and a short distance along the northeast shore of Lake Superior and onto the Upper Peninsula of Michigan (Rogers, 1978, p. 760)." It is unclear how unified Ojibwa culture was prior to the 1600s (Hallowell, 1992, p. 20).

A reasonable starting point is a glimpse at late 18th century life in the region northwest of Lake Superior—a forested region with numerous lakes, rivers, and swampy regions. During this historical period, the Ojibwa complemented their subsistence activities of hunting, fishing, and gathering with participation in the fur trade, which had been ongoing for over a century in this region (Peers, 1994, pp. 22–26). The effective unit of social and economic organization was the extended family, typically composed of several close relatives and their spouses, children, and other kin, which ranged in size from six to about a dozen people (see Hallowell, 1992, pp. 56–57 on bilateral cross-cousin marriage as the prototypical pattern and pp. 29–30 on polygyny). Generally there were patrilineal, exogamous clans (descent groups named after totemic animals)—see Rogers (1978, p. 763) and Brown (1997). The seasonal harvesting round emphasized fish and wild rice (Peers, 1994). In early spring, leaving their winter hunting grounds, several extended families would gather to make maple sugar. Families subsisted on small game, and caches of meat and wild rice from the previous summer. Men might leave on short trapping excursions lasting several days. After the sugar run, people from many camps gathered together at sturgeon-fishing sites for a month. Sturgeon was an important food source, both fresh and processed, to be stored for future use and as sturgeon oil (Holzkamm, Lytwyn, & Waisberg, 1988). As the largest gatherings, spring fishing villages ranged in size from several hundred to over a thousand. Trading exchanges of furs for goods occurred at local trading posts in close proximity to the fishing sites, or with visiting traders. Maple sugar and sturgeon might also be traded.

Activities associated with the Midewiwin, a ceremonial organization concerned with curing (Hallowell, 1992, p. 11) only took place during large gatherings. Hierarchically organized in degrees or grades of membership, initiates were instructed under the leadership of Mide priests (Steinbring, 1981, p. 251). As seeking a cure for illness was one means for entering the society, almost all were inducted into at least the lowest rank. Novices were taught to identify and prepare botanical medicines and to commune with other-than-human persons in order to enhance individual power to heal (Waldram, Herring, & Young, 1995, p. 112). Advancement in the Midewiwin's structured organization contrasts (see below) with the individualized "gifts" of "power" granted by otherthan-human persons through private sensory encounters.

After spring fishing, the Ojibwa dispersed for the summer to engage in fishing, berry picking, and hunting. At the end of the summer, larger groups gathered to hunt migrating waterfowl and collect wild rice. Harvested wild rice was stored for winter use and traded. Autumn activities included visits to trading posts to obtain goods for winter activities. Individual extended families would move to winter hunting grounds and carry out a fall hunt for summer-fattened deer, bear, and moose. The amount of cached food and availability of small game determined how much effort was directed to trapping activities rather than fishing or hunting larger animals. As spring approached, several families might come together for a last intensive period of trapping before rejoining other families to make maple sugar (Peers, 1994).

As Peers (1994, p. 25) notes, "the Ojibwa moved within a world that was at once spiritual and physical… . The forest, streams, and lakes were alive with supernatural [other-than-human] 'persons' and powers, all of whom had to be treated with respect to prevent misfortune, accident, and illness from befalling the human persons who moved among them." Feasts and other offerings conveyed respect and gratitude to other-than-human persons (Hallowell, 1992). Everyday objects and clothing were designed to tap into beneficial powers and protect from harmful powers. Sent alone into the forest around the time of puberty, young men and women actively sought to enter into relationships with other-than-human persons, fasting and begging otherthan-human persons to take pity on them and to help them throughout their lives. The "gifts" and "objects of power" bestowed by other-than-human persons, who occupy the "top rank in the power hierarchy of animate being" (Hallowell, 1960, p. 377), enabled human being" to do things that would otherwise not be possible. In entering into lifelong personal relationships with their attendant gifts, individuals incurred specific and general obligations founded on respectful behavior toward the other-thanhuman persons. Examples of gifts include: ability to change the weather, ability to call wild game, unusual success in warfare, knowledge of healing skills, and the ability to communicate with other-than-human persons to learn things that would otherwise be unknowable (Hallowell, 1955, p. 104, Peers, 1994, p. 25). At times some communications took place in public settings (Hallowell, 1942). Black (1977a) has proposed an "Ojibwa power belief system" underlying interpersonal relationships, including relationships with other-than-human persons.

Both learned skills and practices, as well as knowledge and abilities granted by other-than-human persons, were important in the maintenance of well-being and care of illness. Teachable skills and practices included bloodletting (Pettipas, 1977; Steinbring, 1981, p. 249), enemas (Pettipas, 1977), a range of herbal preparations, and sweat baths (Peers, 1994; Waldram et al., 1995).

From the woodlands northwest of Lake Superior, the Ojibwa subsequently fanned out in a westerly direction into areas rich in furs, large game, fish, and other resources (see Ray, 1974, ch. 2), coming into increasing conflict with the Dakota. By the last decades of the 18th century, small groups of Ojibwa began to move even further west into the prairies and parkland (Peers, 1994, p. 3).

Peers maintains that the fur trade "may not have been as central to their lives as it seems" (1994, p. 27) and notes (p. 43): "Where some trade goods reinforced and elaborated many aspects of Aboriginal cultures, others caused rapid cultural change and damage. Some trade goods did both." For example, alcohol and the "destructive nature of fur-trade drinking parties—even when these were conducted as redistribution events or ceremonies—hints at great stresses generated by the fur trade and at cultural changes resulting from participation in the fur trade" (see also Waldram et al., 1995, pp. 137–140).

Later sections of this entry concern the contemporary context of health based on field research carried out in the 1980s in a southern Manitoba community. Classified by Howard (1965) as plains Ojibwa, the community is located in the "transition parkland belt" which historically provided "most of the resources of both the forest and grasslands" (Ray, 1974, p. 28). It is an Anishinaabe community where members report the long-standing annual observance of the Thirst (Sun) Dance found historically in the plains region and closely associated with the plains Cree (see Pettipas 1994 for a description). Yet, as noted below (and complementing an analysis by Peers, 1994, pp. 152–153, 179, 210–211), there was also considerable commonality with work carried out to the east by Hallowell (e.g., 1955, 1976, 1992) and Black (e.g., 1977a, b). To help situate the discussion of the contemporary community, the next section begins with an abbreviated synopsis of some key social forces starting around the time that the fur trade began to wane.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

## **Missionaries, Treaties, and Newcomers**

As the importance of the fur trade declined and the animal resource base became depleted, missionary activities by Roman Catholics, Anglicans, Methodists, and others intensified during the 1830s and 1840s (Brown, 1997; Hallowell, 1992; Peers, 1994). The response to missionization varied (see Peers, 1994, ch. 5). Early missionary schools did not attract large numbers of Ojibwa students. But for some, baptism was seen as protective against the covert use of evil powers by others and/or providing a connection to new other-than-human persons that could prove helpful in the changing times (Peers, 1994, pp. 162 and 169). Accepting Christianity did not necessarily entail renouncing what has been referred to as the "Ojibwa power belief system" (see Black, 1977a). Peers (1994, pp. 167–169) writes of the turmoil and uncertainties, both social and personal, occasioned by these missionary efforts, of missionary attacks on the Midewiwin and of struggles between missionaries and Midewiwin leaders to attract adherents. And although the Midewiwin began to wane, and continued to do so as time passed, it remained visibly active up through the 1930s, with the report of a ceremony in 1942 (Steinbring, 1981, pp. 252–253; see also Hallowell, 1936). In some communities, the Midewiwin may have continued without coming to the attention of outsiders after that time (see Black-Rogers, 1989).

The intensification of missionary activities heralded the increased intrusions, restrictions and encroachments of the coming years, which escalated following the formation of Canada in 1867, and subsequent treaty negotiations. Hallowell (1992, pp. 35–38) asserts that the signing of treaties and creation of bands and chiefs through the treaty process was more drastic than the earlier impact of the fur trade and Christianity in that the Ojibwa were asked to give up all legal claims to the great majority of lands they occupied, as well as become subject in the future to decisions of a national state. Efforts to negotiate continued access to land resources were ultimately disregarded (Peers, 1994, p. 204). Lands were opened up to settlement and cleared for agriculture by Euro-Canadian settlers in the southern regions and the First Nations groups became increasingly constrained by the boundaries of reserve lands. Off-reserve involvement in wage labor, often in agriculture, became more common. Hunting and fishing rights were restricted while newcomers engaged in the commercial exploitation of natural resources, such as logging and fishing operations. Destructive environmental impacts include: the expropriation and overexploitation of sturgeon fishing by commercial non-Indian fishermen which led to the nearextinction of the sturgeon; impacts on fishing, trapping, and wild rice caused by hydroelectric projects; the clear cutting of forested lands; and mercury poisoning from pulp and paper mills raising individual health concerns while also curtailing fishing and jobs as fishing guides.

The Indian Act of 1876 and later amendments gave sweeping powers to federal Indian administrators to "transform 'Indians' into 'Canadians'" (Pettipas, 1994, p. 17). While First Nations negotiators wanted schooling provisions included in the treaties to adapt to the future, the educational policy developed by the Canadian government became entwined with the efforts of missionaries to "christianize and civilize" (Reading, 1999) and the day-to-day management of the schools was placed under the control of churches. Children were often removed to schools distant from their homes and, among other hardships, often forbidden to speak their own language, while the ways of their parents were disparaged. Missionary aims were furthered when government representatives enforced repressive statutes aimed at eliminating indigenous religious ceremonies, including the Midewiwin (Pettipas, 1994, p. 157). Since the 1950s, fundamentalist Christianity has attracted a significant following in many communities (Steinbring, 1981, p. 253; Young, 1988, pp. 16–17), with messages censuring alcohol and Aboriginal healing traditions. However, healing traditions, like the Midewiwin and the sweat lodge, have been held once again in communities after a hiatus lasting many years (e.g., Pettipas, 1994, p. 7). Some hospital administrators accommodate healers and their practices within hospital settings (O'Neil, 1988; Waldram et al., 1995, p. 205; see for hospital-based case studies illustrating some of the complexities involved).

While missionaries dispensed medicines (like traders before them) and cared for the sick, government increasingly took a role in providing health services (see Young, 1988, pp. 101–102). A recurring debate throughout much of the history concerns responsibility for the provision of health care, with "status Indians" from groups who signed treaties contending that health services are a treaty right and Federal government officials claiming that health services are provided on a humanitarian and not on a legal basis. This controversy lessened with the introduction of universal health insurance in Canada in the 1960s, but First Nations and Aboriginal organizations refer to federal responsibility for health in proposing efforts to enhance, as well as in voicing concerns about reductions to, health programs and existing services for status Indians. Leaders of First Nations bands and political organizations have long asserted that the improvement in health for First Nations people requires radical changes in the historical relationship between Canada's first peoples and those who came later. For example, Phil Fontaine, formerly the Grand Chief of the Assembly of Manitoba Chiefs and later of the national Assembly of First Nations, stated: "The present state of ill health among aboriginal people is a reflection of their placement in the social and political structure of Canadian society" (Fontaine, 1991, p. 21).

## **Health in Historical Perspective**

While no reliable information is available about the size of the pre-contact population, Bishop (1999) states that from "perhaps 10,000 persons at contact whose descendants are now called Ojibwa, the population grew to around 140,000 (registered) in 1996." The trend is not one of a smooth linear increase. The population figures at the time of contact declined through time and reached their lowest points at some point around the transition from the 19th to the 20th century (Ubelaker, 1988).

The pre-contact and the early fur-trade periods were characterized by a relatively healthy population (Young, 1988). Acute infectious diseases swept through the region at intervals starting in the 18th century. The smallpox epidemic of 1780–82 (Young, 1988, pp. 35–36) not only caused extremely high mortality rates, but also fear and despair contributing to suicides and other premature deaths, as well as the vulnerability of survivors because of a reduced labor force: "In a hunting-and-gathering society…the death of a single hunter or female worker could be a threat to the survival of an entire extended family" (Peers, 1994, p. 20; Young, 1988, p. 38). Indirect effects—reduced fertility and post-epidemic mortality linked to malnutrition and dehydration—may have contributed significantly to population decline (Thornton, 2000; Waldram et al., 1995, p. 59). Around 1825, as westward expansion progressed, epidemic diseases such as measles, influenza, and scarlet fever began to strike with more frequency. Disease impact was amplified by malnutrition and undernutrition associated with the depletion of local game and fur resources around the mid-1800s (Waldram et al., 1995).

By the early 1900s, relocation onto reserves or other semipermanent settlements with insufficient food, inadequate sanitation, and crowded housing ensured the continued prominence of infectious diseases, as did the concentration of children in residential schools. Infant mortality was extremely high; for every 1,000 live births there were over 200 deaths during the first year (Young, 1988, p. 124). Social conditions fostered the emergence of tuberculosis—a "genuine plague of enormous proportions": a review of residential schools over a 15-year period indicated that from 25–35% of all children had died, primarily of tuberculosis but also from other diseases like measles (Waldram et al., 1995, p. 156). Tuberculosis "continued unabated throughout the 1930s and 1940s as dwindling economic resources kept the population at mere subsistence level" (Young, 1988, p. 124).

Since World War II health has improved with national universal health insurance, improvements in accessibility to biomedical health services in rural and remote communities, economic assistance programs, and greater control of infectious disease. Still, morbidity and mortality rates for infectious diseases remain at a persistently higher level when compared to the rest of the Canadian population (Hallett, 2000; Waldram et al., 1995; Young, 1988) and are associated not with the quality of or access to health services, but with continuing socioeconomic marginalization.

According to Young (1994, p. 94): "Over the past several decades Native Americans have undergone the 'epidemiological transition' characterized by the decline, though not disappearance of infectious diseases and the increasing importance of the chronic, noncommunicable diseases, accidents, and acts of violence as causes of mortality and morbidity." For the chronic diseases, particularly striking has been the emergence of the so-called "diseases of modernization" or "diseases of westernization," such as type II diabetes, hypertension, obesity, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Many chronic diseases are seen to be "the result of rapid changes in

#### **The Context of Health 907**

lifestyle, particularly in dietary habits and physical activity levels" (Young, 1994, p. 216). The prewar situation of low body weights has changed to one where obesity is common (Young, 1988). While type-II diabetes was rare before the 1950s, the current situation is described as "an epidemic in progress," one that is "still on the upswing, with a trend toward earlier age at onset" (Young et al., 2000, p. 561). Type-II diabetes is also known as maturityonset diabetes as it typically develops later in life, but it is increasingly diagnosed in children and adolescents in Manitoba and northwestern Ontario (Young et al., 2000). In recent years, the discrepancy in life expectancy for Aboriginal peoples compared to others in Canada has steadily decreased but still remains, with recent reports indicating 8 years less for males and 6.7 less for females (Hallett, 2000, p. 34) and primarily reflects more deaths occurring relatively early in life (Young, 1994, p. 37).

With those under the age of 5 years suffering disproportionately from infectious disease (Young, 1988, 1994), the most important causes of morbidity and mortality for the younger age groups (upper limit of 45 years of age) are injuries sustained as a result of accidents and violence (Hallett, 2000; Young, 1994). In the years from 1972–81, over one third of the deaths in the Sioux Lookout region of northwestern Ontario were attributed to accidents and violence, mostly involving alcohol. Suicide rates were almost twice as high as for Canada as a whole. The rates for accidents and violence, with the exception of suicide, have declined since the 1980s (Hallett, 2000; Young, 1994).

Consider the case of Grassy Narrows, one of the more southerly Anishinaabe First Nations in northwestern Ontario (Shkilnyk, 1985). Looking at the 20-year period from 1959–78, Shkilnyk examines the detrimental impact of the government's decision to relocate the community in 1963 and the discovery in 1970 of mercury poisoning in the river that was so central to the life and livelihood of the community. Prior to the relocation, from 1959–63, 91% of all deaths were due to natural causes and 9% were attributed to violence, including suicide. From 1964–68, the frequency of violent deaths rose to 14%, and from 1969–73 to 49%. For the period from 1974–78, violent deaths associated with alcohol or drugs accounted for 75% of all deaths. Although presented as relatively unique (Shkilnyk, 1985), Grassy shares commonalities with many other Ojibwa and First Nations communities and that serves to illuminate the development and nature of the relationship between the first peoples and the wider society (see Garro, 1993 for a more extended discussion). Like Grassy Narrows, the traditional resource base of other communities has been eroded with the resulting dependence on governmentsponsored welfare programs and other forms of economic assistance (see also Waldram, 1985). In addition, separating children from their families and removing them to off-reserve locations has increased the feelings of demoralization and hopelessness. Exposure to mercury poisoning and forced relocations, often because of flooding of land by hydroelectric dams, has occurred with other communities. Many First Nations communities, like Grassy Narrows, have in recent years worked toward achieving a greater degree of self-determination which involves greater involvement in such institutions as education, child welfare, health care, and the justice system. Actions directed at regaining control over a land resource base, through settling land claims or by other means, are another important part of this ongoing process (see Garro, 1993). The struggle for self-determination, for resource rights and lands rights, is also a struggle for better health (Culhane Speck, 1989, p. 90).

## **The Community Context**

The remainder of this entry draws on field research carried out in the 1980s in an Anishinaabe First Nations community in southern Manitoba. It is a community where a substantial majority of adults and children, and essentially everyone over 40 years of age, speaks their own language, Anishinaabemowin; it is the language predominantly used in most social interactions in the community. Many individuals identify as Catholics.

There is insufficient land on the reserve or surrounding it to allow a subsistence or trapping-based means of livelihood, except for a few fishermen. Over time, much of the land surrounding the reserve has been acquired for cultivation, although not by reserve members. A few families farm some small tracts of reserve lands and some households have large gardens. Wild game and fish supplement the diets of most families, and some rely heavily on such products. Because of the lack of on-reserve employment, young people used to move back and forth between the reserve and work sites in agriculture or in the city. This still occurs to some extent. Some elders state that a major shift occurred in the late 50s when welfare assistance became available, making it possible for people to live full-time on the reserve and to purchase store-bought goods. Like many other First Nations communities, increasing numbers of registered members have relocated, permanently or semipermanently, to urban settings over time (Thornton, 2000).

The majority of fulltime on-reserve employment opportunities are through local First Nations government or related services—mainly positions in teaching, administration, and health care services. There is high unemployment and many depend on economic assistance. Until relatively recently, the highest level of schooling attainable without leaving the community was the eighth grade. Many older individuals attended residential boarding schools where progression through the grades was slow. Proportionally, few adults have completed many years of formal schooling. However some young adults in their twenties and thirties, many of whom work for the local government, spent considerable time in boarding schools off the reservation and then often proceeded to obtain a university degree or take college-level courses. On the reserve, much of the housing is overcrowded and of substandard construction; there is a lack of plumbing and water services with many homes relying on water delivered to outside barrels.

Physicians, other biomedical health professionals, schools, television, printed material, radio, and alternative forms of medicine, including diverse Aboriginal healing traditions, have all influenced local understandings. It was not uncommon for community members to contrast the health-sustaining characteristics of the foods and lifestyle of the Anishinaabe past and sicknessinducing propensities of contemporary ways of living from which the Anishinaabeg cannot escape.

# **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Outside of urban centers, few communities have resident physicians. The health center was staffed by visiting physicians approximately three afternoons a week with other physicians and hospitals located in towns approximately an hour's drive distance. All expenses of biomedical care, including transportation costs and prescription drugs, are either covered by universal health insurance or the federal government. Public health nurses and community health workers (residents of the community who have participated in training courses and whose work is supervised by nurses) focus on public health, health education, and prevention. They also make home visits to provide ongoing care and guidance to new mothers and others deemed in need of help with a health problem.

In this community, the most respected healers see themselves as descendants, in spirit if not through direct familial connections, of other Anishinaabe healers reaching back into the community's past. Two general types of Anishinaabe healers are important. First, there are individuals, usually women, who "know how to make (herbal) medicine," the special knowledge of which is learned from another healer and generally passed down through the family. Some are known for their skill in making one specific preparation, for example, medicine to help teething infants, dissolve gallstones, or to control diabetes. Others treat a variety of conditions. Herbal remedies may be used by women for a variety of reproductive health functions, for example, to control menstrual cramping, and to prevent miscarriages or premature birth. For services outside the family, herbalists receive tobacco along with some form of payment, usually money. Second, there are curers who are regarded as "gifted" with special powers. Most often the "gifts" of these medicine persons are manifested by their ability to communicate with other-than-human persons, through dreams, visions, or other altered states of consciousness to diagnose, establish cause, and prescribe and/or carry out remedial actions. If truly gifted, these medicine persons are able to ascertain whether a condition is best treated by a physician or can only truly be resolved through the mediation of a medicine person with other-than-human persons.

Although youths no longer routinely go into isolation and fast for blessings, healing gifts are still granted through visions and dreams. Medicine persons may also guide an individual to interpret his or her own personal experiences as indicating the likelihood of special powers that may manifest themselves or can be called upon in the future. Most medicine persons are not recognized as gifted and consulted by others until they have reached middle age. While it is not as common for women to be recognized as medicine persons, when it does occur it is after menopause.

Medicine persons do not charge for their services but they are always given tobacco and usually a sum of money or goods. Although what is given is at the discretion of the individual seeking help, the value tends to reflect the complexity of the case and the affluence of the giver. Families may incur considerable travel expenses to consult with a respected medicine person in another community.

#### **Classification of Illness, Theories of Illness, and Treatment of Illness 909**

An important component of being helped by a medicine person is a belief in their "gift" and the culturally embedded rationale for Anishinaabe sickness. This is not true of treatment by an herbalist. While individuals in this community can generally be said to share knowledge of Anishinaabe theories about the causes of illness and misfortune, there is considerable variation in the extent to which individuals espouse these theories and rely on them in evaluating events and making treatment decisions. Indeed, some individuals, particularly those who went to boarding school, express strong skepticism about the existence of "Anishinaabe sickness" and the gifts attributed to medicine persons. (Sometimes a household member consulted a medicine person without informing other family members who were not favorably disposed toward Anishinaabe healers [Garro, 1998, p. 350].) In this community there is no perceived contradiction between accepting a medicine person's abilities and being a Christian. The Midewiwin is not present in this community.

Black (1977a, p. 149) notes that those who heal also potentially have the power to cause death, illness, or misfortune at a distance. Uncertainty about the potential to misuse power may enter into interactions with medicine persons.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

## **Illness Treatment Decisions**

Patterns of care-seeking are diverse and complex (Garro, 1998). During the course of fieldwork, thirteen separate visits were made to 61 randomly selected families over a six to eight month period. The total number of illness case histories is 468. Of these, 189 (40%) were cared for at home without recourse to any other source of care. Among the remaining 279 cases, 225 (81%) were seen by a physician, 98 (35%) were seen by medicine persons who were consulted as mediators with other-than-human persons, 21 (8%) sought remedies from a herbalist, and 10 (4%) consulted another type of practitioner (non-Anishinaabe herbalist, chiropractor, acupuncturist, psychologist). The percentages add up to more than 100% because some cases involved multiple treatment alternatives outside the home. Of the 225 cases seen by a physician, 66 (29%) also consulted a medicine person. In cases where both physicians and medicine persons were consulted, physicians tended to be seen first. All but 13 families reported consulting a medicine person in the past five years. Six families (10%) reported never seeing a medicine person.

# **Classification and Explanatory Frameworks for Illness**

In Anishinaabemowin, there are a couple of generally applicable terms indicating the state of being sick that can be used to refer to any illness condition. These "sickness" terms can be modified in a way that connects them with two broad causal categories or explanatory frameworks— "white man's sickness" and "Anishinaabe sickness." Named illness conditions (e.g., diabetes, measles, arthritis) are not fixed exemplars of any one of the categories (see Garro, 1990). Uncertainty is common, an explanatory framework may be framed in terms of possibilities (or probabilities) open to debate, and an illness may be linked to multiple explanatory frameworks. One mother with a sick infant consulted both a physician and a medicine man, who diagnosed an Anishinaabe sickness. When asked which interpretation she thought was correct she replied: "I think they both were right. I believe them both."

**Sickness.** Sickness encompasses a diverse range of explanations, many of which are widely found throughout Canada and the United States. For example, overeating or eating the wrong thing, including "food poisoning" due to spoilage can lead to illness such as stomachaches or diarrhea. Colds, the flu, and tuberculosis could be talked about as something "caught" from someone else and transmitted by means of "a bug," "germs," or a "virus." Similarly, measles was talked about as a common childhood illness that could spread to anyone. An unchecked illness can develop into something more serious, such as a child's fever developing into convulsions. Another concept likely based in biomedical teachings is that of an illness being inherited or passed down through the family. Talk about the possibility that an illness could "run in the family" was generally understood, but heredity is not a common explanation (Garro, 1995, 1996).

Colds, fevers, and respiratory conditions, like bronchitis and sometimes tuberculosis, may be attributed to excessive cold, or to being overheated and catching a chill. A minor illness, like a cold, may leave one in a weakened state and thus more susceptible to the effects of cold and the danger of having the illness worsen into something more serious such as pneumonia or bronchitis. Rheumatism and arthritis were also attributed to getting wet or being exposed to the cold; fishermen were considered to be particularly vulnerable. Women are considered vulnerable to the effects of cold during their menstrual periods (but unlike other illnesses linked to the cold, remedies from physicians were not seen as providing any benefit).

There are also a number of things that, if in excess, have the potential to stress the body and tip the balance toward ill health. Smoking too much can lead to cancer as well as other problems involving breathing and the lungs; eating too many greasy foods can lead to gallstones; drinking too much precipitates a variety of problems, including damage to one's liver and birth defects, such as fetal alcohol syndrome; and being under too much emotional stress can cause sickness by itself as well as exacerbate most illness conditions. To provide a more complex example, high blood pressure is commonly seen to result from any number of sources of bodily imbalance (Garro, 1988). Although the most frequently cited cause for high blood pressure is that of being under too much emotional stress or having too many worries, a number of other catalysts included overexertion or working too hard, drinking too much alcohol, eating too much of particular foods (e.g., salt or greasy foods), and being overweight. These can act either singly or jointly. The same set of multicausal possibilities may be used to explain diabetes, though for this illness the most commonly given explanation centered on ingesting too much sugar through either foods or alcohol, or being overweight as a consequence of eating too much, particularly sweets.

**White Man's Sickness.** "White man's illnesses" are seen as occurring after Europeans came to North America. This phrase is commonly coupled with measles, chickenpox, tuberculosis, high blood pressure, diabetes, and cancer. To use the label of "white man's sickness" is to make a statement, at times with overt political overtones, about the social epidemiology of these diseases, embedding their presence in the community within the continuing disruption and destruction of the Anishinaabe way of life. Reference to "white man's sicknesses" affirms that these diseases were introduced by European settlers. Health problems linked to alcohol may also be referred to as "white man's sickness" since alcohol was not present before contact with Europeans. Discussions about diabetes, high blood pressure, and cancer often highlighted strongly articulated contrasts between the healthy and fortifying foods obtained through Anishinaabe subsistence activities in the past and the comparatively unhealthy reliance on the store-bought foods of the Anishinaabe present. For some, it was simply the inferiority of the present day foods that predisposed one to illness whereas "wild food" was inherently fortifying. There were several explicit comments targeting the large amount of junk food and sugar laden foods eaten by the Anishinaabeg in the present day. By far the most commonly cited source of bodily disturbance associated with "white man's sickness" was the contaminating and rather insidious omnipresence of "poisons" in comestibles. These "poisons" included chemicals and other substances sprayed on crops and injected into animals as well as those added during food processing and canning. Referring to diabetes, high blood pressure or cancer as "white man's sicknesses" shifts responsibility away from the individual (e.g., for eating too much sugar) to a societal etiology that is based in outside actions and is consistent with the local perception that contemporary Anishinaabeg are powerless to reverse such trends. Actions taken in response to illness, including "white man's sicknesses," relate to causal understandings (Garro, 1996, 2000a). Still, only a few individuals (Garro, 1995) consistently affirmed the primacy of "white man's sickness" in accounting for a given illness. It was more common for individuals to mix this explanation with other potential sources of bodily imbalance.

**Anishinaabe Sickness.** Hallowell (1960, p. 410) maintained that the "causes of illness are sought by the Ojibwa within their web of interpersonal relations, rather than apart from it." This assessment remains relevant to an understanding of Anishinaabe sickness. Three features recurred across the case histories and apply to the two explanatory frameworks mentioned below: (1) sickness originates in discrete and identifiable, or potentially knowable, actions of human beings, alive or dead; (2) it involves breaches of certain rules that govern social relationships within the Anishinaabe behavioral environment; and (3) effective redress can be achieved only through the guidance of other-than-human persons.

Most visits to a medicine person take place when one or both of two explanatory frameworks are suspected.

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 911**

The first is "bad medicine"; its use contravenes the high cultural value on an individual's right to autonomy (Black, 1977a, p. 150). Although "bad medicine" often strikes the intended target, there is some unpredictability in its use; victims may accidentally come into contact with "bad medicine" and suffer unintended consequences. In addition to causing direct harm to others, "bad medicine" can be used, for example, to win a competition, to induce someone to fall in love with the user, or to influence a courtroom judge to dismiss charges. Other misfortunes include flat tires, losing a talent contest, a house fire, minor physical problems such as backaches and headaches, striking alterations in an individual's behavior, loss of a spouse's affection, seemingly accidental injuries, acute illnesses and prolonged illnesses, "twisted mouth," miscarriages, and sudden death. A series of misfortunes or even relatively minor illnesses and/or events may raise suspicions that "bad medicine" may be involved, suspicions that may not be acted upon, at least not immediately, but kept in mind and reevaluated in the future in light of other events (Garro, 1998). The ability of a medicine person to remove "bad medicine" from a person or otherwise counteract its effects depends on the relative powers of the sender and the medicine person. The ability to wield "bad medicine" is hidden and not advertised; it is understood that a skilled user's private evil intent may be masked by public amiability.

The second explanation for Anishinaabe sickness links illness and other problems to transgressions that lie outside the realm of everyday and observable interactions between normal living human beings. Participation in the Anishinaabe behavioral environment requires that one enters into respectful relationships with other animate beings, with obligations to behave appropriately toward sources of power. In addition, it is imperative that obligations to other-than-human persons be fulfilled. When these respectful relations and obligations are breached, illness and misfortune may result. The term *ondjine* is used to indicate an illness or misfortune has occurred "for a reason," with the reason attributable to something that someone did at some point in the past. It is typically under the guidance of a medicine person that the individual gains insight into the specific circumstances under which normative expectations were breached. Recalling the past incident is an integral part of treatment; through the medium of the medicine person the other-than-human persons convey what needs to be done to make amends for the past incident and may make other requests for the future. These behests may include such things as holding an annual feast, preparing offerings, or participating in an annual Sun Dance.

There are many different actions with the potential to result in *ondjine* (see Garro, 1990, 2000b, 2001, 2002). The most common explanation for *ondjine* involves improper relationships between human beings and animals, such as causing an animal to suffer or to otherwise interfere with its autonomy. Such interference is considered a violation of norms governing social relationships. Animals may be killed to sustain human life, but this must be done gratefully and without causing undue suffering. *Ondjine* is also an inevitable consequence of the use of "bad medicine." Any crippling illness or painful death may be seen as a confirmation that the afflicted individual or a close family member has used "bad medicine" (see Garro, 1990; Hallowell, 1942, p. 77).

# **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

## **Pregnancy and Birth**

The local health center tries to ensure the health of the expectant mother and her unborn child through prenatal classes, home visits, and by "arranging prenatal care and other help during pregnancy. Canadian government actions and resources relating to maternal and child health have contributed to reduced infant mortality. Almost all births take place in hospitals about an hour's drive away.

For those who recognize Anishinaabe sickness, during pregnancy, an unborn child is considered vulnerable to *ondjine* and birth defects may be attributed to something the mother did when pregnant (or, rarely, the father). Interaction with animals is to be avoided, as is staring at or making fun of a mentally or physically handicapped person (which could lead to one's child being born with the same disability). If steps to acknowledge and redress a transgression are not taken, *ondjine* can continue to affect subsequent births. A miscarriage may also raise concerns about "bad medicine".

Life is respected and comments made about contraception and abortions censured such practices. Actions with the potential to interfere with beings who wish to be born can result in *ondjine*. This was the explanation converged upon by several women discussing another woman who had an abortion in her teens and was now unable to carry other pregnancies to term. A woman with a very large family was told by a medicine person that her chronic lower back pain was due to *ondjine* caused by the sterilization procedure carried out by the doctor after the birth of her last child. Another expressed similar concerns about taking birth control pills. (Yet, birth control pills were dispensed at the health center and one herbalist said that she was at times asked to make a medicine that could help bring on a menstrual period for a woman who was "late.")

## **Infancy**

The health center encourages breast-feeding through home visits. This is seen as an important public health concern for the Canadian Aboriginal population because of the potential impact on elevated morbidity rates for infectious diseases (Martens & Young, 1997) and rates of breast-feeding for Aboriginal women in Manitoba are considerably lower than non-Aboriginal women (Hildes-Ripstein, 1998). Another activity to which health center staff devote considerable effort is a vaccination program for infants and children. A yearly, and popular, baby show is sponsored by the health center with the judging based on vaccination records, breast-feeding, and other health promoting activities.

When infants cry and cannot be comforted a number of possible reasons may be considered—teething, a temperature, or simply a child just "born" that way. One oftenconsidered possibility for the fussiness of a "colicky" infant is that this signals the need for the child to be given an Anishinaabe name. An Anishinaabe name confers some protection on the infant and serves to establish relationships between the child and other-than-human persons. The power to bestow names is a gift given to some individuals in the community. A feast for those invited is given at the time that the name is bestowed and commemorative feasts are given in subsequent years.

# **Childhood**

A central goal for Ojibwa individuals is "not to be controlled by one's 'environment' including other people" with "acts that are attempts to control others ... negatively evaluated" (Black, 1977, p. 145). Even in childhood, autonomy is respected and parents tend not to interfere with what children choose to do. Children are allowed considerable scope to discover the world for themselves and learn from mishaps. Providing food and shelter for children is the responsibility of the parents, but bedtimes, eating times and what is eaten are essentially under the control of the child. Parents have expressed concerns about health education programs that instruct parents about what children should eat or what children should do. Physical punishment of children is rare, and like spousal abuse, the instances recorded involved occasions when the perpetrator was seen to be under the influence of alcohol or "bad medicine". Adults help children learn about responsibilities to others and standards for respectful behavior through their actions but do not overtly control the actions of children, though there may be some verbal commands to desist when children are particularly noisy or troublesome. Many transgressions that later in life result in *ondjine* are remembered as occurring during childhood.

Many children still speak Anishinaabemowin as their first language and others receive instruction through the school system. Like many other First Nations schools, an original language program is an integral part of education efforts.

## **Adolescence**

Suicide, alcohol, the use of drugs, sniffing (solvents, glue, and gasoline), break-ins, and vandalism among adolescents are significant concerns for community members. Living in a community with a high level of unemployment and low incomes dependent on social assistance, many youth do not see the future as having much to offer. Manitoba has the lowest rate of school attendance among Aboriginal youth of any province or territory in Canada. At the time of the 1996 census, only 44.1% of those aged 15–24 reported attending school either full or part-time, with a considerable gap in school attendance between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal youth (Hallett, 2000). Many of the youths who do not attend school are also not employed (37.5% of Aboriginal youths) and Aboriginal youths in Manitoba are 3.5 times more likely to be unemployed as non-Aboriginal youths. Aboriginal youths are over-represented in correctional facilities and in urban gangs (Hallett, 2000). Teen births also occur at a rate three times higher for "status Indians" than for others in the province.

# **Adulthood**

National figures show Aboriginal women having fewer children, steadily declining from an average of 5.7 births

#### **References 913**

per woman in 1970 to 2.55 in 1995 (Hallett, 2000). In recent years, many men and women return to the classroom as adults to make up for missed educational opportunities or to acquire new skills.

The start of menstruation adds an additional expectation for women's behavior. Menstrual blood is considered to have the power to cause illness in males and there were several cases involving young boys who were inadvertently affected. Women are expected to respect this power through appropriate behavior. While the danger is greatest when a woman is menstruating, generally speaking, women should not step over a male or even over a piece of clothing that will later be used by a male, and women should take care that males do not use the same bath towels. There are other associated proscriptions. Hunting may be unsuccessful if women touch hunting equipment, such as guns, while they are menstruating. The objects used by a medicine person should also not come near or into contact with menstruating women. Women who are gifted only come to be known as medicine persons after menopause.

When adults in the community talk about the "old days," reference is being made, not to some time beyond individual memory, but to time within an individual's lifetime, before the introduction of social assistance programs like welfare in the 1950s. The time before is recalled as one when people worked much harder and had little material wealth. Young people assumed more responsibility and had chores to carry out every day. Gardens were more common, as was home canning. Game was more available as were plant foods that could be gathered in the nearby bush. Simply prepared fish, stews, and bannock (bread) were everyday mainstays. But, by those who remember, this harder life was also considered a healthier life. There were no sodas or other junk foods. Wild meats, fish, and gathered foods were seen as more fortifying. Diabetes and high blood pressure were unknown diseases.

## **The Aged**

Elders are treated with respect and are often consulted for advice. For example, as part of the transfer of control process, the health center's director and staff decided to consult with a group of elders on a regular basis and especially before implementing any changes in their services or policy. Although being a respected elder is a matter of recognition rather than something achieved simply by age, a party given for elders invited everyone over the age of 55. At the same time, an increasing number of elders are living on their own, although if grown children are still living in the community they are often nearby and visit often. Increasingly, the long-term consequences of diabetes are evident—including blindness, renal failure, and amputations.

# **Dying and Death**

Most individuals have wide kinship connections throughout the community and a funeral often led to the cessation of most activities because many were in attendance. Prior to the burial, wakes can last for three days and three nights. Offerings, of food or drink, are often left on top of graves. Graves must be treated respectfully or it is said that *ondjine* may result. A man said to steal whisky and tobacco from graves became an alcoholic and his death was the result of drinking. A man who stepped on a grave over the location where the head was buried was said to have become bald because of this.

Interpersonal relationships may continue after death. It is not uncommon for an individual to dream of someone who is dead and be informed about something new through this encounter. Such interactions can become problematic, however, when the dead person desires to be joined by another family member, usually a beloved child. The dead person's efforts to bring this about results in the living person's enduring despondency over the preceding death and typically the individual regularly dreams of the dead person. These indicators of the dead person's continued and quite real presence in the living person's daily life suggest the need for the intercession of a medicine person lest the dead person's desire be realized.

# **REFERENCES**

- Bishop, C. A. (1999). Ojibwa. In J. H. Marsh (Ed.), *The Canadian Encyclopedia 2000* (p. 1702).Toronto: McClelland & Stewart.
- Black, M. B. (1977a). Ojibwa power belief system. In R. D. Fogelson & R. N. Adams (Eds.), *The anthropology of power: Ethnographic studies from Asia, Oceania, and the New World* (pp. 141–151). New York: Academic Press.
- Black, M. B. (1977b). Ojibwa taxonomy and percept ambiguity. *Ethos, 5*, 90–118.
- Black-Rogers, M. (1989). Dan Raincloud: "Keeping our Indian Way." In J. Clifton (Ed.), *Being and Becoming Indian: Biographical Sketches of North American Frontiers* (pp. 226–248). Dorsey Press: Chicago.