# 25

# Regionalism

### Manju Subhash

state is a political entity. It provides a forceful identity to its citizens. In predominantly monolingual and monocultural societies, a state was formed around unitary symbols, one language, one religion, one culture, and in its extreme manifestation, one party and one leader. In a dominant monolingual, monocultural nation-state, different dominant groups seek national identity in their terms. Multiplicity and variation are the key concepts in a pluricultural state. In such a state, recognition and management of diverse identities is a challenge before the politicians and political scientists.

India's fundamental integrative ethos and its self-identity have been drawn from a social reality that is composed of great diversity and plurality, running across which there are certain major cultural streams, and a cultural elite that shape and interpret these streams. Until recently, up to the growth of the national movement and founding of the Indian Republic, what held Indians together was the basic identity of being a civilization tied together by a set of values, by a set of cultural norms, and by an interpreting elite first within the broad stream of *Hinduism*, which, itself had an extremely plural framework and, then through a multicultural, multiethnic, and ultimately multi-national society, which we are now.<sup>1</sup>

Today, all over the world, specific ethnic, linguistic and religious groups are seeking specific regional identities. The International Encyclopedia of *Social Sciences* defines a region "as a homogeneous area with physical characteristics, distinct from the rest of the country". Notwithstanding this definition, anthropologists think of region in terms of culture and seek to relate specific cultures to specific geographic environments.

Regionalism refers to amalgamation of states into geographical, cultural, economic or administrative regions, and to resemblances in politics and policies among such states. Regionalism is portrayed as the effort to meet an area's needs in such a way as to integrate the area into the national culture and economy.<sup>2</sup>

Regions and regionalism are relative to the context or the parameters within which they are referred to and/or meaningfully operative. The social boundaries of a region are more often than not elusive as regions are seldom homogeneous social groupings, differences within a region may be more significant than superficial similarities or traits. However, a combination of cultural and physical characteristics makes one area distinctive in some measure from another area.<sup>3</sup>

Differences in population characteristics or attitudes alone do not necessarily lead to regionalism. It is only when these differences are specifically recognized as a differentiating feature from other regions that they can produce, reinforce or sustain regionalism. In other words, regionalism has a political dimension that involves a consciousness of kind, a collective identity, and a defence of territorial interests. Regionalism involves the politicization of regional concerns and the articulation of regional commitments.<sup>4</sup> Januzzi argues that regional identities are shaped not only by shared language, culture and political consciousness, but also by economic variables.<sup>5</sup>

India has remained multi-lingual and multi-cultural from time immemorial. It has remained so, because variation is accepted and differences are respected making conflict and conciliation a continuous process. Regionalism is rooted in India's cultural and linguistic diversity. In fact, much of India's known history is regional in-between sub-continental empires. Since independence in 1947, cultural politics whether in the demand for linguistic states or in the controversy over Hindi as the national language, or in the nativism of the "sons of the soil" have deepened regional identities confirming Paul Brass that, despite periodic appearances to the contrary, the long-term tendency in India is towards pluralism, regionalism and decentralization. The politics of revivalism and sub-nationalism has created a dilemma for the state.<sup>6</sup>

Projected in geographic terms, it is at the state level both an ethnic and an economic phenomenon. It is an expression of heightened political consciousness, expanding participation and increasing competition for scarce resources. Economic grievances expressed in charge of unfairness, discrimination or centre's neglect may be fused with cultural anxiety over language status and ethnic balance. It is this fusion that gives regionalism its potency. Language and culture, like religion, are at the core of an individual's identity and when politicized take a potentially virulent form.<sup>7</sup>

The regional, sub-regional movements based on language, religion, ethnicity or culture, combine popular grievances from below with elements of manipulation from the above. The leadership of such regional movements seeks to institutionalize its own political authority. These movements are expressed as secessionist, communal, often nativist and parochial. There was a time when people fought for their country. In the next phase, people fought for their party. In the current phase of Indian politics, the predominant mood is to fight for individual's interest. Such regional movements seem to have been very powerful when economic issues are fused with cultural grievances, may be due to the hangover of communal killings and the partition; over-reaction of the leaders and government authorities led to the intensification of regional sentiments and its fallout agitations.

There are several models available for understanding the regional movements based on language, ethnicity, and nativist demands. More situation-specific demands have been developed. Some of the important models for analyzing the regional movements are discussed here.

A new state can be said to be passing through a process of reduction of its primordial sentiments to that of civil order. This transfer of sovereignty from a colonial power to an independent state is more than a mere shift. It is a transformation of the whole pattern of political life, a metamorphosis of subjects into citizens.<sup>8</sup>

The primordialists, therefore, have culture as their major asset. To them, ethnic identities are not 'chosen', but are 'given', *i.e.,* these identities proceed inexorably from the cultural past. Looked this way, they perceive ethnicity as ineluctable and immutable.<sup>9</sup>

The emphasis laid by the primordialists on certain attachments in the cultural sphere as part of personality-formation and development which persist with them through life, consciously, is well taken. There is no doubt that such affiliations provide the impetus and impulses for social and political mobilization. By necessary implication, these assumptions, in the form of cultural attachments tend to change. For among the various components of such a cultural core, one may assume preeminence at a time, but may be supervened by another as the focal point of group identity assertion.

Furthermore, the premise of primordial ties being particularistic, they are perceived as potential road-blocks in the process of national cohesion. It is also argued that since ethnic attachments pertain to the 'non-rational' domain of human personality they lead to social turbulence and violence and, thereby, tend to be dysfunctional in the development processes of the civil society.<sup>10</sup>

 The primordialist view limits ethnicity to actual primordial ties. But some of these ties can be changed or acquired. For instance, sectarian and even linguistic affiliation can be changed during the life-time of an individual and can form the basis of ethnic identity. Secondly, even the 'ascriptive' identity of caste can also be acquired through appropriate mythologies, if it is founded on military power, and legitimized by priests. Thirdly, it is incorrect to argue that ethnic identities and boundaries remain fixed. On the contrary, they wax and wane according to situational contexts. Further, the mere presence of ethnic ties does not necessarily mean that they are ethnic formations. The latter are the result of political action.<sup>11</sup>

India is beset with virtually the entire range of primordial conflicts, and superimposed complexities. It has to be so. India, the vast and various labyrinths of religious, linguistic, racial, tribal, and caste allegiances is developing a many-sided political form. One peels off Punjabi linguism and finds Sikh religious communalism; scratches Tamil regionalism and finds anti-Brahman racialism; views Bengali cultural arrogance from a slightly

#### **452** ✽ CHAPTER 25

different angle and sees Greater Bengal patriotism. No general and uniform political solution to the problem of primordial discontent seems possible in such situations, only a loose assemblage of diverse, locally adapted, *ad hoc* solutions, related to one another only incidentally and pragmatically. The policies suitable for the tribal dissidence of the Naga are not generalizable to the caste-based disaffection of peasant landlords in Andhra. The Central government's stance toward Orissa princes cannot be taken towards Gujarati industrialists. The problem of Hindu fundamentalism in Uttar Pradesh, the heart-land of Indic culture, takes a rather different form in Dravadian Mysore. So far as primordial issues are concerned, Indian civil politics amounts to a disconnected series of attempts to make the temporary endure.<sup>12</sup>

 The rise of regionalism and of divisive forces is no more a phenomenon confined to the North-East or North-West. It has spread in every direction. The regional movements in the post-Independence India may be characterized as a response to the imposition of alien process of nation-building in the frame of a single political community. The process was supposed to erode all the so-called primordial identities and build up a single national community. Influenced by political modernization, the Indian elites also did put faith in this version of nation building. The civilizational base of our nation and pluralist identities were considered incongruent with the modernizing set-up. Soon, the rise of linguistic state demands and popular movements based on religious-ethnic demands exposed the Western notions. A tough dealing with these agitations was of no avail, most of the demands had to be acceded.<sup>13</sup> As the regional interest has become more powerful than the national outlook, sub-regional feelings have become even powerful than a regional outlook. The uneven economic development had led to increased inter-state and intra-state disparity resulting in a qualitative transformation of the Indian politics. The direction and process of transformation depends upon the ability of the regional movements and parties.<sup>14</sup> Regional movements are growing and have ascended to power in many states. Confirming that, though primordial groups and loyalties are traditional and predate even colonial rule, primordial discontents are also movements based on these frustration and are very often the result of independence and subsequent efforts at nation-building. Modern technology and knowledge have increased mobilizing potential of primordial loyalties faster than that of the political parties and other modern institutions. In political sphere, the processes of modernization are identified with secularization, participatory democracy, structural differentiation and replacement of ascriptive loyalties to the rulers by achieved loyalties on the basis of elections or other mechanisms of participation,<sup>15</sup> which, within a democratic framework, create a sense of self-awareness for identities based on region. The ethnic groups acquire an added importance as they fill a vacuum created by the decline of institutions.

Improvements in communications and transportation tend also to increase the cultural awareness of the minorities by making their members more aware of the distinctions between themselves and others. The ethnic conflict within the more industrialized, multi-ethnic states of Europe and North America seriously challenges the contention that modernization dissipates ethnicity,<sup>16</sup> which has been characterized as the new spectre haunting the power elites of our times, variously expressing itself as an assertion of cultures, of communal upsurges, revival of religious voices, and movements of marginalized peoples, regions, and nationalities.<sup>17</sup>

Modernization tends to create awareness of separate identities, and the situation calls for considerable ingenuity in the development of new patterns of federal association. The secessionist demands in the Naga region are being managed by the establishment of an independent Naga state known as Nagaland and the adoption of a flexible attitude in New Delhi towards the "Naga rebels" which has resulted in dissensions and divisions among the rebels. In Assam, the aspirations of the tribal party, the All Party Hill Leaders Conference (APHLC), have been accommodated by the establishment of a new kind of arrangement; a "subfederation" within the state of Assam with considerable internal autonomy and access to resources. Another constitutional innovation was tried earlier with respect to giving special status to Jammu and Kashmir.<sup>18</sup>

#### **Impact of Modernization on Ethnicity**

The process of modernization and development are caught up in the dialectics of their own dynamics, combating ethnic loyalty on the one hand and stimulating ethnic consciousness on the other. Consequently, whatever the level of the development of the state, ethnic conflicts need to be viewed as parts of an ongoing process which have to be coped with and managed, but cannot be resolved once for all except through the total assimilation or elimination of a particular group.

Modernization does not require the extinction of tradition. On the contrary, as Lucian Pye has put it, we must consider "what mixture, or rather fusion, of traditional and modern patterns will lead to national development. The effective operation of the society depends upon whether the traditional patterns of behaviour tend to reinforce and give greater substance and charity to the modern superstructure or whether they tend to undermine and disrupt the superstructure."<sup>19</sup> Once this general proposition is made, we must think in terms not of replacement, but of fusional structures.

There is another group of scholars. They are Marxist in approach and seek to examine regional phenomenon in the post-colonial third world countries, essentially in the light of the problem of nationalities and the path of development the country has treaded. The Marxists argue that primordial loyalties which constitute some of the key sources of regionalism rooted in pre-capitalist relations of production. In the post-colonial third world countries, capitalism coexists with feudalism. This forms the breeding ground of primordial loyalties.<sup>20</sup>

Karl W. Deutsch suggests that six dynamic factors that appear to determine the rate of assimilation. These are: (1) degree of similarity of communication habits; (2) the level of learning capacity on the one side and the teaching capacity on the other; (3) the frequency of contacts; (4) the material rewards and penalties; (5) the values and desires of groups; and, (4) the existence of any social and political symbols and/or actual barriers to assimilation. On the basis of these considerations, it would seem that relatively few of the ethnic conflicts in the currently developing world are likely to be resolved by assimilation, while the elimination of a particular group can only be genocidal and, therefore, an affront to human values and dignity.

In modernization theory, and in the Western scholar's concept of development, ethnic sentiment has been branded as primordial which would disappear in the course of development. But as ethnic factors came up to pose a challenge to the state, and the state development programmes held responsible for the marginalization of ethnic groups came to be attacked; modernization theory received a conceptual jolt. The new concepts as ethnicity, ethno-development, and ethno-politics have captured the stage of social science by surprise. These so-called primordial affiliations, far from being eroded, have set the tenor of politics in many third world countries including India.<sup>21</sup>

 The model on which India is set is one of modernization of an ancient and highly-plural society in the context of an open polity<sup>22</sup> with unevenness of economic development in different parts of the country as one of the most dramatic contributory causes of regionalism in India.

## ❑❑ **What Causes Regionalism in India?**

The dynamic approach to regionalism views regions as not just different territories with different names and characteristics, but as units that must be understood in relation to one another. By analyzing how regions relate to one another within a country, we understand more clearly how power is distributed throughout that society. Regional characteristics can serve merely as benign descriptions unless people within explanations can be identified to understand the process of transformation of regional characteristics into a more political form of regional awareness which is the essence of regionalism.<sup>23</sup> These are:

- 1. Uneven development
- 2. Fear of losing cultural identity
- 3. Political domination
- 4. Personal and selfish motives of politicians

The two types of problem which India face: (1) to uplift the backward areas, and (2) check the unplanned growth of metropolitan centres. Forces interacting between these two are to be regulated by region-specific judicial policy measures and, consequently, regional concepts are bound to be followed. The national planning is to be placed in the framework of regional planning.<sup>24</sup>

The Indian society, for all intents and purposes, has adopted a capitalist path of development. This path was preferred by the Indian bourgeoisie which took control over the state. It has encouraged the development of capitalist relations.<sup>25</sup> With the mechanization of farming industry and introduction of HYV (high-yielding varieties), chemical fertilizers, cooperative credit, and dependence on power-oriented water resources, agriculture is becoming more and more a capital and labour-intensive industry. This improved phenomena infield-produce resulting from these shifts in cultivation (popularly called, 'Green Revolution') has created a privileged class of rich farmers on the one hand and a pauperized stratum<sup>26</sup> of marginal farmers, landless peasants, and migratory labourers on the other hand.<sup>27</sup>

The uneven development of capitalism led to regional concentration of industrial development. The unmitigated sharpening of contradictions of capitalist economy has led to the growth of monopolies, concentration of wealth in fewer hands, and a slow pace of development on one side, and an increase in wage-erosion, unemployment, poverty, and crime on the other. The gap between expectation and achievement for a large mass of the population is increasingly widening. The state has tried to take the economy out of the woods from time to time by resorting to measures, like nationalization of financing institutions, devaluation of currency, borrowing and deficit budgeting. The maladies ingrained in the path of development, however, have defied all these remedial steps.<sup>28</sup> All of these changes took place in the context of heightened expectations regarding governmental performance in bolstering India's economy following Gandhi's *Garibi Hatao* (eradicate poverty) campaign in 1970-71. The costly Indo-Pakistan war over Bangladesh, however, and a series of droughts and floods in several states in 1971, 1972 and 1973, gradually undermined the economic gains of the late 1960s. International inflation accentuated by the oil emergency of 1973, added to rising prices in India and created a desperate situation for huge number of population living below the poverty line. In brief, increasing political centralization combined with failures in governmental planning led inexorably to a crisis of confidence and charges of mismanagement.<sup>29</sup> The growing contradictions of capitalist economy have obliged the state to play a more positive role in the crisis management. It has necessitated centralization of power at the governmental and the party levels on the one hand and unleashed a hostile regional reaction on the other. Hence, the failure of planning developed economic imbalances between states, regions, and sub-regions.

There are also inter-state migrations of labour which gave rise to the 'sons of soil movements' for restricting employment to local residents. The agrarian bourgeoisie, generally, welcomes migrant rural labour as it helps to push wage-rate down. Most of the sons of soil movements have been urban-based.

Many political issues have emerged because planning brought over centralization and the planning process failed to effectively deal with regional imbalances and, especially backward regions of the country. Regional assertions have emerged because of a feeling of deprivation and backwardness of some of the regions in India. Hence, regional political parties are demanding restructuring of the federal divisions of powers, especially transfer of financial resources from the centre to the states.

Regional imbalances are producing both prosperity and poverty between regions. Within the regions, they are also giving rise to the birth of two classes, rich and poor. Punjab, with the proud record of the highest per capita income during the sixties as a result of Green Revolution in India, represents a peculiar case of regionalism with heavy communal overtones. It also resulted in uneven development in different regions of the state. The fruits of the Green Revolution in the 1960s led to the rise of the regional bourgeoisie. The regional political parties and formations which came to prominence in 1967 represented the interests of the locally placed ruling class groups like the landlords and the *kulaks* in Punjab, Haryana, Western U.P., etc., or non-big-bourgeoisie in Tamil Nadu. The uneven development has not only increased disparity between the states, but also among different sections and regions within the state. Green Revolution created new areas of influence and strengthened the economic and political powers of the *kulaks*. Landless labourers, menial servants, and what is perhaps best categorized as a lumpen proletariat in urban areas, are neither significantly mobilized nor relatively economically improved as compared with the past because Green Revolution has been grabbed by just 20 per cent of Jat rich farmers who own more than 60 per cent of the total land.<sup>30</sup> It is this group of prosperous peasants who sought commanding positions in the Akali Dal as they were keen to match their economic muscle with political power. The Akali leadership which represented primarily the rich agrarian interests of the state took recourse to a rapidly religious path. It involves a combination of economic, cultural, and religious issues and at its core, the identity of the Sikh community.

A significant dimension of the contradiction born of the Green Revolution was the creation of new "cultures of deprivation."<sup>31</sup> Large numbers of Scheduled Castes and rural proletariat of the Sikh community felt alienated not only from the Akali Dal which was identified with the rich farmers who were Jats, but also from established Sikh institutions. To many among the socially and economically oppressed, it came to be identified as the religion of the oppressor, Jats who with 20 per cent of the Sikh population owned 60 per cent of land. Non-Jat Sikhs, such as the approximately 20 per cent of the Sikh population who are Scheduled Castes, tend to be anti-Jat and comprise an important element of the Congress party support base. Politically, economically, and numerically, Jats and after 1966, Jats Sikhs are most often the singlemost important group at the village level. In Punjab, the separatist identity has been strong among the Jat Sikhs, whereas non-Jats and Harijans are less involved in this sense of identity.

While the Green Revolution did not cause 'poverty' in Punjab, those who were not full participants in economic progress were placed in a position of at least "relative deprivation" as they perceived it.

The rural poor, though divided in various social, linguistic, and religious groups, share a common inferior status and a common experience of oppression and exploitation by rich farmers and state machinery. The rural poor who constitute the vast majority have at different times resorted to collective action and protest to express their aspirations and discontent against injustice perpetrated by the dominant class and the state which does not always protect their rights.

Jannuzi writes that political extremism in Punjab nurtured by Sant Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, drew support in the early 1980s mainly from sections of the rural poor who had indeed been bypassed by the Green Revolution and whose interests did not coincide with the land-owning Jat Sikhs who have dominated the leadership of the Akali Dal.<sup>32</sup>

After the two partitions in 1947 and 1966, respectively, members from the displaced Sikh community were constantly searching for a homeland where they could be in a dominant position. It is considered as the root cause for regionalism in Punjab. It is rooted in the persistent struggle for authority between the ruling party at the centre and state government. They had a concern with the governance style of Indira Gandhi. It is also associated, paradoxically, with the Punjab's spectacular economic success after the mid-sixties. The economic success and political turmoil in Punjab are inextricably linked to the increasing expectations of the people mounting pressure on any government irrespective of its capacities and willingness to respond to pressure.

Here, it is important to recognize that both the assertion of a regional identity and its assimilation into a larger national identity have been essentially political coalitional processes.

Several cultural, historical, and political facts which reflected regional feelings in Jammu and Ladakh, consciousness of regional identity was not really sharp before independence. Internal communal tensions and cultural and political pulls from neighbouring Punjab inhabited the growth of this consciousness in Jammu. In the case of Ladakh, Tibet's spiritual and cultural domination dwarfed its personality.<sup>33</sup>

Regional divergence was widening by the controversy over the Centre-State relations. While Kashmiris demanded maximum autonomy for the state, regional urges of Jammu and Ladakh were articulated in the demand for maximum integration of the state with the Indian union.<sup>34</sup>

The fact, is that right from 26 October 1947, political power, decisionmaking, administration at higher levels, better deals in matters relating to employment, locations of prestigious institutions, and factories and funds for development have become the privileges of Kashmir alone with the people of Jammu and Ladakh becoming a hostage to the fickle leadership of the valley.

The regional identity of Jammu found its first effective though partial expression in the forum of the *Praja Parishad*, which was a coalition of hurt regional pride, protest against arbitrary rule, urge for share in power and democratic expression, a sense of insecurity about the future of the state, dispossessed feudal, and vested interests and Hindu communal sentiments. The coalition was articulated in the slogan of 'full accession' and abrogation of Article 370 which guarantees a special status for the state within India.

It is true that the people of Jammu, Kashmir, and Ladakh are belonging to different world views, social customs, and culture which are based on conflicting ideas and conceptions. They derive their inspiration from different historical sources. To keep together such people under a single state must lead to a growing discontent and ultimate destruction of any system that may be so built for the government of such a state.

The bifurcation of the state would be beneficial not only for the people of Jammu, Kashmir, and Ladakh, but for the whole of India. It would remove the suspicions generated in the minds of Kashmiris about regional and communal aspirations of the people of Jammu and Ladakh. The Kashmiris will be able to seek a future for them. They are bound to realize that they can find their real identity in democratic India rather than joining Pakistan or by acquiring independence.

It may be argued that Punjab, Assam, and Jammu and Kashmir are special cases because of their unique geographical locations, peculiar communal issues, and critical roles in preserving India's military security. There is no doubt that their internal politics and Centre-State relationships are extraordinarily vexed at present. But, in a very real sense all of the Indian states are special cases, each possessing particular historical, geographic, cultural or economic conditions which give rise to idiosyncratic problems of governance. Over half of the Indian states have sensitive international borders, and most have distinctive minorities whether communal, linguistic, tribal or regional. Virtually, every state lays claims to a special cultural heritage and most can mount a case for being "neglected" or "maltreated" by New Delhi.<sup>35</sup>

Regionalism may also manifest in the form of a movement for special privileges to the sons of the soil' against outsiders. The city of Mumbai is known for wide variety of linguistic, religious, and cultural communities. A political party, named, Shiv Sena, has demanded that outsiders will not be given employments to this city. The Shiv Sena has been particularly hostile to the Tamil migrants for grabbing the mid-range jobs sought by the local Marathi-speaking population.<sup>36</sup>

When an entire state is crowded with migrants, as in the case of Assam, it leads to a situation of cumulative domination, enveloping all aspects of life, the economic domination of Marwari and Punjabi capitalists, the cultural, educational, and occupational domination by the Bengali Hindu middle class, the domination of the rural economy through agricultural colonization by Bengali Muslims, from Bangladesh, and the Nepali-Hindu peasantry, leading to a 'loss of nerve' among the native population. In this content, clearly, there are two types of ethnic groups, that is, the illegal foreign immigrants and the Indian citizens who migrated to the state in search of better economic opportunities.<sup>37</sup>

In the south Indian city of Bangaluru, a political party, named, Kannada Chaluvaligars, emerged in the late sixties, and demanded restrictions against Tamil, Malayali, and Telugu migrants to the city. It is also demanding that preference in employment shouldbe given to the local Kannada-speaking population.

In Chaotanagpur, a native tribal population, a poor illiterate and predominantly rural people have been overwhelmed by waves of migrants who have settled in their region over the past century.

On each of these instances, anti-migrant sentiment took a highlyorganized political form; in four of the five cases (Assam is the only exception) opposition parties ran in nativist platforms calling for employment preferences for the sons of the soil. In several of these states, there has been a substantial violence against the migrant communities. In other states, nativism has taken a less organized and, generally, a less virulent form, but it has been present. Meghalaya has adopted a residential permit bill that requires that persons from outside the state have to obtain a permit from the government even to stay in the state for more than four months. In Kerala, an agitation at a factory demanding that jobs be provided for local people resulted in police firing to disperse the crowd when it set fire to a factory. In West Bengal, the state assembly passed a law stipulating that anyone living in the state for ten years should be treated as a 'son of the soil' entitled to preferential treatment in employment. In Tamil Nadu, where people speak of *'mannin mainder'* (Tamil for 'sons of the soil'), the state government retaliated against Maharashtra's anti-Tamil policy by sending employers a replica of the Maharashtra Government's order on job reservations though this proved to be largely a political gesture in a state where skilled local labour and the local middle class compete effectively against migrants.

Hence, in India, the nativist reaction is not only to foreign migrants, but to socalled "foreigners" from other parts of the country itself. Nativism in India is fundamentally a protectionist movement whose tariff walls and domicile regulation for employment and whose middle-class population is like an infant industry seeking protection against competitive foreign imports.

Generally, a movement has a class base and intends to alter the existing social order and power structures or influence policy decisions and distribution of resources at the national or regional level where it takes place.<sup>38</sup>

 The so called "regional" movements in India are actually political movements by ethnic groups to create or govern states organized around an explicit ethnic identity. For this reason, the Akali Dal (and what was more broadly known as the Punjabi Suba movement) demanded the creation of a Punjabi-speaking state; in Assam's hill areas, various tribal parties agitated for the creation of the tribal state of Meghalaya; and the Samyukta Maharashtra Samiti demanded for the creation of a Marathi-speaking state. Thereafter, other ethnically-defined (mainly linguistically) states were created, regional sentiments persisted and deepened. In each state, the governing party expressed regional sentiments persisted and deepened. In each state, the governing party expressed regional sentiments in clashes with the central government or with neighbouring states. Moreover, regional, but particularly linguistic sentiment affected state government policies concerning the choice of language in education and administration, and the adoption of a variety of cultural policies.<sup>39</sup>

The number games in the politics of Punjab and Assam bear examples in which significance of economic factors have been put to a secondary position. The movements in both the states agitated for enforcing ethnolinguistic majority. Indeed, economic factors as the outsiders, domination in service and industry, the lack of employment opportunities for the educated, etc., were responsible for the 'sons of the soil' sentiment in Assam. But, instead of fighting for the economic demands, Bengali language and the Bengali as a whole were taken as symbols of domination and exploitation. In Punjab also, the sentimental wound (of neglect/non-recognition of religious demands, script) was the effective input for mobilizing the popular emotion. The divided, uncertain linguistic composition in Assam and Punjab could by no means assure them of their identity and security.<sup>40</sup>

Hence, the regional identity, its formation, expression, and assertion have been a very complicated phenomenon. Economic regionalism or movements mainly based on economic issues, remain less explosive phenomenon than campaigns based on socio-cultural issues,<sup>41</sup> *e.g.,* the agelong dispute between Maharashtra and Karnataka over the piece of land in Belgaum, the recent fight over Chandigarh. Even the genuine economic issues and development demands, *viz.,* the ethno-religious idioms used in the movements have been channelized on ethnic lines giving rise to ethno-regionalism.

The Bodos claim to be the oldest tribal or ethnic group, largely inhabiting the northern bank of the Brahmputra and the two districts of Nilanchal and Laulung on the southern bank. The origins of the Bodo movement can be traced to the passage of Official Language Bill in 1960 which led to the assertion of separate tribal cultures by the All Party Hill Leaders' Conference, the Mizo Hill Districts Council and the Plains Tribals Council of Assam (PTCA). The PTCA, the precursor of the present-day All Bodo Students' Union (ABSU) and the Bodo People's Action Committee (BPAC), first articulated a larger version of the Bodoland demand under the name of Udayachal. In 1987, the leadership of the Bodo movement passed into the hands of the ABSU-BPAC combine.

Apart from ethnic factors, complex economic forces played a part in the origin of the Bodo movement. The major ones were the problem of land alienation, poverty, indebtedness, unemployment, and the lack of capital formation. The excessive pressure on land has pushed agriculture down to a marginal or below subsistence level. At the same time, vacant fallen land has been grabbed by outsiders, leading to economic stagnation and a consequent feeling of deprivation on the part of the Bodos.

Another long-drawn movement in the Eastern region was the Jharkhand movement. The Jharkhand area, known as Chotanagpur plateau, includes a cultural region comprising 16 contiguous districts in the states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orrisa, and West Bengal. Later, the demand for the proposed state included 21 districts. The prominent tribes living in these areas are Santal, Oraon, Munda, Ho, Birhor, Asur, Gond, Kheria, Bhumij, Mahali, Kurmi, etc. The region has the richest deposits of the mineral wealth, although it accounts for 2.5 per cent of the total geographical area of the country; more than 25 per cent mineral activities are carried on in this region.<sup>42</sup> The Bihar portion of the proposed Jharkhand area provides the country 100 per cent of cooper, 58.5 per cent of mica, 85 per cent of Kyanite, 44.5 per cent of coal, 22.4 per cent of iron.<sup>43</sup> The development and industrialization process has rarely benefited Jharkhand, or the indigenous people. Rather, dispossession and forced migration have remained chronic among them. The movement based on ethnic and regional economic demands, has always been loaded with split and division on ethnic and religious lines. The Jharkhand movement had long progressed from ethnicity to regionalism. The basic component or issue on which the so called Jharkhand identity came up is all about exploitation by the *dikus* (outsiders).<sup>44</sup> There are two types of *dikus,* those from outside the state of Bihar, i.e., Bengalis, Marwaris, etc., and those from within Bihar. Once again, the degree of legitimacy of the ethnic groups vary, those from outside the state being the object of virulent attack by those who lead the Jharkhand movement, its aim being carving out a separate homeland for the people of the region.<sup>45</sup>

Similarly, Uttarakhand, a region comprising eight hill districts of north western U.P., namely, Almora, Nainital, Pithoragarh, Dehradun, Uttarkasi, Tehri Garhwhal, Pauri, and Chamoli districts, also passed through a turbulent phase of crisis. An imbalanced process of economic development has resulted in distortions in the socio-economic structure of the region. A low level of urbanization, illiteracy, and the wide prevalence of unemployment is forcing the work force to migrate and making the families survive on what is called the "Money Order Economy". Migration is gigantic and in many villages the entire population has moved out except the old and very young.<sup>46</sup>

The lack of political consciousness is another factor which has left the region dormant for four decades. In fact, almost the entire Himalayas are now revolting against the prevalent static systems, which left the people in a state of extreme poverty. The utter disregard for socio-economic, political, and cultural aspirations of the people in such areas has now led to spontaneous movements of people at the grassroots level with mass participation including that of women, considered politically the most ignorant segments of our social strata.<sup>47</sup>

The seeds of awakening among the masses were sown by the Chipko movement which inspired similar forms of grassroots movements with Gandhian style of protest in other parts of the country. It reflected the anger of the common people against ruthless exploitation and attack on the precious natural resources and heritage of the region. Nearly 11 months ago, an agitation was launched by students of this region following the announcement of 27 per cent reservation by the state government for Other Backward Castes (OBCs) in addition to the existing 23 per cent reservation should bear a relationship to the OBC population here is estimated at two per cent making a 27 per cent reservations altogether unjustified.

The Gorkhaland agitation in West Bengal got momentum only in 1986, on the issues of Indo-Nepal Treaty, inclusion of Nepalese language in the Eighth Schedule and other sundry economic factors and a separate state for the Gorkhas to be called Gorkhaland, affecting the sub-division of Darjeeling, Kalimpong, and Kurseong in the Darjeeling district of West Bengal. This agitation was organized by the Gorkhaland National Liberation Front (GNLF) led by Subhas Ghising. From time to time, the movement also adopted violent method boycotted national festivals, like the Republic Day and the Independence Day celebrations, organized strikes which frequently turned violent and took a heavy toll on people and material.

The main thrust was on assertion of India Nepalese identity through citizenship demand. In the Ghorkhaland Accord (1988) enacting the establishment of Gorkha Hill Development Council, none of the two main issues were touched upon.

The process of state formation has since Independence taken place for reasons of strategic security or administrative efficiency, but most frequently to accommodate a primordial demand. The centre in virtually every instance created states in response to pressure exerted by primordial groups that had the most to gain by acquiring statehood. But it was usually manipulative as the centre sought to outbid the primordialists and to ensure the installations of a state government that would support or at least not undermine national unity.<sup>48</sup>

#### **Rise of Regional Elites**

The question is why are the state governments dissatisfied with the present federal arrangements in India?

Two things have changed the complexion of Indian politics. First, the all-India-party system has collapsed. All-India parties with an all-India perspective have been reduced to regional levels. Politically the Central government has ceased to be pre-eminent vis-a-vis state governments. The constitutional arrangements make the Central government pre-eminent, but the swift changes in the fortunes of political parties have robbed the centre of its leadership role. Second, rich strata in every state have emerged politically powerful whether it is the rich peasant class or its allies, the local level industrialists. The rich peasants and the local industrialists in Tamil Nadu or Andhra Pradesh or Karnataka want more resources and power for their state governments. Since the local rich have political influence only in their state, more resources for their state governments will bring more advantage will bring more advantage to the local power elite.

Because of their power and inter-relatedness with other elites, the economic elite is able to lobby for central and regional policies that support its benefit from the re-colonization of Indian society as agents for the central elite.

The regional elites attempt to marshal the powers of the region through the political machinery of the region. Within a national state, regional units struggle against each other for development, and it is the economic and political elite in each region that are frequently at the centre of the heightened competition and struggle between regions.

Regionalism has become equated with provincialism because the local economic and political elite use the province to challenge federal control, and to promote local development.

The Akali Dal in Punjab is a party of rich peasants and hence its demand for more powers for the state government. Local elites have become politically assertive and political power should bring economic benefits. This is the goal of local elite. Decentralizes are representatives of local power elite and centralizers of an all India elite.

Rising regional aspirants are a political and economic reality of India. The devolution of financial resources should seem credible to the twentyfive states of India. The country's complex economic problems cannot be resolved without national planning and this demands an effective central government.

Regional, chauvinism or 'sons of the soil' movements reveal important tendencies in Indian politics, but in dealing with them a distinction should be made between wood and the trees.

Federal-provincial hostiles and confrontations reflect the interest of the regional elite, and long-standing popular sentiment may even be manipulated in order to create regional solidarity.<sup>49</sup>

# ❑❑ **Conclusion**

On the whole, the economy, both in its agricultural and industrial sectors, is becoming more national in character, drawing all regions into an interactive web of mutual dependency. Power and water supply systems serve interstate regions, and a national system of rail and transport carries agricultural produce and industrial goods across the whole of India. Labour migration and employment opportunities for the middle class have given India's major cities ethnic diversity. An all-India managerial elite, in government services and in private business, draws expertise from every region. The emergence of a national system of communication, the reach of newspapers, radio, cinema, and television has nurtured the growth of national consciousness, the sense of being Indian, and it penetrates to all, but the most isolated villages, linking the centre with the periphery, the rulers with the ruled, in (at least ideally) a two-way flow of information. But greater interdependence sharpens consciousness of regional disparities and intensifies the struggle among states to protect and advance their interests. Greater national integration, ironically, may deepen rather that alleviate stress on the federal system.<sup>50</sup>

#### **Notes and References**

- 1. Rajni Kothari, *Politics and the People: III Search for a Humane India,* Vol. II, Ajanta Publications, 1989, p. 480.
- 2. Roger Gibbins*, Regionalism: Territorial Politics in Canada and United States,*  Butterworth and Co. Canada, 1982, p. 4.
- 3. Harry H. Hillar, *Canadian Society. A. Macro Analysis,* 1991, p. 9.
- 4. *Ibid*., p. 10.
- 5. Paul Wallace (ed.), *Region and Nation in India,* New Delhi: Oxford and IBH for American Institute of Indian Studies, 1985, p. 14.
- 6. Paul R. Brasa, "Pluralism, Regionalism and Decentralising Tendencies in Contemporary Indian politics", In A. Jayaratnam Wilson and Dennis Dalton (eds.), *The States of South Asia: Problems of National Integration,* The University Press of Hawaii, Honolulu, 1982.
- 7. Robert L. Hardgrave. "The North-East, the Punjab and the Regionalisation of Indian politics", *Asian Survey,* Vol. XXllI, (Nov. 1983), p. 1173.
- 8. Clifford Geertz (ed.), *Old Societies and New States: The Quest of Modernity in Asia and Africa,* Amerind Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi, 1971, p. 119.
- 9. M.S.A. Rao and Franchine R. Frankil (eds.), *Dominance and State Power in Modern India,* Vol. I, Oxford University Press, p. 38.
- 10. Paul R. Brass, "Elite Groups, Symbol Manipulation and Ethnic Identity among the Muslims of South Asia", in David Taylor and Malcolm Yapp (eds.), *Political Identity in South Asia,* Curzon Press, London, 1981, pp. 35–43.
- 11. *Supra,*n.9,p.38.
- 12. *Supra,*n.9,p.139.
- 13. Sajal Basu, *Regional Movements, Politics of Language, Ethnicity Identity,* Indian Institute of Advanced Studies, Simla (1992), p. 105.
- 14. Surinder Suri, "Shift in Indian Policies: Strong Regions and Weak Centre". *The Times of India,* 8th April 1987.
- 15. C.P. Bhambhri. "Contemporary Framework of Comparative Politics: A Critique", *The Indian Journal of Political Science,* Vol. XXXVI, No. 4, 1957, p. 425.
- 16. Walker Cooner, "National Building or Nation Destroying", *World Politics,* 1972, pp. 319–55.
- 17. Rajni Kothari, "Ethnicity" in Kumar. David and Santasilam Kadirgamar (eds.), *Ethnicity, Identity, Conflict and Crisis,* Areena Press, Hong Kong, 1989, p. 15.
- 18. Rajni Kothari, *Politics in India,* Orient Longman, 1970, p. 332.
- 19. S.N. Eisenstadt, "Initial Institutional Pattern of Political Modernisation", *Civilisation,*  19th March 1962, pp. 461–74.