# **ASSEMBLY AND ASSOCIATION**

# MENAKA GURUSWAMY\*

#### **I. INTRODUCTION**

THE freedom to assemble and the freedom of association are cornerstones of the life of citizens in a constitutional democracy. These freedoms enable organising for the achievement of collective aims and for the engagement of citizens with one another. These freedoms also enable political organising. They are thus amongst the first rights or freedoms to be restricted by any State. The Constitution of India provides for freedom to assemble and the freedom to associate. Article 19(1)(b) provides that all citizens shall have the right to assemble peaceably and without arms. Article 19(1)(c) accords all citizens the right to form associations or unions or cooperative societies.

The freedom to assemble is of special interest within constitutional law, since it is enabled and restricted by an intersection of the constitutional text and criminal procedure legislation. While the Constitution provides for it as a right, the procedural provisions radically restrict this freedom, by empowering the State to regulate its expression and peremptorily curtail its exercise. This incongruity is a reflection of a colonial legacy and the unquestioning adoption of most of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1872, by the independent Indian State. While such a legal framework made sense in a colonial state, its continuation in modern India is unfortunate. The freedom of association, on the other hand, is not curtailed by any procedural code. Its character and breadth is shaped by the constitutional text and the jurisprudence of the Supreme Court. The reasoning of the Court, as this chapter demonstrates, has been weak when it comes to appreciating the freedom of association. Further, the Court has created categories of rights holders—government employees amongst others—whose freedom of association carries additional burdens.

In the early years following the Constitution's enactment, the Supreme Court's approach towards both freedoms was careful and nuanced. Since the 1970s, however, a clear shift has been discernible, with more and more cases having been heard by benches of two and three judges (and not five-judge constitutional benches) less committed to engaging constitutional principles and more likely to arrive at conclusions based on the facts of individual cases.<sup>1</sup> The Court's lack of focus on the rights in question will be demonstrated through the various topics covered by this chapter. This chapter consists of four parts. This brief introduction is followed by a study of the freedom of assembly in Section II. Section III focuses on the freedom of association, and Section IV concludes.

### **II. FREEDOM TO ASSEMBLE PEACEABLY**

# **1. Colonial Restrictions**

The colonial State keenly regulated the ability to assemble. The imperative for this was the interest of the State in preventing organising around the freedom movement. Five colonial-era statutes gave wide powers to the colonial State—and continue to impact the freedom to assemble in modern India.

The Police Act 1861 provided the police with the ability to 'direct the conduct …' of assemblies and processions.<sup>2</sup> Ones that were likely to cause 'a breach of the peace ...' were required to apply for licences.<sup>3</sup> The Prevention of Seditious Meetings Act 1911 aimed to prevent public meetings that were likely to promote sedition or disaffection.<sup>4</sup> The Defence of India Ordinance 1939 empowered the government to prohibit or regulate meetings, assemblies, and processions. The Criminal Procedure Code of 1872 curtailed assemblies and was meant to provide for employing the military in aid of the civil power.<sup>5</sup> This legislation continues in its amended form—the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.

The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Ordinance 1942, passed in response to the Quit India movement, continues to remain in force. The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act 1958, enacted after Independence, is similar in spirit. It grants the armed forces special powers in 'disturbed areas' in order to maintain public order. Such powers include the power to prohibit the assembly of five or more persons.<sup>6</sup> To disperse such an 'unlawful' assembly, officers of the armed forces, after giving due warning, are allowed to fire upon or use such force, even to the extent of causing death.<sup> $7$ </sup>

# **2. Restrictions under the Criminal Procedure Code**

In contemporary India, the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (henceforth CrPC) substantially impacts the right to freely assemble. The CrPC restricts assembly in two ways—prior to the convening of the assembly and once the assembly has gathered.

### a. *Section 144*

Section 144 of the CrPC is typically used to pre-empt persons from forming an assembly, holding a meeting, taking out a procession, or participating in any of the above. It is widely enforced in India. For instance, specific parts of the capital, New Delhi, are almost permanently under Section 144 orders. The drafters of the Constitution were alive to the problems with Section 144. HJ Khandekar reminded the Constituent Assembly that this section had been 'constantly reigning …' in the 'big cities of this country'.<sup>8</sup> Consequently, he argued that 'there cannot be a public gathering of even five or seven persons in cities, nay, not even for carrying on conversation among themselves or giving vent to their ideas and feelings'.<sup>9</sup>

Section 144 provides that when a district magistrate or other specified official finds that there is 'nuisance or apprehended danger …' which must be prevented or a 'speedy remedy is desirable …', then she can 'direct any person to abstain from a certain act …' or can pass orders 'with respect to certain property ...' in that person's possession or management.<sup>10</sup> A magistrate can pass such a direction, if she 'considers that such direction is likely to prevent … obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety, or a disturbance of the

public tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray'.<sup>11</sup> Most cases that examine the import of the text, and the impact of the imposition of a Section 144 order, are usually decisions of the trial and High Courts. In this chapter, we limit our analysis to the Supreme Court's interpretation of this provision.

### b. *Unlawful Assemblies*

The CrPC provides that 'Any Executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a police station … may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more persons likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, to disperse  $\ldots$ <sup>12</sup> Failure by the assembly to disperse could result in use of force or arrests by the police.<sup>13</sup> The CrPC also enables the executive magistrate to use the armed forces to disperse an assembly, in the interests of 'the public security  $\ldots$ '<sup>14</sup> Significantly, the CrPC mandates that there can be no prosecution against any person for acts done with regard to dispersal of an assembly, except with the sanction of the government.<sup>15</sup> The Indian Penal Code 1860 punishes participants in an unlawful assembly with imprisonment, which may extend to six months, or with a fine, or both. $\frac{16}{5}$ 

# **3. The Supreme Court's Jurisprudence**

Before turning to the Supreme Court's jurisprudence on the constitutional text and the CrPC, it is important to note that Article 19(3) of the Constitution provides that nothing in the right to assemble peaceably 'shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevents the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right …' The restrictions pertaining to sovereignty and integrity were added after the adoption of the Constitution.

These restrictions (then public order and morality) did invite criticism at the founding. Damodar Swarup Seth, a member of the Constituent Assembly of India, for instance, argued that they placed the right at the 'mercy or the high-handedness of the legislature' and that the Supreme Court would 'have no alternative but to uphold the restrictive legislation'.<sup>17</sup> Upon reviewing the jurisprudence of the Supreme Court, we find his fears to have been well founded.

The cases examined show that the Court's jurisprudence has been legally and philosophically vague. The Court has consistently upheld the constitutionality of Section 144 of the CrPC, a colonial relic, but has crafted no principles that could be used to guide its exercise. This would have been a useful contribution by the Court given that this power is invariably exercised in pre-emption of presumed acts that lead to a vitiation of public order. Additionally, the Supreme Court has not considered the utility of the strike as a means of protest in any depth. Therefore, outside of groupbased analyses structured around particular professions—for instance, lawyers are not permitted to strike—the Court has offered no further rationale for its decisions.

# a. *Prior Permission for Public Meetings*

In *Himat Lal K Shah v Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad*, 18 the Court considered whether a requirement that prior permission in writing from the police was necessary before holding a public meeting on a public street violated the petitioner's Article 19(1) rights. Here the rule in question enabled the Commissioner or an officer designated by her to refuse permission for such a meeting.<sup>19</sup> Sikri CJ, writing for the majority, distinguished between a statutory provision that enabled the regulation of conduct of persons in assemblies and processions and a rule that enabled the refusal of permission to hold public meetings on public streets without guidelines being prescribed for the officer responsible.<sup>20</sup> He found no fault with the prior permission requirement, as according to him 'the right which flows from Article 19(1)(b) is not a right to hold a meeting at any place and time. It is a right which can be regulated  $\ldots$ <sup>21</sup> He invalidated the arbitrary powers conferred on the officer authorised by the Commissioner of Police.

### b. *Government Employees*

In *Kameshwar Prasad v State of Bihar*, <sup>22</sup> a rule that prohibited any form of demonstrations by government employees was examined. $\frac{23}{10}$  The Court reasoned that a government servant did not lose her fundamental rights, and that the rule by prohibiting both orderly and disorderly demonstrations violated Article 19(1)(b). The Court did not take issue with the notion that government employees as a class could have their rights or freedoms burdened. It observed that:

By accepting the contention that the freedoms guaranteed by **Part III** and in particular those in Article 19(1)(a) apply to the servants of government, we should not be taken to imply that, in relation to this class of citizens, the responsibility arising from official position would not by itself impose some limitations on the exercise of their rights as citizens.<sup>24</sup>

These additional restrictions on government employees will be examined further in the discussion on the freedom of association.

# c. *Section 144 of the CrPC*

#### (I) THE POWER OF THE STATE

The Court confronted the dichotomy between the freedom to assemble and the power to curtail this freedom under Section 144, CrPC, in *Babulal Parate v State of Maharashtra. <sup>25</sup>* Here, the members of an association of millworkers assembled and blocked traffic. In response, the police prevented the millworkers from taking out a procession and then registered cases of rioting and trespass against them. The District Magistrate passed an order under Section 144, CrPC, which the petitioners unsuccessfully contended violated their freedom to assemble.

Mudholkar J found that the 'anticipatory action of the kind permissible under Section 144 is not impermissible under clauses (2) and (3) of Article  $19'$ .  $\frac{26}{10}$  He cited public order as one such instance of a ground that warranted restrictions activity in advance. The judge concluded that Section 144 did not suppress any lawful action, and only permitted anticipatory action by an authority where the danger to public order was 'genuinely apprehended  $\ldots$ <sup>27</sup> The distinction advanced by Mudholkar J

between Section 144 and Articles 19(2) and (3) is difficult to discern. Both seem to allow for preemptory action. One is the power of a magistrate to pass an order, and the other is the power to make laws granted to the legislature. But the judge provided no conceptual clarity on the difference between the two powers.

#### (II) THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF SECTION 144

The constitutionality of Section 144 was challenged in *Madhu Limaye v Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Monghyr.*<sup>28</sup> The Court framed the question as follows—'whether the provisions of Section 144 and Chapter VIII of the Code can be said to be in the interests of public order insofar as the right of freedom of speech and expression, rights of assembly and formation of associations and unions are concerned<sup>[?]</sup> ...<sup>229</sup> The Court referred to Subba Rao J's much- cited passage in the context of Article 19(2) from *Superintendent, Central Prison, Fatehgarh v Dr Ram Manohar Lohia*: ' "Public order" is synonymous with public safety and tranquillity: it is the absence of disorder involving breaches of local significance in contradistinction to national upheavals, such as revolution, civil strife, war, affecting the security of the State  $\ldots$ <sup>30</sup>

Here, Subba Rao J made the point that public order was local and not national in nature. Yet, the Supreme Court did not connect this with the question of whether Section 144 was constitutional. Instead, it noted that Section 144 was imposed depending on the 'urgency of the situation …' to prevent 'harmful occurrences'.<sup>31</sup> It reasoned that the power had to be used in a manner that would stand 'further judicial scrutiny ...' into its 'efficacy and in the extent of its application'.<sup>32</sup> It did not either explain or illustrate what this meant. Finally, the Court found Section 144 to be constitutional and rejected the argument that the section was excessive.

#### (III) 'POTENTIAL' VIOLATION AND 'UNLAWFUL' ASSEMBLY

In *Re Ramlila Maidan Incident*, 33 the Court took *suo motu* cognisance of police action on the nights of 4 and 5 June 2011 at Delhi's Ramlila Maidan. A prohibitory order under Section 144 was sought to be enforced on a sleeping crowd that was dispersed by the police using force.

Swatanter Kumar J noted that 'the provisions of Section 144 CrPC are attracted only in emergent situations. The emergent power is to be exercised for the purposes of maintaining public order.<sup>34</sup> He explained that the power under Section 144 extended to an unlawful assembly as well as a " "potential" unlawful assembly'.<sup> $\frac{35}{2}$ </sup> He clarified that he took no issue with police permissions being required for convening meetings or *dharnas* and that such requirements would not infringe the right under Article 19(1)(b) and would fall within reasonable restrictions under Article 19(3). However, he found that the conduct of the Delhi Police in using force to rouse and disperse a sleeping assembly was unwarranted and recommended criminal action against some of the police personnel involved.

The concurring judgment by Chauhan J provided no clarity on the extent, rationale, or utility of Section 144. Instead, he discussed the numerous procedural infractions by the authorities. First, there had been no service of the Section 144 order to the assembly. Secondly, there was no declaration that the assembly was unlawful. Thirdly, the aim of the assembly of yoga practitioners was 'unobjectionable …'—it was, according to the Judge, 'to improve the material condition of the human race'; and finally, given that the assembly was asleep, and that there was a fundamental right to sleep, they could not be an unlawful assembly.<sup>36</sup> Would the Court have taken such a sympathetic view if the assembly was awake, and their aim was a different one, such as the practise of aerobics?

#### (IV) THE RIGHT TO STRIKE

In a set of three cases, the Supreme Court has categorically denied any right to strike. In *Harish Uppal v Union of India*,  $\frac{37}{2}$  the petitioners sought a declaration by the Court that strikes by lawyers were illegal. The Court referred to *Mahabir Prasad*, <sup>38</sup> wherein it had held that a lawyer could not fail to appear in court by claiming a strike or boycott. It also referred to the case of *Ramon* Services,<sup>39</sup> which upheld the principle that strikes by lawyers were illegal. It further noted that any resolutions passed by the Bar 'expressing want of confidence in judicial officers …' would amount to contempt of the Court.<sup>40</sup> Curiously, the Court also declared that a strike could not be justified on any grounds save when there was an attack on the independence of legal institutions.  $\frac{41}{5}$ 

In *Radhey Shyam Sharma v Post Master General*, <sup>42</sup> pursuant to a strike in the Posts and Telegraph Department, proceedings were initiated and action taken against the appellant. The appellant challenged the action taken as well as the validity of the Essential Services Maintenance Ordinance 1960, which prohibited strikes, as violating Article 19(1)(a) and (b) of the Constitution. The Court referred to *All India Bank Employees' Association*, <sup>43</sup> and held that there was no fundamental right to strike.

*TK Rangarajan v Government of Tamil Nadu* dealt with over two hundred thousand employees being terminated from employment by the State Government for going on strike.<sup>44</sup> The question before the Court was whether these employees had a fundamental right to strike. The Court referred to *Kameshwar Prasad*, <sup>45</sup> *Radhey Shyam Sharma*, <sup>46</sup> and *All India Bank Employees' Association*, <sup>47</sup> and held that Article 19 did not guarantee a right to strike.<sup>48</sup> Further, taking note of *Harish Uppal*<sup>49</sup> and *Communist Party of India*,  $\frac{50}{50}$  the Court held that a strike offended the 'fundamental rights of the masses'.

### **III. FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION**

Unlike the freedom of assembly, the freedom of association is governed solely by the Constitution. Article 19(1)(c) guarantees the freedom of association to all citizens. However, Article 19(4) provides that the right to form associations or unions can be limited by reasonable restrictions in the form of an existing or new law made 'in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, or public order or morality …' The restriction on the ground of the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India was not in the original text of the Constitution. 51

The jurisprudence of the Supreme Court on these provisions may be separated into six themes and subsections: (i) appropriate notice prior to designation as an unlawful association; (ii) the determination of an 'unlawful' association; (iii) the freedom to form an association versus achieving its aims; (iv) maintaining the composition of an association, and control of an association; (v) the right not to join an association; and (vi) restrictions specific to government employees.

# **1. Appropriate Notice Prior to Designation as an Unlawful Association**

The first important issue regarding unlawful associations is the notice that must be served prior to

their designation as unlawful in character. *State of Madras v VG Row* concerned the Indian Criminal Law Amendment (Madras) Act 1950, which empowered the State to declare associations to be illegal by a notification.<sup>52</sup> Section 15(2)(b) of the Act provided that an association could be declared to be unlawful if it constituted a danger to the public peace, or had interfered with the maintenance of public order or the administration of the law. The statute did not provide for any judicial inquiry or for the service of even a notice. Patanjali Sastri J, writing for a five-judge bench, held that Section 15(2)(b) did not fall within the limits of authorised restrictions of Article 19(1)(c).<sup>53</sup>

The Court opined that the curtailment of the right to form associations or unions had consequences in the religious, political, and economic arenas. Therefore, the Court reasoned that such curtailment without allowing such a decision to be 'duly tested in a judicial inquiry' agitated against the reasonableness of the restriction.<sup>54</sup> The Court was concerned that a fundamental freedom could be restricted simply by a 'largely one-sided review …' or the subjective satisfaction of the government.<sup>55</sup> What troubled the Court further was that there was no provision for 'adequate communication  $\ldots$  of the government's notification to the association.  $\frac{56}{10}$  The basis of the Court's concerns and its decision was that principles of natural justice—notice and hearing—were not provided for. The Court did not locate its rationale in a conception of the freedom or in the validity of the restrictions themselves.

# **2. Membership of an Unlawful Association**

When we consider the Supreme Court's jurisprudence on the membership of an unlawful association, we again find that the Court has focused upon the facts of individual cases rather than on the nature of the constitutional right in question. In *Jamaat-E-Islami Hind v Union of India*, 57 the ban on the Jamaat-e-Islami Hind by a notification under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 was upheld by the designated tribunal. Verma J, writing for the Court, overturned the decision of the tribunal and the government. The judge reasoned that there must be an appropriate and adequate adducing of factual evidence that could lead an adjudicatory body like the tribunal to conclude that an association was unlawful.<sup>58</sup> The simple 'subjective satisfaction' of the Union government was not enough of a ground for the tribunal to arrive at the same conclusion.<sup>59</sup> The judge noted that the only material produced by the Union government was a report prepared on the basis of intelligence reports and affidavits of the Joint Secretary of the Home Ministry and Joint Director of the Intelligence Bureau. Both affidavits in turn relied on the reports and did not speak from personal knowledge. The association also filed affidavits, whose deponents were cross-examined, unlike the State witnesses.

Verma J made it clear that the determination of whether an association is unlawful requires the tribunal to consider 'whether the material to support the declaration outweighs the material against it  $\ldots$ <sup>'60</sup> He called this 'the test of greater probability  $\ldots$ <sup>'61</sup> The judge reasoned that a restriction under Article 19(4) that limited the freedom conferred by Article 19(1)(c) had to be reasonable. According to the judge, the tribunal accepted the version of the Union government without scrutinising the credibility of their case.

In *Arup Bhuyan v State of Assam*, <sup>62</sup> Katju and Misra JJ, in a refreshingly short judgment, considered the issue of the petitioner's alleged membership of an unlawful association—the United Liberation Front Assam (ULFA). The only evidence against him was a police confession based on
which the Designated Court, Assam, had convicted him under Section 3(5) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act 1987 (TADA), which makes it criminal to be a mere member of a banned organisation.

The Court noted the precarious value of police confessions, which are often acquired through 'third-degree methods  $\ldots$ <sup>'63</sup> This bench of the Supreme Court considered the jurisprudence of the Supreme Court of the United States in *Elfbrandt v* Russell, <sup>64</sup> which was referred to by the Court in *State of Kerala v Raneef*.<sup>65</sup> Here, the American Supreme Court had held that sheer membership would not incriminate a person until active acts of violence could be attributed to him.

The Court finally held that a mere literal interpretation of Section 3(5) would offend Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution. It reasoned that mere membership could not incriminate a person until there were acts of violence that could be associated with her.<sup>66</sup> Thus, it set aside the conviction of the appellant. It is unclear whether the reference to Article 19 by the Court was also intended to highlight this as an instance of violation of freedom of expression. Perhaps what also swayed the Court was that the only evidence of membership was a confession by the accused before a police officer, which is inadmissible under general law, and only here for an exceptional statute. It would be interesting to contemplate a case where the membership was evidenced by documentary or other evidence that was admissible under general law.

#### **3. Forming an Association versus Achieving Its Aims**

The Supreme Court's view has been that the freedom of association does not include the right to recognition or the fulfilment of the aims of that body. This was first explored in *Raja Kulkarni v State of Bombay. <sup>67</sup>* Since this case, decided in the early 1950s, the Supreme Court has been broadly committed to the principle that there is freedom to form associations. However, according to the Court, this freedom is not a guarantee in ensuring that the aims and objectives of any association will be achieved. State action, like the lack of recognition of an association without which it cannot function, is not part of this constitutionally recognised freedom. Perhaps a better test would be one that includes within its fold an assessment of whether the principles of natural justice and reasonableness have been adhered to. This next step has not been regarded as necessary by the courts.

In *Raghubir Dayal Jai Prakash v Union of India, 68* the petitioner was part of an association of traders that engaged in forward trading, which was refused recognition by the Union government and hence could not function.  $\frac{69}{9}$  In the Supreme Court, the petitioner contended that the denial of recognition and resultant inability to function violated their rights under Article 19(1)(c). The Court ruled that the freedom of association did not involve a 'guaranteed right to recognition'.<sup>70</sup> The Supreme Court explained its position by stating that the action of seeking recognition was voluntary and not mandated by the State. $\frac{71}{1}$  The Court was convinced that the control of forward trading was a legitimate subject of control, since it 'might have deleterious consequences on lawful trade and on the general public by causing violent fluctuations in prices'.<sup>72</sup> However, by creating this distinction, the Court did not address the point that the objective of the association to enable its members to participate in forward trading of notified commodities could not be achieved without recognition of it by the State. So the denial of recognition amounted to negating the aims of the association and hence its rationale to come into existence.

In tune with the reasoning of *Raghubir Dayal* is *All India Bank Employees' Association. <sup>73</sup>* Here, unions comprising bank employees had challenged the constitutional validity of Section 34A of the Banking Companies Act 1949. This provided that the banking company could not be compelled to share books of accounts or other confidential information relating to case reserves and debts. The Indian Bank Employees Union challenged its constitutionality by arguing that it prevented them from effectively exercising the right of collective bargaining in respect of wages.

According to the plaintiffs, this right of collective bargaining was part of their Article 19(1)(c) right, since it was an objective of the association. Ayyangar J, speaking for the constitutional bench, disagreed with the petitioners. He reasoned that Article 19(1)(c) only guaranteed the right to form an association, not the achievement of its objectives. He observed that:

It is one thing to interpret each of the freedoms guaranteed by the several articles in **Part III** in a fair and liberal sense, it is quite another to read each guaranteed right as involving or including concomitant rights necessary to achieve the object which might be supposed to underlie the grant of each of those rights, for that construction would, by a series of ever expanding concentric circles in the shape of rights concomitant to concomitant rights and so on, lead to an almost grotesque result.<sup>74</sup>

This line of reasoning was followed by the Supreme Court in *DAV College v State of Punjab. 75*

# **4. Composition and Control**

The Supreme Court has also confronted the issue of maintaining the original composition of membership of an association. In *Damyanti Naranga v Union of India*, 76 the Court considered the UP Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Act 1956 that superimposed a newly created statutory body in the place of the Hindu Sahitya Sammelan—a registered society. Therefore, the Sammelan was now composed of existing members of the erstwhile society, and others who became members without the consent of these original members.<sup>77</sup> Bhargava J held that since the terms of admission of new members were not decided by the original members, the statute violated the right to form an association under Article 19(1)(c). The judge explained that the right in question could be 'effective only if it is held to include within it the right to continue the Association with its composition as voluntarily agreed upon by the persons forming the Association'.<sup>78</sup>

In contrast to *Damyanti Naranga* was *LN Mishra Institute of Economic Development and Social Change v State* of *Bihar*.<sup> $79$ </sup> Here, the Bihar Government utilising the Bihar Private Educational Institutions (Taking Over) Act 1987 took over an educational institute run by an association. The only function of the association was to run this institute. By virtue of the institute being nationalised, the society lost its right of management and control of it. Dutt J in his judgment held that the State Government's actions did not violate Article  $19(1)(c)$ , since the right of the society to form an association and to determine its composition or constitution had not been infringed.

The State Government's takeover was viewed as being limited to restricting the activity of the association and not infringing the right to form an association. Interestingly, the Court here relied on Ayyangar J's statement in *All India Bank Employees' Association* that the 'Constitution does not carry with it a concomitant right that unions formed for protecting the interests of labour shall achieve their object such that any interference to such achievement by any law would be unconstitutional unless it could be justified under Article 19(4) as being in the interests of public order or morality'. $\frac{80}{10}$  The Court also did not accept the contention that this negated the right by virtue of the rationale for the

continued existence of the association being impacted.

*Dharam Dutt v Union of India*, 81 in tune with *LN Mishra*, concerned an ordinance that constituted the Indian Council of World Affairs as a statutory body, and did away with the registered society that had previously existed. This registered society had the power to control and dispose of two acres of prime Delhi land. Pursuant to the ordinance, this land would revert back to the State. As in the *LN Mishra* case, the ordinance was challenged by the society. The Court concluded that the right to form an association guaranteed under Article 19(1)(c) did not imply the fulfilment of every object of the association.

In both *LN Mishra* and *Dharam Dutt*, the Court's reasoning was weak. The Court refused to engage with the impact of actions on the exercise of rights. It also did not appreciate that the text of the Constitution provided for specified restrictions on these freedoms. The Court in these two decisions and the one to follow in *MH Devendrappa* appeared to be swayed by the fact that it was governmental action that was in question in all three cases. Nationalisation and the affront to the prestige of a governmental entity appeared to be reason enough to maintain the restriction on the freedom. However, it was only in *Damyanti Naranga* that the Court considered the direct and indirect ways in which freedoms could be impacted. The unwillingness of the Court to assess the constitutionality of actions by considering whether the act in question indirectly impacted the exercise of the freedom diminished the conception and utility of the right.

## **5. Right Not to Join an Association**

In *Tika Ramji v State of Uttar Pradesh*, 82 the Supreme Court considered whether it was legal to mandate that sugar factories purchase cane only from cooperative societies formed by cane growers, given the right of freedom of association of those cane sellers who were not members of such bodies.<sup>83</sup> The Court held that the fundamental right to form an association did not extend to the negative right to not form an association. <sup>84</sup> The Court reasoned that as per the facts of the case there was no restriction on the rights of the petitioner. It explained that the petitioner was neither under any compulsion to join the society, nor were there any restrictions on the market that was available to him. Finally, the Court concluded that the State Government could mandate the purchase of sugar cane only under certain circumstances to ensure fair practice in the market.<sup>85</sup>

A surprising departure to the decision in *Tika Ramji* is *M Sitharamachary v Senior Deputy Inspector of Schools*.<sup>86</sup> Here, the Andhra Pradesh High Court was petitioned by an elementary school teacher, who argued that he could not be forced to be part of an association, as mandated by Rule 3 of GOM No 418, Education and Public Health, dated 24 February 1939. An obligation imposed on members included meeting at least once a month, with absences being punishable. Raju J, in contrast to *Tika Ramji* that was decided only about a year before, rightly reasoned that the right to form an association necessarily implied that a person was free to refuse to be a member of an association as well.<sup>87</sup> The judge located his rationale not simply in the 'forced' membership but the inconveniences caused by it, such as punishment for non-attendance of association meetings. He also relied on *Raja Suryapal Singh v UP Government* in arriving at his decision. 88

# **6. Government Employees**

This section considers the restrictions on the rights of government employees, including members of the armed forces and security personnel. Even though the rights that are discussed involve their freedom of association, the restrictions imposed on them as a class have substantially restricted their ability to exercise this freedom.

In *OK Ghosh v EX Joseph*, <sup>89</sup> a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court upheld service rules that prevented government employees from striking. <sup>90</sup> However, Gajendragadkar J, in his judgment for the Court, struck down another rule of the same statute that proscribed government servants from joining or continuing as members of any association that was not recognised by the government. The judge applied the reasoning of *Kameshwar Prasad* and concluded that service rules that prohibited government employees from participating in demonstrations relating to their service violated their rights to freedom of expression and to associate.<sup>91</sup>

Gajendragadkar J reasoned that for the freedom of association to be restricted validly in the interests of public order (as was argued by the State), 'the connection between the restriction and the public order  $\dots$  [was] proximate and direct'.  $\frac{92}{2}$  He concluded that he could not find a 'proximate or reasonable connection …' between recognition of an association by the government and the discipline and efficiency of members of the association.  $\frac{93}{2}$  Similarly, he continued that he saw no 'direct, proximate and rationale connection' between recognition and public order. <sup>94</sup> Therefore, he found that the restriction infringed the freedom under Article  $19(1)(c) \frac{95}{6}$ 

In *MH Devendrappa v Karnataka State Small Industries Development Corporation*, 96 the appellant, who was also the President of the employees' welfare association, issued a press statement welcoming the dismissal of the chairman of the respondent corporation. Subsequently, he was dismissed from service by the corporation, relying on Rule 22 of its Service Rules, which allowed for an employee to be dismissed if she knowingly did 'anything detrimental to the interests or prestige of the Corporation  $\ldots$  or was guilty of misconduct.  $\frac{97}{2}$  The appellant contended that he was dismissed for conduct that was an exercise of freedom of speech, expression, and association.

Manohar J, who wrote the Court's judgment, traced cases where government employees were removed from service for either participating in assemblies—*Kameshwar Prasad v State of Bihar*, 98 which was struck down, or *P Balakotaiah v Union of India*, <sup>99</sup> where an order dismissing 'subversive' workers as per the Railways Services (Safeguarding of National Security) Rules 1949 was upheld, since it did not violate the freedom of association. However, for Manohar J the critical point was that 'the appellant had made a direct public attack on the head of his organisation', that his conduct 'amounted to lowering the prestige of the organisation in which he worked', and therefore the rule could be validly applied to him.<sup>100</sup> Manohar J reasoned that individual freedom must be balanced with the proper functioning of a governmental organisation.<sup>101</sup>

The line of cases that Manohar J relied upon limited individual rights when they conflicted with the interests of a governmental institution. However, this reasoning is flawed. It might be argued instead that exercising freedom of expression and association to express criticism might lead to necessary change in the interests of society at large. Instead, the judge reasoned that the maintenance at all costs of the 'prestige' of a governmental institution served the larger well-being of society.

In *P Balakotaiah*, that Manohar J discussed, the Court in upholding the workers' dismissal had concluded that there was not an Article 19(1)(c) violation, since the right to continue within the trade union had not been curtailed. A five-judge bench of the Supreme Court rejected the argument of the petitioners that their freedom of association was violated when they were dismissed from employment of the Railways as they attracted a service rule that prohibited any subversive activities. Here, the subversive activity was membership of a communist trade union. The Court held that the appellants 'have no fundamental right to be continued in employment by the State  $\ldots$ <sup>102</sup> The Court reasoned that the only violations of the rights of government employees were under Article 311 of the Constitution, which governed their dismissal, removal, or reduction in rank. Their citizenship rights thus appear to be subordinated by the service requirements.

The logic of the Court is weak. When workers have to choose between the membership of a particular union and continuing in government service, then a fundamental freedom to associate and be part of a union of one's choice is being burdened. The Court through both these cases suggests that an order must explicitly prohibit membership of an association or union for it to be unconstitutional. Therefore, orders for dismissal from service because of membership of an association or conduct that stems from such membership are constitutional.

The Court fails to appreciate that orders may directly and indirectly burden the exercise of the fundamental rights and freedoms. The pervasive problem with the jurisprudence of the Court on freedoms to assemble and associate is the rather limited engagement with the restrictions that the text imposes through Articles 19(3) and 19(4). For instance, Manohar J should have necessarily tested the conduct in question against the requirements of Article 19(4) to assess whether it could be upheld. This lack of engagement with the restrictions that the Constitution allows has meant that the Court has upheld restrictions on an assortment of other grounds.

The freedom of association of members of the armed forces and security personnel is even more compromised than that of other government employees. In *Ous Kutilingal Achudan Nair v Union of India*, <sup>103</sup> members of the Civil Employees Union, who were employed as 'non-combatants unenrolled' by the army, argued that their association not being recognised violated their freedom of association. The State argued that the Army Act 1950, whose Rules prohibited joining or forming a trade union, governed civilian employees. The appellants argued that they were not 'members of the Armed Forces' as envisaged by Article 33 of the Constitution, as they were civilian employees. The Court opined that such civilian employees of the army were an integral part of the armed forces and were within the purview of Article  $33.\overline{104}$  This provision enabled Parliament to modify the application of fundamental rights to members of the armed forces and other specified personnel hence, the restrictions on fundamental rights of civilian members of the armed forces were valid.

Similarly, in *Delhi Police Non-Gazetted Karmachari Sangh v Union of India*, 105 the appellant union was derecognised under the Police Forces (Restrictions of Rights) Act 1966. The union contended that this violated their freedom under Article 19(1)(c). The union was initially recognised, but a change in the rules meant that the union could only consist of officers of the same rank. Since the union membership comprised a cross-section of ranks, before and after the change of the service rules, its recognition was withdrawn. The Supreme Court, while ruling against the appellants, reasoned that Parliament had the power to impose restrictions upon the fundamental rights of 'members of Armed Forces' under Article  $33.\overline{106}$  Hence, such restrictions could be imposed on unions and associations. It further held that this classification had its own rationale of discipline, which could not be questioned by the Court.<sup>107</sup>

## **IV. CONCLUSION**

The Supreme Court has been restrained in crafting jurisprudence that enables the exercise of the freedom of assembly and association. The Court has not considered the need to provide for greater conceptual clarity on the necessity of the two freedoms. Nor has the Court engaged in a discussion of principles that must guide it when interpreting these freedoms. Instead, the Court has largely performed a case-by-case analysis—while crafting jurisprudence as it sees fit based on categories or classes of bearers of these freedoms. For instance, instead of engaging in a discussion on strikes, it creates classes of citizens who cannot strike, such as lawyers or government employees. On Section 144 of the CrPC as well, we find that the Court has offered few guidelines to prevent its abuse outside of basic procedural safeguards.

The Court has been confronted by many more cases in the context of freedom of association. It has considered any array of questions, such as the freedom not to associate; the achievement of the aims and objectives of an association; the State takeover of the original control and management of an association; and changes in the original terms of membership of an association. It has accepted a weaker freedom of association when it pertains to employees of the State—civil and military.

Outside of changes in the original terms of membership of an association, the Supreme Court has generally replied in the negative to all the other questions posed by petitioners before it. Surprisingly, the Court has been rather protective of the freedom of association in the context of membership of an unlawful association. Thus far, the Court's positon has been that membership of such as association cannot by itself be considered to be an act that is criminal. Here too, the Court has been driven by how the fact of membership was proved and not the nature of the freedom of association itself. Thus, the Supreme Court in general has been conceptually uninterested in exploring the various dimensions of these freedoms and their connection to democratic constitutionalism in India.

- $\frac{1}{2}$  See generally, Nick Robinson and others, 'Interpreting the Constitution: Supreme Court Constitutional Benches since Independence' (2011) 46(9) Economic and Politcial Weekly 27.
  - $2$  Police Act 1861, s 30(1).
  - $3$  Police Act 1861, s 30(2).
  - $\frac{4}{3}$  Prevention of Seditious Meetings Act 1911, s 5.
  - <sup>5</sup> R Gopal, *Sohoni's Code of Criminal Procedure*, vol 2 (20th edn, Butterworths India 2002) 1151.
  - $6$  Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act 1958, s 4(a). See also Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act 1990.
  - <sup>2</sup> Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act 1958, s  $4(a)$ .
  - <sup>8</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 765, 2 December 1948.
  - <sup>9</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 765, 2 December 1948.
  - $\frac{10}{10}$  Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, s 144(1).
  - $\frac{11}{1}$  Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, s 144(1).
  - $\frac{12}{2}$  Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, s 129(1).
  - $\frac{13}{2}$  Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, s 129(2).
  - $\frac{14}{1}$  Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, s 130(1).
  - $\frac{15}{5}$  Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, s 132.
  - $\frac{16}{16}$  Indian Penal Code 1860, s 143.
  - <sup>17</sup> *Constituent Assembly Debates*, vol 7 (Lok Sabha Secretariat 1986) 712, 1 December 1948.
  - $\frac{18}{1}$  (1973) 1 SCC 227.
  - $\frac{19}{2}$  Bombay Police Act 1951, s 33(1)(o) and Rules for Processions and Public Meetings, Rule 7.

<sup>\*</sup> The author is grateful to Madhulika Murthy, Vivek Paul Oriel, Himanshu Agarwal, Dipankar Das, and Vatsala Kumar for their research assistance.