# **Econophysics**

## **The Prehistoric Times of Econophysics**

The term *econophysics* was introduced in the 1990s, endorsed in 1999 by the publication of Mantegna & Stanley's "An Introduction to Econophysics" [33]. The word "econophysics", paralleling the quests of biophysics or geophysics, suggests that there is a physics-based approach to economics.

From classical to neoclassical economics and until now, economists have been inspired by the conceptual and mathematical developments of the physical sciences and by their remarkable successes in describing and predicting natural phenomena. Reciprocally, physics has been enriched several times by developments first observed in economics. Well before the christening of econophysics as the incarnation of the multidisciplinary study of complex large-scale financial and economic systems, a multitude of small and large collisions have punctuated the development of these two fields. We now mention a few that illustrate the remarkable commonalities and interfertilization.

In his "Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" (1776), Adam Smith found inspiration in the Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687) of Isaac Newton, specifically based on the (novel at the time) notion of causative forces.

The recognition of the importance of feedbacks to fathom the sheer complexity of economic systems has been at the root of economic thinking for a long time. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, the microeconomists Francis Edgeworth and Alfred Marshall drew on some of the ideas of physicists to develop the notion that the economy achieves an equilibrium state like that described for gases by Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann. The general equilibrium theory now at the core of much of economic thinking is nothing but a formalization of the idea that "everything in the economy affects everything else" [18], reminiscent of mean-field theory or self-consistent effective medium methods in physics, but emphasizing and transcending these ideas much beyond their initial sense in physics.

While developing the field of microeconomics in his "Cours d'Economie Politique" (1897), the economist and philosopher Vilfredo Pareto was the first to describe, for the distribution of incomes, the eponym power laws that would later become the center of attention of physicists and other scientists observing this remarkable and universal statistical signature in the distribution of event sizes (earthquakes, avalanches, landslides, storms, forest fires, solar flares, commercial sales, war sizes, and so on) punctuating so many natural and social systems [3, 29, 35, 41].

While attempting to model the erratic motion of bonds and stock options in the Paris *Bourse* in 1900, mathematician Louis Bachelier developed the mathematical theory of diffusion (and the first elements of financial option pricing) and solved the parabolic diffusion equation five years before Albert Einstein [10] established the theory of Brownian motion based on the same diffusion equation (also underpinning the theory of random walks) in 1905. The ensuing modern theory of random walks now constitutes one of the fundamental pillars of theoretical physics and economics and finance models.

In the early 1960s, mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot [28] pioneered the use in financial economics of heavy-tailed distributions (Levy stable laws) as ´ opposed to the traditional Gaussian (normal) law. A cohort of economists, notably at the University of Chicago (Merton Miller, Eugene Fama, and Richard Roll), at MIT (Paul Samuelson), and at Carnegie Mellon University (Thomas Sargent), initially followed his steps. In his PhD thesis, Eugene Fama confirmed that the frequency distribution of the changes in the logarithms of prices was "leptokurtic", that is, with a high peak and fat tails. However, other notable economists (Paul Cootner and Clive Granger) opposed Mandelbrot's proposal, on the basis of the argument that "the statistical theory that exists for the normal case is nonexistent for the other members of the class of Levy laws." The ´ *coup de grace* was the mounting empirical evidence that the distributions of returns were becoming closer to the Gaussian law at timescales larger than one month, at odds with the self-similarity hypothesis associated with the Levy ´ laws [7, 23]. Much of the efforts in the econophysics literature of the late 1990s and early 2000s revisited and refined this hypothesis, confirming on one hand the existence of the variance (which rules out the class of Levy distributions proposed by Mandel- ´ brot), but also suggesting a power-law tail with an exponent close to 3 [16, 32]—several other groups have discussed alternatives, such as exponential [39] or stretched exponential distributions [19, 24, 26]. Financial engineers actually care about these apparent technicalities because the tail structure controls the Value at Risk and other measures of large losses, and physicists care because the tail may constrain the underlying mechanism(s). For instance, Gabaix *et al.* [14] attribute the large movements in stock market activity to the interplay between the power-law distribution of the sizes of large financial institutions and the optimal trading of such large institutions. In this domain, econophysics focuses on models that can reproduce and explain the main stylized facts of financial time series: non-Gaussian fat tail distribution of returns, long-range autocorrelation of volatility and the absence of correlation of returns, multifractal property of the absolute value of returns, and so on.

In the late 1960s, Benoit Mandelbrot left financial economics but, inspired by this first episode, went on to explore other uncharted territories to show how nondifferentiable geometries (that he coined *fractal*), previously developed by mathematicians from the 1870s to the 1940s, could provide new ways to deal with the real complexity of the world [29]. He later returned to finance in the late 1990s in the midst of the econophysics' enthusiasm to model the multifractal properties associated with the long-memory properties observed in financial asset returns [2, 30, 31, 34, 43].

## **Notable Contributions**

The modern econophysicists are implicitly and sometimes explicitly driven by the hope that the concept of "universality" holds in economics and finance. The value of this strategy remains to be validated [42], as most econophysicists have not yet digested the subtleties of economic thinking and failed to marry their ideas and techniques with mainstream economics. The following is a partial list of a few notable exceptions: precursory physics approach to social systems [15], agent-based models, induction, evolutionary models [1, 9, 11, 21], option theory for incomplete markets [4, 6], interest rate curves [5, 38], minority games [8], theory of Zipf law and its economic consequences [12, 13, 27], theory of large price fluctuations [14], theory of bubbles and crashes [17, 22, 40], random matrix theory applied to covariance of returns [20, 36, 37], and methods and models of dependence between financial assets [25, 43].

At present, the most exciting progresses seem to be unraveling at the boundary between economics and the biological, cognitive, and behavioral sciences. While it is difficult to argue for a physics-based foundation of economics and finance, physics has still a role to play as a unifying framework full of concepts and tools to deal with the complex. The modeling skills of physicists explain their impressive number in investment and financial institutions, where their data-driven approach coupled with a pragmatic sense of theorizing has made them a most valuable commodity on Wall Street.

## **Acknowledgments**

We would like to thank Y. Malevergne for many discussions and a long-term enjoyable and fruitful collaboration.

## **References**

- [1] Arthur, W.B. (2005). Out-of-equilibrium economics and agent-based modeling, in *Handbook of Computational Economics, Vol. 2: Agent-Based Computational Economics*, K. Judd & L. Tesfatsion, eds, Elsevier, North Holland.
- [2] Bacry, E., Delour, J. & Muzy, J.-F. (2001). Multifractal random walk, *Physical Review E* **64**, 026103.
- [3] Bak, P. (1996). *How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality*, Copernicus, New York.
- [4] Bouchaud, J.-P. & Potters, M. (2003). Theory of financial risk and derivative pricing, *From Statistical Physics to Risk Management*, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press.
- [5] Bouchaud, J.-P., Sagna, N., Cont, R., El-Karoui, N. & Potters, M. (1999). Phenomenology of the interest rate curve, *Applied Mathematical Finance* **6**, 209.
- [6] Bouchaud, J.-P. & Sornette, D. (1994). The Black-Scholes option pricing problem in mathematical finance: generalization and extensions for a large class of stochastic processes, *Journal de Physique I France* **4**, 863–881.
- [7] Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.W. & MacKinlay, A.C. (1997). *The Econometrics of Financial Markets*, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
- [8] Challet, D., Marsili, M. & Zhang, Y.-C. (2005). *Minority Games*, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
- [9] Cont, R. & Bouchaud, J.-P. (2000). Herd behavior and aggregate fluctuations in financial markets, *Journal of Macroeconomic Dynamics* **4**(2), 170–195.