## **JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE**

## JUSTICE (RETD) BN SRIKRISHNA

## **I. INTRODUCTION**

IN a democratic polity wedded to rule of law an independent judiciary is a sine qua non. In a democratic State governed by a written constitution, the task of interpreting the constitution and being the sole arbiter in constitutional disputes is assigned to the judiciary and it is here that it is required to be totally free of any direct or covert influence by the legislative or the executive. It is in this role that the judiciary has to enjoy complete freedom. If the judiciary were to be controlled by the legislature and/or the executive, the rule of law would become chimerical for absence of an external audit machinery of the constitutional validity of any legislative or executive action. For this reason also, the judiciary needs to be fully independent so that it can test the acts of the legislature or executive on the anvil of the constitution. That is the true *raison d'être* for judicial independence. In the felicitous parlance of Krishna Iyer J,

[I]n a dynamic democracy, with goals of transformation set by the Constitution, the Judge, committed to uphold the founding faiths and fighting creeds of the nation so set forth, has to act heedless of executive hubris, socio-economic pressure, and die-hard obscurantism. This occupational heroism, professionally essential, demands the inviolable independence woven around the judiciary by our Constitution.<sup>1</sup>

This powerful exhortation extolling the virtue of judicial independence, delivered in the *Sankalchand* case, which will be subsequently examined, was supported by highlighting a host of constitutional provisions that recognise this virtue and give it legal shape. These range from the security of the salary of judges to prohibitions on legislatures discussing the official conduct of judges to the immunity that judges receive for the performance of their duties. The form of the oath prescribed in the Third Schedule to the Constitution demands that judges perform their duties 'without fear or favour, affection or ill-will'.<sup>2</sup> In a normative sense, judicial independence would be independence from any factor influencing the judge to deviate from the oath of office, namely to uphold the Constitution and the laws, and to act without fear or favour, affection or ill will. Anything short of these desiderata would spell the absence of independence. The factors that might influence a judge to deviate from the oath of office could be pressure from the legislature, executive, or any other public authority; it could be close affinity with a litigant or, at the worst, corrupt motives. Any of these factors would erode the independence of the judge to abide by the requirements of his oath of office and induce him to decide for reasons other than the merits of the issue for resolution. 'The muniments', as the Supreme Court noted, 'highlight the concern of founding fathers for judicial insulation, a sort of Monroe doctrine.<sup>3</sup>

The aforementioned protections, which constitute the *muniments* that induced the strong observations about the independent status of the judiciary under the Indian Constitution, leave no doubt that the founders were conscious of the pivotal role of the judiciary and ensured that no manner of interference with the independence of the judiciary was brooked. To give but one example, while under the Government of India Act 1935 the judges of the High Court held office during the pleasure of the Crown, Article 217(1) of the Constitution of India substituted a fixed tenure of office during good behaviour for the tenure at pleasure. A judge of the High Court or Supreme Court is thus not removable from office except for proved misbehaviour or incapacity during his tenure of office. The very obviation of the pleasure doctrine as controlling the tenure of office of a judge of the High Court or the Supreme Court is explicit of the intention of the founding fathers to insulate the judges of the superior courts from the pleasure of the executive. The several Articles embedded in the Constitution ensure that a judge is fully independent and capable of rendering justice not only between citizens and citizens but also between citizens and the State, without let, hindrance, or interference by anyone in the State polity. This kind of insulation or immunity from the pleasure of the executive is essential in view of the fact that the Constitution has guaranteed several fundamental rights to the citizens and persons and also empowered the High Courts and Supreme Court under Article 226 and 32 to render justice against acts of the State.

Apart from yielding to someone's pressure or acting on account of ill will or affection or corrupt motives, often the judge may act from benign motives but because of deep-seated prejudices. As Cardozo once said, 'the great tides and currents which engulf the rest of men do not turn aside in their course and pass the judges by'. $\frac{4}{3}$  This perceptive observation of Cardozo stems from his belief that subconscious imprints of the socio-economic background and upbringing of a person appointed as judge could influence the discharge of his functions, but bias due to the political view held by a judge would have been far from his mind. In *SP Gupta*, during the days of the dominant discourse of committed judiciary, while advocating an active role for a judge and 'value packing', a learned judge of the Supreme Court delivered a homily worth quoting for the stark contrast between precept and practice, and also as instructive of how political bias is destructive of the true independence of the judiciary:

It is not unlikely that the total insulation may breed ivory tower attitude, a bishop delivering sermon from the pulpit and therefore no claim to be imperium in imperio can be extended to the judiciary or for that matter to any other instrumentality under the Constitution. It is not as if judicial independence is an absolute thing like a brooding omnipresence … Nor should judges be independent of the broad accountability to the nation and its indigent and injustice ridden millions. Therefore, consequently one need not too much idolise this independence of judiciary so as to become counter-productive … [The] judiciary cannot stand aloof and apart from the mainstream of society. $\frac{5}{2}$ 

Conveniently, the observations of Cardozo were pressed into service to support the pernicious theory of committed judges afloat during the heyday of Indira Gandhi's government. Learned judges, calling themselves 'forward looking', but pejoratively referred to as 'looking forward' judges, vied with each other in giving speeches propounding their perceived socio-political approach to constitutional questions. Forgotten, or perhaps conveniently ignored, were the observations of Benjamin Cardozo that emphasised judicial integrity as part and parcel of the principle of judicial independence:

Judges have, of course, the power, though not the right, to ignore the mandate of a statute, and render judgment in despite of it. They have the power, though not the right, to travel beyond the walls of the interstices, the bounds set to judicial innovation by precedent and custom. Nonetheless, by that abuse of power, they violate the law. If they violate it wilfully, ie, with guilty and evil mind, they commit a legal wrong, and may be removed or punished even though the judgments which they have rendered stand.

. . . The recognition of this power and duty to shape the law in conformity with the customary morality is something far removed from the destruction of all rules and the substitution in every instance of the individual sense of justice, the *arbitrium* boni viri. That might result in a benevolent despotism if the judges were benevolent men. It would put an end to the reign of law.<sup>6</sup>

Cardozo may be right in stating that *the great tides and currents which engulf the rest of men do not turn aside in their course and pass the judges by*, but the mettle of a judge is tested by his ability to

stand firm like the Rock of Gibraltar in the face of tides and currents. That would be the hallmark of true judicial independence.

This chapter focuses on the place that judicial independence occupies within Indian constitutionalism. Under the Indian Constitution the judiciary is divided into superior judiciary—that is, judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts—and subordinate judiciary—that is, the judges under the control of the State High Courts. The judges of the subordinate judiciary also enjoy independence in their judicial acts, albeit that their decisions may be subject to scrutiny by the High Court and they are subject to the administrative control of the High Court. In matters regarding their appointment, pay, and allowances, they are governed by the rules made by the Governor of the State but in matters of performance appraisal, promotions, disciplinary measures, and removal they are subject to the control of the High Court. It would therefore be sufficient to explore the contours of judicial independence in India by focusing the discussion on the judges of the superior courts.

The goal of judicial independence must be considered alongside the goal of judicial accountability. The challenge in any modern constitutional democracy is to design a system that institutionally secures the independence of the judiciary as well as produces a degree of accountability. The goals of judicial independence and judicial accountability are not necessarily at odds. On one account, a legal system in which judges have a greater degree of autonomy will itself produce a greater degree of accountability. This idea of accountability will be based on self-regulation. A second equilibrium is one in which judicial independence is still regarded as a desired goal, but it must be achieved against the backdrop of a perceived failure of accountability through self-regulation. Under this account, accountability comes to be achieved through external checks. This chapter pays special attention to how the balance between independence and accountability has been struck. Different historical periods have witnessed an emphasis on different concerns and goals, thereby shaping constitutional doctrine in this area. It is important to note that while the question of judicial independence has played out most notably in the context of appointments to the higher judiciary, matters relating to salaries, tenure, transfers, removal, administrative staff, and so forth are all integral to this question.

## **II. APPOINTMENTS**

In the matter of choosing judges, the Constituent Assembly sought hard to ensure that the executive does not have unfettered discretion and complete control over the appointments process. The assembly's concern was to create a judiciary that was independent and efficient.<sup>7</sup> The Constitution provides for appointment of Supreme Court judges by Article 124(2), which only requires appointment by the President by a warrant under his hand and seal 'after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem for the purpose'.<sup>8</sup> Article 217 provides that every judge of the High Court shall be appointed by the President by a warrant under his hand and seal 'after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the case of the appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court'.<sup>2</sup> The interpretation of these provisions has been the primary issue on which the debate over judicial independence has played in India.

The first case to consider the import of Articles 124 and 217 was *Union of India v Sankalchand Himmatlal Sheth*. <sup>10</sup> While technically dealing with transfer under Article 222, the Court considered the meaning of the word 'consultation' with regard to Articles 124 and 217 as well. Chandrachud J's

opinion cited *Chandramouleshwar Prasad v Patna High Court <sup>11</sup>* and *R Pushpam v State of Madras*<sup> $12$ </sup> to hold that 'consult' meant 'a conference of two or more persons ... in order to enable them to evolve a correct, or at least, a satisfactory solution'.<sup>13</sup> Thus, 'what the Constitution requires is consultation with the Chief Justice, not his concurrence with the proposed transfer'.<sup>14</sup> However, presaging future decisions, Chandrachud J also warned that 'in all conceivable cases, consultation with the Chief Justice of India should be accepted by the Government of India' and that 'the Court will have an opportunity to examine if any other extraneous circumstances have entered into the verdict of the executive if it departs from the counsel given by the Chief Justice of India'.<sup>15</sup>

In *Subhash Sharma*, <sup>16</sup> a bench of three judges considered writ petitions filed under Article 32. The petitioners prayed for a writ of mandamus to fill up judicial vacancies in the Supreme Court and in several High Courts. While considering the import of Articles 124 and 217 of the Constitution, the Court was of the opinion that *consultation* with the Chief Justice of India was of vital importance and his views must play a decisive role in the appointment of Judges. The Court held that the constitutional phraseology needs to be read in light of the principle of separation of powers, and the goal of judicial independence. Against this background, it took the view that the role of the Chief Justice of India should be recognised as of crucial importance in the matter of appointments to the Supreme Court and High Courts of the State. The Court deprecated the practice of governments of States sending the proposals directly to the Union government without reference to the Chief Justice of State and the Chief Justice of India.

Importantly, the bench also doubted the correctness of the majority opinion in *SP Gupta*, and suggested that *SP Gupta* needed reconsideration by a larger bench. 17 In *SP Gupta*, a seven-judge bench of the Court considered whether a circular issued by the Union Law Minister, which recommended the redistribution and transfer of High Court judges, violated judicial independence. By a majority of four to three, with each judge authoring a separate opinion, the Court dismissed the petitions.

Specifically, the bench in *Subhash Sharma* took issue with two issues dealt with by the majority in *SP Gupta*: the meaning of 'consultation' and the primacy of the position of the Chief Justice of India. First, referring to Articles 124 and 217, Bhagwati J had held that 'on a plain reading of these two articles … the Chief Justice of India, the Chief Justice of the High Court and such other judges … are merely constitutional functionaries having a consultative role and the power of appointment resides solely and exclusively in the Union government'.  $\frac{18}{18}$  Secondly, on the issue of the primacy of the Chief Justice of India, Bhagwati J had held that 'where there is a difference of opinion amongst the constitutional functionaries … the opinion of none of the constitutional functionaries is entitled to primacy', and that the 'Central Government is entitled to come to its own decision as to which opinion it should accept ... '<sup>19</sup>

The issue of the opinion of the Chief Justice was considered by the Supreme Court in the *Second Judges' case*. <sup>20</sup> *SP Gupta* was reversed and the majority held that primacy in the matter of appointment of judges to the superior Courts must vest with the judiciary. It is the Chief Justice of India and his consultees in the superior judiciary who are to select, in consultation with the executive, the next Chief Justice of India. The Court did away with the 'seniority alone rule' by holding that selection of the Chief Justice of India must be made on the basis only of merit. It proceeded to note that the opinion and the recommendation of the Chief Justice of India in the matter of appointment of judges is binding on the executive and this has to be read into the word *consult* used in Articles 124(2) and 217(1) of the Constitution of India. The majority also took the view that in matters relating

to appointments in the Supreme Court, the opinion given by the Chief Justice in the consultative process has to be formed taking into account the views of the two most senior judges of the Supreme Court. The Chief Justice is also expected to ascertain the views of the most senior judge, whose view is likely to be significant in adjudging the suitability of the candidate by reason of coming from the same High Court as the candidate. This judgment was of the view that the opinion of the Chief Justice is not merely his individual opinion but 'an opinion formed collectively by a body of men at the apex level in the judiciary'.<sup>21</sup> With regard to appointment of judges of the High Courts, the Chief Justice of India is expected to take into account the views of his colleagues in the Supreme Court who are likely to be conversant with the affairs of the High Court, and may also take into account the views of one or more senior judges of that High Court whose opinion may be significant. The opinion of the Chief Justice of the High Court must be formed after ascertaining the views of at least two seniormost judges of the High Court. The bench provided a detailed working methodology of the process of appointment, but the importance of this judgment lies in the fact that it overruled *SP Gupta* and held that the Chief Justice of India's opinion had primacy in the matter of appointment of judges to the Supreme Court and the High Courts. This judgment therefore led to the collegium system in both the High Courts and the Supreme Court, which is supposed to collectively represent the views of the respective courts.

Article 217 came to be reconsidered in the *Special Reference No 1 of 1998* made by the President of India to the Supreme Court under Article  $143.22$  The Supreme Court was called upon to express its opinion with regard to Articles 217(1) and 222(1) of the Constitution. Interpreting the expression 'consultation with the Chief Justice of India' in these Articles, the Court held that it meant consultation with a plurality of judges in the formation of the opinion of the Chief Justice of India, which would comprise the four most senior judges for appointment to the Supreme Court and two most senior judges for appointment to the High Court. The appointment of judges to the Supreme Court and High Courts was regarded as a 'participatory consultative process' for selecting the best and most suitable persons. $\frac{23}{12}$  For the Court, the task imposed by the Constitution was one to be performed collectively. The sole individual opinion of the Chief Justice of India with regard to a person to be recommended for appointment to a High Court does not constitute 'consultation' within the meaning of the said Articles. The Chief Justice of India should form his opinion in the same manner as he forms it in regard to a recommendation for appointment to the Supreme Court; that is, in consultation with his most senior judges as well as after consultation with the Chief Justice and judges of the High Court from which a judge for appointment to the Supreme Court was being considered. Importantly, the collegium system was affirmed.

Significantly, the judgment also carved out specific exceptions when the decision of the collegium would not be binding on the Government and would be subject to judicial review. The first was in the case of a transfer of a High Court judge under Article 222, and only if the recommendation made by the Chief Justice of India had 'not been made in consultation with the four senior-most puisne Judges of the Supreme Court … ' or if the views of the Chief Justices of both affected High Courts were not obtained. $24$  Secondly, recommendations for appointment made by the Chief Justice of India 'without complying with the norms and requirements of the consultation process … are not binding upon the Government of India'.<sup>25</sup> This would include cases where the Chief Justice fails to consult his seniormost colleagues, or the seniormost Supreme Court Judge from the same High Court as the proposed appointee, or if the appointee lacks eligibility. Finally, the Government could convey reasons to the Chief Justice of India for the 'non-appointment' of a judge recommended by the

collegium. $\frac{26}{10}$  The Chief Justice, along with other members of the collegium, would be bound to reconsider the recommendation; the Chief Justice was also given the discretion to seek a response from the proposed appointee after conveying to him the Government's reasons for non-appointment.

The Court's opinion did not, however, engage with the larger issues at stake in the case: judicial independence and separation of powers. It merely cited Verma J's opinion in the *Second Judges'* case, holding that the constitutional requirement for consultation was introduced because the Chief Justice was 'best equipped to know and assess the worth of the candidate … [and] to eliminate political influence even at the stage of the initial appointment of a Judge, since the provisions for securing his independence after appointment were alone not sufficient for an independent judiciary'.<sup>27</sup> The Court in the *Special Reference* simply stated that 'The principal objective of the Collegium is to ensure that the best available talent is brought to the Supreme Court Bench' and that the 'Chief Justice of India and the seniormost puisne judges, by reason of their long tenures on the Supreme Court, are best fitted to achieve this objective'. $\frac{28}{5}$ 

As a result of the judgment of the Supreme Court in *Special Reference No 1 of 1998*, the appointment of Judges to the superior judiciary became the exclusive privilege of the collegium of the Supreme Court.

The Three Judges cases led to intense political debate over the judicial control of the appointments process. The decisions, it was suggested, gave the judiciary complete and unchecked power over its own functioning. Numerous constitutional amendment proposals were formally and informally proposed to undo these decisions. The most recent development in this regard was the Constitution (One-hundred-and-twenty-first Amendment) Bill 2014, which became the Ninety-ninth Amendment to the Constitution. This was enacted alongside the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act 2014. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Constitution (One-hundred-and-twenty-first Amendment) Bill noted the following:

The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-first Amendment) Bill, 2014 is an enabling constitutional amendment for amending relevant provisions of the Constitution and for setting up a National Judicial Appointments Commission. The proposed Bill seeks to insert new articles 124A, 124B and 124C after article 124 of the Constitution. The said Bill also provides for the composition and the functions of the proposed National Judicial Appointments Commission. Further, it provides that Parliament may, by law, regulate the procedure for appointment of Judges and empower the National Judicial Appointments Commission to lay down procedure by regulation for the discharge of its functions, manner of selection of persons for appointment and such other matters as may be considered necessary.The proposed Bill seeks to broad base the method of appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court and High Courts, enables participation of judiciary, executive and eminent persons and ensures greater transparency, accountability and objectivity in the appointment of the Judges in the Supreme Court and High Courts.<sup>29</sup>

The Amendment, alongside the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act, put in place a framework that gives the executive considerable power over the appointments process. Article 124A established a six-member National Judicial Appointments Commission (NJAC) of which only half the members were to be judges. Three members were to consist of the Union Minister for Law and Justice and two 'eminent persons' nominated by the Prime Minister, Chief Justice of India, and the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha. Thus, as per the provision, judges were not to have a majority say in the appointments process. Further, Article 124C gave Parliament the power to enact legislation to regulate the appointments process and related matters. This signalled a major departure from India's constitutional framework, where matters like judicial appointments, and related means to secure judicial independence, are guaranteed in the constitutional text and cannot be altered by mere ordinary legislation. As the Supreme Court noted in *L Chandra Kumar*:

While the Constitution confers the power to strike down laws upon the High Courts and the Supreme Court, it also contains

elaborate provisions dealing with the tenure, salaries, allowances, retirement age of Judges as well as the mechanism for selecting Judges to the superior courts. The inclusion of such elaborate provisions appears to have been occasioned by the belief that, armed with such provisions, the superior courts would be insulated from any executive or legislative attempts to interfere with the making of their decisions.<sup>30</sup>

Immediately following their enactment, the Ninety-ninth Amendment and the National Judicial Appointments Commission Act were challenged as violating the Constitution's basic structure. On 16 October 2015, the Supreme Court delivered its verdict, and by a 4:1 majority struck down the Amendment as violating the basic structure doctrine. $\frac{31}{2}$  The key question before the Supreme Court was whether judicial independence required the judiciary to have primacy in the appointments process.

Kehar J, whose opinion contains a detailed history of the development of judicial independence in India and of debates surrounding the appointments process, answered this question in the affirmative and made three particular points. First, he highlighted how it was a mistake to characterise the collegium system as giving exclusive power to judges. Rather, the system established a participatory process. He drew attention to memoranda for the appointments procedure drawn by the Ministry of Law, Justice, and Company Affairs in 1999, following the Three Judges cases, which clearly revealed that the political-executive did play a part in determining how judges were appointed. $\frac{32}{3}$ Secondly, Kehar J suggested that a careful reading of constitutional history showed that BR Ambedkar's principal concern, with regard to judicial appointments, was that the judiciary must have independence from the executive. Thus, the word 'consultation' in Articles 124 and 217, Kehar J argued, aimed at ensuring that appointments were not the free will of the executive. Thirdly, Kehar J held that judicial primacy was done away with by the composition and structure of the NJAC. Even if the Chief Justice and the two other seniormost judges of the Supreme Court made a nomination, it could be blocked by the Commission. In fact, Kehar emphasised, the two 'eminent persons' could reject a unanimous view of the three judicial members. Even the role of the Union Minister for Law and Justice was problematic. The constitutional requirement of judicial independence only permitted him to play a consultative role. By giving him a specific position in the final determination of who might be appointed, the impugned measure undermined the independence of the judiciary.

Lokur J's opinion made similar points. He highlighted Ambedkar's concern with executive primacy over the appointments process, and held that the principal fear of the Constituent Assembly was that a single person (say the Chief Justice of India or the President) would control the process. There was no objection to a consultative, participatory mechanism. The process prior to the Ninety-ninth Amendment was participatory, Lokur J noted, in two ways. At the pre-recommendation stage, it consisted of the Chief Justice and certain other members of the Supreme Court. In the postrecommendation stage, it was participatory because the executive could offer its objections to a particular recommendation. Furthermore, Lokur J pointed out that the judicial primacy in appointments was a constitutional convention that had existed in India since at least the Government of India Act 1935. The NJAC, with its composition, flew in the face of both the constitutional text and history. Like Kehar J, Lokur J offered a scathing criticism of the NJAC's make-up. The two 'eminent members', whose role was nowhere imagined by the Constituent Assembly, had an effective veto over the entire judiciary. Under the Amendment, these two persons who had previously played no role could now 'paralyze the appointment process, reducing the President and the Chief Justice of India to ciphers for reasons that might have nothing to do with the judicial potential or fitness and suitability of a person considered for appointment as a judge'.<sup>33</sup> The Chief Justice was not merely

reduced 'to a number' in the NJAC; more seriously, the measure converted 'the mandatory consultation between the President and the Chief Justice of India to a dumb charade with the NJAC acting as an intermediary'.<sup>34</sup>

Goel J likewise noted that the primacy of the judiciary in the appointments process was a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Without this, the executive or legislature could effectively control the process. Joseph J, who also struck down the measure, placed special emphasis on the separation of powers and the structural consequences of the impugned Amendment. The measure, he suggested, would engender bargaining between different branches of government and thereby seriously impair the structural separation that the Constitution enshrines.

It is important to note that Chelameswar J, who delivered the sole dissenting opinion, did not deny the importance of judicial independence or challenge its place in India's constitutional framework. Instead, he suggested that the primacy of the judiciary in the matter of appointments could not be considered the exclusive route towards the creation of an independent judiciary. According to Chelameswar J, *Kesavananda Bharati* and the cases that followed drew an important distinction between the *basic features* and the *basic structure* of the Constitution. The basic structure of the Constitution was composed of basic features; a change to a single basic feature may not necessarily destroy the basic structure of the Constitution. For instance, Chelameswar J suggested that while democracy was a basic feature of the Constitution, a minor change in the voting age would likely be constitutional. With regard to judicial appointments, the basic feature of the Constitution was not the primacy of the view of the Chief Justice of India or the collegium but, Chelameswar J argued, it was in the executive lacking the exclusive and absolute power to appoint judges. This fact remained unchanged by the impugned Amendment, and it was thereby constitutional.

With the striking down of the Ninety-ninth Amendment, the Supreme Court held that the earlier method of appointment, that is, the collegium system, would revive. Finally, while the majority revived the collegium system it did accept that the system could be improved. It listed, for a further hearing, a consideration of the ways in which the imperfections of the system could be remedied. While there is no doubt that the collegium system could be improved—and the Supreme Court has accepted as much—it must be remembered that this system was a reaction to the political dominance over the appointments process of Supreme Court judges that came about during Indira Gandhi's term as Prime Minister. Judges who upheld views inconvenient to the Government of India had to suffer supersession to the high office of Chief Justice of India on two occasions during the heyday of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, and some had to suffer unilateral transfers.<sup>35</sup> What the collegium system managed to do was entirely eliminate this kind of political interference. The Ninety-ninth Amendment and the NJAC posed a major risk in this regard, and the Supreme Court's decision to strike them down is an important affirmation of the place that judicial independence occupies in India's constitutional scheme. In appreciating the Court's concerns about the NJAC and the bargaining that its composition would have engendered, it is worth remembering Dieter Grimm's observation that:

Judicial independence must be guaranteed, not only against any attempt to directly influence the outcome of litigation, but also against more subtle ways of putting pressure on the judiciary. This is why constitutions usually guarantee the impossibility of removal of judges and often a sufficient salary, to mention only a few devices.<sup>36</sup>
The appointment and conditions of service of officers and servants of the High Courts and the Supreme Court are governed by Articles 229 and 146, respectively. These are interesting sister provisions because all three branches of government are involved to varying degrees in the procedure they prescribe. The case law on these two Articles illustrates how the Supreme Court changed its characterisation of judicial independence after *Sankalchand Himmatlal Sheth*. In a series of decisions from the 1970s, the Court dealt with differences of opinion between High Courts and State Governments on the balance of power under Article 229. The Court did not characterise all cases as being symptomatic of executive encroachment into judicial independence and did not hesitate to rule against the High Courts involved when they were themselves guilty of overreaching. However, two later decisions in *Supreme Court Employees' Welfare Association* and *All India Judges' Association* showed a distinctive shift in the tone of the Court.<sup>37</sup> Both decisions came down heavily in favour of the judiciary's power to prescribe conditions of service, with the latter decision upholding the judiciary's power to involve itself with prescribing conditions of service of subordinate judges under Article 309.

In *M Gurumoorthy v Accountant-General, Assam and Nagaland*, <sup>38</sup> a constitutional bench of the Supreme Court addressed the scope of Article 229, which relates to the appointment of officers and servants of the High Courts. The Chief Justice of the High Court of Assam and Nagaland (as it was then) merged the post of Secretary (held by the appellant) to the Chief Justice into the post of a Selection Grade Stenographer, in the exercise of his power under Article 229. The State Government, however, raised objections about the merging of two separate posts, which were accepted by the new Chief Justice, who vacated the order of his predecessor. Eventually, however, the next Chief Justice decided to restore the original order merging the two posts. In response, the State Government 'took the extraordinary and somewhat unusual step … ' of directing the Accountant-General not to pay the appellant until the Government had issued final orders.<sup>39</sup>

Regarding the scope of Article 229, the Court held that it made the Chief Justice 'the supreme authority… ' and allowed 'no interference by the executive except to the limited extent that is provided in the article'.<sup>40</sup> This was done to 'secure and maintain the independence of the High Courts'. $\frac{41}{1}$  The Court made several arguments to support this contention. First, it pointed to the fact that the administrative expenses of the High Court were treated on a par with the salaries of High Court judges themselves and could not be varied by the State Legislature. Secondly, the Governor's approval for the conditions of service under Article 229(2) was confined only to specific areas. This was in contrast to the Government of India Act 1935.<sup>42</sup> Thirdly, it noted the contrasting treatment in the Constitution of the power to prescribe conditions of service for the Comptroller and Auditor-General under Article 148 and the State Legislatures under Article 187. The relevant authorities in these cases were the President and the Governor, respectively. The Court thus directed the Government to give effect to the original order of the Chief Justice of the High Court.

Interestingly, this same emphasis on judicial independence was not seen in two subsequent cases that came before the Supreme Court just a few years after *M Gurumoorthy*, which involved the Supreme Court reining in overzealous High Courts from exercising their power under Article 229. In *State of Assam v Bhubhan Chandra Dutta*,  $\frac{43}{2}$  the Court ruled that the Assam High Court was wrong in issuing a writ of mandamus directing the State Government to pay the respondent a special allowance that had been fixed by the Chief Justice of the High Court under Article 229 without consulting the Governor. In *State of Andhra Pradesh v T Gopalakrishnan Murthi, <sup>44</sup>* a Pay Commission appointed by the Government recommended that some, but not all, of the Andhra Pradesh High Court's staff be

given the pay scales of their counterparts in the Secretariat. The High Court, through the Registrar, tried to persuade the Government to equate the pay scales of its entire staff. On its failure to do so, the respondents, who were part of the High Court staff, succeeded in getting the High Court to issue a writ of mandamus directing the Government to give effect to the Chief Justice's recommendations. The Supreme Court, somewhat reluctantly, held that the Governor's approval under Article 229(2) was not simply an empty formality:

One should expect in the fitness of things and in the view of the spirit of Article 229 that ordinarily and generally the approval should be accorded. But surely it is wrong to say that the approval is a mere formality and in no case it is open to the Government to refuse to accord their approval.<sup>45</sup>

The Court noted the decisions in both *M Gurumoorthy* and *Bhubhan Chandra Dutta*, but chose to apply the latter as being the 'more apposite and direct case on the point  $\ldots$ <sup>46</sup> Thus, while the Supreme Court ' … share[d] the sentiment expressed by the High Court … ', it found it 'difficult to allow our sentiment to cross the boundary of law engrafted in the proviso to clause (2) of Article 229'.<sup>47</sup> The High Court's writ was set aside.

In *Supreme Court Employees' Welfare Association v Union of India*, 48 the Supreme Court had the opportunity to examine the scope of Article 146, which is the companion provision to Article 229, and applies to the Supreme Court. The Court had noted that its own staff did not have a distinct designation and were instead paid salaries that corresponded to the pay scales fixed by the Central Pay Commissions for other government employees. A five-judge committee of the Court had submitted a report to the Chief Justice recommending that he refer the case of the Supreme Court staff to the Fourth Central Pay Commission. In the meanwhile, the Delhi High Court had allowed a writ petition by its own employees and had revised and enhanced their pay scales. The Supreme Court employees filed a writ petition in the Supreme Court for a similar relief. The Court granted them interim relief, which prompted the Government to refer their case to the Pay Commission. The Pay Commission's Report revised the pay scales of Supreme Court employees, but some were reduced when compared to the Court's interim orders.

In its final judgment, the Court considered the scope of Article 146 and its applicability. Citing its previous decisions in *M Gurumoorthy* and *T Gopalakrishnan Murthi*, the Court held that the President '[could] not be compelled to grant approval to the rules framed by the Chief Justice … ' but when the rules '[had] been framed by a very high dignitary of the State, it should be looked upon with respect and unless there is very good reason not to grant approval, the approval should always be granted'.<sup>49</sup> Further, if the President decided to refuse approval, he had to first ensure the 'exchange of thoughts between the President of India and the Chief Justice of India'.  $\frac{50}{2}$  In this specific instance, however, the Court ruled that Article 146(2) would not apply, since the Chief Justice had yet to formally frame rules.

In *All-India Judges' Association v Union of India*, 51 the Court heard a review petition against its earlier judgment, <sup>52</sup> which had mandated the creation of an All-India Judicial Service and gave specific directions regarding the conditions of service of the subordinate judiciary. The review petition argued, chiefly, that the Court had encroached into the domain exclusively reserved by the Constitution under Article 309 for the executive and the legislature. Rebuffing the argument, the Court declared that the 'mere fact that Article 309 gives power to the executive and the legislature to prescribe the service conditions of the judiciary, does not mean that the judiciary should have no say in the matter'.<sup>53</sup> In a revealing sentence that exposed its preoccupation with executive misuse, the

Court warned that 'theoretically it would not be impossible for the executive or the legislature to turn and twist the tail of the judiciary by using the said power'.  $\frac{54}{3}$  Such an event would be 'against one of the seminal mandates of the Constitution, namely, to maintain the independence of the judiciary'.<sup>55</sup>

One decision, which appears at first glance to be an exception to the Supreme Court's reluctance to formally regulate judicial misconduct, was *HC Puttaswamy v The Hon'ble Chief Justice of Karnataka High Court*. <sup>56</sup> The Chief Justice had chosen to disregard the established procedure for appointing clerks for subordinate courts and instead personally appointed 398 candidates when only 40 posts had been originally advertised. The High Court had allowed writ petitions filed by the unsuccessful applicants to the original advertisement and quashed all of the Chief Justice's appointments. Agreeing with the High Court's course of action, the Supreme Court noted that while the objective of Article 229 was 'to secure the independence of the High Court … ', it also placed on the Chief Justice 'a duty to ensure that in carrying out the administrative functions, he is actuated by the same principles and values as those of the court he is serving'.  $\frac{57}{1}$  What must be noted about this decision, however, is that it dealt with a case of rather egregious misconduct by the Chief Justice: in the Court's words, 'without parallel ... ' and 'manifestly wrong ...'<sup>58</sup> Secondly, since the High Court had already admitted the writ petition against its own Chief Justice, it was not a case with any significant involvement of the State executive or legislature. Rather, it involved a dispute within the judicial family, which was internally resolved.

## **IV. DISCIPLINARY ACTION**

The approach towards disciplinary action against judges, including their impeachment, has major implications for judicial independence. On the one hand, we find that the judiciary has vested considerable faith and power in self-regulation, a fact that has often invited criticism and concern from other branches of government. On the other hand, the legitimacy and nature of judicial power, both in India and elsewhere, makes it extremely hard to allow for external regulation without seriously threatening the autonomy that adjudication demands.

In *Sub-Committee of Judicial Accountability v Union of India*, 59 the Supreme Court, for the first time, was confronted with a motion for impeachment of one of its judges.<sup>60</sup> Allegations of financial impropriety had been made against Justice V Ramaswami, which finally prompted a motion by members of the Lok Sabha to the Speaker of the House for an Address to the President for the judge's removal, under Article 124(4) and the Judges (Inquiry) Act 1968. While this particular decision primarily dealt with the consequences of the dissolution of the Lok Sabha on the pending motion, it also gave the Court the opportunity to examine the scope and nature of the provisions for judicial impeachment in the Constitution. It also revealed much about the Court's interpretation of judicial independence and accountability.

To begin with, the majority opinion decided to 'take a conspectus of the constitutional provisions concerning the judiciary and its independence', in order to 'adopt a construction which strengthens the foundational features and the basic structure of the Constitution'.<sup>61</sup> According to the Court, 'Independence of the judiciary [was] … an essential attribute of rule of law', which in turn was a basic feature of the Constitution.  $62$  The provisions the Court flagged as being relevant were Articles 121, 124, and 217. The Court then examined the procedure for removal of judges in other jurisdictions, in order to obtain 'a proper perspective for the understanding and interpretation of the Constitutional Scheme'.<sup>63</sup> It pointed to Canada, Australia, and the United States as examples of a general trend that favoured 'investigation and inquiry into the allegations of misconduct … against a judge by a judicial agency before the institution of the formal process of removal in the legislature'. <u><sup>64</sup></u> This would bolster its own interpretation of the Indian constitutional scheme.

Coming to Articles 124(4) and (5), the Court framed three possible interpretations: two of which would effectively vest the entire power of removal with Parliament, and one which would first require an investigation by an outside forum in order to ensure that the allegations against the Judge were 'proved'. The Court came down heavily in favour of the latter, pointing out that the other two interpretations would put the procedure 'entirely beyond judicial review' and the possibility of 'inconvenient judicial pronouncements thus endangering judicial independence'.<sup>65</sup> In other words, the law enacted under clause (5) of Article 124 constituted a limitation on Parliament's power of removal under clause (4), since it would determine whether the allegations were 'proved' as required by clause (4). This interpretation, the Court argued, would also cohere with Article 121, since it would effectively bar an investigation of the conduct of a judge within Parliament. Thus, the Court divided the process of impeachment into two parts: the first would cover the investigation according to the law enacted under clause (5) and the second would cover the parliamentary process under clause (4) after a finding of proof. The practical consequence of this interpretation was that 'the validity of [the enacted law] … and the process thereunder … ' would be 'subject to judicial review independent of any political colour ...<sup>'66</sup>

An interesting argument that the Court had to address was that in addition to the constitutional remedy under Article 124, the fundamental right to move the Supreme Court included the right to an impartial judiciary. This would cast on the Court the duty 'to ensure the integrity and impartiality of the members composing it and restrain any member who is found to lack in those essential qualities ...'<sup>67</sup> The Court rejected the idea of such a jurisdiction as 'unacceptable' and 'productive of more problems than it can hope to solve', and pointed to the constitutional scheme as being exhaustive.<sup>68</sup> Interestingly, the Court then added that 'The question of propriety [was] … different from that of legality.<sup>'69</sup> Coming back to the central figure of the Chief Justice, the Court suggested that it 'should be expected that the learned Judge would be guided in such a situation by the advice of the Chief Justice of India  $\ldots$ <sup>70</sup> Alternatively, it was left to the individual Judge in question: '... unless he himself decides as an act of propriety to abstain from discharging judicial functions during the interregnum'.<sup> $71$ </sup> The Court derived support for this idea from the fact that there was no provision in the Constitution to suspend 'higher constitutional functionaries' like the President and Supreme Court judges, unlike, for example, a member of a Public Service Commission in Article 317(2).

In *K Veeraswami v Union of India*, 72 the appellant was a former Chief Justice of the Madras High Court, against whom the Central Bureau of Investigation had registered a case of disproportionate assets under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1947. The appellant's chief contention was that judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court were not within the purview of the Prevention of Corruption Act. The constitutional bench of five judges delivered four separate opinions, with Verma J dissenting, and Ray J and Sharma J delivering concurring opinions to Shetty and Venkatachaliah JJ's opinion. With the exception of Verma J, all the other opinions ultimately found that the expression 'public servant' in the Prevention of Corruption Act was wide enough to include judges of the High Courts and Supreme Court, and the trial court was directed to proceed with the case.

In the process of reaching this decision, however, the opinions had an opportunity to discuss

judicial independence, and also inserted an important qualification in the process of prosecution of a judge under the Act. The first question that they confronted was the 'authority competent to remove' an errant judge from his office under Section 6(1)(c) of the Act. This posed an interpretive problem, since Parliament would then have to be the authority, given the terms of Article 124. However, this was rejected as 'impracticable', since Parliament was 'unsuitable to the task', especially given the prohibition on discussion by Article  $121<sup>23</sup>$  The puzzle was resolved by reading 'authority competent to remove' as 'authority without whose order or affirmation the public servant cannot be removed': this would make the President the competent authority, 'since the order of the President for the removal of a Judge is mandatory'.<sup>74</sup>

This, however, led to a second concern. The President does not act independently, but only on the advice of his Council of Ministers. Fully cognisant of this possibility, the Court decided to 'avoid [an] interpretation which is likely to impair the independence of the judiciary'.<sup>75</sup> Therefore, the Court, as 'the ultimate guardian of rights of people and independence of the judiciary' decided to 'lay down certain guidelines lest the Act may be misused'.<sup>76</sup> These guidelines centred on the person of the Chief Justice of India, who, being 'primarily concerned with the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary', was not to be 'kept out of the picture of any criminal case contemplated against a Judge'.  $\frac{77}{1}$ Somewhat cryptically, the Chief Justice was said to 'be of immense assistance to the government in coming to the right conclusion'.<sup>78</sup> Thus, no criminal case was to be registered under Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure unless the Chief Justice of India was consulted. Importantly, the Court was explicit that if the Chief Justice was of the opinion that it was 'not a fit case for proceeding under the Act', the case was not to be registered.<sup>79</sup> There would then be a second consultation with the Chief Justice before granting sanction for prosecution.

In *C Ravichandran Iyer v Justice AM Bhattacharjee*, 80 the Court was confronted with the resignation of a High Court judge. The Bar Council of Maharashtra and the Bombay Bar Association, among others, had forced the resignation of the respondent, who was the Chief Justice of the Bombay High Court, after allegations of impropriety against him. Since the respondent had already resigned, the question before the Court was whether Bar Associations were entitled to pass resolutions demanding the resignation of a judge and what the effect of such resolutions would be on judicial independence.

The Court, taking a cue from the judgment in *Sub-Committee of Judicial Accountability*, reiterated that decision's interpretation of the impeachment process as something that Parliament would 'sparingly' resort to as an 'extreme measure', which 'implies that [the] impeachment process is not available for minor abrasive behaviour of a Judge'.<sup>81</sup> The process was supposed to strengthen, and not undermine, judicial independence: 'It reinforces that independence to the Judge is of paramount importance to sustain, strengthen and elongate rule of law.' 82 In a nod to the distinction made in *Sub-Committee of Judicial Accountability* between the legality and propriety of an individual judge's conduct, the Court emphasised the (non-enforceable) expectation from a judge to 'voluntarily set forth wholesome standards of conduct reaffirming fitness to higher responsibilities'.<sup>83</sup> In the absence of self-enforced probity, dealing with the 'Bad conduct or bad behaviour of a Judge … [who] needs correction… ' would involve a 'delicate but pragmatic approach to the questions of constitutional law'.<sup>84</sup> The answer, for the Court, lay in the person of the Chief Justice. It held that when there was a complaint against a High Court judge, the Chief Justice of that High Court 'should satisfy himself about the truth of the imputation made by the Bar Association… and consult the Chief Justice of India,

where deemed necessary ... '<sup>85</sup> The Chief Justice of India, in turn, would 'tender such advice either directly or may initiate such action, as is deemed necessary… ', thereby allowing the Court to '[discipline] by self-regulation through in-house procedure'. <sup>86</sup> Judgments like *C Ravichandran Iyer* demonstrate the absence of any machinery for disciplinary action against judges of the superior courts short of removal by the process of impeachment.

There have been proposals for constitutional amendments and parliamentary legislation to take disciplinary action against judges short of their transfer and removal. Such proposals appear to be potentially deleterious to judicial independence, and a better approach would focus on greater internal regulation within the judiciary. Any threat of removal or disciplining of a judge at the hands of any other authority would surely inject pusillanimity into the veins of the judge as he would constantly look over his shoulder before taking any decision for fear that it might annoy the powers that be. After all, the Emergency showed us that even judges of the Supreme Court wilted when the heat was on. In matters of appointments, tenure, transfer, disciplinary action, and removal, the Constitution has been deliberately designed to ensure absolute judicial independence, with no scope for Parliament or the executive to interfere with judicial conduct or influence judicial decisions in any covert manner. Despite the highfalutin discourse by politicians and parliamentarians, absent principles of constitutional morality and honest attempts to uphold the Constitution, tinkering with the existing provisions of the Constitution would permanently damage the characteristic fearlessness and independence of the superior judiciary in India. The remedies proposed may, in the long run, prove to be worse than the malaise itself.

## **V. CONCLUSION**

As this chapter shows, the relationship between judicial independence and judicial accountability depends on the historical experience of how institutions operate. Embedded in the different choices that are made, and the corresponding shaping of constitutional doctrine, is a judgment of which risks are most serious. In the Indian context, it was the undermining of judicial independence during the Indira Gandhi era which led to the judiciary increasing its role in the appointments process, and it was through a series of cases on judicial appointments that judicial independence acquired a crucial place in the Constitution's Basic Structure. The Supreme Court's most recent decision in *Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association*, which struck down the Ninety-ninth Amendment to the Constitution, confirms this place.<sup>87</sup> Perhaps, the Supreme Court considered that the collegium system with all its so-called deficiencies was a lesser evil than what was enacted by the Ninety-ninth Amendment.

It should be noted that this chapter does not exhaust the ways in which judicial independence can be compromised and is secured. For example, it does not delve into financial autonomy of courts, the absence of which can have major implications for its independence. In practice, budgetary allocations made by the High Court and approved by the Chief Justice are nearly always arbitrarily pared when forwarded to the executive government. Various expenses and bills are required to be sent to the State Government for approval, and often enough expenses are capriciously rejected by a member of the bureaucracy. The most serious forms of rejections take place with regard to administrative and institutional expenses. Another topic that is not fully explored is post-retirement benefits. Such benefits come in a variety of shapes. They could come by way of a grant of land at concessional rates

to individuals or societies of individual judges. They could also come by way of post-retirement appointments on commissions and tribunals. Actions like the former are clearly condemnable, for it makes judges obligated to the executive. As far as the latter is concerned, there is no doubt that in the present set-up commissions and tribunals do need to be manned by persons of recognised integrity and competence in whom the public reposes faith. Indubitably, a retired judge would fit the bill. If the executive desires to exploit the talent of a retired judge for public benefit by appointment to a commission or a tribunal, there can in principle be no conceivable objection to it, if it is done honestly and transparently. What is objectionable would be any attempt to offer an allurement to a sitting judge or attempts to negotiate terms with a sitting judge with regard to post-retirement benefits. Another recent topic of discussion has been the disclosure of judges' assets. Although accountability does not necessarily mean disclosure of a judge's assets publicly, the judges of the Supreme Court and judges of several High Courts have voluntarily adopted the practice of placing details of assets and liabilities in the public domain. This is a right step in the direction of transparency and accountability in judicial affairs. The judgment of the Delhi High Court in *CPIO, Supreme Court of India v Subhash Chandra Agarwal* represents an attempt to make judges more accountable by seeking information on their assets and liabilities voluntarily disclosed to the Chief Justice by seeking disclosure under the Right to Information Act.<sup>88</sup>

Future years are likely to see further debates on how to balance judicial independence with accountability in India. While judicial independence is an inviolable aspect of Indian constitutionalism, concerns about accountability remain, and doubtless the judiciary has a number of internal reforms to undertake. What remains clear is that whatever changes may occur in future years, whether they involve new procedures for appointing judges or new means for disciplining their behaviour, they are likely to be the subject of major constitutional debate and adjudication. Although studies on judicial power, both in India and elsewhere, typically focus on the grounds of judicial review and the forms that judicial remedies take, a noteworthy aspect of Indian constitutionalism is the extent to which the very idea of judicial independence itself has been the topic of such intense contestation. In the final analysis, the best guarantee of judicial independence is the character of the person holding the office. Neither constitutional guarantees nor statutory provisions can ever be an effective substitute. Judges ultimately are products of society and we shall always get the judges that we deserve. Judicial independence ultimately would be directly proportional to the value attached by the citizens of the country and the judges to that signal virtue.

- $2$  Constitution of India 1950, sch 3.
- <sup>3</sup> Sankalchand Himmatlal Sheth [\(n](#page-14-0) 1) [78–79].

- $\frac{11}{1}$  (1969) 3 SCC 36.
- $\frac{12}{12}$  AIR 1953 Mad 392.
- <sup>13</sup> Sankalchand Himmatlal Sheth [\(n](#page-14-0) 1) [39].

<span id="page-14-0"></span><sup>1</sup> *Union of India v Sankalchand Himmatlal Sheth* (1977) 4 SCC 193 [65].

<sup>5</sup> *SP Gupta v Union of India* (1981) Supp SCC 67 [710–11].

<span id="page-14-1"></span><sup>4</sup> Benjamin N Cardozo, *The Nature of Judicial Process* (Yale University Press 1921) 168.

 $\frac{6}{2}$  Cardozo (<u>n 4</u>) 129, 136.

<sup>7</sup> See Granville Austin, *The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation* (Oxford University Press 1966) 218–29.

 $\frac{8}{3}$  Constitution of India 1950, art 124(2).

 $<sup>9</sup>$  Constitution of India 1950, art 217.</sup>

<sup>10</sup> *Sankalchand Himmatlal Sheth* [\(n](#page-14-0) 1).