### The First Reform Wave

When, by a narrow majority, Gorbachev was made general secretary, he quickly sounded the alarm. Much needed to be done. All was very far from well. However, in his first year he seemed like a younger and healthier Andropov, who during his short tenure of office also pointed to the need for change in the petrified and stagnant system. It now appears that Gorbachev did have more radical ideas than he was able to speak of publicly, since in the given political balance, he would then not have been allowed to become general secretary. Only after he got rid of some of the leading 'conservatives' on the politbureau, such as Grishin and Romanov, could he gradually unveil a reform programme that went beyond what used to be called 'further perfecting' the centralized system. Already in April 1985 he stated that 'the fate of our country, the future of socialism in the world, depend in large measure on how we tackle our task," and all evidence shows that he knew how vast the task of reform was, though he was as yet unclear just how he would tackle it.

At first we seemed to be seeing a 'replay' of the abortive 'Kosygin' reform of 1985: a shift from material allocation to trade in means of production, more freedom to negotiate some prices, more financial responsibility and more independence for enterprise management, with the product-mix determined primarily by the needs of the customers. Instead of compulsory plan targets, there would be 'state orders' *(goszakazy)* covering only basic requirements; the rest of productive capacity could then be devoted to freely negotiated contracts.

In practice, little changed. Industrial ministries remained in

existence, still with responsibility for their sectors of the economy, responsibilities they could only carry out if they had power to issue orders, which they continued to do. The more was this necessary when radical price reform was postponed, so that profitability could not act as a rational guide to action, since prices in no way reflected relative scarcities or use-values. Furthermore, the practice of 'taut' planning continued, with the adoption of the twelfth five-year plan (see below), and this meant more of the all-too-familiar shortages, including shortages of material inputs. As a result, *goszakaz* came to cover the bulk of output, and management actively sought after *goszakazy* because they would then be more likely to receive allocated inputs. So both production planning and administered allocation continued to dominate. It looked like a repeat of the frustrations that followed the similar attempt in 1965.

One reason for the inconsistent half-heartedness with which reform was tackled at this time was unclarity as to the scope and scale of reform and its end-objective. In the first year even the word 'market' was avoided - one spoke of 'commodity-money relations', and not (yet) of any species of even a *socialist* market. The old orthodoxies were only gradually shed. The revival of cooperative enterprises was mooted, and eventually they were legalized, but not until 1988 (see p. 402 below). In agriculture, small-group and family contract *within* state and collective farms was being actively encouraged by the new leadership, but was also being actively obstructed by local officialdom and by farm management, so that little changed there either.

Gorbachev clearly intended to push ahead with economic *perestroika,* 'restructuring', and he listened to advisers who urged a more rapid tempo of change. Among these were Abel Abenbegyan and Tatiana Zaslavskaya; the latter, in the late-Brezhnev years, had circulated a memorandum that was leaked to the West (which earned both of them a formal reprimand), in which she pointed to the many deficiencies of the system, and called for radical *systemic* change.<sup>2</sup>

Gorbachev also advocated *glasnost',* a term which could be interpreted just as greater openness on the part of the authorities, but which rapidly became a recipe for much greater freedom of

criticism, discussion and publication. (The attempt in 1986 to cover up the Chernobyl nuclear disaster made *glasnost'* seem more urgent.) This made possible the appearance of a devastating account of the real state of the economy, and it is a guide to the thought-processes of Gorbachev himself that, when asked for a comment, he said that he agreed with almost all of it (the exception being his rejection of unemployment as part of the cure). Here is a sizeable extract from this article, by N. Shmelev:

We are still dominated by the conception that the existing system of economic and property relations is the embodiment of Marxism-Leninism in practice, fully consonant with the nature of socialism as a social formation.

Marx and Engels elaborated the theoretical bases of revolution, showed its objective inevitability, but as for what shape the economy would take after victory, on this they only had guesses *[dogadki] ...* They left us virtually nothing which could be considered as practical advice about the methods of reaching the aims [of socialism]. The pre-revolutionary works of Lenin were also in the main devoted purely to politics .. . and not to what will have to be done to organize a full-blooded economic life after the revolution. Thus the revolution caught us without a thought-out or complete economic theory of socialism... It is essential to realize that the cause of our difHculties is not only or not solely due to the heavy burden of military expenditures and the very expensive global responsibilities of our country. If we expended them correctly, even the remaining resources would be sufficient for maintaining a balanced and technically progressive economy and for satisfying the traditionally modest needs of our population. However, prolonged attempts to break up the objective laws of economic life, to suppress the age-long natural stimuli for human labour, brought about results quite different from what was intended. Today we have an economy characterized by shortage, imbalances, in many respects unmanageable, and, if we were to be honest, an economy almost unplannable . . . We have one of the lowest levels of labour productivity of any industrial nation, especially in agriculture and in construction, since through the years of stagnation the working masses have reached a state of almost total disinterestedness in freely committed and honest labour...

Apathy, indifference, thieving .. . have become mass phenomena, with at the same time aggressive envy towards high earners. There have appeared signs of a sort of physical degradation of a sizeable part of our population, through drunkenness and idleness. Finally, there is a lack of belief in the officially announced objectives and purposes, in the very possibility of a more rational economic and social organization of life. Clearly all this cannot be swiftly overcome - years, maybe generations, will be needed.<sup>3</sup>

What, then, had to be done? What was the alternative to the 'unmanageable and unplannable' centralized system? There was, objectively speaking, only one alternative: either one's output is allocated, or one *sells;* either one applies for material inputs, or one *buys.* Buying and selling equals the market. *Tertium non datur.* 

But this required the overcoming of the most formidable obstacles. One was ideological: market and socialism had for generations of Marxists seemed to be inherently incompatible. Markets could be, indeed were, tolerated on a limited scale, but should eventually wither away. This view was not only held by numerous officials; it penetrated deeply into society. Ordinary citizens also saw private enterprise and buying and selling for profit as some sort of black-market or 'speculative' activity. The masses were accustomed to low prices of necessities (food, rents, etc.) and to job security, and valued both, though efficiency required a break with such practices.

It is noteworthy that even as late as July 1990, when the twenty-eighth party congress met, the delegates voted by a large majority, to Gorbachev's annoyance, to omit the word 'market' from the name of the economic reform commission which it appointed.<sup>4</sup> This showed the attitude, or lack of understanding, of the bulk of party functionaries, and underlined his dilemma: the one effective means of imposing reform, the party machine, was, to say the least, uncommitted, if not directly opposed, to the policy it was asked to carry out. A particularly vivid example of this occurred in 1986-7, when functionaries launched a campaign against so-called 'unearned incomes'. Local officials took this as a signal to obstruct the (perfectly legal) transport of goods to kolkhoz markets, while 'axes and even bulldozers' were used to destroy peasants' attempts to grow vegetables under glass (e.g. see *Vop. ekon,* No. 7, 1987).

So a second obstacle was the interest of many in the party-state machine to retain their function of allocating resources, which was a vital source of both power and privilege, a point discussed by Zaslavskaya in the memorandum to which reference was made above. Bureaucrats could and did obstruct change which threatened jobs and careers.

A third and vitally important obstacle was more purely practical. Millions had become accustomed to the old system, knew how to operate within it. Management was used to having their customers designated by the plan, never had to practise the arts of marketing. Market infrastructure was (and is) lacking. So were the needed information flows, and the very existence of non-state trading intermediaries was still illegal. The law of contract was full of holes, contracts all too frequently broken. 'Market culture' was lacking. So that even if all agreed about what kind of market economy there should be, and agreed on the boundary between plan and market, the transition to a new system was going to be a formidably difficult task. The more so because, while a direct leap into a fully fledged market seemed impossible and altogether too risky, intermediate stops on the way threatened to create impossible hybrids. Thus, to take but one example, to give management full freedom over the product-mix required a total change in the principles of pricing, while price rises alone could not be expected to reduce demand for material inputs so long as there was not a 'hard budget constraint' and enterprises retained an interest in increasing the value of gross output (since higher-priced inputs were then actually preferred). Reform had to be introduced in viable *packages.* So one had what could be called both the necessity and impossibility of gradualness.

It is worth stressing all this because it helps us to see some of the key causes of the failure of economic *perestroika.* But there were also grave policy errors, which made a difficult task altogether impossible.

One such error was, in fact, the twelfth (and last) five-year plan. Gorbachev's advice, for which Aganbegyan was subsequently blamed, was that the stagnation of the Brezhnev years had to be overcome by a sharp acceleration *(uskorenie)* in growth and in investment, with priority given to industrial re-equipment and so to expanding and modernizing the machine-building industry. As will be seen below, the first version of the plan, drafted during 1985, was amended upwards when finally adopted by the twenty-seventh party congress in 1986. An ambitious long-term plan, through to the year 2000, was also presented.

The 1986-90 plan envisaged the following growth rates over the five-year period (note that the 1981—5 aggregate growth figures are substantially overstated, for reasons already referred to):

| 1981-5                   |      | 1986-90<br>first version | 1986-90<br>final version |  |
|--------------------------|------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--|
| National income utilized | 16.5 | $19-22$                  | 22.1                     |  |
| Industrial production    | 20   | $21 - 24$                | 25                       |  |
| Producers' goods         | 19.6 | $20 - 23$                | 24                       |  |
| Consumers' goods         | 20.8 | $22 - 25$                | 27                       |  |
| Agricultural production  | 5-5  | $14-16$                  | 14.4                     |  |
| Investments              | 154  | $18-22$                  | 23.6                     |  |
| Real incomes per capita  | 11   | $13 - 15$                | 14                       |  |

*{Source: Pravda, 19 June 1986.)* 

By 1990 all indicators were pointing downwards, as we shall see. The following tables give one a notion of the rate of progress through 1988, after which the regress began.

|                                                                              | Official growth figures, per cent |                   |                   |                  |                  |                                |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|------------------|------------------|--------------------------------|
|                                                                              | 1981-85 1986<br>(average)         |                   | 1987              | 1988             | 1989             | 1990                           |
| National income utilized<br>Industrial production<br>Agricultural production | 3.2<br>3.9<br>10                  | 2.3<br>5.5<br>7.1 | 1.6<br>4.6<br>-14 | 4.4<br>6.3<br>25 | 2.5<br>0.4<br>17 | $\sim 4-0$<br>$-1.2$<br>$-2-3$ |

(Sources: Soviet report to IMF, IBRD, OECD, for data through 1989. 1990 figures from *Ekonomika i zhizn'*, No. 5,1991.)

The industrial statistics (p.  $400$ ) show both the shortfalls *vis-d*vis the five-year plan and the decline which set in after 1988 (and which accelerated in 1991).

While output of the key industrial sectors began a sharp decline after 1988, manufactured consumers' goods, especially durables, continued to do well until 1990. This was true, for

|                                 | 198S  | 1988  | 1990<br>plan | 1990<br>actual |
|---------------------------------|-------|-------|--------------|----------------|
| Electricity (milliard kWhs)     | i,S4S | 1,705 | 1,860        | 1,728          |
| Oil (million tons)              | 595   | 624   | 635          | 570            |
| Gas (milliard cub. metres)      | 643   | 770   | 850          | 815            |
| Coal (million tons)             | 726   | 772   | 795          | 709            |
| Rolled steel (million tons)     | 108   | 116   | 119          | 112            |
| Chemical fibres (thousand tons) | i.394 | i,535 | 1,850        | 1.500          |

(Source: Pravda, 19 June 1986, Ekonomika izhizn', No. 5,1991.)

example, for TV sets, refrigerators, radios. It is only in 1991 that they too were affected by the growing chaos.

The basic problem with the strategy of 'acceleration' was that it was in complete conflict with the aim of economic reform, which required a lesser degree of tautness to permit flexibility and the abandonment of administered allocation of inputs. Allocation, a form of rationing, was kept in being by fear of shortage. This same fear encouraged hoarding by enterprises, which accentuated shortage. So one could say that uskorenie conflicted with economic perestroika.

The priority of machine-building in investment did not in fact materialize. The largest increases were directed towards energy, where costs were rising rapidly. The notorious *dolgostroi* ('longbuild') became worse, as the economic ministries continued to press their own projects, in defiance of the efforts of Gosplan to reduce the total investments to the level at which they balanced the resources available. Nor were there any defence cuts in those vears to relieve the strain on resources.

It is a fair generalization that, through 1988, the old system continued to function in much the old way, with goszakaz being gosprikaz, i.e., state 'commercial' orders were in practice compulsory orders of the traditional species, and growth may have benefited from the campaign against drunkenness, which, as we shall see, did harm to state finances. But the long-existing defects of the old system - waste of inputs, neglect of user requirements, poor quality — continued to be denounced by the increasingly free  $\frac{1}{2}$ media and by highly critical economist-reformers. Thus D. Valovoi complained that the linking of the wage level with the value

of gross output *(val)* continued to stimulate the wasteful use of inputs, since 'the higher the cost, the higher the wage',<sup>5</sup> and Danilov-Danilyan summarized the position as follows:

our economy can be characterized as cost-inducing *(zatratnoi),* because the economic mechanism for many years orientated enterprises to increase costs rather than economize on them, since it is precisely through expenditure *(zatraty)* that the command-bureaucratic system measures the results of economic activity: there is no other way in the absence of a market, the only known objective instrument by which to compare costs and results. But it is cost-inducing in another sense: its very structure predetermines excessive costs in comparison with the economies of postindustrial countries, and this for practically every kind of product.'

In 1987 came a new 'enterprise law', and also the notion *of*  'republican *khozraschyof,* which had the intention of transferring more powers to the republics, Unking their own finances more closely with the functioning of 'their' enterprises. The two measures were in fact contradictory: managerial independence did not require the transfer of power from all-union to republican bureaucrats. In practice little changed, but the measure gave an impetus to republican separatism, which was to have very grave consequences in and after 1990.

Meanwhile progress in agriculture remained mostly on paper. There was an increasing volume of published criticism: thus N. Shmelev wrote, 'The crisis-situation in our agriculture is evident to all.' Large investment has been largely wasted. 'The crisis in our villages is due to the triumph of coercion over common sense . . . Few can now doubt that the basic reason for the deplorable condition of our agriculture, its stagnation, lies in the undivided power which the administrative stratum has acquired over everything in the village." The peasants had become totally alienated, indeed depeasantized. To quote S. Vikulov, 'in the old days the peasants reasoned: why should we work, we will not be paid. Now they reason: why should we work, we will be paid anyway.'<sup>8</sup>

The efforts to overcome this indifference through the introduction of contract groups and family leasing were making very slow headway, and there emerged a strong lobby of farm managers, led by V. Starodubtsev, one of the plotters in August 1991, who

resisted loss of land for peasants, to avoid the danger of breaking up the state and collective farms which they managed (and in which they behaved, in the words of many critics, like landlords, *pomeshchiki).* E. Gaidar wrote withering words about 'vast ineffective capital investments, the erection of reinforced concrete palaces for low-productive livestock, the digging of [useless] irrigation canals, the supply of record quantities of painted scrap-iron proudly described as agricultural machinery ...' . He pointed out that in 1971-85 agriculture had obtained investment of 590 milliard roubles, yet 'the national income created in this sector in the middle 1980s remained at the level of the early 1970s.'<sup>9</sup> A whole number of decrees aimed at changing this state of affairs made little impact, diluted or sabotaged by local officialdom, aided and abetted by those at the centre (for example E. Ligachev) who hoped to preserve the *kolkhozy* and *sovkhozy*  while making their operations more efficient.

Investments in agriculture continued to be wasted on unsound projects. Much criticism was directed at *Minvodkhoz,* the Ministry of Water Resources, which spent vast sums on drainage and irrigation to no good purpose, and repeatedly at projects to build big, 'extremely ineffective' livestock complexes while essential infrastructure (storage space, roads) was neglected.<sup>10</sup> In Central Asia, imposed cotton monoculture and unsound irrigation led to ecological disaster, including the destruction of the Aral Sea.

A hopeful and overdue sign of progress was the law on cooperatives, adopted at the beginning of 1988. It was divided into two parts. One concerned the legalization of urban cooperatives of many kinds - small-scale-industrial, service, catering, trading - to fill gaps and to compete with the monopolistic state sector. The other envisaged turning units within the big *sovkhozy*  and *kolkhozy,* and also the service organizations in the agricultural sector, into genuine cooperatives. This, together with family and small-group leasing, could have had a sizeable impact. However, for reasons already advanced, changes were very slow in agriculture, and we shall see that more radical measures taken in 1989-90 also made little difference in the short run.

As for urban cooperatives, their activities did substantially expand. Thus output of goods and services increased from 40 milliard roubles in 1989 to 70 milliard in 1990. At the end of 1990, 260,000 cooperative enterprises, many very small, employed 6.2 million persons, including part-timers, but many were directly linked into (or even operated within) state enterprises (as a means of evading financial controls). *Leased* enterprises in industry produced goods worth 48 milliard roubles."

However, cooperatives ran into several problems and obstacles. One was the fact that, with generalized shortage, they were able to charge high prices, which rendered them unpopular and attracted restrictive legislation. Then these same shortages stood in the way of their obtaining material inputs through legitimate channels. Another problem was that they could pay their members and employees well above the (controlled) wage rate paid in state enterprises, which caused tensions and protests. Local authorities frequently obstructed their activities, which could have expanded much faster if these obstacles had not been present.

Another important reform affected foreign trade, hitherto strictly the monopoly of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and its corporations. In 1987 it was decreed that a large number of other ministries, corporations, enterprises, could enter into direct dealings with abroad. The measure was widely welcomed. However, it came at a time when the USSR's trading position became less favourable, with adverse movements in terms of trade. Also it created confusion as to responsibility for debt. Previously, all foreign trade deals could be seen as being backed by a Soviet state guarantee, since trade was in reality with the state. Now there was a transfer of responsibility to those who previously had hardly any experience of dealing with foreigners, and this at a time when foreign 'hard' currency was particularly scarce, as were the goods that could be bought with it. It became gradually apparent that the rules concerning retention of a part of the currency earned by export could be evaded, and by 1990 perplexed foreigners were uncertain as to who was to pay them. The high credit rating previously earned by the Soviet Union began to tumble.

In the previous chapter it was noted how, under Brezhnev, the combined effects of increased oil output and soaring oil prices led to a very substantial rise in foreign-currency earnings. Under Gorbachev there was the declared intention of greater participa-

tion in the international division of labour. However, two adverse factors intervened. Firstly, oil output began to stagnate, and later in the decade to fall. Secondly, 1985 saw a steep decline in world prices of oil and gas. Already by 1986 exports to capitalist countries fell by 3.5 milliard foreign-trade roubles, i.e. by some 5 milliard dollars, and would have fallen faster if the tonnage of oil exports had not been substantially increased. This adverse trend continued in subsequent years and had two negative consequences. One was a cut in imports, especially of consumers' goods (other than grain, which remained high because of agricultural shortfalls). The other was a fall in budget revenue. Convertibility of the rouble could only be a remote aim in the circumstances.

## The Budget, Money, Wages, Inflation

To move towards a market economy in any form one evidently needs money with real internal purchasing-power, i.e. an end to chronic shortages. This in turn is inconsistent with budget deficits financed by money creation. One needed strict control over credits, and wages either subject to direct control through the planned 'wages fund' or by hardening budget constraints on enterprises. Tragically, a series of decisions and events, some foreseeable, others not, had profoundly adverse effects on the whole reform process.

First, the budget. As has already been noted (p.389 above), it was supposed to be in surplus, though this was not the case. Gorbachev inherited deficits of the order of 10-15 milliards, covered by advances from the state bank. This deficit grew extremely rapidly, to 47.9 milliards in 1986, 57.1 in 1987, 90.1 in 1988. It was approaching 100 milliards in 1989, and at long last it was possible to say so publicly.<sup>12</sup> Why did this happen?

The following causes can be distinguished. Firstly, the budget's revenues were adversely affected by the sharp fall in tax yield on liquor, due to the campaign against drunkenness (which led to a sharp cutback in output of not only vodka but also wine), and in revenue from foreign trade arising from the fall in world oil prices and the cutback of imports of consumers' goods that were resold at high prices. Secondly, budget expenditures rose because of the escalating cost of food subsidies (higher prices for farms were unaccompanied, until 1991, by higher retail prices of staple foodstuffs), plus urgently needed increases in spending on the shamefully neglected medical service, and on education, pensions and housing, and then because of the unexpectedly high expenditures associated with the Chernobyl nuclear disaster and the Armenian earthquake. So revenues fell, expenditure rose. Cuts in defence spending were resisted, as were the spending programmes of most ministries. The result was a sharp rise in money supply.

Of course, we should not forget that large budget deficits happen elsewhere, including Reagan's and Bush's United States. However, the American deficit was a much smaller percentage of GNP, and was financed in a non-inflationary way.

The other cause of trouble was a consequence of the loosening of control over enterprise finance, both in respect of wages and of capital expenditures. Wage control had previously been remarkably effective: in successive quinquennia the 'target' for average wages was not exceeded. This was due not to a hard budget constraint but to an imposed 'wages fund' limit, which enterprises were unable to exceed without specific authority. This limit was abandoned as part of the policy of enlarging enterprise autonomy. Wage increases were henceforth supposed to be linked to 'productivity', but this could be increased by shifting to dearer product variants, or by evading price control, thereby increasing rouble production per worker. Shortages helped enterprises to foist higher-priced goods on their customers. With more money available to them, enterprises paid higher wages, and undertook investments which added to excess demand and so to *dolgostroi.*  The table on p. 405 illustrates what was happening.

According to E. Gaidar, while in 1989 a total of 24,000 investment projects were 'frozen' by the centre, no less than 146,000 new ones were begun, making nonsense of the policy of concentrating investment resources on what could be completed.<sup>13</sup> Also the burden of defence continued high. Thus, according to V. Loginov, out of 16,5 million persons employed in the 'machine-building

**Household money incomes (percentage rise over previous year) 1986 1987 1988 1989 3.6 3.9 9.2 13.1 Currency in circulation (% increases) 1986 1987 1988 1989 6.1 7.8 13.6 19.5**  *{Source: The Economy of the USSR* **(IMF, IBRD, OECD, EBRD), December 1990, 'data** 

**provided by the Soviet authorities'.)** 

complex', only 5.6 million, a third, worked in enterprises under civilian (i.e. non-military) ministries.<sup>14</sup>

The above-cited increases in money supply and personal incomes do not look unusually big by the standards of other inflation-prone countries. Their consequences were rendered grave by the attempt to hold back the rise in prices. This led to an increasing gap between personal incomes and enterprise revenues on the one hand, and the consumer and producer goods available at established prices on the other. Of course prices did in fact rise, by the sort of manoeuvres described in the Appendix. But none the less the gap became most serious, and, as happens in such cases, the rush by all concerned to buy up and hoard whatever can be found, leads to ever-greater shortages. It also acts as a disincentive to work: why earn extra if it cannot be spent? A large part of the increase in savings bank deposits is regarded by Soviet economists as frustrated purchasing power.

The authorities well knew that prices were out of line. In a speech in Murmansk in October 1987, Gorbachev himself asserted the need for a radical overhaul of consumer prices, to reduce the burden of subsidies and to stimulate the economy.<sup>15</sup> Many economists pointed out that the low prices (e.g. of meat) benefited

#### **Radicalization of Reformers and the Rise of Nationalism 407**

mainly the residents in 'priority' cities such as Moscow, and those with access to special stores, while a great many of the poorest had to pay the much higher free-market prices or go without. But the unpopularity of price rises was such that the long-needed rise was postponed until it was too late. Price increases of underpriced energy, timber and other materials were also left until 1991, by which time they were irrelevant amid ominous threats of hyperinflation.

Yet without meaningful prices, i.e. prices at which goods and services can actually be obtained, there could be no move to a market economy. Through 1988 the wheels still turned, production continued. The old supply relationships and the administrative allocation system ensured, by a kind of inertia, that materials arrived most of the time. However, the centralized system was being gradually dismantled, while the conditions for creating a market system were not present. The stage was set for disintegration.

#### **Radicalization of Reformers and the Rise of Nationalism**

As mentioned above, in the first Gorbachev years the 'radical reforms' did not question the commitment to socialism, or the dominance of state ownership. The idea was to subject state enterprises to the discipline of the market, with consumer choice and therefore competition. In 1988 cooperatives were legalized, but *private* enterprise remained taboo, and private employment was still seen as impermissible 'exploitation'. Indeed one accusation levelled at the newly legalized cooperatives is that they were private enterprise in disguise, which in fact some of them were.

In the second half of 1989, and even more in 1990, the reformers' ideas became bolder. The more conservative elements in the profession continued to resist, and a conference of economists, managers and economic officials which met in November 1989 responded to some of the conservative speeches with loud applause, noted with dismay by the then director of the Institute of Economics and vice-premier in charge of economic reform

projects, L. Abalkin. However, conscious that the entire reform process had stalled, groups of economists drafted new reform plans: during the spring and summer of 1990 S. Shatalin, G. Yavlinsky and others drafted a so-called '500 day programme' for transition to a market economy, which now envisaged large-scale privatization. As Shatalin told a party meeting earlier that year, 'it is not a question now of saving socialism, communism or any other -ism, it is a question of saving our country, our people.'<sup>16</sup> At the same time prime minister Ryzhkov, assisted by Abalkin, was drafting an alternative plan, less radical, but also aiming at marketization. Gorbachev asked Aganbegyan to adjudicate, and he came down largely on the side of Shatalin-Yavlinsky. They all called for financial stabilization, an end to budget deficits, the creation of the needed market infrastructure, the legalization of private enterprise. (I have at home a collection of these and other such documents, which, unfortunately, produced nothing except paper.)

The Supreme Soviet, elected in the freest ballot known in Soviet history since 1917, still contained many officials nominated by various bodies controlled by the Communist party, and indeed some nominated by the party itself. While it was the scene of free debate, contrasting with the dreary unanimity of the past, it was not an effective legislative body and by no means contained a reliable reform-minded majority. Presented with the compromise Aganbegyan version, the Supreme Soviet dithered and procrastinated, being particularly unhappy with the (much-needed) price rises. Nor, as we have seen, were party functionaries convinced of the virtues of a fully fledged market, as was shown by the reactions of the delegates to the twenty-eighth party congress to Gorbachev's speech, in which he argued for much greater freedom for all categories of enterprises, radical price reform and even for the creation of stock and commodity exchanges.<sup>17</sup>

By now, 'privatization' was publicly advocated, though it was also strongly opposed. Meanwhile, in the words of Yu. Maslyukoy, head of Gosplan, speaking to the party's February (1990) plenum, 'the state's directing organs have lost control over many of the most basic aspects of economic development,' and E. Gaider wrote, 'from the middle of 1989 the all-union organs

#### **Radicalization of Reformers and the Rise of Nationalism 409**

increasingly lost freedom to manoeuvre. There was a growing divergence between the economically essential and the politically possible.'<sup>18</sup>

Shortly afterwards we had the following comment by the talented publicist Igor Klyamkin: 'We should not demand of Gorbachev that he, being in the position of Janos Kadar, should act like Vaclav Havel .. . Our economic life until recently was dominated by two groups of all-powerful officials: party and government-departmental, and both were secret or not-so-secret collaborators of the military-industrial complex, which was the bone-structure of the Soviet economy and the stable basis of the totalitarian regime.' It took several years of failure of partial reforms to persuade them that more radical steps were essential. 'Thus life compelled the reformers, led by Gorbachev, to adopt such alien words as "market", "privatization", "private property". But the reformers, themselves products of party and departmental officialdom, also clearly understood that these alien remedies are poison for them. Hence no doubt the long delay, until delay seemed even more dangerous ...' " Hence also a kind of built-in half-heartedness or obstructionism in implementation. And in another article, Igor Klyamkin noted that, in the absence of private property in the means of production, citizens saw themselves primarily as consumers, the authorities as providers. 'So if in such a society one introduces a representative democracy, the elected parliaments cannot but become societies of angry consumers *(serditykh potrebitelei),* who demand redistribution at the expense of other groups .. . But since the rulers can only give by taking away, and there is no one they can take from, they have only one solution: to print more new money and divide it among all the claimants.'<sup>20</sup>

This helps us to understand the causes of the huge budget deficit. The 'rulers' knew it should not have existed, which is why they kept its existence secret.

A growing number of the radical reformers now began (or were at last able) to express directly anti-socialist views. It was asked: can a market exist if most of the economy was not privatized? And at the theoretical level it was asserted that Marx and Engels had been wrong about socialism, wrong about the market. At first Lenin was brought into the argument by claiming that in his last year he had learnt the hard lesson of the failure of war communism and was about to redefine socialism, but a whole number of publicists (Selyunin, Strelyany, A. Tsipko, the novelist Soloukhin, later also G. Popov, editor of *Voprosy ekonomiki)* were insisting that Leninist Bolshevism itself had been to blame for the horrors of Stalinism, that in 1917 Russia had taken the wrong road, and should now return to Western civilization. Successive reform plans advanced by the radicals went ever further in the direction of privatization, capital markets, in fact the restoration as soon as practicable of capitalism.

Gorbachev was left uncomfortably poised between the radicals and the conservatives. However, before discussing what he did in the last months of 1990 it is necessary to look at the rise of nationalism and its effects on the political structure.

*Glasnost\** and political freedoms, including freedom to organize opposition parties, and the decision, early in 1990, to end the constitutional monopoly of power of the Communist Party, had profound effects, especially on those republics with a history of nationalism. This concerned above all the three Baltic republics, forcibly incorporated following the Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939, but also Georgia, where a Menshevik government was overthrown by Bolshevik forces in 1921, and later also the Ukraine. To complicate matters further, the Russian republic (RSFSR), after electing Yeltsin as president, also took an independent line. The republics challenged the Union's right to control their economies, insisted on the priority of republican over union in laws. Already in 1990 there developed a so-called 'war of laws' *(Voina zakonov),* with no one quite sure whose laws were valid, or who owned what. For example, the republics began to claim ownership of all-union enterprises located in their territories. The resultant confusion in no way resembled the legal order necessary for a smooth functioning of either a command or a market economy. While the Baltic republics and Georgia moved towards leaving the Union altogether, the others at first were willing to consider some looser forms of association in a new Union treaty.

This left many key issues unresolved. What power, if any, would be left to the Union? How could it maintain the military,

#### **Radicalization of Reformers and the Rise of Nationalism 411**

unless it had real power to raise revenue? How could it implement a policy, whether of marketization, financial stabilization, or indeed any policy, when it no longer had the means of implementing it? Especially when the Russian republic declared that *it* was sovereign? To cite the noted publicist A. Migranyan, 'The president and the Supreme Soviet are trying to marketize and democratize the USSR, *a state that no longer exists.* The final collapse of the political centre means that no reform programme has a hope of being implemented by it .. . What is falling apart is not just the empire, but the ideology that held it together' (emphasis mine).<sup>21</sup>

The reference to ideology is vitally important. True, the party and its beliefs had long been decaying, but the entire legitimacy of the regime was now undermined. It had presided over economic failure, and loud voices were asserting that the huge sacrifices of the past had been in vain, that they were led for seventy-three years down the wrong road, or a cul-de-sac. As a bitter quip asserted, 'Socialism proved to be the longest road from feudalism to capitalism.' The demoralized party was deliberately weakened by Gorbachev, when he downgraded its politbureau at the twenty-eighth congress, in 1990, and told its local functionaries not to interfere with, or order about, the managers and the elected Soviets. Workers responding to shortages and hardship organized strikes in defiance of the party and of the official trade unions, and in some coalfields they took over the functions of the local authorities during the strikes.

Democratization and *glasnost'* permitted freedom of speech, the press, organization. But, except in such national republics as the Baltic states, there emerged no serious political alternative to the party, no mechanism for implementing central (or in Russia, Russian-republican) decisions. The power vacuum, in its turn, affected the economy, most of which was still state-owned and state-run. It was no longer clear - run by whom?

This was the background to Gorbachev's temporary 'right turn' in the last months of 1990. This was when leading reformers Shevarnadze, Yakovlev and Bakatin, and also the radical economist Petrakov, resigned. Several of their replacements were leaders of the abortive coup in August 1991. The military attempted,

unsuccessfully, to suppress Baltic independence. Gorbachev apparently hoped still to save the Union, and was under strong pressure from the military-industrial complex and most of the party functionaries. If he wished to go on with 'market' reform, as he insisted he did, the conservatives were unlikely to let him though interestingly one group of military colonels, led by Supreme Soviet deputy Alksnis, spoke openly of the 'Pinochet model', i.e. imposing the market under martial law. Reformers too spoke with many voices, some, like Larisa Pyasheva, being admirers of Hayek and Friedman, regarding even German socialdemocrats as left-wing extremists.<sup>22</sup>

### **Crisis and Collapse**

In 1990, according to the official figures, national income fell by 4 per cent, industrial production by 1.2 per cent, agricultural production by 2.3 per cent.<sup>23</sup> However, it is generally accepted that the falls were bigger. Particularly threatening was the substantial decline in output of oil and coal, the latter particularly affected by strikes. While the weather was favourable, and the grain growing in the fields could have been a record, disruption due to shortages of fuel and spare parts led to record losses. The official total for 1990, 218 million tons of grain, should have been sufficient, especially when topped up by imports. However, distribution was increasingly affected by the growing disorder: farms were reluctant to sell to the state, so procurements fell. This tendency was even more pronounced in 1991: farm management hoped for price increases, or were hoarding foodstuffs for use in barter deals. Republics and local authorities acted likewise, frequently blocking movement of food out of their regions. The compulsory procurement quotas of the past were no longer compulsory, but conditions were unpropitious for marketing. Shortages became worse, fuelling discontent and strikes. The 1991 harvest was disappointing, estimates ranging from 155 to 160 million tons, and, anticipating serious food shortages, there were appeals for Western aid.

Both at the centre and in many of the republics legislation was

adopted facilitating the creation of private family farms, either on long leases or in some instances (e.g. in the Baltic republics) based on land ownership. Family farms did come into existence, first in Georgia, Latvia and Estonia, then in other republics too, but progress was and is impeded by lack of supplies of necessary inputs (including small-scale machinery and building materials), and in Russia and the Ukraine also by the unwillingness of most peasants to take the risks involved in working for themselves, especially given the uncertainty with regard to future policies (would the successful again be labelled kulaks?). Also, until the coup, management of *kolkhozy* and *sovkhozy* continued to obstruct change.

The fall in oil production led inevitably to a fall in exports. Oil exports fell by nearly 50 per cent between 1989 and 1991. Gold was sold in increasing quantities to try to maintain the necessary level of imports. A further blow to foreign trade came as a result of the dramatic events of 1989-90 in Eastern Europe. Comecon was dissolved, and it was decided that trade with the USSR's former allies be conducted in hard currency. This, together with the consequences of political changes, led to a very steep decline in trade with all the former Comecon partners, and to shortages of equipment, components and consumers' goods formerly imported from these countries.

In 1990 there was a current account deficit of roughly 15 milliard dollars, which necessitated a drastic cut in imports in 1991 - in the first half year imports fell by 47 per cent. The economic adviser Grigory Yavlinsky announced that the gold reserves (previously secret) had fallen to 240 tons, far less than previously estimated: 'the country is bankrupt.'<sup>24</sup>

Far too late, it was decided to grasp the price nettle. Wholesale prices were increased on 1 January 1991, retail prices on 1 April. The increases were substantial, as the table on p. 414 shows. But there was still an attempt to fix and control prices, and, with output falling, most of these items remained unobtainable, other than through what remained of the allocation system or through barter deals, since money was rapidly losing purchasing power. The Russian republic was proposing much higher prices for coal and oil, and it was pointed out that even the new prices were in

**Prices (April 1990 =100)** 

| Electricity             | 192 |
|-------------------------|-----|
| Crude oil               | 255 |
| Oil products            | 218 |
| Iron and steel          | 184 |
| Machinery and equipment | 186 |
| Light industry          | 252 |
| Food industry           | 235 |

*(Source: Ekonomika i zhizn',* **No. 23,1991)** 

some instances (e.g. oil) far below world prices even at the official exchange rate. *,* 

Consumers' goods prices were to have been raised in June 1990, under proposals put forward by premier Ryzhkov but blocked by the Supreme Soviet. The increases in April were estimated as more than doubling the general level of consumer goods and services, though the declared intention was a rise of only 60 per cent, with compensatory increases in incomes and benefits, and even an upward revaluation of part of savings bank deposits. Increases in previously highly subsidized items were huge: beef from 2 to 7 roubles per kilo, pork from 1.90 to 5.30, butter from 3.50 to 8.80, eggs from 1.30 to 2.60, the cheapest rye bread from 0.12 to 0.48, the cheapest cotton cloth from 1.12 to 3.00 per metre, children's clothes up between 4- and 5-fold.<sup>25</sup>

But with output falling and incomes out of control, prices in free markets increased rapidly. In the first half of 1991 GNP fell by 10 per cent over the same period of 1990, industrial output by over 6 per cent, food-industry output by 8.5 per cent, agricultural output by 11 per cent, according to the half-yearly statistical report.

By mid-1991, all physical output indicators with the single exception of gas were showing a fall over the same period in 1990; oil by 9 per cent, coal by 11 per cent, steel by 12 per cent, iron ore by 10 per cent, motor vehicles by 8 per cent, tractors by 12 per cent, fertilizers by 8 per cent, timber by 13 per cent, paper by 7 per cent, according to the above-cited report. With supplies disrupted by the sharp cut in imports and by republican

and local-authority barriers, the decline looked set to become cumulative.

In 1989-91 one saw a radicalization of the nationalist movements, as well as some bloody clashes: between the military and secessionist forces in Lithuania and Latvia (in January 1991), between Azerbaidzhanis and Armenians, between Uzbeks and Kirgiz, between various nationalities in Moldavia. Secession became a live issue also in the Ukraine. Demands for sovereignty emerged also within the Russian federal republic. On paper the union republics had 'sovereignty', and the right to secede, even under the 'Stalin' constitution. But of course this 'right' could not be given any real meaning, and power was in fact exercised by a highly centralized Communist Party, with the 'elected' republican Soviets having minimal political and economic powers. Now, however, there was real freedom, and nationalism was strengthened by, and contributed to, economic disintegration. The economic links between republics and regions were close, there was a network of pipelines, an inter-republican electricity grid. There were also millions of mixed marriages, and between 60 and 70 million persons lived in republics other than their own. Separation led to disruption of supplies and threatened collapse and conflict. This was realized by many economists and politicians both in Moscow and in the periphery. But centrifugal forces could not be halted. Though plans for 'economic union of sovereign states' continued to appear, they are unlikely to be realized.

In 1991 the authority of the centre was collapsing, and in many instances republics or even cities (including Moscow) decreed their own prices. In any case, barter deals, and not a market, were in process of replacing the allocation system. Barter between republics, between regions, between enterprises and farms. Management had to try to obtain by barter food for its own workers, as well as material inputs. And anyone who could sell anything for hard currency naturally tried to do so, even if this meant not supplying anyone who could pay only in roubles.

Examples of barter deals could fill a book: Kuzbas coal bartered for Urals consumer goods; Vologda province barters metal for grain from Krasnodar. Ukraine's newspapers were stopping

publication because paper from Russia would only be supplied against Ukrainian food, which could not be made available.

It was obvious that a real currency was needed, and this required stopping printing so much money. However, the political breakdown had deplorable financial consequences. Thus the allunion budget was to have obtained revenues of 55 milliard roubles in the first quarter of 1991, but the actual revenue was only 19.9, while expenditures were 47.0, since republics withheld the sums destined for the centre,<sup>26</sup> and some republics, notably Russia and the Ukraine, ran big deficits of their own; total deficits were expected to exceed 20 per cent of GNP in 1991, a clear recipe for fiscal and monetary catastrophe.

An official reform proposal for the Russian republic described the situation as at April 1991 as follows:

The economy approaches the borderline beyond which one can speak not of economic crisis but catastrophe. The sharp fall in output that is occurring in most state enterprises is accompanied by growing inflationary processes. Management is concerned not with production, but with how to find means to pay the wages demanded by its employees and how to supply them with food and consumers goods to spend these wages on. These problems, as well as those of material-technical supply, are increasingly being resolved by the archaic method of barter... but this cannot ensure the needed supplies, so economic links are disrupted and production is halted. The degree of uncontrollability *(neupravlyaemosti)* of the economy has reached catastrophic dimensions. The planning institutions are demoralized by the uncertainties of their situation today and particularly tomorrow. Information from the grass-roots is lacking. All-union, republican and regional orders contradict one another, which adds to social-political tensions<sup>27</sup>

The Russian republic, under Yeltsin, seemed willing to go faster in the direction of marketization. The Shatalin-Yavlinsky programme, stalled at all-union level, was formally adopted by the republic in the autumn of 1990. But by the end of that year Yavlinsky, who had been given a senior post in the republican government and B. Fedorov, who was a young reforming Russian finance minister, both resigned, complaining of irresponsible populism on the part of their colleagues. Yeltsin's government was just as prone to run budget deficits as had been the Union.

The Union government, following Ryzhkov's resignation due to ill-health, was now headed by the former finance minister, Pavlov. He too produced a marketization-and-privatization scheme ('a socially orientated market economy within a single all-union area'), with prices largely freed, steps towards privatization, and so on.<sup>28</sup> But, as was also the case with Yeltsin's Russian republic, there was little implementation. And Pavlov was a leading member of the *put schists* of August 1991.

There were, it is true, some important moves towards marketization. Numerous commercial banks came into existence, and also commodity exchanges, where materials and machines could be bought, sold and swapped, at prices freely negotiated. Attempts to attract foreign capital resulted in the creation of numerous joint ventures, though few of these were producing goods and services. Privatization, including the sale of stocks and shares on nascent stock exchanges, made slow headway, with criticism directed at *nomenklatura* (managerial) takeovers. There was limited liberalization of foreign currency deals, with auctions, which enabled enterprises to purchase dollars from each other, at extremely unfavourable rates, ranging from 27 to 35 roubles to the dollar. In 1991 this also became the tourist rate. Since the official and so-called 'commercial' rates were still kept high (0.66 and 1.80 roubles to the dollar respectively), and controls were weakened, diis, and the chronic shortages of everything, provided ample opportunities to make money out of price and exchange-rate differences, so that much of the legalized private enterprise was diverted into dealing and not production. It should be noted that at the free exchange rate, average wages in mid-1991 were only about 15 dollars a *month* (and when I travelled from Kiev to Lvov by sleeper in June 1991, my ticket cost just one dollar and twenty cents!). By December the free rate reached 100 roubles to die dollar

It was only on 2 April 1991 that a law was adopted 'on the general principle of entrepreneurship by citizens', which finally allowed individuals to trade ('buy, sell, deal in bonds') and to employ others. So for the first time since 1930 private trade ceased to be punishable 'speculation', and private employment no longer noxious 'exploitation'.

It was also symbolically important that Gosplan was abolished under that name, and Gossnab relabelled the Ministry of Wholesale Trade.

By the summer of 1991 the process of disintegration was proceeding at an accelerated pace. The centre had now neither money nor authority, not even in Moscow, where Yeltsin's Russian-republican institutions ignored Gorbachev's decrees or the all-union Supreme Soviet's laws whenever they chose. Negotiations on a new Union treaty dragged on, while the economic situation continued to deteriorate. The draft Union treaty which Gorbachev was to have signed in August left the centre with little in the way of power and resources, but was in any event full of vague generalizations. No doubt the military-industrial complex felt it was being bereft of any financial or administrative base, and this was probably why the coup was timed for the day before the Union treaty was to have been signed. We know that this last attempt to save the old Union failed, the Communist Party dissolved, all the republics declared their sovereignty. So now there is no Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. There may be a loose economic association of sovereign states, under negotiation at the time of writing. But a more likely outcome is that most republics will go their own way, with all, including Russia, facing chaos and breakdown as they try to go it alone. Yeltsin announced Russia's 'marketization' programme on 29 October 1991. Gaidar, whom I have frequently quoted, has been put in charge of Russia's road to a market economy. It is far too soon to speculate about success or failure, in Russia or in other republics.

There will be no more chapters in the history of the USSR.

Looking back, one is struck by a paradox, or dilemma. To carry through the fundamental *perestroika* of the economy required strong government. In the first three years of Gorbachev's rule the mechanism for imposing a policy did exist, but the apparatus which would have had to do the imposing was not inclined to do the job, since marketization threatened its power and privileges. So Gorbachev set about dismantling the apparatus, changing its personnel, allowing criticism of the privileges, putting the whole *nomenklatura* system into question. *Glasnost'* and *demokratizatsiya*  doubtless weakened the powers of resistance and obstruction of the *apparatchiki.* However, the effect was also to undermine the power to implement policy. So by the time the reform programme was radicalized, the means to enforce it no longer existed. This, as well as doubts and hesitations about how far and how fast the reform process should go, plus the disastrous monetary and fiscal policy (or lack of policy), led to failure. Add the centrifugal forces of nationalism and regionalism, and one had collapse. What was there that could hold it all together? In the name of what? Answer came there none.