# **THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION SEEN FROM OUTSIDE**

## MARK TUSHNET

## **I. INTRODUCTION**

THIS chapter examines some aspects of the Constitution of India and its judicial interpretation, as seen from outside India. In doing so it necessarily focuses on topics that have travelled abroad. But, where is 'abroad'? The Indian Constitution and its interpretation has been an important model for constitutional development elsewhere in South Asia. Doctrines like that dealing with unconstitutional constitutional amendments were rapidly adopted in Pakistan and Bangladesh, for example. In the *Sisters of Menzingen* case, the Sri Lankan Supreme Court relied on differences between the Sri Lankan Constitution's text and the Indian Constitution's to reject a proffered interpretation of guarantees of religious liberty.<sup>1</sup> Indeed, it might be said that in South Asia constitutionalism developed, at least for a generation or two, with participants looking over their shoulders at India.

Beyond South Asia, courts and scholars have paid attention to developments in Indian constitutional law. The topics that interest them are not necessarily the ones of most interest to domestic scholars of the Indian Constitution. For example, as the chapter on emergency powers lays out, $\frac{2}{3}$  the constitutionality of Presidential rule—the displacement of State-level governments by rule from the Centre—or, more precisely, the conditions under which Presidential rule is constitutionally permissible, has been the focus of a great deal of attention *within* India. The reason is the political significance of Presidential rule. Yet, though the question of Centre–State relations is common to all federal systems and so is a topic clearly suitable for comparative constitutional study, the Indian experience has received relatively little attention *outside* of India.

The reasons for this relative lack of attention may be complex. Constitutional federalism takes a wide variety of forms, and comparison may be more difficult with respect to federalism than with, for example, some individual rights, and even some other structural issues. In addition, Presidential rule or its equivalent has occurred in other federal systems, but less extensively than in India. Jurisprudence elsewhere is less developed, so non-Indian scholars have fewer resources to draw upon in the comparative enterprise. Yet, the very fact that the issue of Presidential rule is important in Indian constitutionalism and not elsewhere can be made a matter for inquiry. The impetus for elaboration of constitutional doctrine regarding Presidential rule was a conflict between the national government and sub-national governments over secularism.<sup>3</sup> In the United States parallel conflicts might arise in connection with the constitutional requirement that the national government guarantees that each State has a republican form of government. But in the United States such conflicts are rare, though one might describe the Civil War as in part about that question. Reflecting on why India has a practice and jurisprudence relating to Presidential rule and the United States does not have one relating to the republican form of government might tell us something about differences in national identity.

If domestic importance does not provide a good guide to attention from the outside, what does? This chapter discusses several topics in which the Indian constitutional experience has entered into

comparative constitutional discourse: doctrine about unconstitutional constitutional amendments; public interest litigation; aspects of affirmative action doctrine; and, in some ways related to the preceding ones, the mechanisms by which judicial independence has been secured in India. What unites these topics is, first, that many other constitutional systems have substantial experience with each, and secondly, at least as a first approximation, each topic can be discussed without connecting it too extensively with too many other details of a specific constitutional system. That is, scholars can compare the theoretical justifications offered within India for the 'basic structure' doctrine, which the Indian Supreme Court has said applies to questions of secularism and federalism, with the justifications offered elsewhere without knowing a great deal about precisely how federalism or secularism—as constitutional values—actually work in India.

Indian jurisprudence on unconstitutional constitutional amendments has been influential elsewhere, whereas the Indian experience with the other topics discussed here is not best understood as a source of influence. Rather, that experience provides students of constitutionalism with an important set of materials they can incorporate into their general accounts. So, for example, students of judicial independence and students of the relation between constitutional review and the political branches should develop accounts compatible with their general accounts of the fact that Indian judges have managed to obtain almost complete control over the appointment of justices to the Indian Supreme Court.

# **II. UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS AND THE 'BASIC STRUCTURE' DOCTRINE**

Some constitutions distinguish among constitutional amendments, constitutional revisions, and constitutional substitutions, prescribing different mechanisms—different majorities, different decision-making institutions—for amendments as against revisions or substitutions. These distinctions can support conclusions that a particular change in a constitution is unconstitutional for what have come to be called procedural reasons. Other constitutions have 'eternity' clauses—the term given to the relevant provisions of Germany's Basic Law. These provisions specify that some constitutional changes are substantively impermissible (absent what has to be conceptualised as a constitutional revolution). Constitutional theorists have dealt with the procedural and substantive provisions by deploying ideas about an original and a derivative constituent power.

Prior to decisions taken by the Supreme Court of India, there was some jurisprudence dealing with constitutional changes found to be unconstitutional for procedural reasons, but no significant jurisprudence dealing with substantively unconstitutional provisions.<sup>4</sup> This does not mean that eternity clauses were constitutionally irrelevant; they may have been quite effective in making unthinkable the changes they barred. But, overstating the point for emphasis, the fact that no one seriously proposed an amendment barred by an eternity clause meant that there was no concrete jurisprudence fleshing out what eternity clauses actually meant.

The Indian Constitution does not have eternity clauses. One modest implication of that fact is that political actors who simply read the constitutional text would not be able to identify proposals for constitutional amendments that were obviously ruled out by the Constitution itself. In addition, the Indian Constitution is relatively easy to amend. This means that proposals with substantial political support often have a decent chance of being adopted. And, finally, the Congress Party dominated the nation's politics for a significant stretch of India's post-Independence history. This meant that amendments sought by the Congress Party would be adopted without difficulty. Taking these features together, we have a picture of a constitutional system in which constitutional changes that might be deeply normatively troubling could be—and were—adopted with some regularity.

The proximate origin of the doctrine developed by the Supreme Court of India was the Emergency period of 1975–77. The Court's actions during that period, largely acquiescing in what came to be seen as the government's abuses of its power, severely impaired its reputation among the public. The Court's doctrine about unconstitutional amendments can be understood as its effort to say to the public, 'Never again will our constitutional system be subject to deep distortion when politicians find it useful to do so.'

But the doctrine may rest on deeper foundations. One can fairly argue that the Supreme Court of India developed its doctrine in response to the fact that the Constitution's easy amendment rule was in the hands of a dominant-party government. The abuses of the Emergency period resulted from those more fundamental characteristics. So, put schematically, an easy amendment rule in a dominant-party system caused the Emergency, and the Emergency caused the Court to develop a doctrine that some constitutional amendments were unconstitutional.

The doctrine on unconstitutional amendments in India holds that amendments inconsistent with the Constitution's 'basic structure' are substantively unconstitutional. The 'basic structure' doctrine has spread well beyond India, and has now become a subject of a substantial amount of scholarship in comparative constitutional law.<sup>5</sup> This influence may flow from the fact that India's Constitution does not have eternity clauses embedded in its text. Consider some eternity clauses in the German Basic Law: insulating the constitutional protection of human dignity and of Germany's form of a federal social welfare state from amendment. German constitutional lawyers have no need to develop a synthetic or theoretical account of why these particular provisions and not others are protected by eternity clauses. It is enough for them to understand how each specific text operates. In contrast, without a text to work with, the Supreme Court of India could only develop a doctrine dealing with unconstitutional amendments by offering some generalisable justification for the specific elements protected against amendment.

What does the development of the 'basic structure' doctrine tell us? First, it suggests that, at least where conditions like those prevailing in India occur (ie, one-party dominance and ease of amendment), a doctrine of substantive unconstitutionality for amendments might be a defensible component of constitutional law.  $\frac{6}{5}$  As the doctrine has spread to other nations, scholars might devote some attention to whether it is being deployed in the right circumstances. The 'basic structure' doctrine is in some tension with straightforward notions of popular sovereignty and more theoretically informed concepts about the constituent power. While the doctrine might be defensible in some circumstances, this tension means that one's enthusiasm for it should be tempered.

If amending a constitution is difficult, or if the political system consists of two or more parties with substantial political support, a doctrine of substantive unconstitutionality of amendments might not be necessary.<sup>7</sup> One might wonder, for example, whether it would be appropriate for the German Constitutional Court to find a procedurally proper constitutional amendment to be a violation of an eternity clause, at least where, as suggested in the discussion below, there is a plausible case to be made that the amendment expresses a reasonable specification of 'human dignity' or 'social welfare state'.

Secondly, the conceptual structure of the doctrine deserves some attention. The Indian Supreme Court's terminology has been widely adopted, but not examined carefully. The terms are 'basic' and

'structure'. The former term resonates with the language used in discussing 'basic' human rights, but the latter term may be the more important one. Constitutional scholars typically distinguish between a constitution's rights provisions and its structural provisions. As formulated by the Indian Supreme Court, the doctrine is concerned with those *structures* that are basic. The Court's initial applications of the doctrine dealt with judicial independence, easily characterised as a basic structure of constitutional governance. Similarly with federalism, mentioned in the Indian Supreme Court's enumeration of elements of the basic structure in India. Constitutional theorists who focus on structures tend to argue that they are important not merely because they provide the operating instructions for a nation's political institutions, but because they provide indirect protections for individual rights: Design the structures well and you will have little need to spell out protections for basic rights because the institutions' natural operations will protect (or not produce infringements upon) those rights.

Some applications of the basic structure doctrine outside India have the feature just described. For example, if we regard the decision by the Colombian Constitutional Court to reject as unconstitutional an amendment authorising a President to serve three terms as resting on the amendment's substantive unconstitutionality, $\frac{8}{5}$  the justification for the decision would be that Presidents who hold office 'too long' are in a position to entrench their supporters throughout the government in ways that make abuses of rights substantially more likely to occur.

The Indian Supreme Court and some courts that have followed its lead have included more substantive matters in its enumeration of elements of the Constitution's basic structure.<sup>2</sup> Doing so raises the stakes by increasing the occasions on which substantive questions about the constitutionality of amendments arise. Again, the Colombian Supreme Court provides a good example, in its decision that a constitutional amendment affecting the tenure of civil servants was an unconstitutional alteration of the Constitution's basic structure. $\frac{10}{10}$  One can imagine an argument that the independence of the civil service is an important component of good governance, and of the impartial administration of the laws. Yet, it seems like a judicial overreach to treat even non-trivial changes in the rules of civil service tenure as threatening the Constitution's basic structure.

The example illustrates a pervasive problem with the basic structure doctrine. The components of the basic structure—federalism, secularism, and the like—are, and probably can only be articulated, at a rather abstract level. Consider an example from Turkey.<sup>11</sup> A government with (at the time) moderately Islamist tendencies supported a statute that made it lawful for women to wear head coverings in locations where doing so had previously been unlawful. The Turkish Constitutional Court held the statute unconstitutional. The government then obtained a constitutional amendment specifically authorising the action taken in the invalidated statute. The Constitutional Court then held the amendment substantively unconstitutional as a violation of the secularism element of the basic structure of Turkey's Constitution. Critics of the decision contend, not unreasonably, that expanding the lawfulness of the wearing of head coverings was not inconsistent with the principle of secularism but was instead an alternative specification of what secularism permits.

The more general point is that the basic structure doctrine has been attractive in large part because enumerating the components of the basic structure is generally uncontroversial only because those components are described in general, abstract terms. The more the doctrine is applied in specific circumstances, the more likely it is that its application will be justifiably controversial. The Indian Supreme Court's articulation of the basic structure doctrine has opened up intriguing possibilities for constitutional development and controversy in other constitutional systems.

Finally, the political conditions generating the basic structure doctrine illuminate another feature of Indian constitutionalism in light of non-Indian constitutional theory. Elsewhere, particularly in the United States, the theory of constitutional review has centred around the so-called countermajoritarian difficulty. Constitutional review by courts whose judges are only weakly accountable to the people, it is said, is in tension with the idea that a democratic people should be responsible for its own governance. For long stretches of post-Independence Indian constitutional history, though, the idea that there could be a counter-majoritarian 'difficulty' made little sense. The Supreme Court did rule against legislative efforts to expropriate land, as discussed in the chapter on the right to property, <sup>12</sup> but those decisions were readily overridden by constitutional amendment. The reason lies in the combination of an amendment rule making it relatively easy for a dominant party to obtain constitutional amendments. Though the easy amendment rule may remain stable, as the conditions of one-party dominance change—disappearing and then reappearing—concern about the countermajoritarian difficulty will wax and wane accordingly. The Indian experience thus helps us understand some connections between political structures and constitutional theory that the USfocused scholarly literature overlooked.

#### **III. PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION**

The Supreme Court's 'public interest litigation' (PIL) is well known around the world for its procedural innovations as well as its substantive outcomes, both of which raise interesting questions about constitutional law generally. Public interest litigation, described in more detail in Shyam Divan's chapter, <sup>13</sup> has several important procedural features. One is an expansion of the notion of standing to the breaking point. Standing doctrines typically identify characteristics entitling a person or entity to initiate litigation. The most typical characteristic is that a potential litigant must be injured by the action it is challenging, with a fair amount of doctrine, and controversy, over what counts as sufficient injury. Standing for individuals is sometimes augmented by a principle of third-party standing, in which a person or entity with some relation to another who could satisfy the individualstanding requirement is allowed to sue on the latter's behalf.

For all practical purposes, PIL does away with standing as a bedrock requirement, transforming it into what in US constitutional law would be described as a matter of prudential concern. In a PIL case, there need be no litigant (in the traditional sense) whatsoever, only a problem deemed by the Court as worthy of attention. Having identified such a problem, whether through a case filed, a petition or letter received, or in some celebrated cases a newspaper article read, the Court will scour the litigation universe to locate someone who can provide adequate litigation support for the claim. Sometimes, of course, the Court will find that a non-governmental organisation that, in classic terms, might have had third-party standing, is the right entity to propel the case along. But sometimes the Court will be unable to locate such an entity. Here too the Court has innovated by creating a 'public interest unit' within the Court itself.

The procedural innovations associated with PIL raise interesting questions about whether judicial institutions necessarily have a limited set of institutional characteristics. Lon Fuller believed that they did. For Fuller, courts were distinguished from other institutions of governance in part because they were necessarily reactive. Courts mobilised to deploy government power only when asked to do so. Further, courts necessarily dealt only with problems where someone claimed that a pre-existing right had been violated by someone else. For Fuller, adverseness was built into the structure of the judicial institution. Fuller contrasted judicial institutions with administrative and legislative ones. Legislatures, for example, could seek out problems to solve, perhaps propelled by the political ambitions of their members, and the problems they dealt with could be systemic ones without identifiable victims or villains.<sup>14</sup>

The Indian Court's PIL practice places enormous pressure on Fuller's conceptualisation of judicial institutions. That practice's features conflict with Fuller's specification at nearly every point. One might respond that the PIL practice shows that, when the Court engages in it, it is not acting 'as a court'. That, though, seems unnecessarily stipulative. Better to respond that Fuller was mistaken in thinking that judicial institutions had to have only those characteristics he identified.

Fuller's was mostly a definitional argument, but he supplemented it with some consequentialist observations. He argued that institutions, whether called courts or something else, that did more than respond to complaints about rights violations brought to them would, as he put it, depart from the judicial proprieties, which he identified mostly by negative example. These institutions would engage in *ex parte* contacts (there being, to coin a phrase, no 'parte' anyway), call on 'outsiders' to supply them with institutions (because, in some sense, no one could be outside the institution's domain anyway), experiment with solutions and revise them in light of experience, and more.

The PIL experience, and similar experience elsewhere, shows that Fuller was correct about institutional behaviour in the absence of adverseness and rights claiming. The Indian Supreme Court has on one or another occasion done everything Fuller said would be done. In public interest cases, for example, much of the Court's work is done through the use of interim orders, nominally pending a final disposition but having immediate and important effects. What remains, then, is the question: when officials who are called judges do those things, are they violating judicial proprieties? Again it is hard to avoid the conclusion that Fuller's was a stipulative approach, which we can now reject on the basis of the PIL experience and similar practices elsewhere.<sup>15</sup> The Indian Supreme Court looks like a court, and its judges look like judges; to the extent that Fuller's argument attempts to persuade us to call them something else, it is not persuasive.

The PIL practice is linked to the enforcement in India of social and economic rights.<sup>16</sup> Questions about the enforcement of such rights have generated quite an extensive literature, which need not be surveyed here. Much of the attention to enforcement of these rights has shifted away from India to other nations and regions, especially Latin America. At the heart of that literature is a set of concerns about the relation between judicial enforcement of such rights and the choices made by democratically responsible political actors with respect to questions of social provision, questions sometimes described as implicating the separation of powers. These cases are sometimes thought to raise the counter-majoritarian difficulty in a particularly acute form because of the large amounts of money thought to be at stake, and because of real disagreement over what policies are most effective in ensuring social provision over the long run.

Some PIL cases are truly counter-majoritarian, but others are not. On the most general level, often the Court's interventions arise when bureaucrats fail to implement existing statutes. Although one can develop an argument that what the democratic majority wants is manifested in its combination of substantive statutes and effective (or ineffective) enforcement, much of what the Supreme Court has done has received support, sometimes tacit but sometimes explicit, from Parliament.

The right-to-food litigation implicated not the costly acquisition of food for distribution, but the (less costly) distribution of food already on hand but held in storage houses either because of

bureaucratic mismanagement or corruption.<sup>17</sup> Ordering that food on hand be distributed is counterbureaucratic, perhaps, but not obviously counter-majoritarian. The *Delhi Bus* case accelerated the implementation of a policy already chosen by the political process. 18 It *was* counter-majoritarian, but only in the sense that pushing the policy forward more quickly requited financial outlays now rather than later. And, the *Vishaka* case was explicitly dialogic in form, seeking to prod the legislature into enacting legislation against gender discrimination while creating what was, again explicitly, an interim remedy.<sup>19</sup>

Finally, why did the PIL practice arise, and why do legislative and executive officials tolerate it? The answers undoubtedly have many elements. The PIL practice is a response to government failure —failure to address evident social problems, as in the *street dwellers* case and the *Vishaka* case, failure to implement enacted policies as in some right-to-food cases. Perhaps problems inevitably elicit institutional solutions. That is, given something perceived as a problem and the absence of any existing institutional attempt to address it, some institution will do what it can to address the problem. One might see some aspects of PIL as an effort by the courts to address widespread corruption at the level of administration, thereby linking it to broader institutional reforms being sought in Indian political life. And the PIL practice may have arisen because of the failure of another government institution, the Supreme Court itself. As with the basic structure doctrine, the Court may have developed PIL in part to rebuild its reputation after the Emergency period, by making constitutional rights effectively available on a widespread basis.

Politicians might tolerate the PIL practice in part because the Court's actions have popular support precisely because PILdeals with problems that no one else is dealing with. A politician who attacked the Court's PIL practice might be vulnerable to the charge that at least the Court is trying to do something, in contrast to the politicians, who are content to do nothing. Sometimes, too, the PIL practice might be compatible with politicians' goals. Probably the most notable example here is the *Delhi Bus* litigation, where judicial intervention enabled politicians to complete a transformation of policy on which they had already embarked but which was impeded by ordinary political concerns that the Court's intervention helped displace. PIL interventions provoked by corruption at the level of administration might also be welcomed by higher-level politicians.

But, finally, we should not overestimate the effectiveness of the PIL practice overall. It has had some notable successes, but some less noted failures as well. And, it seems likely that the Court has refrained from aggressive PIL intervention in some situations where it anticipated likely failure or likely strong political pushback. The actual practice of PIL, that is, might be less troublesome to politicians than its theoretical justifications suggest it could be. If so, finding themselves not substantially bothered by complying with PIL orders, politicians might put up with it even if they would, overall, rather have the courts stay out of their affairs entirely.

#### **IV. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION**

India has a long history of dealing with affirmative action (or positive discrimination) as a constitutional matter. The chapter on affirmative action describes the evolution of policies reserving government and other positions for members of 'backward classes' and other groups and the treatment of those policies in constitutional law. $\frac{20}{2}$  As other nations grapple with similar policies, targeted at those groups that have historically been subordinated in their nations, some policymakers and

scholars have looked to India for lessons.

One lesson might be that, once adopted, affirmative action policies are extremely difficult to limit or displace. At each stage in the adoption of these policies in India, the policies were said to be limited in time. Yet, as each time limit approached, the provision specifying the limit was amended so that the affirmative action policies could persist. The reason for this pattern is clear enough: such policies create a constituency of political support for the programme's perpetuation, and their existence suggests to other groups the possibility of gaining similar reservations and benefits through political action. If one holds a normative view according to which affirmative action is problematic —defensible in some limited circumstances but in tension with other strong normative commitments nonetheless—the Indian experience suggests caution at the first step.

A second lesson from the Indian experience is the 'creamy layer' doctrine. Sometimes affirmative action policies are defended on the ground that their beneficiaries are typically in a condition of material deprivation because of their group-based status. The Indian Supreme Court acknowledged that sometimes some of those identified by their group membership—in a group that is *generally* in a condition of material deprivation—are not especially deprived. These are the 'creamy layer' in the group, and the Court has said that they should be excluded from obtaining the benefits of affirmative action programmes targeted at relieving material deprivation.

The 'creamy layer' idea has attracted some attention in the general literature on affirmative action, perhaps because it serves as a limit on policies that, as noted before, are sometimes thought to be normatively troubling. Yet, the 'creamy layer' idea is closely tied to a specific justification for affirmative action. If the reason for affirmative action is compensating for the current effects of past policies of discrimination, for example, including the creamy layer within the class of potential beneficiaries might be defensible: although the members of the creamy layer might not be in a condition of substantial material deprivation, they might be less well-off than they would have been had there been no prior discrimination. Excluding them from the benefits of affirmative action programmes might be seen as punishing them for their initiative in reaching the creamy layer. Similar arguments for including the creamy layer in affirmative action programmes can be made in connection with other justifications for affirmative action.

The 'creamy layer' doctrine brings to the surface questions about both the justifications for affirmative action and its appropriate scope given its justifications. Those questions disrupt, and may force a reformulation of, the standard formulations dealing with affirmative action, which counterpose 'colour-blindness' to 'anti-subordination'. The 'creamy layer' doctrine does not fit comfortably into either formulation. Here too Indian constitutional law has contributed to discussions around the world.

#### **V. JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE**

Constitutional courts fit uneasily within constitutional structures generally committed to democratic self-governance. An enormous literature offers normative justifications for judicial displacement of decisions taken by institutions—legislatures and executives—directly responsible to the electorate. Without questioning the validity of any of those justifications, one can wonder about how constitutional courts survive politically. That is, constitutional courts routinely put themselves in opposition to the political elites in other institutions, who, one would think, have the resources to

retaliate against those courts. Under these quite predictable circumstances, how can constitutional courts survive?

Answering that question directs our attention to how the politics surrounding a constitution operates. For example, a constitutional court can survive challenges in a robust multiparty system by drawing support from a party that is currently in the opposition but has a real chance of taking office in the near future: the opposition party is the court's political 'ally'. And, more generally, in such a system each party can anticipate being in the opposition at some point, and for that reason is willing to tolerate the constitutional court's intervention when the party happens to be in power.

As noted earlier, though, for much of its post-Independence history India was a dominant-party nation, lacking robust opposition to the Congress Party. So, how could the Indian Supreme Court become as interventionist as it did? The first step in the analysis must focus on the process of appointing members of the Supreme Court. Typically, constitutions are designed to ensure that legislative and executive elites have substantial input into the appointment process. The reason is clear: legislative and executive leaders know that the constitutional court is structured to intervene (sometimes) against the policies they favour, and they want to have as much influence as they can over the court's membership so as to limit the extent of judicial opposition to their policies. One can expect relatively inactive constitutional courts in dominant-party systems with substantial party input into judicial appointments.

The Indian experience shows that even in a dominant-party system a court can sustain its independence from the dominant party. As detailed in the chapter on judicial independence,  $\frac{21}{2}$  the Indian Supreme Court did so by what in other contexts might be called an 'auto-coup d'état'—that is, the seizure by judges of the power over the appointment of their own successors.<sup>22</sup> This pushes the inquiry back one step: why were legislative and executive leaders willing to accept their own disempowerment in the appointment process?

Several answers suggest themselves. First, the Indian Supreme Court might have developed an independent source of political support in the people, or in activist legal elites, as one institution that functioned reasonably well in a political system pervaded by corrupt and otherwise badly functioning institutions. Secondly, strong conventions arose limiting the pool of potential appointees to the Supreme Court. Appointees had to have many years of service on High Courts, which meant that they were relatively old when they reached the Supreme Court. Together with a mandatory retirement age, that meant that no judge could anticipate serving on the Supreme Court for a long enough period to advance any agenda of personal interest. 'Activism', that is, would not make much personal sense from the point of view of any individual judge. Allowing judges to appoint their successors might not produce judicial activism, so political elites need not be concerned about the phenomenon. Against this, though, are the occasional examples of judges appointed at a young enough age to have a longterm activist agenda, and, perhaps more important, the possibility that a judge appointed close to retirement might decide that he or she has no time to waste.

Thirdly, as the previous discussion of PILsuggests, what the courts were doing might not have been important enough for those leaders to worry about. The Indian Supreme Court's decisions, that is, might be something like occasional bites from an annoying flea, but not a source of serious political trouble for the leaders in other institutions. If Supreme Court judges did not generally find judicial activism attractive from a personal point of view, legislative and political leaders did not find judicial activism important enough to worry about. Finally, perhaps the political system had lost its party-dominant character by the time the Supreme Court gained its current degree of control over the appointment process.<sup>23</sup> That would imply that no one was in a position to mobilise effectively against

the Court's auto-coup. $\frac{24}{3}$ 

As in other areas, Indian practice on judicial independence pushes the boundaries of constitutional ideas well beyond limits found elsewhere. It is not uncommon to have judges participating in the selection of other judges, a practice compatible with general practices in civil law systems. Ever since Kelsen, though, it has been widely understood that constitutional courts are different from ordinary courts, and processes of appointment to such courts are widely thought to require substantial input from the political branches, both to ensure that the constitutional courts are staffed by judges who know more than 'mere' law and to ensure that those courts have a reservoir of support in the political branches, to be drawn upon when, as they inevitably will, judges act against the wishes of those holding political power. But, in India, judges have achieved a degree of independence of political control or even influence over the appointment process that is probably unsurpassed in the world. Understanding the Indian experience is likely to help us better understand the very idea of judicial independence itself.

#### **VI. CONCLUSION**

Several of the discussions in this chapter have connected doctrinal developments to dominance of the Congress Party when the doctrines began to emerge, and to the phenomenon of large-scale failures of governance, including corruption. Similar conditions exist elsewhere, of course, and to that extent the Indian constitutional experience may have some relevance outside India, both as a source of normative guidance for doctrine and as an aid to understanding. In a more methodological vein, the Indian constitutional experience suggests the importance for analytical purposes of understanding the connection between constitutional developments, including the development of constitutional doctrine, and a nation's overall political system, with special attention to the party system in place.

Governance failures can be overcome through mechanisms other than judicial intervention, and the Congress Party is no longer dominant in India. The conditions that encouraged and perhaps enabled the courts to engage in PIL and to find constitutional amendments substantively unconstitutional may disappear, or may have faded in importance already. Even so, constitutional doctrine has some degree of autonomy, and can persist after the conditions that gave it birth have changed. In a new political environment, old doctrine may be transformed, and it will certainly face new challenges. We can expect Indian constitutional jurisprudence to change, and it seems likely that those outside India will continue to find it helpful to study that jurisprudence for what it will continue to tell them about the relation between constitutional doctrine and the political environment in which it operates.

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>1</sup> A Bill titled 'Provincial of the Teaching Sisters of the Holy Cross of the Third Order of Saint Francis in Menzingen of Sri Lanka (Incorporation)', SC Special Determination No 19/2003 (Sri Lanka).

<sup>&</sup>lt;sup>2</sup> See <u>Rahul Sagar, 'Emergency Powers'</u> (chapter 13, this volume).

<sup>3</sup> *SR Bommai v Union of India* (1994) 3 SCC 1.

 $4$  See Madhav Khosla, 'Constitutional Amendment' (chapter 14, this volume).

 $5$  For a recent comprehensive discussion, see Yaniv Ronzai, 'Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendments: A Study of the Nature and Limits of Constitutional Amendment Powers' (2014) PhD dissertation, Department of Law, London School of Economics [<http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/915/](http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/915/)>, accessed November 2015.

 $\frac{6}{5}$  The foregoing argument does raise a puzzle, to which I return below: how, under the conditions that make the doctrine normatively