## **Rubinstein, Edward Mark**

Mark Rubinstein, the only child of Sam and Gladys Rubinstein of Seattle, Washington, was born on June 8, 1944 . He attended the Lakeside School in Seattle and graduated in 1962 as one of the two graduation speakers. He earned an A.B. in Economics, magna cum laude, from Harvard College in 1966 and an MBA with a concentration in finance from the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University in 1968. In 1971, Rubinstein earned his PhD. in Finance from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). During this time at UCLA, he was heavily influenced by the microeconomist Jack Hirshleifer. In July 1972, he became an assistant professor in finance at the University of Californian at Berkeley, where he remained for his entire career. He was advanced to tenure unusually early in 1976 and became a full professor in 1980.

Rubinstein's early work concentrated on asset pricing. Specifically, between 1971 and 1973, his research centered on the mean–variance capital asset pricing model and came to include skewness as a measure of risk [3–5]. Rubinstein's extension has new relevance as several researchers have since determined its predictive power in explaining realized security returns. In 1974, Rubinstein's research turned to more general models of asset pricing. He developed an extensive example of multiperiod security market equilibrium, which later became the dominant model used by academics in their theoretical papers on asset pricing. Unlike earlier work, he left the intertemporal process of security returns to be determined in equilibrium rather than as datum (although as special cases he assumed a random walk and constant interest rates). Rubinstein was thus able to derive conditions for the existence of a random walk and an unbiased term structure of interest rates. He also was the first to derive a simple equation in equilibrium for valuing a risky stream of income received over time. He published the first paper to show explicitly how and why in equilibrium investors would want to hold long-term bonds in their portfolios, and in particular would want to hold a riskless (in terms of income) annuity maturing at their death, foreshadowing several strands of later research.

In 1975, Rubinstein began developing theoretical models of "efficient markets." In 1976, he published a paper showing that the same formula derived by Black and Scholes for valuing options could come from an alternative set of assumptions based on risk aversion and discretetime trading opportunities. (Black and Scholes had required continuous trading and continuous price movements.)

Working together with Cox *et al.* [1], Rubinstein published the popular and original paper developing the binomial option pricing model, one of the most widely cited papers in financial economics and now probably the most widely used model by professional traders to value derivatives. The model is often referred to as the *Cox–Ross–Rubinstein option pricing* (*CRR*) model. At the same time, Rubinstein began work with Cox [2] on their own text, *Options Markets*, which was eventually published in 1985 and won the biennial award of the University of Chicago for the best work by professors of business concerning any area of business.

He supplemented his academic work with firsthand experience as a market maker in options when he became a member of the Pacific Stock Exchange. In 1981, together with Hayne E. Leland and John W. O'Brien, Rubinstein founded the Leland O'Brien Rubinstein (LOR) Associates, the original portfolio insurance firm. At the time, the novel idea of portfolio insurance had been put forth by Leland, later fully developed together with Rubinstein, and successfully marketed among large institutional investors by O'Brien. Their business grew extremely rapidly, only to be cut short when they had to share the blame for the October 1987 stock market crash. Not admitting defeat, LOR invented another product that became the first exchange-traded fund (ETF), the SuperTrust, listed on the American Stock Exchange in 1992. Rubinstein also published a related article examining alternative basket vehicles.

In the early 1990s, Rubinstein published a series of eight articles in the *Risk Magazine* showing how option pricing tools could easily be applied to value a host of so-called exotic derivatives, which were just becoming popular.

Motivated by the failure after 1987 of index options to be priced anywhere close to the predictions of the Black–Scholes formula, in an article published in the *Journal of Finance* [8], he developed an important generalization of the original binomial model, which he called *implied binomial trees*. The article included new techniques for inferring risk-neutral probability distributions from options on the same underlying asset. Rubinstein's revisions of the model provide the natural generalization of the standard binomial model to accommodate arbitrary expiration date risk-neutral probability distributions. This paper, in turn, spurred new academic work on option pricing in the latter half of the 1990s and found immediate application among various professionals. In 1998 and 1999, Rubinstein rounded out his work on derivatives by publishing a second text titled "Rubinstein on Derivatives," which expanded its domain from calls and puts to futures and more general types of derivatives. The book also pioneered new ways to integrate computers as an aid to learning.

After a 1999 debate about the empirical rationality of financial markets with the key behavioral finance theorist, Richard Thaler, Rubinstein began to rethink the concept of efficient markets. In 2001, he published a version of his conference argument in the *Financial Analysts Journal* [6, 7], titled "Rational Markets? Yes or No: The Affirmative Case," which won the Graham and Dodd Plaque award in 2002.

He then returned to the more general theory of investments with which he had begun his research career as a doctoral student. In 2006, Rubinstein [11] published "A History of the Theory of Investments: My Annotated Bibliography"—an academic history of the theory of investments from the thirteenth to the beginning of the twenty-first century, systematizing the knowledge, and identifying the relations between apparently disparate lines of research. No other book has so far been written that comes close to examining in detail the intellectual path that has led to modern financial economics (particularly, in the subarea of investments). Rubinstein shows that the discovery of key ideas in finance is much more complex and multistaged than anyone had realized. Too few are given too much credit, and sometimes original work has been forgotten.

Rubinstein has taught and lectured widely. During his career, he has given 303 invited lectures, including conference presentations, full course seminars, and honorary addresses all over the United States and around the world. He has served as chairman of the Berkeley finance group, and as director of the Berkeley Program in Finance; he is the founder of the Berkeley Options Database (the first large transaction-level database ever assembled with respect to options and stocks). He has served on the editorial boards of numerous finance journals. He has authored 62 journal articles, published 3 books, and developed several computer programs dealing with derivatives.

Rubinstein is currently a professor of finance at the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley. Many of his papers are frequently reprinted in survey publications, and he has won numerous prizes and awards for his research and writing on financial economics. He was named "Businessman of the Year" (one of 12) in 1987 by *Fortune* magazine. In 1995, the International Association of Financial Engineers (IAFE) named him the 1995 IAFE/SunGard Financial Engineer of the Year. In 2000, he was elected to Derivatives Strategy Magazine's "Derivatives Hall of Fame" and named in the "RISK Hall of Fame" by *Risk Magazine* in 2002. Of all his awards, the one he cherishes the most is the 2003 Earl F. Cheit Teaching award in the Masters of Financial Engineering Program at the University of California, Berkeley [10] (Rubinstein, M.E. (2003). *A Short Career Biography*. Unpublished.)

Rubinstein has two grown-up children, Maisiee and Judd. He lives with Diane Rubinstein in the San Francisco Bay Area.

## **References**

- [1] Cox, J.C., Ross, S.A. & Rubinstein, M.E. (1979). Optional pricing: a simplified approach, *Journal of Financial Economics* September, 229–263.
- [2] Cox, J.C. & Rubinstein, M.E. (1985). *Options Markets*, Prentice-Hall.
- [3] Rubinstein, M.E. (1973). The fundamental theorem of parameter-preference security valuation, *Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis* January, 61–69.
- [4] Rubinstein, M.E. (1973). A comparative statics analysis of risk premiums, *Journal of Business* October.
- [5] Rubinstein, M.E. (1973). A mean-variance synthesis of corporate financial theory, *Journal of Finance* March.
- [6] Rubinstein, M.E. (1989). Market basket alternatives, *Financial Analysts Journal* September/October.
- [7] Rubinstein, M.E. (1989). Rational markets? Yes or No: the affirmative case, *Financial Analysts Journal* May/June.