#### **Introduction 305**

- Korbin, J. E. (1997). Culture and child maltreatment. In M. E. Helfer, R. Kempe, & R. Krugman (Eds.), *The battered child* (5th ed., pp. 29–48). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Korbin, J. E. (1998). "Good mothers," "babykillers," and fatal child maltreatment. In N. Scheper-Hughes & C. Sargent (Eds.), *Small wars: The cultural politics of childhood* (pp. 253–276). Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Levinson, D. (1989). *Family violence in cross-cultural perspective*. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- National Research Council (1993). *Understanding child abuse and neglect*. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
- Rohner, R. (1986). *The warmth dimension: Foundations of parental acceptance–rejection theory*. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.

- Scheper-Hughes, N. (Ed.). (1987). *Child survival. Anthropological perspectives on the treatment and maltreatment of children*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel.
- Scheper-Hughes, N., & Sargent, C. (Eds.). (1998). *Small wars: The cultural politics of childhood*. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Scrimshaw, S. (1983). Infanticide as deliberate fertility regulation. In R. Lee & R. Bulatao (Eds.), *Determinants of fertility in developing countries: A summary of knowledge* (pp. 714–731). New York: Academic Press.

# **Cholera and other Water-Borne Diseases**

**Linda M. Whiteford**

## **INTRODUCTION**

### **Cholera—A Water-Borne Disease**

The practically invisible bacterium *Vibrio cholerae* made millions of people sick and die before it was first recognized in 1503 (Kiple, 1993). Easily transmitted through water and food, sudden large outbreaks of cholera can occur through fecal contamination of a water supply. Cholera outbreaks are often associated with a breakdown in sanitary conditions such as those following a hurricane or flood where drinking water systems are contaminated with fecal matter as pipes break and raw sewage spills out. Political and economic forces are also implicated in the spread of cholera; its spread is most often associated with inadequate sanitation and hygiene conditions.

The World Health Organization (WHO, 2001) estimates that every 8 seconds a child dies of a waterrelated disease and probably more than five million people die from diseases associated with contaminated water and poor sanitary conditions. Cholera and other water-borne and water-washed illnesses are particularly relevant for social science research because their control depends on understanding the human decisions and behaviors surrounding the continual transmission of the bacterium. Medical anthropologists' contributions to the study of cholera and other water-borne and water-washed diseases include research on food-handling and foodpreparation practices, the ubiquitous street vending of foods, household health traditions, ethnomedical understandings of disease transmission, indigenous curing practices and beliefs, patterns of land tenure and agricultural traditions, community participation interventions, analysis of political and economic forces, and national water policy recommendations.

### **Cholera: Disease History**

Cholera is an acute intestinal infection with a short incubation period (from 1 to 5 days), and produces an enterotoxin causing copious amounts of watery diarrhea (WHO, 2001). Untreated, cholera can quickly result in severe dehydration and death. Treatment includes oral rehydration salts (ORS) and, for severe cases, both intravenous fluids and antibiotics. Prevention is based on the public health infrastructure of safe water and sanitation, and cultural beliefs and behavioral practices based on a reliable supply of water and security in its use. Once cholera is introduced into a community, endemic control necessitates the hygienic removal and disposal of feces, the provision of a reliable supply of clean water, and an understanding and the practice of safe food hygiene.

While cholera is an ancient disease, it continues to emerge and re-emerge. In 1991, the cholera epidemic that began in Peru and for two years spread across South America, was the first time in 100 years that cholera was diagnosed on that continent. Before it was over, more than 9,000 people had died and many more were sickened by it (Guthman, 1995). During an earlier cholera pandemic, a London physician named John Snow identified the mode of transmission. In his classic 1853 study, Snow demonstrated that a single source of water was implicated in the cholera outbreak in a particular neighborhood. The people who became sick drank water from a common public water source, the Broad Street pump. Others living in the same neighborhood did not become sick when they used water sources other than the Broad Street pump. Snow decided that the water being pumped from the Broad Street well was contaminated and had the pump handle removed. Within days the number of cases was reduced, and the outbreak was over. Snow correctly deduced that the well was contaminated and that the contaminated water was making people sick, even though it was not until later that they learned a contaminated cesspool had leaked cholera bacteria into the well (Diamond, 1992).

# **TYPOLOGY OF WATER-RELATED DISEASES**

While cholera may be one of the most widely recognized examples of a water-borne disease, the list of illnesses associated with water is extensive. Several of the terms commonly used help clarify the relationships between water and various pathogens follow. *Water-borne diseases* are those such as cholera which are caused by the ingestion of water contaminated with human or animal feces or urine containing the pathogen. The pathogen may be bacterial or viral. Typhoid, diarrhea, and dysentery, as well as cholera, are examples of water-borne diseases.

*Water-washed diseases* are those associated with poor hygiene and are often associated with unreliable access to clean water. Water-washed pathogens can cause diseases such as scabies, trachoma, and flea, lice, and tick-borne diseases when contaminated water is brought into contact with human skin and eyes.

*Water-based diseases* are caused by parasites found in non-human hosts living in water, and are transmitted when humans come into contact with the intermediate organisms while wading, swimming, bathing, washing clothes, or other water-based activities. Schistosomiasis, dracunculiasis, and other helminths are such examples.

*Water-related diseases* are caused by insect vectors that use water as breeding grounds. Yellow fever, malaria, and dengue fever are some of the best-known examples, but onchocerciasis and trypanosomiasis, while less well known, are also examples.

Human activities such as the building of dams for water and electricity, the creation of irrigation systems, the flooding of land for agriculture, and the construction of human dwellings in pristine forests, savannas, and flood plains each change the balance between hosts and vectors by changing the proximity of common reservoirs. The Aswan Dam in Egypt, for instance, provided water and electricity but also increased rates of schistosomiasis (a water-based disease) (Kloos, 1985). In the Dominican Republic, crowded urban living conditions and an unreliable water supply system created a perfect breeding ground for *Aedes egypti* mosquitoes and resulted in increased rates of dengue fever (a water-related disease) in the urban areas (Whiteford, 1997). In rural communities in the Andes, labor migration patterns continue to influence the re-introduction of cholera when laborers return home to celebrate holidays with traditional food- and drink-sharing practices (Whiteford, 1998; Whiteford, Laspina, & Torres, 1996). As these examples suggest, central to any in-depth understanding of the distribution of water-borne and water-washed diseases is a social science analysis of the underlying sociopolitical and economic variables that effect changing patterns of human contact with non-human vectors and pathogens.

# **ANTHROPOLOGICAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE STUDY OF WATER-RELATED DISEASES**

Much of the anthropological research on cholera builds on the extensive body of literature created between the 1980s and 2000 by medical anthropologists studying diarrheal disease (Bentley, 1988; Chen & Scrimshaw, 1983; Green, 1986; Kendall, Foote, & Martorell, 1983, 1984; Nitcher, 1988; Whiteford, 1999; Yoder, 1995). The world-wide scale of Child Survival intervention programs, and in

#### **Anthropological Contributions to the Study of Water-Related Diseases 307**

particular, the mass distribution of oral rehydration salts as part of oral rehydration therapy (ORT) regimens for the treatment of diarrhea provided excellent opportunities for medical anthropological studies (reviewed in the Diarrhea entry). While the provision of rehydration salts does not break the cycle of disease transmission, it saves lives by replacing the water, sugar, and salts commonly lost through diarrhea. In addition, the ability to produce the oral rehydration salts locally made the application of anthropological knowledge a necessity. Anthropological research findings were used to facilitate the introduction and acceptance of ORT by building on the classic features of anthropological theory and methods: the respect for local beliefs, the understanding of local social organization, the need to integrate new knowledge within existing knowledge frameworks, and the recognition of the power of history and politics. Communities where oral rehydration therapy has successfully been adopted are often those where the process was based on the integration of indigenous knowledge and local resources with lessons learned from biomedicine.

### **Three Anthropological Perspectives to Interpret Disease**

Donald Joralemon (1999) succinctly demonstrates how anthropological perspectives deepen our understanding of a disease such as cholera. He identifies three anthropological perspectives which he applies to an analysis of cholera: (1) ecological/evolutionary; (2) political/ economic; and (3) interpretive. Joralemon concludes by suggesting a fourth and more inclusive and synergistic point of view. The central concepts within these three identified frameworks provide valuable ways to identify anthropological contributions to the study of water-borne and water-washed diseases. The concept of *natural selection* is central to the ecological/evolutionary perspective; associated with natural selection are the concepts of adaptation and fitness. When applied to understanding a disease such as cholera, this perspective emphasizes the biological and evolutionary relationship between the human hosts and the cholera bacteria.

The ecological/evolutionary analysis of cholera highlights the impact of changing human demographic, economic, and medical patterns on the bacteria's evolutionary trajectory. The combination of evolutionary theory with the ecological model has also provided insights into the long-term genetic implications for human hosts of exposure to other epidemic agents (Joralemon, 1999, p. 40).

The second perspective Joralemon refers to as the political/economic perspective and is often discussed as critical medical anthropology (Baer, Singer, & Johnson, 1986; Frankenburg, 1988; Singer, 1989a, 1989b), or the political economy of health (Morsy, 1979, 1981, 1993), and more recently as the critical anthropology of health. Regardless of the variants of the name, they all share a focus on the underlying political and economic forces that affect the distribution and experience of disease. Central to this view is the idea that resources are not equally distributed, and the lack of equity is generated by *political and economic forces*, resulting in a concentration of poor health and health resources among marginalized populations.

A political/economic perspective on the cholera epidemic might question, for instance, what are the social class and resource variables that account for a country such as Ecuador having recurring outbreaks of endemic cholera in the rural highlands but not in the cities. Such an orientation would question why once the epidemic was controlled in the urban centers, and whether it continued to re-occur in the rural highlands. What structural variables influence the continued re-emergence of a communicable disease where low population densities make its endemicity unexpected? Employing a political/economic analysis suggests that part of the answer lies in Ecuadorian international economic policies, national racism, and local cultural traditions. The structural adjustment policies (SAPs), for instance, that Ecuador experienced as part of the re-negotiation of loans with the World Bank, required the removal of many price subsidies that unequally affected the poor. As gasoline prices rose, farmers distant from central markets were strongly affected, and some farmers were forced to give up farming and move to urban areas to engage in wage labor. One of the highland states with the highest incidence of cholera was the state of Chimborazo, and is composed of small-scale farmers and craftspeople. It also has the largest number of indigenous people in the country. People in the small towns in Chimborazo were forced to leave the land and migrate to cities such as Quito or Guayaquil (the largest city in Ecuador, located on the Pacific coast) for work, often returning to their home communities only for ritual occasions. Anti-Indian sentiment also pushes labor migrants into the large urban areas by reducing the number of jobs available to them in mid-sized cities. As people migrate to coastal cities such as Guayaquil, and are forced through economic circumstances to live in conditions lacking basic hygiene and sanitation, and come in contact with the water-borne cholera bacteria, fresh outbreaks of cholera frequently follow their return to their highland home communities. Traditional cultural activities often require actions that lend themselves to the transmission of communicable diseases. Such activities might be the sharing of drinks, common handling of shared food, and often inadequate or no running water or sanitary facilities. Therefore, local traditions facilitate the spread of cholera once a migrant carrying the bacterium returns home. To understand the endemicity of cholera in the rural highlands of Ecuador using a political/economic perspective, then, one needs to understand the international lending practices that force people into labor migration, the racist beliefs that impede access to jobs for indigenous people, and the local cultural traditions that facilitate the trans-

mission of water-borne diseases (Whiteford et al., 1996). The third perspective identified by Joralemon is the Interpretive, or meaning-centered approach. A number of anthropologists have been identified with this approach (Good, 1977; Good & DelVecchio Good, 1980, 1981; Lock & Scheper-Hughes, 1990;<sup>3</sup> Scheper-Hughes & Lock, 1986, 1987). In essence, the Interpretive approach centers on the *experience of the illness for the sufferer*, with all of its permutations. This perspective has been said to put the person back into the analysis and focuses on personal accounts of experience, its meanings and metaphors, members of networks of the sufferer, and interactions with friends, family, and physicians. As an example of this approach, Joralemon uses an article by Nations and Monte (1996) on cholera in a poor community in Brazil as an example of this perspective applied to an understanding of experience of cholera. One remarkable insight derived from the analysis demonstrates how the Brazilian cholera health education campaign came to be seen by those most affected by it as a direct attack on them and on their living conditions—without a concomitant recognition of the forces responsible for creating and maintaining those very conditions.

While these three perspectives are not as exclusive as I have suggested in these few paragraphs, they do offer a glimpse at ways in which anthropological conceptualizations shape the kinds of understanding we have about a disease such as cholera and other water-washed and water-borne pathogens. In addition to the well-known areas of medical anthropological research, new research is further developing our understanding of how cultural practices intersect with biological pathogens to cause human illness. In the remainder of the entry I turn to a discussion of water insecurity and disease, looking at water and its culturally constructed use as an emerging area useful to our understanding of the cultural concomitants of water-washed and water-borne disease transmission.

## **Water Insecurity and its Relationship to Water-Related Diseases**

While medical anthropology has contributed to a significant and recognized portion of the literature on behaviors and beliefs associated with water-borne diseases, anthropologists have also begun to study the relationship between water scarcity and water insecurity and the intransigence of certain water-borne diseases such as endemic cholera. Following the 1991 cholera epidemic that swept across northern South America, massive public health aid controlled the epidemic in most of the urban areas. However, outbreaks continued to occur in the rural areas where cholera was endemic. Caused in part by lack of access to a constant source of clean water, water insecurity caused people to use their limited water for multiple uses—some of which were counter-indicated in the elimination of the *Vibrio cholerae* pathogen. Anthropological studies demonstrated that families who raised pigs, for instance, were reluctant to use soap (an intervention recommended by public health authorities) to wash their hands because the wastewater was used as slop for the pigs, and the pigs refused the slops with soap in the water. Traditional cultural practices and land tenure patterns were also identified through anthropological research as implicated in the spread or re-introduction of cholera in indigenous communities. Land use and ownership practices caused thousands of people to migrate to urban and often coastal cities to find employment. During peak periods in the calendar of traditional obligations when urban migrants returned to their rural communities and shared festival drinks from common bowls and water sources, cholera was spread. The same anthropological techniques applied to an analysis of the behavioral consequences of water insecurity provide some unexpected insights into water-washed and water-borne disease transmission.

Water insecurity, like food insecurity, results when people do not have access to a reliable water supply. While the underlying causes for the lack of a reliable water supply may be due to a wide variety of factors, it results in behaviors to conserve water through multiple

#### **Conclusion 309**

means, such as water storage, re-use, and a hierarchy of use often placing personal hygiene activities such as hand-washing at the bottom of the scale (Cairncross & Kinnear, 1992; Esrey & Habicht, 1986; Whiteford, 1999). Patterns of water storage in the Dominican Republic due to water insecurity have been implicated in the increased rates of dengue fever (Whiteford, 1999), while Starkloff (1998) showed that in a village in Sri Lanka families were dependent on river water polluted with feces and pesticides during extended dry periods. Trachoma, another water-borne disease (sometimes referred to as "river blindness"), is also associated with water scarcity. When people must conserve water or travel considerable distances to obtain water they are less likely to use it for activities that are not economically productive—such as face or hand washing. And yet, according to public health officials, the easiest and most effective intervention against trachoma is to wash away the larvae deposited on the skin around the eyes (West et al., 1989).

The relationship between personal hygiene and enteric diseases such as diarrhea have long been noted by public health officials. However, in a 1998 study on cultural responses to water shortage among Palestinians in Jordan, Arar (1998) documented that as the availability of water was reduced and with it the frequency of personal hygiene behaviors (such as hand-washing and bathing), increased levels of diarrhea were noted. Lack of access to a reliable source of water impacts what people eat and may also affect the amount they eat, since water is a basic component for cooking many foods such as rice or beans. The cost of water, either in the formal or informal economy, can also influence patterns of water usage. In marginalized peri-urban neighborhoods in Guayaquil, Ecuador, where the public infrastructure to provide water did not extend, people paid an informal network of water trucks to deliver their water. The cost for one month of water delivery exceeded the government minimum wage covering the same period of time. Just paying for water could consume a wage-earner's entire monthly salary—and that's assuming that he or she was paid the minimum wage and not less (Whiteford et al., 1993). When people pay more than they earn for water, they learn to conserve it in as many ways as they can, often at the expense of their health.

Water insecurity and its associated water-borne diseases are not equally distributed. As was mentioned above, the poor, living outside of the city services, are disproportionately affected, as are women and girls (Ahmed, Hoque, & Mahmud, 1998; Cairncross & Cliff, 1987; Starkloff, 1998; West et al., 1989). In many societies, women are the prime users of water. They cook and clean with water, as well as treat the sick or the infirm. They may also be responsible for the collection and storage of water (Whiteford & Coreil, 1997). Women in many parts of the world spend between 10 minutes and 2 hours daily collecting water; this translates into less time to spend on other household-related activities.

Water scarcity is implicated in the diminution of health status through a reduction in consumption of water, the energy expended in its collection and storage, the loss of time from other health-related and family hygiene activities, the reliance on contaminated water sources, the multiple household use of a single water source, and the sharing of water-borne diseases through that source.

## **CONCLUSION**

### **Understanding the Determinants of Water-Related Diseases**

Understanding the cultural beliefs and behaviors related to water use, as well as the underlying reasons for water scarcity, are central to any attempt to reduce morbidity and mortality due to cholera and other water-borne diseases. Untangling the complex set of relationships between determinants of water supply, personal and household hygiene behaviors, and exposures to waterborne diseases has benefited from the work of medical anthropologists and their application of concepts, skills, and techniques. The synergistic effect of expanding our understanding of the underlying determinants of the changing rates of water-borne and water-washed diseases to include behaviors and beliefs associated with water insecurity enhances our ability to facilitate the interruption of transmission of water-borne and water-washed disease such as cholera, trachoma, schistosomiasis, amoebic dysentery, malaria, and hepatitis.

### **Useful Internet Sites**

The reader desiring more information on water-borne and water-washed disease is encouraged to consult the references cited and the following web sites:

- www.givewater.org ("Water Aid"—U.K. Fundraising Site)
- www.who.int/inf-fs/ed/fact107.html (WHO Information "Cholera")