*subjects of research*. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.

- Wailoo, K. (1997). *Drawing blood: Technology and disease identity in twentieth-century America*. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Weisz, G. (1990). *Social science perspectives on medical ethics*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Wertz, D. C. (1998). International research in bioethics: The challenges of cross-cultural interpretation. In R. DeVries & J. Subedi (Eds.),

*Bioethics and society: Constructing the ethical enterprise* (pp. 145–1165). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

- Wolpe, P. R. (1996). "If I am only my genes, what am I?" Genetic essentialism and a Jewish response. *Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, 7*, 213–230.
- Wolpe, P. R. (1998). The triumph of autonomy in American bioethics. In R. DeVries & J. Subedi (Eds.), *Bioethics and society: Constructing the ethical enterprise* (pp. 38–59). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

# **Biomedical Technologies**

### **Anthropological Approaches**

#### **Margaret Lock**

### **INTRODUCTION**

The history of technology<sup>1</sup> has usually been transmitted in Europe and North America as an heroic tale about the conquest of the enemy, whether this be aspects of the human or natural worlds—a narrative of progress, and of the betterment of social life in general. This has been characterized as the Standard View of technology (Pfaffenbergger, 1992), one which assumes that necessity is the mother of invention, causing humans to produce tools, devices, and artifacts that permit us, we believe, increasingly rational, autonomous, and prosperous lives, liberated from the constraints imposed by individual biology, oppressive human enemies, and the environment.

It has been suggested that inherent to the Standard View are two sets of tacit meanings that at first glance appear to be contradictory. The first assumes that the relationship of humans to technology is too obvious to need examination. Organizations, industries, technicians, craftspeople, and so on simply make things that are in themselves neither good nor bad. The second approach, one of technological determinism, conceives of technology as a powerful and autonomous agent, inherent to progress, and therefore by definition an unquestionable good, but that inevitably dictates the form to be followed by human social life (see, for example, Heilbroner, 1967).

Marshall Sahlins (1976) takes a very different approach. For him neither technologies nor the human "needs" they are devised to alleviate should be conceptualized as autonomous, but must inevitably be understood as embedded in cultures and histories. Cultural analyses of technology are concerned with the attribution of meaning to technologies and their application, and hence with "entrenched moral imperatives" (Pfaffenberger, 1992, p. 506). The politics of national, community, and individual identity making is intimately associated with the development, global transfer, and implementation of socio-technical artifacts and systems. Pfaffenberger concludes that "when we examine the 'impact' of technology on society, we are talking today about the impact of one kind of social behavior on another" (Pfaffenberger, 1988). For him technology is "humanized nature," and inseparable from both political relationships and the culturally informed meanings associated with it.

It has been shown repeatedly that artifacts, including biomedical technologies, can be introduced successfully to new cultural settings without a simultaneous adoption of the logical use originally associated with them (Lock & Kaufert, 1998; Van Der Geest & Reynolds Whyte, 1988). New meanings and social relations coalesce around transported artifacts, whatever the direction of their travel.<sup>2</sup> This is not an argument for the autonomy of artifacts (or for that matter for the autonomy of culture), but rather for their inherent heterogeneity as social objects. Alternatively, some artifacts and technologies, notably when they threaten entrenched values, are

#### **Biographies of Pharmaceuticals and Contraceptives 87**

actively rejected, or after attempted adoption fail to take root or their use is severely restricted.

Disputes among politicians, scientists, clinicians, and activists within any given location often take place over access to and distribution of technologies. Breast cancer activists have, for example, lobbied hard for increased research and technological developments in connection with this disease, forcing the hand of politicians (Kaufert, 1998). The governments of many countries with few economic resources, often to the consternation of Western trained physicians and the World Health Organization (WHO), encourage pharmacologists, traditional practitioners, or even itinerant vendors of medicine, to diagnose diseases and prescribe medicine, thereby economizing dramatically on health care expenditure (Van Der Geest & Reynolds Whyte, 1988). Several of the best documented examples of cultural dissonance in connection with biotechnology transfer have to do with contraceptive and reproductive technologies, and with AIDS prevention (Epstein, 1996; Ginsberg & Rapp, 1995; Lock & Kaufert, 1998). For example, the technology that identifies the sex of a fetus has been applied in some locations to systematically practice selective abortion of female fetuses.

For anthropologists, it is technologies in practice their differential development, transfer, and application, relationship to politics and economics, national interests, and dominant values, and their impact on individuals, communities, and societies at large—that is of over-riding concern. Also of considerable interest is the relationship of the technologies of biomedicine to indigenous technologies. Inevitably the ethnographic approach is central to such research; further more, the culture concept is almost without exception drawn on either explicitly, or else is implicitly assumed to be an influential force in individual and community responses to technologies, both indigenous and those that are imported. This entry will be confined largely to such research.

It is not possible to make a comprehensive coverage of the anthropology of biomedical technologies, as even a cursory glance at journals such as *Medical Anthropological Quarterly* will show. Notably absent is recent research into new techno/visual representations of the body, including the emerging field of telemedicine (Csordas, 2000; Sinha, 2000; Taylor, 2000). Nor does space permit an evaluation of how politics and values are implicated in the development and application of specific biomedical technologies while others are never supported.

Coverage of the rich literature produced by sociologists of science that has direct relevance to the conceptualization and development of technologies and their implementation is also absent (see, for example, Berg, 1997; Berg & Mol, 1998; Cambrosio & Keating, 1995; Latour, 1999; Timmermans, 1999).

# **BIOGRAPHIES OF PHARMACEUTICALS AND CONTRACEPTIVES**

Numerous scholars, among whom Charles Leslie was perhaps the first, have shown how medical pluralism is the rule in virtually all societies today, so that competition among medical sectors is common (Leslie, 1980), often with major repercussions on the health of populations. This tendency is well illustrated by examining the availability and use of medicinal technologies. Beginning in the 1950s anthropologists showed concern about the effects of imported pharmaceuticals, notably antibiotics, on the health of people in developing countries, when it became clear that these powerful medications were being misapplied. Anthropologists also were interested in the impact of the availability of pharmaceuticals on the use of indigenous medicines.

It was quickly recognized that politics are inevitably implicated in the global transfer of drugs, but in addition that pharmaceuticals have not only biochemical properties but are also associated with culturally defined meanings. "We can speak of the biography of a drug: its production, distribution, marketing, interpretation and use," argue Van Der Geest and Reynolds Whyte (1988). Etkin (1988), in a similar vein, discusses the cultural construction of efficacy with respect to pharmaceuticals and suggests that healing should be understood as processual in order to grasp the way in which a series of outcomes are usually considered important to efficacy, not all of them physical.

It has been shown repeatedly that the introduction of pharmaceuticals has had major impacts, many of them negative, in societies without a health sector that has a well-functioning and well-funded infrastructure. In El Salvador, for example, when the use of locally produced indigenous medicinals was largely replaced, due to the introduction of a commercial pharmaceutical sector, community breakdown was evident as well as individual dependence on brand name prescription medications (Ferguson, 1981). Van Der Geest and Reynolds Whyte (1988) describe the formation of an informal sector for the purchase of pharmaceuticals, one that included smuggled medicines in the Cameroon. They argue that self-medication with products bought in the informal sector can be detrimental to health (not only to individuals but to populations as antibiotic-resistant bacteria multiply); that money is often wasted on useless medication but that, for certain medical problems, the availability of pharmaceuticals sold across the counter is better than nothing. In such instances a form of autonomy can be achieved by patients that would otherwise not be possible. Nichter (1989) shows how in South India over the past two decades use of herbal remedies has rapidly been overtaken by sales of commercial medications. He argues that biomedicine is equated with modernity and progress, and pharmaceuticals have in effect become fetishes imbued with power, as is the case elsewhere. Family members share medications with each other. But Nichter detects ambivalence at work as well, because danger and impurity are also associated with these new, foreign drugs.

Oral rehydration salts (ORS) have been widely promoted by WHO and other organizations to combat infant diarrhea, the major cause of infant mortality in areas where poverty is widespread. MacCormack and Draper (1988) write about how mothers in Jamaica were taught to use ORS imported from Switzerland in place of very effective mint teas or coconut water prepared at home. They note the irony of importing ORS at great expense when one of the two ingredients in the packages is sugar—the bedrock of the Jamaican economy. These authors go on to show how aid agencies actively promote the use of ORS as a medicine—as a quality-controlled chemical formula—when in fact all that the packages contain are sugar and salt. Mothers must walk for hours with their sick children to clinics to obtain this "medicine" rather than caring for the children at home. Nichter argues that in Sri Lanka, ORS have been introduced to that country as a "technical fix." He shows how purveyors of this technology draw on local beliefs about health and "strength" to assist in their marketing strategies (Nichter, 1989). Increased infant mortality has been documented in connection with the promotion of bottle-feeding in regions where poverty and unhygienic conditions are present (Van Esterik, 1989). Numerous anthropologists writing on the subject of the introduction of pharmaceuticals, bottle-feeding, and ORS to the "developing" world have pointed out that, increasingly, governments adopt a reductionistic approach to the health of populations—a medicalized technical fix—at the expense of dealing with public health and environmental issues. Global and capitalist interests are rarely concerned with preventive medicine, and local elites, including many members of the medical profession trained overseas, give priority to high-tech medicine over primary care.

When biomedical technologies are adopted in countries supposedly dedicated to the idea of development, the response from some sectors is often one of nationalism. The result is that even as new biomedical technologies are incorporated, usually unevenly across society, there is a renewal of interest in indigenous techniques and therapies, although efforts are very often made to have them rationalized and scientized. Public interest in indigenous technologies is usually fired up through appeals to nationalism and often also to naturalism (Adams, 2002; Farquhar, 1995; Leslie, 1989; Nichter, 1989).

The globalized distribution of pharmaceuticals has another dark side that anthropologists have recently begun to research. The experimental trials of contraceptives in Egypt prior to their approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States (Morsy, 1998) is one telling example of the use that the bodies of peoples in Africa, the Caribbean, the Middle East, and South East Asia have been put to as experimental subjects in the interests of drug companies. The cost of drugs proven to be effective against HIV/AIDS and of crucial medications for other diseases including malaria and multi-drug resistant TB, and the impact of these marketing strategies on the everyday lives of people has also been documented by anthropologists (Farmer, 1999; Nguyen, 2001).

### **CONTRACEPTIVES AND ABORTION**

Indigenous contraceptive knowledge and practices are widely dispersed, and the systematic importation of new contraceptive technologies does not take place in a vacuum. As with pharmaceuticals, it is largely through the mediation of government that contraceptives such as the contraceptive pill (the Pill) and intra-uterine devices (IUDs) are made available to populations and this is carried out, almost without exception, in association with national policies of "family planning." The large ethnographic literature on contraception produced by

#### **New Reproductive Technologies and New Forms of Kinship 89**

anthropologists reveals several dominant themes, among which is a prominent concern by informants about unwanted side-effects associated with pharmaceutical contraceptives, and with the insertion of objects into the body for contraceptive purposes. Nichter (1989) writes about a "rhetoric of rumor and side effects" in Sri Lanka and describes how local accounts about the way in which the Pill works are absorbed into ethnophysiological knowledge. Fear about negative effects of the Pill on the normal functioning of the body make its use unacceptable to many women. Good (1980) notes that Iranian women fear that the Pill will render them sterile because it "dries out the uterus." Similar concerns about the drying properties of the Pill have been reported worldwide. In Japan the Pill was not made legally available as a contraceptive until 2000 due in part to a powerful opposition lobby by Japanese companies that make condoms and to a concern among men about female promiscuity associated with the Pill (noted in many other parts of the world). But a fear among women about unwanted side-effects was also implicated (Lock, 1993). The result has been that abortion, relatively easily available in Japan, has been made of regular use for family planning (Coleman, 1983).

Lopez (1998), whose research deals with sterilization, the preferred method of population control in Puerto Rico, argues that a focus on individual women is inappropriate in this type of research. Lopez insists that the reproductive decisions made by Puerto Rican women, and by implication women virtually everywhere, can only be understood within a larger historical and social framework as well as through an ethnographic lens. Contradictions in connection with the application of technologies of contraception are then made apparent. She wants more attention given to community rights in connection with such technologies, and less on individual rights and interests, as is the case for the bulk of research carried out in North America and Europe.

Family planning in most countries is implemented by governments on the assumption that economic development can be brought about by reducing family size. China is the best known example of this approach, where a rhetoric of an overly populous nation prevails, and the enforced one-child policy is implemented with a concurrent discourse of neo-eugenics about "raising the quality of people" (Anagnost, 1995). Ong (1995) shows how the ideology of family planning in Malaysia increases tensions between many husbands and wives. The Pill was introduced in Malaysia together with a rhetoric that implied that the life of couples would improve with its use by reducing the burden placed on women. Moslem men actively resisted the planning of their families, and although birth rates among the Chinese and Hindu populations fell in Malaysia, among the Moslem population it rose, something that Ong attributes to the negative reaction of men. Moslem men argued that the Pill was making their wives sick, and even very poor men with large families resisted its use.

In Egypt, the state, collaborating with donor agencies, explicitly uses a family-planning program as a tool to modernize its population, to improve its overall health, and to remove "weakness." The concepts of "progress" and of "material wealth" are made use of in association with efforts to normalize nuclear families and to promote ideas about individuality and privacy in the hope of reducing family size. Ali (1996) shows how Islamic principles have been interpreted by the State so as to support family planning, but he also demonstrates the mixed reception this policy has had, particularly among Islamic parties who object vehemently to the secularization of the moral and family life of Egyptians. Similarly to the responses of nationalist and religious groups in India, Indonesia, Nepal, North America, and elsewhere, Islamists in Egypt actively seek to defend the domestic sphere from what they perceive to be moral breakdown. Clearly, accounts about increasing individual autonomy for women, so often associated with the introduction of birth control, must be situated in context and suitably tempered. It may well be that at times the reverse is actually the case.

In recent years condom use has been widely promoted because of its value in preventing the transmission of HIV, and several anthropologists have documented the social, cultural, and political issues at stake here (see Grundfest-Schoepf, 1993, for example). (Pigg, 2002) has analyzed the fraught relationship among participants in a public debate about sexuality, national identity, and the introduction of HIV/AIDS prevention strategies in Nepal.

# **NEW REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES AND NEW FORMS OF KINSHIP**

A large literature exists on the anthropology of birth and the technologies associated with birth practices (see the entry Medicalization and the Naturalization of Social Control for a review of some of this research). Research has also demonstrated the lengths to which women are driven to try to overcome infertility (Inhorn, 1994; Kielmann, 1998). Much of this research, like many of the materials cited above, highlight the global, local, political, and economic strategies associated with the introduction of technological interventions, while at the same time documenting local responses to and experiences with both indigenous and newly imported technologies.

In recent years the systematic development and implementation of assisted conception and the new reproductive technologies has generated a rather different body of research that focuses on the technologies themselves as objects of knowledge and on what they make possible. The effects of these technologies on the lives of women who use them, on their partners, and on the new forms of kin relations they permit, are integral to these analyses. But so too is a reflective examination of contemporary society and the impact of science on society—such research comes under the umbrella of "science as culture, cultures of science" (in Franklin's 1995, idiom). This approach is concerned less explicitly with political economies, and focuses instead on the scientific enterprise itself, on its impact on human relationships in late modernity, and at times on policy-making. Politics, power relations, and the reproduction of hegemonies are part of this research, but so too is the way in which biomedical technologies, despite objectification of the body and body parts, can enable individual agency (Cussins, 1996; Lock, 1998). Overt national interests are less evident in this research, as is the way in which the adoption of technologies is a sign of modernization and rationalization. But inevitably, given the globalized economy and the protean spread of values associated with the idea of modernity as it took shape originally in Europe, there are links between research into the new high-tech biomedical technologies and studies based in locations other than where these technologies are developed.

Marilyn Strathern was perhaps the first to use the discourse associated with the new reproductive technologies to reflect critically on the classical categories of anthropology. She noted early in the 1990s the power of these technologies to challenge received wisdom in the social sciences about an inherent dichotomy between nature and culture, and between biological and social reproduction. Taking the concept of culture to be "the way people imagine things are," Strathern analyses official debates in the United Kingdom about assisted conception focusing on how the representation of persons and individuality that are used in these debates displaces other ways of representing human communities. She uses her years of experience as an anthropologist in Papua New Guinea to create a critical argument. Strathern's thesis is that when humans reproduce themselves, no matter in what way this is achieved, they inevitably do so with already existing and specific forms of themselves and of genealogy making in mind (Strathern, 1992, p. 10). She highlights how in Euro-America ideas about particular social arrangements, notably the nuclear family, in theory inform the way in which reproductive technologies will be put into practice. This is so because the nuclear family and inter-generational ties of blood are understood as "natural" and indisputable, and technology may, therefore, be used to bring about the "natural" family when Nature itself fails to do so. But, as Strathern points out, new reproductive technologies also permit us to challenge what is assumed to be "natural," in particular, who can be counted as "natural" mothers and fathers.

Overcoming infertility, whether male or female, is set up as a matter of individual choice in contemporary society. Individuals become consumers of the new products of human gametes and fertilized embryos, a market enhanced through technological manipulation, advertising, and promotions. These medicalized objects become absorbed into the enterprise culture in which we moderns participate. Strathern argues that above all the new technologies "enable" rather than simply producing products per se; they carry the connotations of service. Moreover, these technologies broach a distinction between body and machine believed to be unassailable—they permit the creation of hybrids of nature and culture (p. 47). We are now able to artificially intervene into what have been represented as supremely natural processes—whether it be in order to create embryos in vitro and then re-implant them into either the woman who donated the egg or into another woman for gestation; to genetically modify fetuses created in vitro before re-implantation; or to manipulate the process of dying.

Sarah Franklin, like Marilyn Strathern, uses a cultural account of assisted conception and the uncertainties associated with these new technologies to reflect on anthropological theory about kinship and reproduction. Reciprocally, she uses anthropological insights to produce a critical account of assisted conception (Franklin, 1997). See also Edwards, Franklin, Hirsch, Price, and Strathern, (1993) and Franklin and Ragone, (1998). Franklin shows how media and popular representations about reproductive technologies inform subjective knowledge **Boundary Crossings: Organ Transplants and the Mixing of Self and Other 91**

and experience. She argues that in vitro fertilization (IVF) is portrayed as a "hope technology," and notes that both failure (which is very high in IVF clinics) and success is continually subject to re-definition. Failures can be a "relative success" under certain circumstances. And retaining hope and "hope management" are key to the practice of this technology (Franklin, 1997, p. 158).

Handwerker reports how, in China, despite the existence of the one-child policy, to have no children is regarded with disfavor. She documents resort to IVF clinics by women whose infertility means that they are stigmatized. But Handwerker also makes it clear that some Chinese women deliberately choose to remain single or not to have children. This research is one of an increasing number of recent publications that highlight the contradictions and ambiguities associated with the new reproductive technologies. Prominent is the way in which some women respond by embracing the possibilities that the technology offers, while others resist or are indifferent to technological intervention (Handwerker, 1998; see also Cussins, 1996). Lock tracks the history in Japan of several hundred years of a "planned family" and how the implementation of reproductive technologies carried out under government and medical guidelines show continuities with the past so that only the reproduction of the "natural" family is permitted. Use of sperm donors and surrogate mothers are prohibited except under very exceptional circumstances when close "biological relatives" are made use of as substitutes (Lock, 1998).

Becker (2000) has analyzed an increasing politicization of infertility together with a consolidation of the industry of reproductive technology in the United States. She shows how the staggering array of medical options now available to women and men have profound financial and emotional impacts on consumers of these technologies. Her interviews with hundreds of infertile people make clear that the majority question the claims made for the technologies and how they are put into practice patients become vigilantes as they act out their ideals of informed choice and autonomy. However, even in the world of high-tech medicine men are often protected from the "stigma" of infertility, and the assumption all too often remains that the "problem" lies with the woman. Becker concludes that despite experimentation with reproductive technologies people strive to achieve continuity and normalcy and the idea that the family is biologically based is upheld as is the ideal of a twoparent family as the reproductive unit. Lewin (1998) has shown how lesbian couples to some extent emulate these ideals when they make use of reproductive technologies.

Becker argues that when people believe themselves to be infertile, they embody the idea that they have a disability and resort to technology to overcome the problem. At the same time, they resist the way in which the medical world transforms their whole life into an infertility problem. Becker concludes, as do other researchers, that "technology as a template of culture is one arena in which normalcy is both resisted and reaffirmed and through which the enactment and transformation of cultural practice occurs" (Becker, 2000, p. 250). One other feature of Becker's research is that she has been involved personally with the technology about which she writes, as has Layne (1996), whose research comprises a biographical and autobiographical account of her experiences with a neonatal intensive care unit.

# **BOUNDARY CROSSINGS: ORGAN TRANSPLANTS AND THE MIXING OF SELF AND OTHER**

Research into organ transplants carried out by medical anthropologists deals, as does inquiry into assisted conception, with boundary demarcations and crossings, the commodification of bodies and body parts, and with the way in which technologies such as these impact on subjectivity, individual identity, and what counts as kin relations.

Sharp (1995) argues that receiving an organ transplant is a personally transformative experience that may impact on how recipients assess their own social worth. She shows how this transformation takes place at two levels—first, subjectively so that a recipient's sense of self may be extended to include qualities attributed to the donor and, second, through interactions with family, communities, and the medical profession. Sharp notes, as does Hogle (1995, 1999) how the language used in connection with organ procurement depersonalizes bodies and body parts, but that many recipients re-personalize organs through the creation of narratives about their re-birth. Subjectivity is "intensely corporeal" but contradictions are rife. Transplant specialists insist that organs should be objectified and reified, especially when communicating with recipients, but when talking with potential donor families they make free use of

a metaphor of the "gift of life," and insist that the donor will "live on" in another's body. The organ, as do pharmaceuticals and even contraceptives, takes on a biography of its own, independent of the persons in whom it resides (see also Crowley, 2001; Lock, 2001).

Hogle (1999) shows how disputes in Germany about the commodification of human body parts and their use as therapeutic tools are powerfully influenced by the history of National Socialism in that country and its practices of eugenics. In particular, revulsion about the history of Nazi experimentation makes many people reluctant to cooperate. Much earlier beliefs about the diffusion of the essence of life throughout the entire human body are also influential in culturally informed responses to the transformation of body parts into technological artifacts. The ideas of "solidarity" (a powerful metaphor from the former East Germany) and Christian "charity" are both made use of to encourage organ donation, but Hogle argues that in multicultural Germany making organ donation into a social good in which everyone can participate is fraught with difficulties (p. 192).

The problem of body commodification and biomedical technologies becomes overtly political in countries where an enormous disparity exists between rich and poor. Das (2000) and Scheper-Hughes (1998) have both shown how the poor are particularly vulnerable to exploitation. By tracing the complex networks of activities between organ procurement and their transplantation, sometimes involving criminal activity and the unwilling participation of living kidney donors, these researchers show how societal inequities are reproduced and even magnified through the practices of transplant technology. Moreover, organ tourism permits citizens from wealthy countries to obtain organs from vulnerable people living in poverty. Das's research in India enables her to critique both contract law and the bioethics usually associated with organ transplants in North America, grounded in the language of rights. She argues that such language masks the politics of violence and the suffering involved in organ procurement where gross inequalities are present in social life, and where bribery and corruption are not uncommon. On the other hand, using extensive ethnographic research, Crowley (2001) is able to show that in Mexico poor people quite often become organ recipients, and that at times economic assistance and organs donated from Mexicans living in America permit their relatives in Mexico to obtain organ transplants. She argues for recognition of greater complexity.

Joralemon (1995) notes a "cultural rejection" of the transplant enterprise in the United States, in that at least half the population remains unwilling to donate organs. He documents the creation of a rhetoric across several domains to the effect that donating organs is a public good. Mixed usage of a contradictory language of property rights on the one hand, and of gift-giving and altruism in connection with organ donation on the other, is used liberally in the United States in an attempt to overcome cultural resistance. This rhetoric must suppress strongly held beliefs about bodily integrity if it is to be increasingly successful, something about which Joralemon remains skeptical. Once again, ambiguities and contradictions are made evident through ethnographic research. Organ transplants, like other biomedical technologies, function to fulfill what society, and in particular the State, recognizes as genuine needs or even as a right. However, the impact of these technologies on the everyday lives of those people directly involved in their use is context dependent, complex, and cannot be measured directly. Above all, these technologies set up a challenge to what is taken to be the natural order of things; as such they bring with them a moral dimension which can act as a touchstone for larger debates about nationalism, modernization, progress, equity, whose lives are valuable and whose are not, and what parts of the

# **MAKING UP THE GOOD-AS-DEAD**

circumstances.

human body can be commodified and under what

The majority of organ transplants make use of organs procured from donors diagnosed as brain-dead. Creation of the concept of brain-death in the late 1960s, immediately following the world's first heart transplant, could not have happened without the prior invention of the artificial ventilator. This machine enables the heart and lungs of a patient whose brain is irreversibly damaged to continue functioning. Brain-dead entities are hybrids, both alive and dead, and their existence challenges, as do so many new biomedical technologies, the fundamental assumptions made until recently in the social sciences and in society at large about clear dichotomies between nature and culture, life and death, mind and body (Lock, 1997, 2000, 2001). Lock has shown how the ambiguous condition of the brain-dead has been largely repressed in the public domain in most of Europe and North America

#### **References 93**

(but see Hogle, 1999, in connection with Germany). The power of the metaphor of the "gift of life" passed along through organ donation has usurped uncertainties in connection with this new entity about where exactly organs come from. On the other hand, in clinical settings where medical practitioners and families must confront the ambiguities associated with the brain-dead at first hand, there is considerable evidence that these patients are not regarded as fully dead. However, in intensive care units (ICUs) in the United States and Canada sending the braindead for procurement of their organs is justified in people's minds, whether they be family or health care practitioners, on the assumption that the "person" is dead (Lock, 2000, 2002). In Japan, on the other hand, braindead patients have not been regarded as medically or legally dead until very recently, and then only if there is evidence of a clear indication on the part of the patient and their family that donation is acceptable. Lack of trust in the medical profession, a massive public debate about brain-death, and differing ideas about personhood are just three of the reasons that account for the Japanese situation.

Simple technologies such as tube-feeding in ICUs mean that patients who are permanently unconscious but whose lower brain continues to function (and therefore are not brain-dead) can be kept alive for years on end. Kaufman (2000) has shown that this condition too challenges our conventional ideas about identity, personhood, and agency. Increasingly there is pressure, primarily economic, to count such patients as good-as-dead (Lock, 2002) so that "death" becomes an ever-more problematic category, as is the case for "life" in the world of reproductive technologies. As Kaufman (2000) notes, the very existence of technologically produced hybrid forms of human existence "subvert the meaning of nature" and of the "natural" (p. 79).

The new genetics and the mapping of the human genome present further challenges to the nature/culture divide. We can intervene in the body in ways never before possible and claims are being made by certain scientists that we will soon be able to manipulate fetuses so that babies will be made to order. Genetic testing and screening, often leading to abortion, are already well entrenched (see the entry Medicalization and the Naturalization of Social Control), but to date the hype associated with genetic enhancement technologies far exceeds what can actually be accomplished. It is not simply the implementation of those technologies that already exist to which we must pay attention, but also to the claims made about the imagined futures that technologies in the making may bring about. Anthropology has already given us plenty of evidence as to the way in which biomedical technologies, as they spread globally, are at once agents of hope and transformation and at the same time foster alienation and destruction. It is not to simply argue for technology as progress.

### **NOTES**

- 1. By technology I mean tools, machines, artifacts, prostheses, and other devices that have been created through human effort for the purpose of changing, manipulating, or controlling the natural and human worlds. Included are the technologies of the survey as discussed by Foucault (1979).
- 2. This is as equally true for acupuncture and herbal medicines being imported and adopted for use in Europe and North America, as it is, for example, for vaccinations being administered throughout Africa.

### **REFERENCES**

- Adams, V. (in press). Establishing proof: Translating "science" and the state in Tibetan medicine. In M. Nichter & M. Lock (Eds.), *New horizons in medical anthropology: Essays in honour of Charles Leslie*. London: Routledge, pp. 200–220.
- Ali, K. A. (1996). The politics of family planning in Egypt. *Anthropology Today, 12*, 14–19.
- Anagnost, A. (1995). A surfeit of bodies: Population and the rationality of the state in post-Mao China. In F. D. Ginsburg & R. Rapp, (Eds.), *Conceiving the New World Order* (pp. 22–41). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Becker, G. (2000). *The elusive embryo: How women and men approach new reproductive technologies*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Berg, M. (1997). *Rationalizing medical work: Decision-support techniques and medical practices*. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
- Berg, M., & Mol, A. (1998). *Differences in medicine: Unraveling practices, techniques and bodies*. London: Duke University Press.
- Cambrosio, A., & Keating, P. (1995). *Exquisite specificity: The monoclonal antibody revolution*. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Coleman, S. (1983). *Family planning in Japanese society*. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Crowley, M. (2001). *Organ donation and receiving in Mexico*. PhD thesis, University of California, Los Angeles.
- Csordas, T. J. (2000). Computerized cadavers: Shades of being and representation in virtual reality. In P. E. Brodwin (Ed.), *Biotechnology and culture: Bodies, anxieties, ethics* (pp. 173–192). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Cussins, C. (1996). Anthological chorography: Agency through objectification in infertility clinics. *Social Studies of Science, 26*, 475–610.