# **Drug Use**

#### **J. Bryan Page**

# **INTRODUCTION**

Among all the things that people do in the quest for health, ingestion of materials thought to improve an individual's state of mind and body appears to be universal. Human beings have discovered and learned to consume myriad preparations derived from plants and minerals, usually in the course of seeking food, but human foragers must have had some degree of receptivity to possible remedies or ways of achieving altered states of mind. This entry will point out that the discovery of altered consciousness and of remedies for ills have been, and still are inextricably interconnected. Anthropologists, using their holistic perspective in examining how herbal remedies and mindaltering drugs fit into the lives of the people who use them, have provided especially useful information and perspective on human variability related to drug use.

The archeological record of humankind's Paleolithic epoch holds little evidence of early consumption of plants or plant products as drugs.<sup>1</sup> Nevertheless, in the thousands of years that our ancestors spent foraging in shifting and changing ecologies, the search for the edible likely led to the discovery of the pleasurable, or at least the interesting effects of certain plants (Naranjo, 1995). The first clear evidence of use of a drug plant in the Western Hemisphere involves the discovery of mescal beans in a cave site in Coahuila, Mexico (Adovasio & Fry, 1976) about 8,500 years ago. Use of alcohol is implied in materials found in Old World sites of about the same antiquity, and use of other drug plants somewhat later. As with most invention, accidental occurrences probably shaped the process of discovering the first medicines and other drugs. Biodiversity in the local ecology, the numbers of different species per square meter, probably also played a part in adding to the list of novel plant preparations found by early humans.

If we assume that accident and biodiversity combined to lead to the identification of drug plants, then we could anticipate the relative productivity of different parts of the world, taking into account density of population. Not surprisingly, zones known to be tropical, but not very populous, have contributed substantially to the human pharmacopia, both of medicines and hallucinogens, as demonstrated by generally accepted medicines such as digitalis and quinine, as well as the famous hallucinogens ayahuasca and iboga. We do not know, however, why the Western Hemisphere has dominated in the identification and production of hallucinogens (Schultes, 1977). Zones that are temperate but populous have contributed strongly to that pharmacopia, as Europe's linden, camomile, datura, and wormwood demonstrate. Tropical zones with dense populations have by far the most extensive list of plant-derived medicines and drugs, exemplified by the massive herbal pharmacopia of the Chinese and Indian traditions. Arctic tundras, with low population and low biodiversity, produce the fewest herbal remedies and drugs, although Amanita muscaria and its use among reindeer herdsmen show that even these parts of the world produce traditional uses of drug plants.

The principles of biodiversity and population interact to yield large numbers of medicinal and psychotropic plants. High biodiversity occurs in the tropics, especially where there is variability of altitude, and combined with high population, the two factors increase the likelihood that people will accidentally discover plant-derived drugs. A third factor, however, comes into play in the specific case of hallucinogens, as most of them are found in sparsely populated tropical zones in the New World. Receptivity to radical, potentially frightening effects of plants may help to explain the disproportionate contribution of hallucinogenic plants by the Western Hemisphere (Schultes, 1977).

The principles of accident, biodiversity, and receptivity have exercised influence on the anthropological study of drugs throughout the history of pre-anthropology, as well as the current discipline established in the latter half of the 19th century. From Herodotus' accounts of Scythians using Cannabis to Schultes' encyclopedic descriptions of drug plants in Central and South America, human interaction with local ecologies provided the basic material that anthropologists eventually represented as herbal drug use to the Western audience.

#### **Background and History 375**

This entry will take the approach that interactions between ecology and human populations underlie all of the other phenomena to be discussed.

# **BACKGROUND AND HISTORY**

### **Early Accounts of Drug Use**

Before anthropology was a separate discipline, travelers, explorers, and scholars wrote accounts of how people lived in cultural settings different from their own. These chronicles became the first literature on intercultural variation, albeit often riddled with the writers' own prejudices and misinterpretations of what they had observed. Some of the early ethnographic writings contained descriptions of drug use.

Besides being the recognized father of the Western approach to recording and reporting history (reservations about method and accuracy notwithstanding, cf. Pritchett, 1993), Herodotus provided some accounts of how non-Greeks, or "barbarians," lived in their respective natural habitats. In the course of describing the Scythians in what could be termed an early ethnography, Herodotus mentions their use of "hemp," which was probably cannabis, including an account of his hosts' consumption of the plant, which, when burned, produced intoxicating smoke (Wheeler, 1854, p. 159).

Lack of botanical and pharmacological expertise characterizes many of the early explorers' descriptions of non-Western people using unfamiliar plants. Europeans first thought the tomato poisonous because of its apparent taxonomic relationship to poison ivy. Prejudice against the people being described is evident in the conquistadores' encounters with the Aztecs' consumption of peyote and psilocybin and the Incas' consumption of coca (Carter & Mamani, 1986; Furst, 1995). European men of the 16th century gave disparaging and lurid accounts of these practices, setting the stage for centuries of prejudice against those who continued them. Consumption of tobacco as observed by Columbus and his crewmen, on the other hand, contributed to the eventual establishment of a highly lucrative trade good.

As travelers' agendas evolved from conquest, subjugation, and profit to subtler ones of governance and academic understanding, descriptions of drug use and healing practices became more detailed, although not necessarily less ethnocentric. Sir Richard Burton (n.d.) wrote in the 19th century on his travels in Africa and the Middle East, including medicinal and drug-using patterns in these places. Frazer (1915) commented on the origin of the concept of souls and the relationship of that concept to dreaming and mind-altered states. The rise of behavioral science brought decidedly less ethnocentric views of the variants of human behavior along with assiduous attention to detail.

### **Anthropology of Drug Use**

By the late 19th century, some academic travelers, calling themselves anthropologists, were beginning to write highly detailed ethnographic monographs. Because of their attention to detail, these works included accounts of whatever drug-using patterns were found in the groups being described. In terms of the anthropological view in its purest sense, this approach, the inclusion of drug use in the context of full ethnographic monographs that richly contextualize the described cultural patterns, may still represent the ideal in reporting on drug use. A focus on patterns of drug use without full attention to the cultural contexts in which it occurs can lead to overly facile representations of how people use drugs.

The cultural contexts in which drug use occurs, however, may not lend themselves to the production of a definitive monograph. In most parts of the contemporary world, whether people are using tobacco, ayahuasca, or heroin, societies have multicultural components in highly interdependent systems of symbols and exchange. For this reason, the specialized study of drug use had to arise, and it began to do so by the middle of the 20th century. One of the earliest examples of this kind of specialized study was Lowie's (1919) monograph on the Crow Tobacco Society. It related tobacco use with many other aspects of Crow life, including religion, social structure, linguistics, and ethnobotany, demonstrating the aptness of the anthropological view in studying patterns of drug use. Lowie also exemplifies anthropologists who did not necessarily focus on drug use, but in the course of their investigations, characterized drug use in specific cultural contexts (cf. Honigmann & Honigmann, 1945; Mangin, 1957).

### **Historical Context of Interest in Drugs**

Before moving into the chronology of focused anthropological studies of drugs, the general historical context of drugs deserves brief attention. Western European biomedicine and its power to discover palliatives and topical remedies have exercised strong influence on the place of drug use in Western life. By the time anthropology was emerging as a discipline, the European pharmacopia included numerous remedies derived from plants, many of which were not native to Europe. Opium and its tinctures had many uses in 19th-century English medical practice, and cocaine hydrochloride, a water-soluble transformation of a single alkaloid extracted from coca leaves, appeared in scores of patent medicines marketed in Europe and the United States (Morgan, 1981; Musto, 1987). Avant-garde artistic enthusiasm for some drugs arose in 19th-century Europe and England, exemplified by Coleridge's enthusiasm for laudanum (a tincture of opium) and Baudlaire's *Club Les Hachichins* (a group of French literati who took hashish, or concentrated Cannabis resin, as a source of inspiration).

**Hazards of Drug Use.** A perception of the hazards presented by these and other drugs if taken for purposes of pleasure also began to develop in the 19th century (Morgan, 1981; Musto, 1987). Reports of obsessive use, called addiction, had become associated with consumption of laudanum, an opium preparation. Patent medicines containing cocaine somewhat later attracted the attention of journalists as stories of addiction to Vin Mariani and Coca-Cola began to circulate in late 19th-century newspapers and magazines (Morgan, 1981; Musto, 1987). Exotic, foreign patterns of drug use, particularly the smoking of opium among Chinese (a practice promoted by English trade in Asia), were portrayed in the print media as particularly debilitating and dangerous (Barth, 1964). Drugs, if misused, could become pathways to depravity and death, and the similarity between drug addiction and alcoholism was not lost on the burgeoning temperance movements in England and the United States of the early 1900s (Morgan, 1981).

*Western Moralism and Drugs.* Somehow, people had to be protected from the potential ruin brought by drugs used for pleasure or personal enjoyment, and for the 70 years between 1880 and 1950, adherents to Western biomedicine and Victorian moralism set out to protect people from ruining themselves through drug use. This movement was particularly convenient for politicians and police who at the same time had to deal with massive cultural diversity in their home polities. The United States was receiving people of color from all parts of the world at that time, many of whom used drugs other than alcohol and tobacco. France had intense interaction with Egypt in the 19th century. England received people from all over the world.

Prohibition of drug use gave the police a ready excuse to arrest and harass people who were non-white and culturally distinct, because they often brought with them different ways of consuming drugs. Attacks on opium smoking among Chinese immigrants, cocaine raids among African Americans, and, perhaps most egregiously, Harry Anslinger's famous onslaught against marijuana, primarily directed toward people of color, set the tone for intolerance of culturally distinctive drugconsuming behavior in the United States. These assaults also set a precedent for later persecution of the Native American peyotist practices in the 1960s.

The drugs targeted by prohibitionist fervor in the early 20th century, particularly opium, cocaine, and alcohol, in fact had extensive records of association with ruined lives, and therefore the cause of protecting people against ruin had legitimacy from a public health perspective. Curiously, tobacco, by far the most important killer among all drugs, slipped under the scrutiny of those who would police drug use in the world. Tobacco does not appreciably change users' behavior in the state of acute intoxication, and its sequelae either were missed altogether in the era when people did not live long enough to contract lung cancer or emphysema, or were confused with important killers such as pneumonia.

*Prohibition and the Culturally Distinct "Other".* In order to protect people against the ravages of addiction, polities prohibited people from using drugs such as alcohol, opium, and cocaine altogether, and this approach doomed all subsequent efforts to use law enforcement as the principal arm for prevention of drug misuse. Furthermore, prohibition gave law enforcers license to continue policies aimed at controlling the behavior of culturally distinct groups in their respective communities. On the other hand, culturally distinctive communities had an advantage in the continued procurement, sale, and distribution of forbidden commodities, because police forces did not understand them very well. Moreover, culturally distinctive sub-communities in large cities, such as San Francisco's Chinatown, New York's Harlem, and Miami's Overtown developed reputations as places where rules of "decent" behavior were in suspension, and one could seek pleasures there that one could not find in

#### **Development of Methods and Models 377**

the city's "respectable" neighborhoods. In fact, the vast majority of the enclaves' inhabitants behaved as "decently" as the people in the "respectable" neighborhoods. It was only natural that some individuals in the enclaves of people who were excluded from the advantages enjoyed by their culturally different neighbors would take advantage of the opportunity to profit at the expense of those same neighbors by providing drugs and sex in covert fashion.

The perception of drug users as a kind of threatening "other" whose actions and lifestyle undermined the structure of mainstream society persisted, complete with interwoven threads of racism and xenophobia that had become established in the early 20th century. Anslinger's declarations that marijuana was associated with jazz musicians and people of color, newspaper reports of cocaine-crazed "black" fieldhands, and the ubiquitous portrayal of the heroin user as desperate dope fiend fostered a public perception of deviant otherness with racial and cultural undertones. These perceptions were reflected in sociological approaches to studying social problems in terms of deviance (Becker, 1963) rather than adaptation.

*Mid-20th-Century Reaction to Prohibition.* Specific questioning of policies on drugs and attitudes about their use spontaneously changed social environments of the late 1960s, both in the United States and in Europe. Young people who experimented with marijuana concluded that the official government position on that drug was riddled with disinformation. If the government's policies on that drug were flawed, then perhaps other drugs' properties were also misrepresented in the official literature. The United States and Europe experienced an epidemic of drug use between 1965 and 1975 driven by the questioning of questionable information on the drugs of choice—marijuana, LSD, and heroin (Chambers & Ball, 1970).

Participants in the epidemic aroused the concern of the medical community and curiosity among social and behavioral scientists. The former group asked if the widespread experimentation with illegal drugs would have health consequences in the future, and the latter group asked if the "tribal" lifestyles associated with drug experimentation constituted transitory or evolving cultural patterns (Partridge, 1973). The emergence of a "counter-culture" rebellion against policies aimed at eradicating the use of illegal drugs marked the beginning of an era in which anthropological inquiry about drug use of all kinds received increasing encouragement, both from the reading public and from agencies that fund research. That encouragement grew out of historical processes set in motion by would-be enforcers as well as the intellectually curious. The following sections attempt to chronicle subsequent developments in the anthropology of drug use while taking note of the social processes that supported them.

# **DEVELOPMENT OF METHODS AND MODELS**

### **Pioneers and Hallucinogens**

Anthropological inquiry seems to be driven primarily by curiosity about some aspect of the human condition, and the early investigation of drug use by anthropologists was no exception. The true pioneers in this area of inquiry were Richard Schultes and Weston La Barre, both of whom began their studies in the 1930s, in an era when North America was advocating for prohibition of specific drugs throughout the world. Schultes was in the process of accumulating information on the uses of a vast array of plant species (e.g., Schultes, 1938, 1940, 1963) in the course of establishing the larger sub-discipline of ethnobotany (Schultes & von Reis, 1995). La Barre began a career-long inquiry into the uses of peyote for religious purposes (cf. La Barre, 1938a, 1960). These specialized studies became models for the work of anthropologists who focused on drug use in ethnographic research.

Furst (1990), Dobkin de Rios (1968, 1970, 1971), and Harner (1974) exemplify the next generation of studies that focused on the use of hallucinogens in non-Western cultural contexts. Single-mindedly seeking evidence of drugs in far-flung cultural materials, these anthropologists found representations of drugs and their uses in artifacts (Furst, 1970) and monumental structures (Dobkin de Rios, 1977). They also conducted edifying ethnographies, reporting on how the use of specific drugs interacted with specific cultural traditions (cf. Dobkin de Rios, 1970; Furst, 1990). A contemporary of these earnest students of non-Western drug use, Carlos Castaneda (1969), published accounts of his "research" on Yaqui drug use as "elicited" from a shaman, spawning a series of books on the relationships among personal power, spirituality, and ingestion of hallucinogens. The widespread

popularity of these books made them vehicles for teaching the public about the process of learning about a cultural "other," but further examination led to the conclusion that they were works of fiction (De Mille, 1976, 1990). Still, the message that drug use in ritual applications could lead to positive, life-affirming experiences remained consistent in both the ethnographic and fictional works on non-Western drug use.

## **Alcohol and the Ritual Setting Hypothesis**

Alcohol, perhaps the most universally consumed drug, attracted the attention of anthropologists in the context of holistic ethnographies, but by the 1930s it had also drawn the attention of anthropologists who focused on its use in a cultural context. La Barre (1938b) characterized grainderived, fermented alcoholic beverages among Native Americans, and Heath (1958) embarked on his lifelong inquiries into patterns of alcohol consumption. These investigations either compiled extant ethnographic descriptions or provided ethnographies focused on the consumption of alcoholic drinks.

Whatever their approach, the early anthropological investigations of alcohol use attempted to avoid judgment on the manner in which people consumed the drug, focusing instead on the meaning of alcohol consumption within specific cultural contexts. Heath (1958) asserted that even drinking highly potent preparations of alcohol (aguardiente at 190 proof) to the point of drunken stupor does not carry severe health or social consequences. His justification for this view involved direct observation of life in a community where this kind of alcohol use took place only within ritual contexts. Studies of other drugs in other settings had come to similar conclusions: restriction of drug use to ritual contexts, regardless of the potency of the drug, reduces the likelihood of negative effects in the human community. This view of drug use as benign within strictures of ritual remains controversial, as anthropologists and non-anthropologists alike cite examples of the deleterious effects of alcohol and other drugs, even when they are only consumed in ritual contexts.

## **Broadening Perspectives on the Consequences of Drug Use**

Later investigations of alcohol use, both in non-Western cultural settings (cf. Marshall, 1979) and in the United States (Ames, 1985; Bennett, 1985; Spradley, 1970) acknowledged and attempted to explain proportions of problematic and non-problematic alcohol use within the same populations. Cultural adaptations to the presence of negative consequences of alcohol use have become legitimate topics in the study of alcohol use. Heath himself, in a later revisitation of the same cultural setting, the Camba of eastern Bolivia, allowed that under changing circumstances and community structure, alcohol use may not have the benign impact that it once had among the same people (Heath, 1994).

Acknowledgment that drug use may have different impacts under different cultural circumstances, regardless of the drug being consumed, provided an important perspective on the impact of drugs in different cultural settings. Heath (1958) and Carter (1977) concluded that problems related to alcohol consumption may have markedly different frequencies in cultural settings that restricted drinking to ritual contexts. Wilbert (1990) and Lowie (1919) made the same point about tobacco in traditional Native American cultural environments. On the other hand, in circumstances of poverty and marginalization, Singer (1986) made a convincing case for expecting increases in alcohol-related problems among Puerto Rican immigrants to the northeastern United States. Problems related to fully commercialized tobacco use, the most ruinous drug in terms of impact on the public health, have also drawn the attention of anthropologists attempting to find strategies for preventing the onset of addiction to tobacco (Nichter & Cartwright, 1991).

## **Drugs after 1960**

The florescence of wide varieties of recreational drug use in the United States and Western Europe occurred in an historical setting in the 1960s in which for decades, drug use had been the object of negative public opinion (Morgan, 1981; Musto, 1987). The emergence of these patterns, despite the widespread negative perceptions of drugs, excited curiosity about the true impact of consuming drugs such as marijuana and cocaine.

**Cannabis Initiative.** Attempts to determine the impact of marijuana smoking occurred at all levels, from the individual, who experimented by smoking Cannabis, to the national blue-ribbon commission, whose members assessed all available information about the drug. In 1971, the Shafer Commission, having reviewed

#### **Development of Methods and Models 379**

copious materials on the social, health, and legal impact of marijuana use, could find no justification for its scheduling as a narcotic (National Commission on Drug Abuse, 1973).

According to the executive branch officials of the time (Richard Nixon's appointees), the primary flaw of the Shafer Commission's report lay in its lack of time depth. In places where marijuana smokers had been using Cannabis for long periods of time, the health and social consequences of their behavior would be obvious. Therefore, the fledgeling National Institute on Drug Abuse contracted for three studies of patterns of Cannabis use in places where long-term use was common: Jamaica, Costa Rica, and Greece. Anthropologists Vera Rubin, Lambros Comitas, William Carter, and Paul Doughty formed teams to conduct studies of Ganja in Jamaica (Rubin & Comitas, 1975) and Cannabis in Costa Rica (Carter, Coggins, & Doughty, 1980). These studies applied ethnographic methods to the study of drug use in the context of large, complex societies. They also combined medical and psychological assessments with anthropological findings to determine the consequences of smoking Cannabis for over 10 years. The studies failed to accomplish the desired characterization of the ills that accompany long-term use of Cannabis. They in fact found little evidence of health risks related to Cannabis use. Subsequent studies (Dreher, 1984; Fletcher et al., 1996; Page, 1983; Page, Fletcher, & True, 1988) enhanced the precision of the original ones, still concluding that the consequences of long-term Cannabis use are subclinical in nature, entailing considerably smaller health risk than that associated with heavy consumption of alcohol or tobacco.

**Ethnography of Street Drug Use.** Ethnographic perspectives on another pattern of drug use that expanded in the 1960s, namely injection of heroin, began to receive anthropological attention in the late 1960s. Michael Agar (1973) applied ethnomethodology in the form of free listing and pile sorting to the study of intravenous drug use, and the results of his inquiry, conducted at the Lexington facility for treatment of opiate addiction, shed new light on the activities involved in maintaining a heroin habit. Agar later conducted street-based participant observation under the tutelage of Edward Preble, author of the breakthrough article on addicts' behavior, "Taking Care of Business" (Preble & Casey, 1969). Works by Agar included further elaboration of his ethnography of drug use (Agar, 1980), as well as works of methodological and theoretical importance.

During the late 1960s and early 1970s, street-based research on patterns of illegal drug use attracted increasing interest on the part of the United States' newly formed National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). Administrators in that agency envisioned qualitative, observational perspectives on the drug use that takes place in street settings (hereafter, street drug use) through ethnographic research. Publications supported by NIDA included various combinations of both sociologists and anthropologists (e.g., Feldman, Agar, & Beschner, 1981, a collection of ethnographies on use of phencyclidine; and Weppner, 1977, brief reports on various aspects of street ethnography by anthropological and sociological researchers). From the mid-1970s, NIDA, the principal agency funding research on patterns of drug use, consistently supported ethnographic studies of drug users.

## **AIDS and its Impact on Drug Research**

Between 1975 and 1985 the group of ethnographic researchers on the use of illegal street drugs remained very small, roughly 20 people. In 1987, an initiative to slow the spread of infection by the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) among injecting drug users (IDUs) sought to establish ethnographic capabilities in interventions throughout the United States. This initiative, funded by NIDA, led to the gainful employment of more than 20 doctoral level anthropologists in cities all over the United States. Each site in the initiative was required to have an ethnographic component, which provided observational data and in-depth interviews with IDUs in order to characterize local patterns of self-injection behavior. This feature attracted already accomplished investigators from other varieties of research, as well as newcomers to drug research. None had studied illegal drug use before, but their inclusion in the effort to prevent HIV infection among IDUs brought fresh perspectives and new capabilities to the mix of anthropologists studying illegal drugs.

Among the senior anthropologists involved in this new endeavor were Robert Trotter and Merrill Singer. Among the newcomers were Stephen Koester, Robert Carlson, and Claire Sterk. All eventually distinguished themselves with significant contributions to the study of street-based drug use. Trotter and colleagues focused on networks of informal social relations among IDUs (cf. Trotter, Bowen, & Potter, 1995). Singer wove his studies of IDUs in Hartford into his well-known critical perspective (Baer, Singer, & Johnson, 1986; Singer, Baer, & Susser, 1999) in medical anthropology. Koester (1994), taking a cue from observational studies by Page (Page, 1990; Page, Chitwood, Smith, Kane, & McBride, 1990; Page, Smith, & Kane, 1990) used direct observation to explain the aversion of IDUs to carrying their own syringes. Carlson (Carlson, Wang, Siegal, Falck, & Guo, 1994) elaborated a sampling scheme for studying communities with drug-related HIV contagion. He also provided a fully contextualized perspective on injecting drug use in the United States (Carlson, 1996). Sterk (1999) thoroughly characterized the status of women who become involved in intensive drug use and the sex trade.

The most intensive study of street drug use by anthropologists has taken place in the United States, but ethnographers in Europe have also conducted important studies. Gamella (1990, 1994) analyzed the lives of IDUs in Madrid, tracing the trajectory of a new heroin epidemic and its concomitant spread of HIV infection. He also produced the definitive work on methylenedioxy-nmethylamphetamine (MDMA) and its use among youth in Spanish nightclubs (Gamella, 1999). Also in Spain, Page and Salazar (1999a, 1999b, 2001) have offered ethnographic evidence that the mere availability of needles and syringes may not suffice to slow the spread of HIV.

Other North American contributions to the anthropological literature on drug use have included Bourgois' *In Search of Respect* (1995), which used a contemporary critical perspective to humanize crack users in East Harlem, and Waterston's *Street Addicts in the Political Economy* (1993), which placed Philadelphia's IDU population in a political and economic context. These works drew upon the growing richness of ethnographic literature on drug use.

# **IMPACT AND CONTRIBUTIONS**

Anthropological studies on how human beings use drugs have had major impact in at least eight areas:

- 1. They have extended the general understanding of how many different variants of drug use there are in the world.
- 2. They have conveyed the valuable message that the cultural context in which people use drugs helps to determine whether or not those who use suffer negative consequences.

- 3. They have developed paradigms for addressing questions of health and avoidance of harm related to drug use.
- 4. They have contributed mid-level theory about social process and structure in regional and transnational cities.
- 5. They have improved the precision of field interventions to prevent consequences of drug use through characterization of environments in which risk takes place.
- 6. They have built approaches to cognitive mapping of how drugs are perceived and how those perceptions are enacted.
- 7. They have analyzed the process of clinical interventions with an eye toward improvement of fit between cultural background of clientele and clinical approach.
- 8. They have offered methods for the study of covert behavior in urban contexts.

The impacts outlined above fall into three basic categories: descriptive, theoretical, and methodological. One cannot over-emphasize the importance of the descriptive impact. With all of their bewildering complexity and detail, it would seem that the thick descriptions contributed by Furst (1990), La Barre (1938a, 1938b), and Lowie (1919) were the antithesis of science, which seeks unifying and simplifying principles. Nevertheless, these descriptions ultimately will help to define the boundaries of human variation and provide the wherewithal for building theory. The works of Heath (1958, 1994) articulated the theory that ritual contexts provide protection against the harmful consequences of drug use, and La Barre's, Furst's, and Wilbert's work on peyote and tobacco supported this concept by characterizing the use of strong drugs in non-Western cultural contexts where they were not associated with health problems and addiction. Although this position remains controversial, it forces us to question the assumption that the use of drugs for mindaltering purposes ultimately visits harm upon users. Works by Page et al. (1990, Page & Salazar, 1999a), Gamella (1994), and Koester (1994) defined the nature of health risk among IDUs in terms of contextual factors, providing information necessary to improve interventions for preventing HIV infection. This contribution takes an approach to the relationship between drug use and its consequences that advocates for close examination of cultural context to determine the nature of risk.

Beyond theory specific to the consumption of drugs and its consequences, anthropological studies of drug use have analyzed the human condition in broad strokes, relating drug use to the general distribution of wealth (Waterston, 1993) and health care (Singer, Baer, & Susser, 1999). Trotter et al.'s (1995) conceptual struggle

#### **References 381**

with networks among IDUs also has edified with implications for the structure of human relations.

The anthropology of drug use can trace its origins to some of the first descriptions of one people by another. It has grown into a thriving branch of the discipline populated by active scientists. Their contributions to the state of knowledge have been important not just to medical anthropology, but to anthropology as a whole. In a world where cultural traditions swirl together into complex recombinations, the study of drug use represents an exemplary application of the anthropological view. It is a behavior that has implications for many aspects of the human condition, and therefore it demands an holistic perspective in order to achieve adequate understanding of its impact. The anthropological works cited here demonstrate this principle clearly. Furthermore, the humanity of the people who use drugs comes through vividly in these writings, and this is perhaps their most important contribution.

# **NOTE**

1. A word about nomenclature is in order. Many well-meaning publications, some quoted in this entry, refer to drugs as "substances." That term is too broad for purposes of discussing what people take to make them feel better, or at least different. This entry will refer to all preparations ingested by human beings to alter the state of the body–mind continuum as "drugs," including tobacco, alcohol, antibiotics, and heroin, among many others. The term "preparation" will refer to a specific form of a drug, as it usually takes some preparing to render naturally occurring material into a consumable drug. The entry will also refer to misuse of these drugs, not abuse, except when referring to NIDA.

# **REFERENCES**

- Adovasio, J. M., & Fry, G. F. (1976). Prehistoric psychotropic drug use in northeast Mexico and Trans-Pecos Texas. *Economic Botany*, *30*, 94–96.
- Agar, M. (1973). *Ripping and running*. New York: Knopf.
- Agar, M. (1980). *Professional strangers: An informational introduction to ethnography*. New York: Academic Press.
- Ames, G. M. (1985). Middle-class Protestants: Alcohol and the family. In L. A. Bennett & G. M. Ames (Eds.), *The American experience with alcohol: Contrasting cultural perspectives* (pp. 435–460). New York: Plenum Press.
- Baer, H. A., Singer, M., & Johnson, J. (1986). Towards a critical medical anthropology [Special issue]. *Social Science & Medicine*, *23*(2).
- Barth, G. (1964). *Bitter strength: A history of the Chinese in the United States 1850–1870*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

- Becker, H. (1963). *Outsiders: Studies in the sociology of deviance*. London: Free Press of Glencoe.
- Bennett, L. A. (1985). Alcohol writ accountable: The Episcopal Diocese of Washington, DC. In L. A. Bennett & G. M. Ames (Eds.), *The American experience with alcohol: Contrasting cultural perspectives* (pp. 411–434). New York: Plenum Press.
- Bourgois, P. (1995). *In search of respect selling crack in El Barrio*. New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Burton, R. F., Sir (n.d.). *First footsteps in East Africa*. London: J. M. Dent.
- Carlson, R. G. (1996). The political economy of AIDS among drug users in the United States: Beyond blaming the victim or powerful others. *American Anthropologist*, *98*(2), 266–278.
- Carlson, R. G., Wang, J., Siegal, H. A., Falck, R. S., & Guo, J. (1994). An ethnographic approach to targeted sampling: Problems and solutions in AIDS prevention research among injection drug and crack-cocaine users. *Human Organization*, *53*(3), 279–286.
- Carter, W. E. (1977). Ritual, the Aymara, and the role of alcohol in human society. In B. M. DuToit (Ed.), *Drugs, rituals, and altered states of consciousness* (pp. 101–110). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Balkema Press.
- Carter, W. E., Coggins, W. J., & Doughty, P. L. (1980). *Cannabis in Costa Rica*. Philadelphia: ISHI Press.
- Carter, W. E., & Mamani, M. (1986). *Coca en Bolivia*. La Paz, Mexico: Librería Editorial Juventud.
- Castaneda, C. (1968). *The teachings of Don Juan: A Yaqui way of knowledge*. New York: Ballantine Books.
- Chambers, C., & Ball, J. (1970). *The epidemiology of opiate addiction in the United States*. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
- De Mille, R. (1976). *Castaneda's journey: The power and the allegory*. Santa Barbara, CA: Capra Press.
- De Mille, R. (1990). *The Don Juan papers: Further Castaneda controversies*. New York: Wadsworth Press.
- Dobkin de Rios, M. (1968). Folk curing with a psychedelic cactus in northern Peru. *International Journal of Social Psychiatry*, *15*, 23–32.
- Dobkin de Rios, M. (1970). Banisteriopsis used in witchcraft and folk healing in Iquitos, Peru. *Economic Botany*, *22*(2), 194–199.
- Dobkin de Rios, M. (1971). Ayahuasca, the healing vine. *International Journal of Social Psychiatry*, *17*(4), 256–269.
- Dobkin de Rios, M. (1977). Suggested hallucinogenic motifs in New World massive earthworks. In B. M. DuToit (Ed.), *Drugs, rituals, and altered states of consciousness* (pp. 237–250). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Balkema Press.
- Dreher, M. C. (1984). *Working men and Ganja: Marijuana use in rural Jamaica*, Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues.
- Feldman, H. W., Agar, M. H., & Beschner, G. M. (1979). *Angel dust, an ethnographic study of PCP users*. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
- Fletcher, J. M., Page, J. B., Francis, D. J., Copeland, K., Naus, M. J., Davis, C. M. et al. (1996). Cognitive correlates of chronic cannabis use in Costa Rican men. *Archives of General Psychiatry*, *53*, 1051–1057.
- Frazer, J. G. (1915). *The golden bough, a study in magic and religion*. New York: St. Martin's Press.
- Furst, P. T. (1970). The Tsité (*Erythrina* spp.) of the Popol Vuh and other psychotropic plants in pre-Columbian art. Paper presented