#### Secularism revisited 6

# Doctrine of destiny or political ideology?<sup> $1$ </sup>

T N Madan

[Feuerbach's] work consists in the dissolution of the religious world into its secular basis. He overlooks the fact that after completing this work, the chief thing still remains to be done. For the fact that the secular foundation detaches itself from itself and establishes itself in the clouds as an independent realm is really to be explained by the self-cleavage and self-contradictoriness of this secular basis.

Karl Marx, 'Theses on Feuerbach'

The historical modus vivendi of secularism, while seeking to chasten religious dogmatism, embodies unacknowledged elements of immodesty in itself. The very intensity of the struggle it wages against religious intolerance may induce blind spots with respect to itself.

William Connolly, *Why I am not a Secularist* 

#### I

Alongside democracy, federalism, and socialism, secularism was one of the foundational principles on which the leaders of the new state of independent India set out in the middle of the twentieth century to create an economically developed and socially just society. Democracy was of course the legacy of the freedom movement and the animating spirit of the Constitution adopted in 1949; it found prominent mention in its Preamble. The federal structure of the state – an imperative in view of the large size and huge population of the country and its regional diversities – was also laid out in great detail in the Constitution. Socialism and secularism did not find direct mention despite the efforts of many members to have them written into it. B. R. Ambedkar, the presiding deity as it were of the drafting committee, considered it unwise to constitutionally bind the future generations to a socio-economic agenda that may have to be changed with the passage of time (see Madan 2006: 84–85, 106).

As for secularism, the liberty of 'belief, faith and worship', inscribed in the Preamble and spelled out in a number of clauses in the chapter on fundamental rights (see Madan 2006: Chapter 2), was obviously considered adequate enough for the word secularism also to be mentioned in the Constitution. Fearful of the mutual hostility of religious communities (which had led to the partition of the subcontinent) though India's leaders were, and committed to a modern rational outlook on national life, secularism in its original sense of the ideology of those committed to bringing about the decline of religion in human affairs (see Madan 1997: Chapter 1), obviously was considered inappropriate in the Indian cultural setting. Widely respected and influential

intellectuals actually said so. [...] Radhakrishnan's view (see Madan 2006: Chapter 4) [was] that [...] India needed [...] to evolve its own concept of secularism. The effort to do so began straightaway and we do indeed now have our own definition of the term, although the same is not followed consistently; nor has it yet entered into sociological literature generally or such widely consulted dictionaries as the *Concise Oxford English Dictionary*, which now abounds with Indian words.

Indian secularism has come to have both a focused meaning and also a wider connotation. Interestingly, Jawaharlal Nehru brought them together in an early statement. In a letter to the chief ministers in 1952, he observed that the word 'secular' meant more than the 'free play of religions': it also conveyed 'the idea of social and political equality'. Thus, he did not consider 'a caste ridden society ... properly secular'. He concluded: 'we must always keep the ideal of the unity of India and of the political and social equality of her people, to whatever group, religion or province they might belong' (see Austin 1999: 557–58). As is well known, Nehru was not happy about caste-based reservations in civil services and legislatures. It is indeed ironical that today's 'secular forces' (so called) are headed by, among others, mutually antagonistic caste leaders for whom secularism and casteism are not at all contradictory as Nehru correctly perceived them to be. The 'wretched national agonizing about secularism' about which Shashi Tharoor (2003: 3) has written simply does not go away.

### $II$

There are two bodies of reflection and writing on Indian secularism understood as the freedom of conscience (or religion) of the individual, and as the commitment of the state to protect this freedom and to ensure that religious identity in no way interferes with citizenship rights. There is a multi-vocal public discourse carried on by politicians, journalists, and lawyers and judges; and there is an academic discourse. In my reading of these two discourses, the former is, of course, much older and therefore the original discourse: the latter is generally reactive and hesitant to break new ground. Of late it has begun to seem even insular, somewhat cut off from discussions on secularization and secularism (actually the former term is used to refer to both the *process* and to the *thesis* that the process is linear and universal, and the latter term is not equally in vogue) among political and social theorists in the West.

In the public or political discourse, the secularist position (or what could be called so) first made its appearance as nationalist rhetoric towards the end of the nineteenth century. Its precise context was the efforts of the leaders of the newly founded Indian National Congress to secure participation of the Muslims in its activities and programmes. As I have already pointed out elsewhere (Madan 1997: 267ff.), a Muslim leader from Bombay, Badruddin Tyabji, in his presidential address to the Congress in 1887, hoped that there was nothing in the mutual relations of the various religious communities that would make anyone of them refrain from joining the others to obtain from the British 'general' administrative reforms and civic rights 'for the common benefit' of all people. The principal opponent of this point of view was Sayyid Ahmad Khan, one of the most prominent public figures of north India and an energetic promoter of modern education among the Muslims. Through an exchange of letters in 1888, these two distinguished Muslims may be said to have opened the secularism debate of modern India, although they did not use the term 'secularism'. Tyabji argued

that community and national interests were both equally legitimate and they were nonantagonistic; Khan insisted on the priority of the former and questioned the validity of the latter in India where the Hindus outnumbered Muslims three to one. In Tyabii's judgement. Muslim interests would be best served by linking them to general interests. and not by pursuing a separatist strategy.

From the nationalist Muslim point of view, secularism (read nationalism) could be an encompassing or a residual concept: general interests could be so stated as to include community interests; or community interests even when granted primacy still would leave a residual space for common interests. Muhammad Ali Jinnah, a follower of Tyabji and a Congressman who later also became Muslim League leader, put the secularist position succinctly when he famously rebuked one of his protégés (and clients), the Raia of Mahumdabad, who showed increasing consciousness of his Muslim identity, that he was 'an Indian first and then a Muslim' (Wolpert 1985: 79). Actually, as far as I have been able to find out, Jinnah was one of the first public figures of modem India to speak of the 'affairs of our common secular existence'. He did this in his presidential address to the Indian Muslim League in 1916, when he was also one of the leading lights of the Congress.

It is not my intention here to undertake a survey of usages: I only want to draw attention to three noteworthy conceptions of secularism discernible in the public discourse during the years of the national movement. The first has been noted above. The second we owe to Mahatma Gandhi. His support in 1920 to the Khilafat movement in India, which campaigned for the grant of sufficient temporal powers to the defeated Sultan of Turkey, so that he might discharge his duties as the *Khalifa* of the Muslims (that included notably the protection of the major holy places of Islam worldwide), appeared to be paradoxical from a nationalist (secular) point of view. He defended his decision in terms of his moral obligation (dharma) to forge bonds of 'friendship' between Hindus and Muslims and thereby promote 'internal peace' in the country (see Brown 1992: 142). He placed the burden of winning Muslim participation in national affairs on the shoulders of Hindus, the majority community. For him, this too was an issue of moral obligation; his critics considered it a policy of appeasement. But he firmly denied that there was any element of bargaining in his politics (see Nanda 1989: 223–24). If secularism in the context of the 1920s was the cultivation of common interests, even when these interests were apparently not secular, like the Muslim demand for the protection of the *Khalifa* and the Hindu demand for the protection of the cow, then the Gandhian version of it was a morally grounded social contract of mutual benefit, which also served higher national interests through a reconciliation of the two communities. But Gandhi was not a secularist; he was very much a religious person. Given his absolute stand that good ends do not justify bad means, his approach cannot really be considered (as some critics have done) a compromise with communalism for the furtherance of national goals. That his actions contributed to the communalization of politics can only be called 'an unintended consequence'.

The third conception of secularism was characteristic of the thinking of Jawaharlal Nehru (discussed in Madan 2006: Chapters 3 and 4). It came closest to the Western conception of secularism as agnosticism and rationalism. Nehru was actually more concerned with exposing the economic foundations of Muslim separatism and the negative ideology of communalism than with the elaboration of a positive ideology of secularism. The word (or its cognates) do not occur in either his autobiography (Nehru

1936) or The Discovery of India (Nehru 1946). He did, however, write about the secular state in Glimpses of World History (Nehru 1942: 706) in the specific context of Kemalist Turkey.

These formulations, made in the context of the movement for independence rooted in the ideology of nationalism, are now of no more than historical interest. As already noted, Jinnah eventually promoted the thesis of incompatibility of cultural values and secular interests of the two major 'nations' of the subcontinent (Hindus and Muslims) that became the basis for partition, and swept away Gandhi's politico-moral endeavour to build a social contract between the religious communities. Nehru's modernist thesis about the primacy of secular interests, and the irrelevance (if not unreal character) of the religious factor in public life, to which he adhered until the very last years of the freedom movement, also fell by the way.

After independence, the focus shifted to the making of the state, and secularism, so called, derived from Western sources, but not wholly faithful to them, was presented as its ideology. The limited appeal of the liberal or Marxist notions of secularism among the people generally convinced Nehru and other leaders that in India, 'a religious country' (as he called it) (see Madan 2006: 81) secularism would have to mean, at least in the foreseeable future, that the state would honour all faiths without discrimination (sarva dharma samabhava), and that it would provide equal opportunities to all citizens. This position was, of course, in consonance with Gandhi's pluralist perspective on inter-religious understanding. It is this which has become the state ideology, and has now been for quite a while the basis of virtually all discussions of Indian secularism, whether in the public arena or the academe.

In the post-Nehruvian period, the characterization of the current pluralist ideology as 'pseudo-secularism' by the intellectuals of the Hindu right, because of its emphasis on minority rights, allegedly denies Hindus the advantage of numbers that an unqualified policy of equal treatment would give them, is a clever political ploy to further the agenda of majoritarianism. Hence, they bring forward the charge of appeasement of the minorities, which does, however, stick on some political parties. Untrustworthy minorities are a creation of diffident and mistrusting minds that pick up aberrant cases of espionage, sabotage, terrorism, etc., as evidence of a general malaise.

# III

[…] The 1950s and early 1960s, up to Nehru's passing in 1964, were the years of high hope, and even heady enthusiasm, for the votaries of the ideologies of secularism and socialism. When anxieties began to emerge, and later in the 1970s to thicken, these concerned the slow pace of secularization and the recurrence of communal conflict rather than the suitability or viability of received ideas and institutions. A widely discussed public document, voicing serious concern about 'the accelerating pace of retreat from reason' and 'the decay of rationality', was 'A statement on scientific temper', issued in 1981 by a galaxy of intellectuals (see Bhaduri et al. 1981). It called for the fostering of 'scientific temper' (the phrase was attributed to Jawaharlal Nehru) and the recognition of science and technology as 'viable instruments of social transformation'. It drew a spirited retort from the cultural psychologist Ashis Nandy in the form of a 'Counter-statement on humanistic temper' (1981), in which he focused attention on the role of science in 'the institutionalization of suffering' and promotion of modern 'superstitions' and 'authoritarianism'.

Subsequently, Nandy published a radical critique of ideological secularism, under the provocative title of an 'An anti-secularist manifesto' (1985), pointing out that the Indian national movement had stressed that religious tolerance may be derived from an attitude of respectfulness toward all religions, and did not have to depend upon the devaluation of religion. If secularism 'is not to become a reformist sect within modernity, [it] must respect and build upon the faiths and visions that have refused to adapt to the modern worldview' (ibid.: 2). It is not people of faith, Nandy added, but religious zealots and secularists who are respectively against religious tolerance and religion itself. He argued that religious violence becomes unmanageable when its foundation is secular logic and political calculation rather than orthodox religious passion. An increase in the 'pathologies of religion' was, however, only a part of the full story. There was also a turning back to traditional ('non-secular') ideas of religious tolerance (Nandy 2001: 161-88).

Nandy's assertations did not come as a surprise to those Indian scholars familiar with Western sociological literature on secularization; unfortunately not many are, even now. After all, the high noon of the secularization thesis was in the 1970s (see Glasner 1977), and the thesis about its 'self-limiting' nature was being increasingly argued in the 1980s: the process of secularization generates its own reversal through religious revival. The Iranian Revolution of 1978–79 was the best known example of this phenomenon. Nandy's polemical style and occasional carelessness (for example, the opening sentence of his 1985 article - 'Gandhi said once in a while that he was secular' [sic] - evoked hostile reactions that have been frenetic and have expanded their scope to excoriate the work of several other scholars who engaged in serious examination of the infirmities of the concept of secularism.

In [..] [a] recent essay, Nandy writes that the twilight of the certitudes of dogmatic secularism may already be upon us, that the 'concept' [ideology] 'has begun to deliver less and less' (2003: 67). He reiterates his well-known earlier position that tradition had its own ways of dealing effectively with bigotry and communal conflict, which in any case never flared into the kind of large scale riots that defaced the Indian landscape in the twentieth century. But these ways have been eroded by an aggressive secularism just as traditional systems of medicine have been displaced by modern (allopathic) medicine. Nandy thinks that secularism survives today because it serves the 'interests of the hegemonic state (cherished equally by self-styled secularists as well as those they call communalists, by the Congress no less than by the Bharatiya Janata Party) and of those who serve this state' (ibid.:  $70-75$ ). In spite of its sweeping character there is much weight in this argument.

I have followed, over the years, Nandy's writings on the theme of religious tolerance, and am in sympathy with the main thrust of his arguments. I agree that, paradoxical though it may seem, religion itself can perhaps still be a resource in the fight against religious bigotry. I also agree that modernity (including secularism), being hegemonic in character, narrows rather than enlarges the domain of significant choice-making, but it surely is not all bad. I do not also agree with all the claims Nandy makes on behalf of abstract religion as against historical religions. He tends to idealize tradition, and does not recognize the enormous philosophical doubts and practical difficulties that will attend any serious attempt at the recovery of religious tolerance in a measure that proves adequate in today's circumstances. It is not only the place of religion in public life that has been challenged, so much else also has changed, including the scale and technology of violence. Our times are not of the local riot of the *lathi* and the knife, they are of the terror symbolized by  $9/11$ .

# 92 T. N. Madan

Let me hasten to add, I am not against such critiques of modernity by intellectuals and civil society groups, and indeed support them. I only want to stress that the cultivation of the pluralist attitude, and of religious tolerance in particular, is not going to be easy. Considering, for instance, the lack of success of the three-language formula, because most Indians are reluctant to seriously learn a second Indian language, what are the chances of religious-minded people in this country taking a genuine interest in faiths other than their own? Is religious tolerance possible unless it is based on engagement and dialogue rather than indifference or avoidance? And what about the secularists? Moreover, historical memories of the pasts of India as shaped by, among other things, the century-old debate about secular and religious nationalisms, have tended to be divisive rather than cohesive.

# IV

Starting off from a different point of departure than Nandy's, I have presented a critique of ideological secularism in several essays, some of which have been collected in […] a book (Madan 1997). One of the early such writings was an address (Madan 1987, 2006: Chapter 3) in which I emphasized, first, the origin of secularism in the dialectic of Protestant Christianity and the Enlightenment and, second, its incompatibility with India's major religious traditions. Consequently, I expressed scepticism about an easy passage of the Western ideology of secularism to India, and stressed the importance of taking religion seriously. The intention was to warn against complacency in both thought and action, to sound a wakeup call. Such is the zeal of the missionaries of secularism that my essay was promptly judged to be heretical and I, along with Nandy, was called 'anti-secularist', a term that he had of course used to describe himself (Nandy 2001: 67). Thanks to the furore, [this essay, entitled] 'Secularism in its place', has enjoyed a long life!

[The critiques have been wide-ranging, but unfortunately – with only a few exceptions – have missed the mark in various ways. Generally, the strategy of critics has been (i) partial or out of context quotation, (ii) disregard of such of my arguments as clearly contradict the critics' assertions, (iii) insertion of words into my text that are not there, and (iv) attribution of motives. I have responded to some of these in previous works, attempting to clear up the misconceptions (Madan 1994 and 2003a). […]

Not long after Nandy's and my early essays, Partha Chatterjee, a political theorist, also sought to clear the conceptual confusion and carry the discussion forward. Ignoring significant differences in the scope and style of these interventions, the uncritical critics slapped the label of anti-secularists on us to reiterate their own dogmatic positions. I must briefly recall here Chatterjee's seminal contribution to the debate on secularism (1998).

## V

Partha Chatterjee's point of departure was 'the political challenge of Hindu majoritarianism', particularly I presume in the wake of the Ramjanmabhumi agitation of the late 1980s and the subsequent demolition of the Babri Masjid at Ayodhya in 1992. 'The majoritarianism of the Hindu right', he wrote perceptively, 'is perfectly at peace with the institutional procedures of the "western" or "modern state"' (Chatterjee 1998: 346). The question that arose therefore was, 'Is the defence of secularism an appropriate ground for meeting the challenge of the Hindu right? Or should it be fought where the attack is being made, i.e. should the response be a defense of the duty of the democratic state to ensure policies of religious toleration' (ibid.: 348)? The short history of the secular state in India, which derived its basic principles of liberty, equality, and neutrality from the West had revealed the anomalies into which it had run in the Indian historical and cultural setting.

The crucial issue that had emerged from the muddling was the articulation of the best means of protecting the right of a minority to live as a minority. Chatterjee's carefully argued answer was 'toleration … premised on autonomy and respect for persons' was the reasonable course to follow in the Indian situation, so that the minorities can 'resist homogenization from outside and push for democratization from inside' (ibid.: 375, 378). Chatterjee's constructive intervention in the debate did indeed seek to move 'beyond secularism' after pointing out the difficulties in which the secular state in India had become enmeshed. But almost as he had expected, Chatterjee too had to face resistance, but the wall had surely begun to show some cracks.

Writing about the same time as Chatterjee, economist Amartya Sen (1998) drew attention to a new 'intellectual scepticism', underscored the 'incompleteness of secularism, and the need to go beyond', and regretted the 'reluctance' of 'secularist intellectuals in India' to address the issues that had been presented by critics such as Varshney (1993), Nandy and myself, and later others. In a well organized but rapid review of the various critiques, he concluded that in an 'integrally pluralist society' secularism as the 'symmetric political treatment of different religious communities' (ibid.: 484) was an imperative. In fact, the pluralist social structure of the country had long had the cultural backdrop of toleration (ibid.: 478). That, such open mindedness notwithstanding, Sen chooses to call himself an 'unreformed secularist' is, I believe, a matter of personal preference. The important thing is that he emphasized the need for discussion, which is what I also have stressed all along.

Another political theorist, Rajeev Bhargava, presented a defence of secularism which included a significant clarification of the concept and a constructive critique of 'the Madan–Nandy thesis' (Bhargava 1994, 1998). I accept his contention that 'Secularism in its place' suffers from a certain conflation of two distinct notions of secularism (the ethical and the political, as he calls them). My essay did mention the Enlightenment and Indian versions of secularism, the one calling for the privatization of religion and the other advocating the state policy of acknowledgement of the presence (even legitimacy) of religion in public life and the symmetric treatment of their followers. My criticism of the former was read by many critics as my rejection of the latter. Actually, this misunderstanding should not have occurred (Bhargava did not get me right on this point) because I had explicitly written that in South Asia we need to take both religion and secularism seriously. It should hardly be necessary in our time to have to say that, as many scholars, including Durkheim and Weber among the sociologists (see Madan 2006: Chapter 1), have long acknowledged, religion and science do not pertain to the same areas of human life and, therefore, there is no essential conflict between them.

Bhargava's thesis of two secularisms is an important contribution and should be pursued seriously. According to him:

Ethical Secularism … seeks the separation of religion from politics by virtue of the contribution it makes to the realization of some ultimate ideal. The second type of secularism, I shall call, Political Secularism because, rather than contribute to the

# 94 T. N. Madan

realization of some external comprehensive set of ultimate ideals, the separation of religion from polities, on this view, merely makes for a more livable polity.

Bhargava 1998: 492

It is clear that, although narrower in scope, political secularism is no less important than ethical secularism. In its absence the larger enterprise of providing space for the pursuit of ethical secularism itself may be jeopardized. Political secularism does not challenge the legitimacy of ultimate goals, whether these be said to flow from religion or ethical secularism; it only excludes them from the political arena and the larger public sphere, or neutralizes them by treating different religions and ethical traditions symmetrically (the celebratory sarva dharma samabhava of India).

The problem that remains is how to render a society 'guided by principles of political secularism ... in the long run ... a viable community' (ibid.: 508). Obviously, Bhargava holds the view (and I agree with it) that societies do not live on stratagems alone, even though politics maybe a matter of, in F. G. Bailey's (1969) famous phrase, 'strategems and spoils'. Politics do not constitute human life in its entirety as (to borrow Weber's deeply insightful words of almost a century ago) 'every one of us who is not spiritually dead must realize'. It follows that 'an ethic of ultimate ends and an ethic of responsibility are not absolute contrasts but rather supplements' (Weber 1948: 127). Considerations of ethical secularism, or of religion, may be postponed, they must not be shelved.

As for the relationship of ethical secularism and religion, Bhargava detects the existence of 'quite irreconcilable conflict', although he says in an aside that this may not be true of all versions of ethical secularism (1998: 495). This is a complex issue with definitional and substantive dimensions, and calls for a fuller and more nuanced discussion than he provides. One would have to convincingly argue that the principle of ethical secularism (or secular humanism), such as respect for human life, liberty, and dignity, is necessarily absent from religious ethics. I am sure Bhargava does not want to take such a position, for he agrees with Nandy and me that 'the resources of religious tolerance', derived from the religious traditions (I presume), must be deployed to confront bigotry and social conservatism. Indeed, he considers such deployment, alongside 'a strong defence of minority rights' and the consolidation of 'whatever space of the common good [that] already exists' (ibid.: 542), as a kind of minimum definition of Indian secularism. I find this agreeable. I do think, however, that the issue of the determination of the minority status of community is not addressed adequately by him.

I again agree with Bhargava, political secularism is more than 'a good fallback strategy', it may be 'the only available way to prevent a community from falling apart' (ibid.: 511). And if that political community happens to be multi-religious like the Indian, the secular state may have to intervene in the areas of life of the citizenry that are seen by them to belong to the domain of religion, so long as this is done in a nondiscriminatory (which does not necessarily mean identical) manner. In the language of the Indian Constitution, for example, 'The state shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform [not *common*] civil code throughout the territory of India' (Article 44). Moreover, the state shall have to ensure 'a strong defence of minority rights' (Bhargava 1998: 542), the justification for which I have argued earlier, juxtaposing 'Hindu insensitivity to the feelings of those who consider themselves non-Hindu' with the valid 'anxieties and sensitivities of the minorities' (see Madan 2006; 92, 103).

I have discussed at some length and to historical perspective the majority-minority conundrum (ibid.: Chapter 4). It lies at the very core of the contemporary debate on Indian secularism. In Beyond Secularism, Neera Chandhoke (1999), […] another political theorist, argues rigorously for the rights of religious minorities. She writes that formal equality is the justificatory principle of Indian secularism and the foundation of the secular state's policy of non-discrimination. But formal equality in a setting of demographic and socio-economic inequalities is a recipe for the perpetuation of inequalities. The policy of sarva dharma samabhava, unexceptionable in itself, is of little use if minorities are victims of systematic neglect on the part of the state, and unable to mobilize the necessary resources to hold their own against the assertiveness of the majority. What is called for, therefore, Chandhoke maintains, is a corrective policy based on the notion of substantive equality, so that the minorities may be compensated for the conditions of political and economic deprivation that cannot reasonably be said to be their own creation, and enabled to preserve their cultural heritage. The state should therefore be required to put in place 'supportive structures', which are exclusive to the minorities, to enable them to survive without loss of cultural identity and prosper like anybody else.

'The idea of shifting ground from secularism to equality', Chandhoke observes, 'is not meant to devalue the concept', but to strengthen it and, indeed, to help it to realize the goal of equality. 'Secularism alone cannot do this; for in its present form, it has simply exhausted its potential. We will have to go beyond secularism to look for ways in which relationships between communities can be arranged in a just and fair manner' (ibid.: 95–96). The notion of tolerance too is inadequate: she develops at length a holistic framework for achieving the stated goal on the basis of interwoven patterns of democracy, equality, and rights. The last category is in some ways the most crucial and also complex as there is inherent in it a tension arising from the fact that the rights of the individual do not always coincide with that of the community. Chandhoke comes out on the side of the individual characterizing the rights of the community as 'conditional'.

The supportive structures that Chandhoke mentions were in principle written into the Constitution as, for instance, when, under Articles 29 and 30, the minorities were given the fundamental (inalienable) right to establish their own educational institutions. But more can be done as, for instance, in promoting minority languages and literatures and other artistic and creative activities. She goes quite far in developing this argument, and runs the risk of being criticized for making recommendations that would perpetuate communal identities and also not be quite workable. Thus, how could the state prevent the Parsis from dying out through intermarriage, or a tribal community from disappearing through gradual absorption into the surrounding caste-based Hindu society or willing conversion to Christianity? […]

VI

In the debate on secularism the 'academic field' reflects, I think, the 'power field', which may be characterized in terms of different sets of relations. One such characterization hinges on the interplay of demography, geography, history, and ideology.

The four-fifths majority of the Hindus (80.5 per cent) in the population of the country, and the considerable share at 13.4 per cent of the Muslims in it (between themselves the two religious 'communities' account for 94 per cent of the total, with Christians and Sikhs accounting for a little over 4 per cent in about equal measure), creates a severe lack of balance which generates fears of majoritarianism that are not wholly unrealistic. I might add in passing that among those counted at the 2001 census, less than 1 per cent were silent on the question of their religious identity. This is not merely a demographic datum; it is a sociological fact of immense political significance.

The geographical distribution of the Muslims, with only two states out of 35 having an absolute majority (Lakshadweep 95 per cent and Jammu and Kashmir 67 per cent) and three others having about one-fourth share in the population (Assam 31 per cent, West Bengal and Kerala 25 per cent each), reveals extreme spatial unevenness. Moreover, at the district and lower levels, there are many pockets of Muslim concentration (old or new) generating a sense of security among the residents, but renewed fears of Muslim separatism among the others. Parochial programmes of traditional (madrasa) education, resistance to social reform, exclusivist claims to historical monuments, etc., aggravate the situation.

History speaks in multiple voices. Hindu and Muslim readings of the past are often not the same. The demand for parity for the two communities, or for weightage, in employment and political representation in the years leading up to partition in disregard of the population statistics, but in recognition of the historical role of Muslims during the 'medieval' period, on the one hand, and negative readings of the same period by some Hindu historians and their empathetic readers, on the other, went a long way in creating both deep cleavage and distrust. Eventually the partition came to be seen on both sides as the result of a community consensus among the Muslims rather than the handiwork of a party (Muslim League) or its top leadership (see Shaikh 1989). As such, it was and is generally regarded as an achievement by Pakistani and Bangladeshi Muslims, and as the betrayal of Muslim interests by Indian Muslims (see Hasan 1997), and of larger national interests by many others. One might have thought all these differences now belonged to the past, but the unfortunate course of events that ultimately led to the demolition of the Babri Masjid and the Gujarat pogrom, from which the country has not yet recovered, revealed that this is not so. The situation has been complicated by the emergence of a militant separatist movement among Kashmiri Muslims in the late 1980s (see Madan 2006: Chapters 6 and 7), some of whom claim to be the third nation of the subcontinent, and international terrorism, and by the upsurge of Hindutva.

Finally, the ideological ambiguities of Indian secularism, which I have discussed above, have generated more heat than light. The facts of demographic and geographic distribution are virtually unalterable. But multiple readings of history and construction of accommodative, forward-looking, ideologies of nationhood and pluralism provide immense scope for human agency. Some years ago, as the movement for the European Union gathered support, one of France's leading intellectuals, Paul Ricoeur, and others like him, gave the call for overcoming the bitter legacies of the past through such means as the 'exchange of memories', 'promotion of plural readings of founding events', 'narrative hospitality', and above all, 'forgiveness' (Ricoeur 1992). If the West, which we like to call materialist, can think in such terms (Ricoeur writes of 'spiritual density'), maybe Indian intellectuals also can do the same. And maybe secularism can yet be reworked as an ideology of participatory pluralism based on the values of dignity (equality of rights) and freedom of conscience, attentive to new situational exigencies and open to radical ways of conceptualizing and coping with them. The foregoing values (and others like them), it must be remembered, can become imperatives only within the normative frameworks of particular configurations of cultural life, and the social practices of particular communities.

As for the state, its policy, as I have argued in more than one place [..], should have the twin objectives of, first, protecting everybody's freedom of conscience (as provided for in the Constitution) and, secondly, contrary to present practice, denying without exception financial assistance for the practice of religion. Let me recall, once again, Gandhi's admonition that a religion that depends on state support for its existence does not deserve to exist. Thus would the policy of uniform treatment of all religious communities (*sarva dharma samabhāva*) be truly implemented.

# Notes

- 1 This is an abridged version of the article that appeared in Ashis Nandy, *Traditions, Tyranny*, and Utopias: Essays in the Politics of Awareness (Delhi; New York: Oxford University Press, 1987).
- 2 Exactly as employers of child labourers in South Indian match and fire-works factories have recently produced elegant justifications for their employment practices in response to an indictment published by a civil rights worker. See the controversy following the publication of Kothari (1983a, 1983b).
- 3 deMause (1975) even has a name for this; he calls it the 'reversal reaction'.
- 4 For example, on the Indian tradition of child rearing see Kakar (1979).

# References

- Austin, Granville (1999) *Working a Democratic Constitution: The Indian Experience*, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Bailey, F. G. (1969) Stratagems and Spoils: A Social Anthropology of Politics, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
- Bhaduri, Amit et al. (1981) 'A statement on scientific temper', *Mainstream*, 25 July.
- Bhargava, Rajeev (1994) 'Giving secularism its due', Economic and Political Weekly, 9 July.
- (1998) 'What is secularism for?' in Rajeev Bhargava (ed.) Secularism and its Critics, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Brown, Judith (1992) *Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope*, New Haven: Yale University Press.
- Chandhoke, Neera (1999) *Beyond Secularism: The Rights of Religious Minorities*, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Chatterjee, Partha (1998) [1994] 'Secularism and toleration', in Rajeev Bhargava (ed.) Secularism and its Critics, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Chatterjee, P. C. (1995) Secular Values and Secular India, New Delhi: Manohar.
- Connolly, William (1999) *Why I am not a Secularist*, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Glasner, Peter (1977) The Sociology of Secularization: A Critique of a Concept, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
- Hasan, Mushirul (1997) Legacy of a Divided Nation: India's Muslims since Independence, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Madan, T. N. (1987) 'Secularism in its place', Journal of Asian Studies, 46(4): 747-59.
- (1993) 'Whither secularism in India?', Modern Asian Studies, 27(3): 667-97.
- (1994) 'Secularism and the intellectuals', *Economic and Political Weekly*, 19: 1995–96.
- (1997) Modern Myths, Locked Minds: Secularism and Fundamentalism in India, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- (1999) 'Perspectives on pluralism', *Seminar* 484: 18–23.
- (2003a) 'Introduction', Modern Myths, Locked Minds: Secularism and Fundamentalism in *India*, 4th impression, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.