# Chapter 7

# The Politics of Language, Religion, and Identity: Articulation of Social Difference

Language and region, each on its own, are important marks of difference, but they tend to coincide with each other in the Indian context. In fact, together have been the driving force behind the reorganization of society and polity in India in the post-independence era. Language and region, though important, however, do not tell us anything about the inner workings of the society and polity that they embody. What is even more striking is that despite differences based on language and region, societies are enormously similar in their societal characteristics—religion and caste being predominant among them. Indeed, religion and caste cut across region and language, and to that extent constitute the common threads across the diversity of languages and regions (Dumont 1998). It is this commonality that has come to be the principal unit of sociological study and discourse in India. This partly explains why language and region have not become rallying points for sociological deliberation and analysis. Analyzes of language and region are not unimportant, but these aspects were embedded in the institutions of caste and religion. It is within this commonality of Indian society that tribes in India have been posited and are constituted by sociologists and social anthropologists in India.

The commonality has been so pervasive and persuasive that even colonial ethnographers could not escape its influence when they began conceptualizing tribes in the Indian context. Thus, to colonial administrators-cum-ethnographers, tribes came to be constituted as peoples who practiced animism or tribal religion. In such a conceptualization, colonial administrators described tribes as communities located outside of historical and textual religions and their accompanying social organizations. Of course, other criteria such as primitive living conditions and living in

isolation were not left out of the analysis, but they followed more as a corollary from the first postulate.

In anthropological literature, tribes in general have been defined in terms of language, culture, territory, and government. However, these features have not been brought to the centrestage of sociological discussion. Béteille in his essay (1960) has discussed these issues and pointed to the kinds of inadequacies that these present in the Indian context. However, a new analysis based on these features as a starting point was not pursued. As stated earlier, tribes came to be conceptualized residually, in terms of the contrast with the general or universal features of Indian society rather than the particular features they embodied. This is not to say that the particular features were overlooked, but that they were not at the centrestage of the conceptualization of tribes. For people at the grassroots level, it was not so much the common features, namely caste and religion that mattered. Rather what mattered most were language and culture, now often referred to as ethnicity, and were considered the most pronounced markers of distinctiveness. In the regional context, tribes were invariably posited against the dominant regional community, which also happened to be a distinct linguistic and cultural community. This is evident from the fact that tribals are addressed by their ethnic or tribe names, which generally correspond with their distinct language or dialect. Yet this aspect of the labeling of tribals has been overlooked in the sociological discourse on tribes. In the attempt to differentiate on the basis of general or universal features (albeit in a limited sense), what has been overlooked are the differences on the basis of which people themselves differentiated between one another.

Recognition of Differences as Types: The Social Science Perspective That there is a difference between tribes and larger Indian society is widely accepted. Indeed, the difference has been taken as the starting point for understanding the growth and expansion of Indian society and the nature of social transformation in tribal society. However, sociologists and social anthropologists do not agree on the ways of conceptualizing the difference. The overwhelming majority sees the difference as one of structure. In this view, the difference between tribes and the larger Indian society is one of

type and not of kind. Thus, tribes have invariably been seen as lying outside the larger Indian society. To put it plainly, tribes were seen as not being part of civilization, and, therefore, were considered outside the structure of the larger Indian society. And yet they were seen not as isolates but as being in constant interaction with so-called civilization, at least in the case of those on the fringes of the larger Indian society. Hence, tribal societies were seen as undergoing change because of the process of acculturation resulting from their contact and interaction with larger Indian society. This process of acculturation has been viewed in terms of tribes becoming a part of larger Indian society. Thus, Kosambi (1975) refers to the growth and expansion of Indian society resulting from a fusion of elements belonging to tribes and larger Indian society. Bose (1941) points to the process of how tribes were drawn into the social organization of the production system of the larger Indian society, which invariably provided protection and security. This was how, according to him, tribes were absorbed into the larger Indian society. He called the process 'the Hindu method of tribal absorption'. Srinivas (1977) talks of the process of Sanskritization through which the lowerranking castes emulated the way of life of the higher-ranking castes. Although the concept of Sanskritization has been used mainly to understand the process of social mobility within the caste hierarchy, it has also been extended to understand the process of transformation in the context of tribal society. Sinha (1962) also points to the processes of Sanskritization and Hinduization, but, according to him, these take place invariably within the framework of state formation.

Now in this understanding of Indian society and its social transformation, tribes as entities with distinct languages, cultures, customs, traditions, and, above all, social organizations, are at least recognized. Indeed, these differences act as the points of departure in the analysis and understanding of the transformation of tribal societies. They point to how as tribes come in contact with the larger Indian society, they tend to lose their distinct identities and are absorbed into the latter. According to this line of thinking, this process of social transformation leaves tribes with no distinct identity and space of their own. If at all they have an identity, this is an identity only as a caste within the overall organizational and hierarchical structure of the caste system.

## Denial of Differences as Types: G. S. Ghurye and Right-Wing Political Thinking

According to another school of thought, the difference between tribes and non-tribes, as recognized by the scholars mentioned earlier, has been overlooked. This is not to say that the difference was not recognized. Rather, what was not recognized was the difference of a type as articulated by most social anthropologists. The origin of this line of thinking can be traced to G. S. Ghurye's writings on tribes. Ghurye in his book, *The Aborigines—"so called—and their Future*, argued in favour of describing tribals as Hindus; the expression he used was 'backward Hindus'. The book has been issued several times since it was originally published in 1943 under a new title, *The Scheduled Tribes*. Ghurye divides tribes in India into three groups: those that are properly integrated; those that are loosely integrated; and those that are not more than touched by Hinduism. Referring to the last group, he says that the only proper description of these people is that they are imperfectly integrated classes of Hindu society and that they are in reality backward Hindus. He makes this argument on the grounds that there was much similarity between Hinduism and the animistic tribal religions and that the two could not possibly be distinguished from one another. This argument was based not on fieldwork but on the observations and comments of some of the Census Commissioners between 1891 and 1931, where they expressed their dissatisfaction with the fact that tribes were described as animists. It is, of course, an open secret that Ghurye made his observation based on highly inadequate data and on the very selective use of the comments and observations of the Census Commissioners (Ghurye 1963: 1–22).

Indeed, Ghurye's conceptualization of tribes as 'backward Hindus' set the tone for a future line of thinking on tribes in India. It found a very strong resonance in the report of the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee. The committee, more popularly known as the Niyogi Committee after its chairman, was constituted to look into the activities of Christian missionaries, tracking to the conversion to Christianity by tribes in the erstwhile undivided state of Madhya Pradesh. The committee cited extracts from Ghurye's book in support of its own recommendations (Niyogi 1956: 27–29). Since then, the view that tribal people are Hindus

has become a popular refrain among right-wing Hindu social and political activists. The position is reiterated and articulated aggressively by the Sangh Parivar in its discourse on tribes in India. Indeed, this has become the pattern of thinking about tribes in India today. 1

By bringing religion to the forefront of the conception of tribe, the Sangh Parivar and other right-wing ideologues show a marked continuity with the colonial tradition. Yet there is also a departure in a certain respect from that tradition. In the colonial literature, tribes were no doubt characterized on the basis of their distinctive religion but they were also described on the basis of other criteria, especially their isolation from the larger society. According to the latter view, tribes were regarded as a society unto themselves and hence as constituting a different society vis-à-vis the larger society. What is new as far as the advocates of Hindutva are concerned is that they have begun to conceive of tribes solely in terms of religion. Yet even here the proponents of Hindutva adopt a position different from the colonial point of view.

According to the colonial tradition, tribes were classified as animists, a pointer that they belonged to a religious tradition other than that of the major religions of India. The advocates of Hindutva, however, conveniently overlook this fact and categorize them as Hindus. Indeed, they have gone even further. In keeping with their new interpretation of the concept of tribes, they have begun denying the status of tribes to those who otherwise belong to the same ethnic group, speak the same language, share the same social organization, but who practice and adhere to a tradition other than the Hindu religious tradition. Such an articulation, hitherto dormant and latent, has now come to the surface, as seen in the recent attacks on tribal Christians in India. As the media coverage of these attacks reveals, the Sangh Parivar activists have time and again forcefully and aggressively declared that tribes cease to be tribes once they became Christians. They also insist that tribes must identify themselves as Christians and not as tribes when they apply for jobs and other government benefits, on the grounds that when they become Christians, they cease to be tribes and are therefore ineligible to apply for state benefits as tribes.<sup>2</sup>

Now such a conception not only goes against the general anthropological understanding of tribe but it also militates against the basic conception and

spirit underlying the Constitution of India. Certain groups or communities have been identified as tribes not because they follow a particular religion but because they have been enumerated as scheduled tribes under the Indian Constitution. These groups or communities are Scheduled as Tribes not because they practice a particular religion but because they constitute a particular community distinct from the dominant regional community. They generally speak their own languages and have a distinct social organization and way of life, quite different from that of the dominant regional community.

Anthropological Reading Versus Politico-Administrative Practices It is a paradox that the historical and anthropological understanding of tribes dominant in social science literature has had little influence on popular thinking about tribes in the post-independence period. Indeed, political and administrative practices concerning tribes are influenced more by the general thinking than thinking stemming from social science inquiry. The dominant social science thinking on tribes in one and the dominant political and administrative thinking and practices in another. This is contrary to the way anthropology had functioned under colonialism. Anthropology had then been a tool in the pursuit of colonial interests and hence was the handmaiden of the colonial state. In the postcolonial period, however, the role of anthropological writings in shaping state policy and strategy pertaining to tribes, despite the presence in the state administration of noted anthropologists as advisors or administrators, has been almost negligible unless it has been convenient to the dominant political thinking about tribes. State policies and administrative practices pertaining to tribes in matters of language, culture, and religion are, for example, contrary to anthropological understandings of them. These issues have been taken up for discussion later.

Challenges to Social Science Concepts and Theories

The thinking enunciated by Ghurye and advocated aggressively by the Sangh Parivar has far-reaching implications for the way in which tribes have been discussed and understood in social science inquiry so far. That this will also have a significant bearing on the future course of policies and programmes on the tribal question in India can hardly be denied.

The categorization of tribes as Hindus leads to conceptual and empirical difficulties. To begin with, whether tribes are to be treated as Hindus is a debatable question. There are both similarities and differences in the religious practices of Hindus and tribes. The protagonists of Hindutva have, however, conveniently overlooked the differences. Even on the matter of similarities, it is not tenable to treat tribes as Hindus. Similarities have been drawn based on two sources of evidence. The first is the influence of Hinduism on tribes, and the second is a similarity owing to the fact that both are, to a greater or lesser extent, natural religions (Bose 1941; Elwin 1960; Ghurye 1963).<sup>3</sup> There is no doubt that there has been much give and take between the two religions. However, the influence of Hinduism on tribes, though present, is not adequate grounds for describing tribes as Hindus. The second aspect that has been alluded to is the dimension of natural religion. As a natural religion, tribal religion shares many attributes in common with Hinduism, as it does with the religious practices of tribes in the Americas and in Africa.<sup>4</sup> Yet it is doubtful whether the religious practices of tribes in the Americas or in Africa can be described as Hinduism, or whether those tribes can be alluded to as Hindus. To categorize tribes in India as Hindus, therefore, smacks of cultural and religious expansionism. Just because there are some similarities, the tribes cannot be denied their distinct identity and autonomy. It is important to note that religion does not include only practices. It also includes ideas and beliefs. However, this fact is completely glossed over even by sociologists and social anthropologists in their discussions and analyzes of tribal religions. The fact that tribes have their own world view is not granted any place or recognition in such deliberations.<sup>5</sup>

Second, if tribes are to be regarded as Hindus, then the entire historical process depicted by historians to explain the evolution and development of Indian civilization is open to contestation, and even rejection. The same would be the case with the conceptual apparatus of Hinduization, acculturation, assimilation, and absorption developed and used to understand the dynamics of Indian society. Hinduism is intricately linked with the caste system, and it is not so much against religion as against caste that the social organization of tribes has generally been posited in social science literature. This makes it impossible for a tribal to be a Hindu and a member of a tribe at the same time. One can be a Hindu only at the risk of losing one's tribal status. The two cannot go together. One can, of course, acquire a new status, but that new status is of caste rather than that of tribe. That is how social scientists, including historians and anthropologists, have viewed social change among tribes (Bose 1941; Sinha 1962, 1987; Kosambi 1975). The implication is that in social science literature, tribes and Hindus are two incompatible entities, at least as the point of departure for analysis and understanding. However, it is precisely this view that the votaries of right-wing political thinking have been questioning. Social science inquiry, on the one hand, and the dominant political thinking on the other, seem to be at loggerheads with each other in their conceptions and understandings of tribe. While this is so, it is important to note that social science literature does not deny the process of Hinduization and the eventual transformation of tribal people into Hindus. However, this process is viewed as the endpoint and not as the starting point, in Ghurye's formulation (1963).

#### Constitutional Provisions: Recognition of Differences

These difference in the conceptualization of tribes gave rise to two conflicting views regarding the policy to be adopted towards them in India. These have been popularly identified as the policies of isolation and assimilation. The former is attributed to Elwin, though many colonial administrator–ethnographers also largely shared it. The latter is associated with Ghurye. The two positions were, of course, connected with the conception of tribes that was based on, but did not exclusively draw on, that understanding. Some anthropologists shared Elwin's conception of tribes but did not necessarily adopt the same line of argument that he did. Nor did they support or share Ghurye's viewpoint. It is generally believed that the two anthropologists subsequently abandoned their respective positions and argued more in favour of integration than isolation or assimilation. It is somewhat puzzling that Ghurye should have advocated the policy of assimilation given the conception he held of tribes. To argue that tribes were Hindus, as he advocated, meant that tribes were an integral part of the larger society. In a sense, then, the advocacy of the policy of assimilation

seemed redundant. Ghurye's stance was more of a ploy to counter the position held by Elwin.

In the first few decades after independence, deliberations on the tribal question among scholars, administrators, social workers, and politicians focused on the need to facilitate the integration of tribes into the larger society. Since then, leaders, planners, academicians, and bureaucrats at the national level have been talking of the state policy concerning tribes as one of integration. It is a different matter that there exists no formal statement or document in regard to the policy to be adopted towards tribes in postindependence India.

The state's policies and attitudes towards tribes could, however, be discerned from the kinds of provisions laid down for tribes in the Indian Constitution. The special provisions for tribes include statutory recognition, proportional representation in legislatures, the right to use their own language for educational and other purposes, the right to profess their own faith or freedom of faith, and the the right to pursue development economic and social—according to their own genius. The Constitution also empowers the state to make provisions for reservation for tribes in the areas of jobs and appointments. The Constitution also empowers the state to bring areas inhabited by tribes under the Fifth or the Sixth Schedule for purposes of special treatment in respect of the administration of tribal people. In addition, the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution require that the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of society, including tribals, be especially promoted.

Now if one carefully reads the special provisions contained in the Constitution for the tribes, one finds that these provisions reveal an approach that may be described sociologically by the term 'integration'. The aim of the constitutional provisions pertaining to reservation in education, employment, political representation, and administration of tribal areas as well as the provisions laid down in the Directive Principles of State Policy is to bring the tribes closer mainstream Indian society. The Constitution also has provisions for not only protecting and safeguarding the languages, cultures, and traditions of the tribes, but also for promoting them. In this sense, the overall thrust of the Indian Constitution concerning the tribes is one of integration rather than assimilation. Although the

meaning of integration may be understood in different ways, the underlying assumption is that it provides space for diversity, unlike the policy of assimilation, which extends no such space. The conception of assimilation entails that the small minority must give up its culture in favour of the culture of the dominant majority. It is a paradox that notwithstanding the constitutional provisions, no official document exists where the policy of integration is explicitly stated or discussed. Yet integration is often cited or upheld as the tribal policy in India. Often national leaders, planners, and administrators take up the principles that Nehru had enunciated in his foreword to Elwin's book, *A Philosophy for NEFA*, 'as [a] statement of the national policy towards tribes' (Elwin 1960). It is intriguing that a national policy has to be sought in a book rather than in an official government document. The ambiguity of policy is, of course, advantageous for the state. The state can deploy it as and when it finds it convenient. Further, it is doubtful if the principles enunciated by Nehru could be taken as the national principles. After all, these principles never formed the guiding spirit of tribal development for mainland India. They were at best guidelines for development for north-eastern India, especially the Sixth Schedule areas and the erstwhile NEFA. Indeed, it would not be out of place if one were to treat Nehru's principles as nothing more than the explication of the rationale underlying the provisions in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

## Rupture Between Constitutional Provisions and Administrative and Political Practices

What is stated in the Constitution, laws, and statutes is one thing and what actually happens is quite another. Often, there are gaps between what is stipulated and promised and what is actually done. Such gaps are more pronounced in situations where the beneficiaries happen to be small, backward, inarticulate, and dominated, as has been the case with tribals in India. Their future is, therefore, contingent on the benevolence of the larger Indian society, especially its leadership. Often, however, the leadership has not shown such benevolence. After all, tribes have never been placed on the same footing or been seen in the same light as members of the larger society in terms of their access to rights, whether civil, political, or social. They

have invariably been seen as those who have had to make place for the larger society and the agencies that protect their interests, namely the state.

Despite the proclamation of lofty ideals and the adoption of various constitutional and legal provisions for the protection and welfare of tribal people, actual developments have moved in a direction opposite to that which has been promised. Indeed, the achievements of the state in this context have been more in the direction of extending civil and political rights to tribes vis-à-vis the larger society to which they have been drawn. The gains have thus been more in the direction of bringing the tribes closer to the state and to the larger Indian society through measures such as reservation in politics, education, and government employment. However, the lack of success has been most striking precisely in the domain aimed at protecting their culture and tradition, so crucial to the ethos of integration described by scholars and administrators as underlying the national tribal policy. The protection of tribal lands—their life-support system—has been poorly implemented, but at least there has been some symbolic effort in this regard both in terms of legislation and implementation (Singh 1986).

The Constitution recognizes the distinct cultural features of tribes, especially with respect to language, and talks of their protection and promotion. At the same time, as part of the process of integration into the larger Indian society and polity, tribes have been given citizenship rights. As citizens, tribes enjoy fundamental and civil rights such as the right to freedom of expression and freedom of faith. Yet the reality has often been different, for they have been denied such rights in practice, as can be seen in the area of tribal language and religion. According to Article 29 of the Constitution, a cultural or linguistic minority has a right to conserve its language and culture. The article provides protection to scheduled tribe communities to preserve their languages, dialects, and cultures. It also says that the state can not by law enforce upon them any other culture or language. Further, Article 350a provides for facilities for instruction through the mother tongue at the primary stage of education. Yet no effort whatsoever has been made so far by the central, state, and local governments to safeguard tribal languages, much less their promotion. Rather, education in all states and union territories, even at the primary level, has been imparted in the language of the dominant community. In

some states like undivided Bihar, primers were prepared in some tribal languages for pedagogical purposes in the mother tongue, but these were allowed to rot in government godowns.

One may argue that since the Constitution has given the tribes certain rights, it is left to the tribes themselves to take care of their culture. As far as the state is concerned, it will not come in the way, and it may even give assistance in the form of grants and infrastructural facilities. If this is indeed the case, it is perhaps too much to expect this from communities with scarcely any literacy. At the same time, it is worth noting that governments have been far from neutral in regard to the issue of language. The dominant regional languages have been actively supported and promoted by respective state governments. However, there is no level playing field for the promotion or protection of tribal languages despite the constitutional provisions. At the same time, the tendency in regional politics has been to give tribes the regional identity of the dominant-language-speaking people, which often weakens or threatens their cultural identity. Looking at the access to resources and facilities available to the tribes, whether in politics or employment or education, we see that they are invariably excluded on the grounds that they belong to a different ethnicity. In short, in certain contexts, or for certain purposes, the emphasis is on absorption, which entails the inclusion of the tribes into the dominant society while in others the difference is not only maintained but also covertly employed to deny, to discriminate, and even to prevent them from gaining access to wider social and cultural relationships. What obtains is a strategic deployment of difference.

The domain of religion is another area where the distinctiveness of tribes is denied by the state. As stated earlier, one of the important criteria used for the delineation of communities as tribes was religion. Generally, tribes were identified and delineated vis-à-vis larger Indian society, which practiced Hinduism primarily, but contained were adherents of other religions as well. In contrast, tribes were described as those groups that practiced animism. That is how tribes were differentiated from the rest of the population. However, those who practiced animism also represented different kinds of social organization and different languages, customs,

traditions, and social practices. These were implicit and not explicitly articulated in the delineation of tribes.

Since the inception of separate religious electorates in 1909, the politics of religion has gained momentum. Hindu organizations sought to return anyone of doubtful status to the Hindu fold. Hence, these organizations mobilized tribes to enumerate themselves as Hindus rather than as animists or as followers of tribal religion, as was the case in the earlier census enumeration. A synoptic and insightful view of this politics vis-à-vis tribes is available in Sundar's account of the Indian census (Sundar 1999: 109– 110). Notwithstanding the enumeration of tribes as animists, the classification of tribal religion continued until the 1941 census when it was replaced by the category of tribal origin. However, soon after independence, both tribal origin and tribal religion/animism as the basis of census enumeration were done away with. Instead, tribals began to be enumerated as Hindus if they were not adherents of any other major religions. Indeed, one may say that this is the post-independence method of tribal absorption. In the earlier method of tribal absorption, whether described by Bose (1941), Kosambi (1975), Sinha (1962, 1987) or even Srinivas (1977), the agency remained with the tribes, and to that extent they had the freedom to be or not be absorbed. Bose (1941) described the method of tribal absorption as the Hindu method. The Hindu method continues in the postindependence period, but with a difference. That is, in the earlier method, the absorption took place by means of economic co-operation and security, and to that extent the absorption was voluntary. However, in the postindependence period, the absorption has been through the state's administrative practices, which gives no choice to the tribals in declaring their religion (tribal religion) in terms other than those of the major religions. An element of coercion has thus been built into the absorption process.

### Articulation of Difference and Identity

The dominant line of thinking in social science inquiries recognizes difference as the hallmark of a distinct tribal identity. However, interaction with non-tribes poses the problem of coming to terms with difference. The interaction, as discussed earlier, eventually leads to the absorption of tribes

into the larger society. At the administrative level, despite the constitutional provision for the protection and promotion of tribal languages and cultures, the unstated administrative practices both at the federal and the state levels are geared to securing their absorption into the larger society. This has been most evident in practices pertaining to tribal languages and religions. The domain of languages lies under the jurisdiction of the states and hence forms part of the administrative practices of the states. The domain of religion lies under the jurisdiction of the federal administrative structure and practice. The decision to enumerate tribes as Hindus while abandoning the earlier practice of enumerating them under the 'tribal religion' category was taken at the federal administrative level. Paradoxically, the decision coincided with the adoption of a constitution that provides safeguards for tribes in regard to their language, culture, and tradition. The adoption of these administrative practices at the federal and state levels was the result of the compulsions of regional and national politics. Regional politics aimed at consolidating linguistic and cultural identity by absorbing tribes into it. National politics aimed at consolidating Hindu national political identity, which has been articulated aggressively and coercively since the 1930s.

Despite the attempts at absorption through administrative practices at both the central and state levels over the last 50 years, the attainment of constitutional objectives is still an elusive goal, and is going to become even more elusive in the future. This is evident from the kinds of assertions being made by tribes in different parts of the country today. Of course, such assertions are not uniform. They vary in extent as well as in degree. Whereas they are pronounced in some regions and among some tribes, they are markedly absent in others. However, it is noteworthy that such assertions are on the rise and are at the forefront in the political arena. They can be seen at different levels, but are most clearly discernible in those of land and forest, language and culture, and identity and autonomy. In a way, the assertions of different kinds and at many levels are the result of the increasing social consciousness of difference and identity among tribes. Interestingly, this staking out of identity is taking shape at a time when tribal society is becoming increasingly socially differentiated.

The differentiation among tribes is visible in all areas. For example, one can see it in respect of landholding, which was not the case earlier. Most

tribal societies have now become differentiated into the landless, agricultural labourers with some land, marginal farmers, small farmers, middle farmers, and even rich farmers in a limited sense (Shah 1992; Pathy 1984). In terms of occupation, they are now differentiated into cultivators, agricultural labourers, industrial workers, white-collar or salaried workers, and even shopkeepers, traders, and transporters among some tribes like the Khasis, the Jaintias, and the Mizos. Tribes have also become differentiated in terms of access to education, income or wealth and political power. Even in the areas of religion and culture, one can see much differentiation among tribes today. This differentiation is the result not so much of forces from within as it is the outcome of forces from the outside. For example, agrarian differentiation, namely differentiation in regard to access to land, is more the result of land alienation arising from fraud, deceit, indebtedness, and state-sponsored projects leading to large-scale displacement of tribes from their lands and resources (Fernandes and Paranjpye 1997; Singh 2002). Again, occupational differentiation is largely the result of the policies and practices of the state, especially reservation in the areas of education, government employment, and political representation (Xaxa 2001). However, the working of such differentiation is still limited. At the same time, even though it may be limited, social differentiation has caused considerable fragmentation in tribal society. The social solidarity that once marked tribal society has come under stress and strain because of increasing differentiation along the axes of religion, politics, economics, and society.

Despite the fragmentation of tribal society because of social differentiation, the assertion of tribal identity is on the rise. This is largely the result of the emergence of a middle class within tribal society. With the emergence of a middle class, the issue of its culture, tradition, livelihood, control over land and resources, and demand for a share in the benefits of the projects of modernity has become an integral part of identity articulation among the tribes. There is a new kind of consciousness among the tribes now, which has largely to do with the emergence of the middle class. Until recently, the emerging middle class had moved in the direction of acculturation to the larger society through such processes as Sanskritization and Hinduization, which threatened the distinctiveness of tribal society and hence its identity. However, one can now discern a reverse process, which

has more to do with alternative avenues of social mobility and social change among tribals. This is mainly because of the opening up of various opportunities resulting from the spread of modern education and the availability of modern occupations (Orans 1965).

The emergence of the middle class is largely the result of the spread of modern education among the tribes. Access to modern education has made it possible for tribal people to gain entry into government and nongovernment jobs. Tribes have been aided in this venture by the provision of reservation, which is available not only in employment but also in higher education and politics. These measures have made possible the emergence of a middle class in tribal society (Datta-Ray 1983).

The increasing assertion by tribals seen in recent years is the result of cleavages and conflicts between tribes and non-tribes, which have become sharper in the post-independence period. In the early phase of the encounter between tribes and non-tribes, conflict between them invariably assumed the form of revolts, rebellions, and insurrections. Tribal society then was relatively homogeneous and hence had a very strong sense of solidarity. Alien rule was considered illegitimate and hence deserved to be overthrown. However, with the consolidation and expansion of colonial rule in the tribal regions, the winds of change began to blow among the tribals.

As already pointed out, tribes had earlier seen only one kind of change, which was in the direction of absorption into caste society. British rule facilitated movement in this direction because of increased contact between tribes and non-tribes as a result of improved means of communication as well as the processes of urbanization and industrialization. All the same, change in this direction was limited. British rule in the tribal areas also opened up the space for change in another direction. Hence, change in the direction of caste society, and therefore Hinduism, experienced a setback, if not a total halt. This was mainly because Hindus were no longer able to provide protection to tribals, a factor that Bose (1941) considered important. Instead, it led to the domination, subjugation, oppression, and exploitation of tribes. Instead of being cooperative, Hindu practices proved to be competitive and exploitative vis-à-vis the tribals.

There were other factors that arrested this development as well. Of these, the administrative and political concessions extended by the colonial state

and the spread of modern education introduced by Christian missionaries, often with the help of the colonial state, were the most influential. While relations with Hindus deteriorated, coming under increasing strain and conflict, relations with Christian missionaries were seen as holding out greater promise. Christian missionaries addressed the problems created by the movement of the Hindu population into tribal areas. It was, therefore, hardly surprising that tribes became increasingly attracted to the Christian faith. By posing the issues of exploitation, oppression, and domination, and addressing the issues of health, disease, education, and language in concrete terms, Christian missionaries heightened the distinctive identity of the tribes as against that of the larger society, especially caste Hindus. It is, therefore, not surprising that Christian missionaries have been accused of depriving the aborigines of their Hindu heritage and of obstructing the natural inclination of the tribes towards Hinduism.

The problems faced by tribes during the colonial period—in the form of loss of control over land and other resources because of alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes and displacement caused by state-sponsored development projects—have continued unabated in the post-independence period. Tribes have been confronted with other problems as well. While post-independence India adopted well-meaning constitutional and legal provisions for their protection, welfare, and development, actual practices have belied this hope. Tribal people have been experiencing deprivation, oppression, exploitation, and discrimination in almost all aspects of life on a daily basis. The government response to the problems of tribes has been lukewarm, indifferent, and often hostile. This experience has been felt most acutely by the emerging middle class. That explains why there has been increasing identity assertion among tribes that now have a sizeable middle class.

The new social mobilization has been prompted by the discriminatory treatment meted out to tribes by the larger population or by the state. Hence, there has been an increasing assertion for securing rights and control over land and other resources in the form of mobilization against alienation of land from tribes to non-tribes and against state-sponsored development projects leading to displacement. What we have been witnessing is the demand for greater political power and autonomy, which has, more often

than not, moved in the direction of a demand for a separate state, either within the Indian Union or outside it. This articulation of identity has not been confined to movements for autonomy. It is also seen in the demand for the promotion and revitalization of tribal languages, including the creation of primers and other literature and for their introduction in schools. Related to this is the demand for the development of a script, as in the case of the Santhals and the Tripuri-speaking tribes of Tripura. The choosing of a script from among those with which the tribal people are familiar also forms a part of identity articulation, as in the case of the Bodos of Assam.<sup>6</sup> Identity articulation for greater political power has more to do with the drawing of distinctions between tribes and non-tribes with a view to gaining economic and political power, however limited. The movement connected with language and culture, on the other hand, is primarily concerned with enriching the content of the identity created in the process of interaction between tribes and non-tribes.

The articulation of identity is most pronounced among tribes where an educated middle class has emerged. The larger the educated middle class, the greater is the identity articulation among them. However, the consciousness evident in such identity articulation is not the consciousness of tribe as a category but consciousness of being a people different from others, and especially of being distinct from the dominant regional community. The identity manifested in this articulation is one of being either a Santhal or a Khasi or a Bodo, people generally described as tribes. Often the articulation of such an identity has taken on a more generic name, such as Naga, Kuki, and adivasi. The articulation of the former has been most evident in the domain of language and culture. The articulation of the latter has been most pronounced in the domain of politics.

### Conclusions

Despite the constitutional provisions aimed at securing the development of the tribes without causing violence to their languages and cultures, the reality has been quite the contrary. There have been attempts at an aggressive incorporation of tribes into the language and religion of the dominant regional community. Yet, in terms of access to the fruits of development, such incorporation has been, on the whole, avoided and even resisted. The rights of tribes over land, forests, and other resources have been usurped without their receiving any tangible benefits in return. This constitutes the structural setting for the emergence of identity politics among tribes in India.

Identity politics among tribes has generally been described as the politics of tribal identity. In my view, such a description is misleading. Apparently, there is a rupture between the way in which tribal social consciousness is represented by the tribal people themselves and the way in which it is represented by scholars, administrators, and others. The latter invariably regard tribal identity as a means of describing these people. However, such an articulation or expression of identity is not coterminous with the consciousness of tribals. Tribals often have no idea of the category of scheduled tribe or its Hindi or regional-language counterparts. Such an articulation is a part of legal and administrative practices, and constitutes only a small part of the general consciousness of tribals. The articulation of a tribal identity is related primarily to the state and its resources or to the benefits that it may make available. Hence, tribal identity emerges more in the context of the relations of tribal peoples with the state, the facility of reservation, and other forms of affirmative action. In the domain of social and cultural life, tribal identity does not enter as part of tribal consciousness. Hence, tribal consciousness is more a middle-class consciousness than the consciousness of tribals at large.

#### References

Béteille, André . 1960. 'The Definition of Tribe.' *Seminar* 14.

Bose, N. K. 1941. 'The Hindu Method of Tribal Absorption', *Science and Culture* 7: 188*–*94.

- Datta-Ray, B. (ed.). 1983. *The Emergence and Role of Middle Class in North-East India*. Delhi: Uppal Publishing House.
- Dumont, Louis. 1998. *Homo Hierarchicus*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Elwin, Verrier. 1960. *A Philosophy for NEFA*. Shillong.

- Fernandes, Walter and Vijay Paranjpye (eds.). 1997. *Rehabilitation Policy and Law in India: A Right to Livelihood*. New Delhi: Indian Social Institute.
- Ghurye, G. S. 1963. *The Scheduled Tribes*. Bombay: Popular Prakashan.
- Kosambi, D. D. 1975. *The Culture and Civilization of Ancient India in Historical Outline*. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
- Niyogi, M. B. 1956. *Report of the Christian Missionary Activities Enquiry Committee*. *Madhya Pradesh, Volume 1*. Nagpur: Government Printing, Madhya Pradesh.