21

# **Trade Union Movements**

Sharit K. Bhowmik

rade unions are unique organizations in many ways. They are formed mainly for protecting the interests of workers or employees against those who would harm them. These could be the employers, the state or any agency identified as such. In this sense, trade unions could be considered as opposition organizations. Most trade unions broadly centre on this basic objective. Secondly, trade unions are a product of industrialization. They were born out of the industrial revolution and, as such, had no connections with any pre-industrial form of social organization. Thirdly, the most important features of trade unions are that theory did not play bigger role in their initial formation. In other words, there are no theoretical roots to the origins of trade unions. Their growth was a spontaneous, healthy process which grew out of the needs of common people. The result is not a neat and tidy pattern, but something which is complex and overlapping. Hence, in order to understand the nature of trade unions and has to go back to their origins. In this chapter, we will deal with the features of trade unions in India, and in doing so we will begin with the origin and growth of trade unions and then discuss the problems of trade unionism in the country.

Trade unions had their origins in England and they were a result of the industrial revolution. In the early stages, they were formed to regulate competition among the workers. The industrial revolution had impoverished the British peasantry and artisans who were then forced to flock to the industrial townships in different parts of England. These people provided cheap labour for the factory owners. The factories were damp, dark unhealthy places, and the hours of work were long and the work was tedious. The wages which the workers get were very low and in most cases the entire family had to work to make both ends meet. Since the number of unemployed was large, there was constant competition between low-paid workers and job seekers. If a worker was unwilling to work at a particular wage the employer could find several others who would be willing to work for even less. This competition for jobs depressed the wage-rates and provided total power to the employers.<sup>1</sup> Friedrich Engels wrote in 1848 that this was the worst side of the present state of things in its effects upon the workers, the sharpest weapon against the proletariat in the hands of the bourgeoisie.<sup>2</sup>

Workers tried to overcome this competition by forming associations. They did so in the face of stiff opposition from the employers. In fact, trade unions were a result of these spontaneous attempts of workers to end competition.

At first, these associations carried out their activities underground as legal status was not given to them. They were able to organize a few strikes. In most cases, violent outbursts against intolerable conditions were observed. However, their growth was inhibited because of secrecy. It was only in 1824 when the British parliament granted the right to free association that trade unions could finally take off. As a result, "these combinations were soon spread all over England and attained great power."<sup>3</sup>

By and large, unity achieved through trade unions gave the workers a feeling of confidence resulting from collective action. It also provided better awareness. Trade unions strove to remove competition among the workers and changed the conflict between individuals within the class to the conflict between classes. Indeed, one of the most important contributions of trade unions has been that they made workers realize that the supremacy of their employers lay in the disunity of the workers.

#### **Origins of Trade Unions in India**

Factory production started in India in the early 1860s. During that time, the objective was to export the manufactured goods to markets in Britain. To facilitate export, factories were set up in the port towns of Calcutta and Bombay. Cotton-textile mills were set up in Bombay and jute mills in Calcutta. Later, factories were set up in Madras too. One of the reasons for the setting up of industries was that costs of production were much lower in India as labour was available at very cheap rate. A few decades earlier, in 1839, tea plantations were encouraged in Assam. The workers, in these tea gardens, were tribal people from Central India who had been brought to the plantations as indentured labour. The tea produced in these gardens was again mainly for consumption in Britain.

The existence of a large pool of cheap labour in India was mainly due to two reasons. First, the indigenous economy had been devastated with the introduction of colonial rule by the East India Company a hundred years earlier. During this period, the local crafts were replaced by cheaper imports of factory produced goods from England. This led to the complete rout of artisans in the country. The agriculturists, too, were no better of as in many parts of the country they were forced to cultivate cash-crops which were needed as raw materials for the factories in England, and give up cultivating food crops. Alongside, there was higher taxation on the cultivators through the new types of land-settlement and land-revenue imposed by the colonial rulers. As a result, there was a general impoverishment of the rural population. These people served as pools of cheap labour when the factories were set up in India.

The other reason for cheap labour was that at the initial stages of industrialization the colonial government, by any means, did not try to regulate working conditions or wages. The workers were unorganized and the industrialists were able to make them work long hours at low wages. Women and children were worst affected in this system as their wages were even lower.

The miserable plight of the textile-workers, especially the children working in the mills, in Bombay, caused concern among some of the social workers there. One of them was S.S. Bengalee, a philanthropist and social reformer. He tried to convince the government to pass some regulations protecting children in the factories. He even drafted a bill on this subject and sought the help of his friends in England to influence the government to pass it. Meanwhile, the mill-owners in Lancashire were unhappy over the state of affairs, because they faced competition from the cheaper Indian goods. They, too, tried to influence the government to impose regulations on the conditions of labour in India. Their move was not out of concern for the conditions of the Indian factory workers, but more, because such regulations would lead to increase in cost of production of the Indian goods.

These pressures led the government to pass the first Factories Act in 1881. This Act reduced the working time of child labourers to nine hours a day. Ten years later, in 1891, the second Factories Act was passed which reduced working time of children to seven hours and of women to eleven hours a day. A half hour recess was allowed for workers to take their meals. At the same time, there was no move to regulate the working hours of males. The employers accepted the provisions of the Act, but since there were no regulations on wages, they resorted to paying women and children less for the reduced time. This, in fact, increased the burden on the maleworkers as they had to work longer hours to make up for the loss in the family income. Working hours of male-workers were regulated only after the third Factories Act was passed in 1911. This Act laid down that their working hours should not exceed twelve hours in a day.

During this period, there was uneven development of industries since they were mainly set up for export purpose. Industries were largely concentrated in the three port-towns and they manufactured mainly cotton-textiles and jute. The Census of 1911 showed that there were 524,000 persons employed in factories and plantations in India. Of these, around 400,000 were in tea plantations and jute mills. The total number of workers in the secondary and tertiary sectors totaled around 800,000.

Though trade unions had not yet emerged on the industrial scene, the workers did not always accept their fate meekly. There were frequent protests and strikes to highlight their miserable conditions. But these actions were more spontaneous in nature. Some leaders of the nationalist movement, too, tried to draw the workers into the mainstream protest against the British rule. The most striking manifestation of this was observed in 1906 when Lokmanya Bal Gangadhar Tilak, a nationalist leader and a long-time friend of the textile-workers, was arrested by the colonial government. The mill-workers of Bombay came out on the streets to protest and suspended work for six days.

In spite of the growing discontent among the workers and their frequent outbursts, they were yet to unionize themselves. There were attempts to form organizations among the workers, especially in Bombay, by social reformers, but these were more in the nature of mutual aid societies. The most prominent of these was the Bombay Millhands Association formed by N.M. Lokhandey, the editor of a Marathi newspaper in Bombay. Lokhandey had been working among mill-workers and he tried to focus on their grievances. This association was formed in 1980 and Lokhandey was made a member of the second Factories Commission. It was on the recommendation of this commission that the second Factories Act was passed in 1891.

Industries in India expanded at a rapid rate during the First World War (1914-18) which led to the expansion of the working class. Moreover, this gave an opportunity for the existing factory-workers to be promoted to the ranks of skilled workers and supervisors, positions which formerly were held by Europeans.<sup>4</sup> Hence, changes occurred in the composition of the working class, which was mainly composed of unskilled workers. The inclusion of skilled and literate workers provided conditions for initiating the trade union movement.

#### **Beginnings of Trade Unions in India**

Though the war had led to expansion of industries in India; it also brought a lot of misery for the poor. There were food-scarcity and inflation. This condition mainly impacted on the working class as wages remained low. This led to large-scale labour unrest in all the towns where industries existed. The workers in Bombay and Calcutta were, especially extremists while expressing their grievances. The textile-mills of Bombay witnessed a wave of strikes. In the months of September and October in 1917 alone, more than thirty strikes were called. Strikes became even more frequent in 1919. The workers in Calcutta went on a long strike in protest against reduced wages. In Madras, the workers of Buchingham and Carnatic Mills (Binnys) struck work for increased wages. Textile-workers in Ahmedabad struck work and demanded a fifty per cent wage increase. Their movement resulted in Mahatma Gandhi's involvement in the labour movement and the formation of the Textile Labour Association which was also known as Majoor Mahajan. These strikes were all centred on the demand for increased wages. There was a regular pattern in these strikes. Workers in one factory would demand increase in wages, and if this was granted workers in other factories in the vicinity would put up similar demands and go on strike if the management refused to concede. Workers followed this trend because by that time there was no trade union movement which would have coordinated their demands on a common united platform.

The year 1918 witnessed the birth of the first trade union. The Madras Labour Union was formed in April and was led by B.P. Wadia, a social worker, who had been organizing the workers of Buchingham and Caranatic Mills. It is necessary to make a clarification here. Some researchers on the labour movement mentioned N.M. Lokhandey as the founder of the trade union movement as he had established the Bombay Millhands Association in 1890. However, this association and the similar ones set up after it were basically mutual aid societies. They had been formed by philanthropists and attempted to aid the poverty-stricken mill-workers. They had no memberships nor did they collect any subscriptions from the workers. Moreover, they did not organize the workers to protest against their employers. Instead, these philanthropists tried to use their personal influence to convince the government of the need for legislation to protect the workers. This is based on the views of two labour historians, namely, Revri and Sen. The Madras Labour Union was different even though its founder, B.P. Wadia, was a philanthropist. It had an elected leadership, it maintained records of its members and collected subscriptions from them. It also tried to seek recognition from the managements as the bargaining agent of the workers (this was never given to them though).

During the same year, but a few months later, Mahatma Gandhi founded the Majoor Mahajan in Ahmedabad. This union, which is till now the largest union of textile-workers in that city, had several unique features. Since August 1917, the mill owners of the city were paying a bonus of about 70 per cent of wages to compensate for the rising costs. In January 1918, they stopped the bonus and this created bitterness among the workers. They demanded that they be given at least 50 per cent dearness allowance as compensation and when the employers refused they struck work. The workers sought Gandhiji's intervention. He agreed to negotiate with the millowners provided the workers scaled down their demand to 35 per cent. The millowners were willing to pay only 20 per cent and they declared a lock-out when the workers refused to accept this. Gandhiji then went on a fast to pressurize the owners. Finally, the owners agreed to arbitration and in the end the workers received 27.5 per cent. After this incident, Gandhiji decided to form the 'Majoor Mahajan' which was based on his ideals of trusteeship. The union sought to protect the interests of labour through cooperation rather than confrontation with the employers. It enlisted the support of the employers and other wealthy people in running welfare and educational programmes for the workers. In doing so, it developed close links with the employers and at times even supported them in the Municipal elections.<sup>5</sup> This union had little or no influence outside the textile-workers in Ahmedabad, and it did not seek affiliation with any trade union federation.

In 1919, the International Labour Organization (ILO) was formed. Britain and its colonies became its members. In order to have a labour representative in the ILO, it was necessary to have a national centre of trade unions. At the same time, some of the nationalist leaders including Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Lala Lajpat Rai had been active among workers and peasants in trying to draw them into the anti-colonial struggle. These leaders evolved a plan for starting a national trade union centre. In October 1920, the All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) was formed in Bombay. Tilak, one of its architects, had unfortunately, died only a few months earlier. The first president of the AITUC was Lala Lajpat Rai. In his presidential address, he emphasized three basic ideals of the working class movements, i.e., class consciousness, international proletarian outlook, and the place of nationalism in the class outlook.<sup>6</sup> However, a section of the Congress did not seem favourable to the formation of the AITUC. This was because there were several industrialists in the movement who felt that though the organization would be a front against colonialism, it could also challenge the interests of capital. Lala Lajpat Rai, a few months after his election, resigned from the post of President of the AITUC. It was believed that he was pressurized to resign.

After the AITUC was formed, the colonial government became more cautious in dealing with labour. It attempted to grant workers some concessions in order to contain unrest. In 1922, it passed the fourth Factories Act which reduced the working day to 10 hours and in 1926 the Trade Unions Act was passed. This Act provided for registration of trade unions and proposed some regulations. By the mid-1920s, the AlTUC had nearly 200 unions affiliated to and its membership stood at around 250,000.

#### **Splits in the Movement**

As the AITUC was a broad-based organization involving diverse ideologies, it soon started being pulled apart by the different streams. The two main ideological groups in the organization were the communists led by S.A. Dange and M.N. Roy and the moderates, like N.M. Joshi and V.V. Giri. There were differences over the objectives of the AITUC. The moderates were eager to use the organization to get representation at the ILO (N.M. Joshi had been appointed by the government as the labour representative at the ILO). While the communists were interested in focusing on the problems of the working class, the moderates also had no objection in cooperating with any government body to solve problems of the labour class. There was another group, namely, the nationalists. They were in favour of the AITUC opposing the colonial government. Initially, there were several areas of agreement between the nationalists and the communists and the two groups were collectively known as the Left. In 1929, the colonial government appointed the Royal Commission on Labour in India under the chairmanship of Lord Whitley. The moderates were in favour of supporting this commission, whereas the communists and the nationalist leaders in the AITUC wanted to boycott it. The latter managed to pass a resolution to this effect upon which the moderate leaders in the Executive Council including V.V. Giri, N.M. Joshi, Dewan Chamanlal, and others resigned and decided to form a rival organization. Jawaharlal Nehru, who was then president of the AITUC, made the following comment in this autobiography: "The leftwing was in favour of a boycott of the Commission, the right-wing in favour of co-operation, and the personal factor came in, as some of the rightwing leaders were offered membership of the Commission. My sympathies were with the left. It seemed absurd to co-operate with official commissions when we are carrying on, or going to carryon, a direct action struggle."<sup>7</sup>

Apart from seeking representation in the Royal Commission on Labour (N.M. Joshi and Dewan Chamanlal were appointed members), there were other issues of affiliation which led to the split. The Left was keen to affiliate the AITUC to the Pan-Pacific Trade Union Centre and to the League Against Imperialism (Nehru was an active member of the League). The moderates on the other hand wanted to participate in the ILO and develop close links with the British Trade Union Congress. Since these issues could not be resolved the moderates broke away and formed the Indian Trade Union Federations in 1930 and took with them around 50 of the affiliated unions. V.V. Giri was the leader of this federation. In 1931, another split took place in the AITUC. This time the split happened because of differences between the communists and the nationalists. The Congress was on the verge of launching the civil disobedience movement and the nationalist leaders in the AITUC wanted to involve it in the movement. The communists opposed this move because they believed that the nationalist movement was controlled by the bourgeoisie, hence the working class should retain its distinct identity by distancing itself from the movement. Thus, in the Calcutta session of the AITUC in 1931, which was held under the Presidentship of Subhash Chandra Bose, the communists split to form the Red Trade Union Congress.

The splits in the trade union movement affected it badly. There was a sharp fall in membership and the working-class which was reeling under the effects of the Great Depression of 1930 were the worst sufferers. The communists realized their mistake and rejoined the AITUC in 1934. The Second World War had begun in 1939 and India was unilaterally pulled into the war. The government promulgated the Defence of India Rules which prevented strikes or any form of militant trade union activity. At the same time, as in the First World War, there were shortages of essential commodities, rise in prices, and a freeze on wages. In 1940, the leaders of the Indian Trade Union Federation too decided that the workers had paid a heavy price for the splits and they decided to merge their organization to the AITUC. This unity continued till the dawn of independence when the trade union started splitting even further.

# **The Post-Independence Period**

During the last few years of British rule several Congress leaders of the AITUC were imprisoned and the communists managed to take complete control of the organization. Unable to gain a foothold in the organization after their release from jail these leaders decided to form another trade union centre. Thus, the Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) was formed in May 1947, a few months before independence. After independence when the Congress came to rule the country the INTUC became the most important federation because of government backing. Its ideology was close to the Gandhian view of co-operation rather than confrontation with the employers and it was opposed to any alliance with the communistled AITUC. The AITUC had since then become the trade union front of the communists while the INTUC was identified as a Congress front. Since this time onwards the trade union movement has been increasingly split on the lines of the political parties. It seems the rule now that a political party must also have its trade union front. Thus, when political parties split their trade union fronts also split.

In 1948, the Congress Socialists who had remained with the AITUC decided to form a new political party called 'the Praja Socialist Party'. Subsequently, their groups in the AITUC broke away to form the Hind Mazdoor Panchayat with the hope that it would be able to draw the non-communist and non-Congress trade unions into its fold. This was partly realized when the Royist, Indian Federation of Labour merged with it to form the Hind Mazdoor Sabha (HMS). In 1949, however, the members of the Revolutionary Socialist Party (a Marxist group with influence mainly in West Bengal) decided to break away from the HMS, because it was under the control of the socialists. They formed their own federation called 'the United Trade Union Congress (UTUC)'. In 1952, the Bharatiya Jan Sangh, a political party having a Hindu fundamentalist background, was formed and in 1955. It initiated another trade union centre known as the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh. In 1965, another socialist party called 'the Samyukta Socialist Party' was formed and its most important trade union leader, George Fernandes, broke away from the HMS to form another Hind Mazdoor Panchayat. However, till 1970 the three major national centres in the country were the INTUC, the AITUC, and the HMS.

The split in the communist party into the Communist Party of India and the CPI (Marxist) split the AITUC in 1970. The CPI(M) formed in that year the Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) and took away a large section of unions with it. The UTUC, too, was split on political lines between the RSP and the Socialist Unity Centre of India.

We can see from the above that the trade union movement became increasingly split on the lines of political parties since the country became free. Another feature developed in the late 1960s, namely,unions of regional parties. The DMK in Tamil Nadu started its trade union centre and later when the AIADMK split from it, they started their own trade union wing. The year 1967 saw the birth of the Shiv Sena in Bombay. In its early phase the Sena was a pro-Maharashtrian and anti-South Indian front. It soon set up its own labour wing called 'Bharatiya Kamgar Sena'. It was widely believed then that the Shiv Sena had the backing of the big industrial houses in the Bombay-Pune belt to combat the strong influence of the communists and socialists in the labour unions. It managed to do this fairly successfully and by the mid-1970s, its trade union wing became the largest union in Bombay. The challenge to the Sena's supremacy came in 1977 from a fiery INTUC leader, Dr. Datta Samant.

Though a medical doctor by profession, Samant, got involved in trade union activities during the late 1960s when he started organizing the lowpaid stone-quarry workers in the north-eastern part of Bombay. Later, he was approached by workers from other industries in that area for help in forming unions. In doing so, Samant came in conflict with the Shiv Sena which was by then controlling the labour belt. He encouraged the workers to oppose the Sena's domination in a militant manner. This led to several clashes between the supporters of the Senaand Samant, and in most cases Samant emerged victorious. In 1972, Samant was elected as an MLA from Kurla on a Congress ticket. When the emergency was declared in mid-1975, Samant refused to tone down his militant approach and he encouraged his union members to strike work whenever necessary. The government arrested him and jailed him till the emergency was lifted in 1977. Samant was the only Congress MLA in the country to have been imprisoned. After his release, his popularity increased even further. By the end of the 1970s, he became the most important trade union leader in the Bombay-Pune industrial belt. He left the Congress and the INTUC in 1978 and became an independent union leader, and thus setting a new trend in the trade union movement- that of independent unions.

#### **Independent Unions**

In our discussion so far, we have seen that the trade union movement in India, especially after independence, has had strong links with political parties. These parties have formed their own trade union federations, which was led to the proliferation of trade unions. This has led to frequent interunion rivalries with the result conflict between unions are at times stronger than conflicts between unions and the employers. This trend has to a large extent harmed the interests of the working class.

At the same time there has been a trend, since the 1960s of independent unions. These are unions which are not directly affiliated to a federation or to any political party. One of the earliest major unions of this type is the Engineering Mazdoor Sabha of Bombay. This union is led by a veteran trade union leader, R.J. Mehta. It is one of the largest unions in the metropolitan covering workers in the engineering, chemicals, printing, and allied industries. Dr. Datta Samant's activities have been discussed above. He started a number of unions covering different industries. These are, Association of Engineering Workers, Mumbai General Kamgar Union, Maharashtra Girni Kamgar Union, among others. The last named union (Maharashtra Mill Workers Union) was formed in 1981. It received unprecedented support of the textile-mill workers of Bombay. In the same year, in October, the union led the largest and longest strike of textile workers in the city. The strike was a massive failure and half the mill workers lost their jobs. The total workforce before the strike was 250,000. After the strike, that lasted 18 months, the workforce was reduced to 125,000. Though Samant's popularity as a trade leader has reduced considerably, he continued to be a formidable force in the trade union movement in Bombay till he was murdered in 1996.

There were two independent union leaders who came into prominence during the late 1970s. These were Shankar Guha Neogi who organized the contract workers in the iron-ore mines of Dalli Rajhara near Bhilai in Madhya Pradesh into a formidable union, and A.K. Roy who organized the coal-mine workers in the Dhanbad-Jharia belt of Bihar. The workers, in both these cases, joined the unions because they felt that the traditional trade union federations operating in the areas were not sensitive to their problems. In Dalli Rajhara, the trade union federations (INTUC and AITUC) were more concerned with the problems of the workers in the organized sector, namely, the permanent and better-paid workers of the Bhilai Steel Plant. The problems of casual workers were largely ignored. Neogy's union, therefore, got overwhelming support from these workers and other workers employed in small and medium-scale industries in the region. Unfortunately, Neogy fell victim to his success. He was brutally murdered in 1990 in Bhilai. It is suspected that some of the industrialists were responsible.

A.K. Roy's union has a similar support-base, namely, the contract and casual labour in coal-mines. In addition, a large number of local tribal mineworkers have lent him support as these people too have been bypassed by the trade union federations operating there.

In Ahmedabad, Ela Bhat, a leader in the Majoor Mahajan broke away to form the Self-Employed Women's Association (SEWA) when she found that the union was not sensitive to the problem of women workers in the unorganized sector. This union became independent in 1982. Within a short span it emerged as the largest trade union in Gujarat. By 2004, its membership grew to over 700,000 and was spread in four states, Gujarat, M.P., Kerala and Bihar.

There are several other cases of independent unions in different parts of the country. In almost all cases, they have come up, namely, because the existing trade union federations have been unable to meet the expectations of the workers. The concerned workers have then tried to seek alternatives for improving their bargaining conditions with their employers. The main feature of these unions is that they are more often than not centred on a particular leader. This can be a problem because, in most cases, the policies of the union are determined by the leader alone. Nonetheless, the emergence of these unions expose the weakness of the traditional trade union federations.

There are also other types of independent unions which are different from the ones discussed here. In traditional industries, such as textiles, jute, mines, and plantations, we find trade union organizations revolved around industries rather than enterprises. In modern industries, with better educated and skilled workers, we find a tendency of trade unions based on enterprises. One can find this trend in the enterprises employing skilled and better paid workers in cities, like Bombay, Bangalore, Hyderabad, and Pune. In most cases, these enterprises have internal unions, the leadership of which is elected by the workers. In many cases these unions are not affiliated to any central federation though individuals, in the leadership, may have personal loyalties to them. The need for a single internal union comes up precisely because workers in these enterprises want to have a single bargaining agency.

Since the problems of the trade union movement in India seems to be linked to the problem of political parties, let us briefly discuss the relationship between unions and politics.

# **Trade Unions and Politics**

The proliferation of trade unions on political lines is believed to have harmed the interests of the working class. The logic of a trade union is based on the dictum, 'in unity lies strength'. Workers join a trade union mainly because they realize that individually they are helpless. In the early stages of industrialization we have seen that workers formed associations because they were unable to protect their interests in any other manner. Therefore, this basis of unity and strength can be weakened if workers are fragmented into a number of unions based on diverse or conflicting ideologies. Moreover, involvement of trade unions in politics can divert workers to issues which are not immediate to the problems relating to their employment and working conditions. It can, therefore, be argued that since the basic objectives of trade unions is to protect the interests of the workers vis-a-vis their employers, politics can cause more harm than good. However, before we come to any conclusion let us examine whether the delinking of trade union from politics is possible, and if so, desirable.

First of all, in civil society it is difficult for any person or group to remain aloof from politics. The state influences every aspect of our lives. It passes laws to regulate behaviour between individuals and between groups. The entire framework for industrial relations is made legal through the laws passed by the state. Therefore, when trade unions want to defend the rights of workers they have to not only protect them against their employers, but also try to influence the state to pass laws for protection. In this respect, the involvement of trade unions in politics is not only desirable, but also necessary.

If we look at the trade union movement all over the world, and especially in the developed countries, we will find that it has strong links with politics and political parties. Let us begin with Britain, where trade unions helped forming the Labour Party after they realized that their interests could be served only if they had their own political party. It began at the turn of the century with the famous Taff Vale case. The workers of Taff Vale Rail Company went on strike when some of their basic demands were not met. The company then sued the trade union for breach of employment contract. In 1901, when the case went to the House of Lords, it passed a judgement upholding the management's claim. This decision rendered almost any form of union action illegal. Trade unions then realized that without political intervention their actions would be fruitless. They, therefore, started moving politically and, finally, in 1906 the government passed an Act which immunized trade unions from charges of conspiracy or breach of contract.

In other countries, too, the links between trade unions and political parties are explicit. In France the largest trade union federation (CGT) has strong links with the Communist Party while another federation, CFDT, is linked with the Socialist Party. Similarly, in Germany and Italy trade union federations are supporters of either the Communist or Social Democratic parties. In fact, in most countries in Western Europe which have communist parties and socialist or social democratic parties at least two trade union federations exist. Invariably, one will support the communists, and the other, the socialists. In most cases, the unions help mobilize electoral support for the party concerned and also make contributions to the party funds.

We can, hence, see that links between hade unions and political parties are not unique to India alone. In fact, the USA and Japan could be perhaps the only two countries where unions do not have direct links with political parties. Both countries have only single trade union federations-AFL-CIO in the USA and SOHOYO in Japan. Even so, these federations are not totally apolitical as they lend support to some candidates or political parties during the elections. The AFL-CIO has supported some of the candidates of the Democratic Party in the presidential elections and the SOHOYO has given support to the communist, socialist and liberal candidates.

The influence of trade unions on political parties can have positive features for the working class. One can observe this in some of the European countries which have socialist governments backed by the unions. When these parties are voted to power, they pass legislation granting greater security to workers. In Britain, when the Labour Party was ruling in the 1970s, it passed a number of legislations relating to security of employment, unemployment insurance, and regulations concerning termination of employment. Most of these laws were later rescinded by the Tories after they came into power. Similar legislations were passed by socialist or social democrat governments in Italy, France, West Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Finland. In addition, in France the government of the Socialist Party has included the right to strike in the country's constitution. In Norway, the government passed a law which makes it mandatory for employers to consult the unions before introducing labour saving technology. On the other hand, in the USA, though the workers are supposed to be the highest paid in the world, they do not have the same security of employment as in the above mentioned European countries. There are no laws guaranteeing permanency of employment even if a worker has put in several years of service. A worker's job guarantee depends on the willingness of his employee or the ability of his union to protect him. This is in spite of there being a single unified trade union federation. This is mainly because the labour movement there has not been able to intervene in politics effectively.

We can, therefore, see that the link between trade unions and political parties are not necessarily detrimental to the interests of workers. However, we have a somewhat different situation in India. Here fragmentation of unions takes place on the basis of narrow party lines. The unions receive divided when political parties split resulting in a large number of unions competing for support from the same group of members. In the countries as mentioned above, political parties do not split as easily as in India. Moreover, even if they do split, the union does not follow suit. For example, the Labour Party in Britain split in the late 1970s when a group broke away to form the Social Democratic Party (SOP). Some of the constituent unions of the Trade Unions Congress supported the SOP, but they did not break away to form another federation.

Almost all the major unions in India have admitted at some point of time that the prevalent form of multi-unionism is the major drawback of the trade union movement. Yet nothing much has been done by them to rectify the situation. A recent example will illustrate the gap between slogans for unity and practice. In its general conference of 1989, the AITUC leadership gave a call for merger of all trade union federations (except the BMS) into a single federation. This they maintained could be possible only if the federations delinked themselves from their parent political parties. To prove their seriousness, the president and the general secretary of the AITUC resigned since they were secretariat member and general secretary of the Communist Party of India. Though most of the trade union federations appreciated AITUC's stand, but only one of them came forward to accept the offer. This was the HMS which, a year earlier, had made a similar appeal. It was then decided by the leadership of the two organizations that they would merge into a single centre. Soon after this, talks between the two centres began. It was even declared that after the merger this federation would rank as the largest in the world in membership. However, nothing concrete has emerged till 2005. This perhaps shows the lack of seriousness in such proposals.

### **Recognition of Trade Unions**

Fragmentation is not the only problem plaguing the trade union movement. In fact, much of this chaotic and unwieldy situation is caused by the legal structure, or lack of it, in regulating trade unions.

Perhaps the most shocking aspect of the legal system regulating industrial relations is that till now there is no law providing for compulsory

#### **414** ✽ CHAPTER 21

recognition of trade unions in an enterprise. The decision is left to the management. In the absence of any mechanism for compulsory recognition, it is possible for unions with miniscule membership to vie for recognition. Managements, too, find it convenient to recognize more than one union to promote the divide and rule policy for workers. The Trade Unions Act of 1926 which exists till now unchanged provides for registration of any union having ten or more members in an enterprise. Verification of union membership is left to the Registrar of Trade Unions and it is rarely done. Unions are asked to voluntarily submit their membership figures and it is often found that after adding the figures submitted by each union the total exceeds the actual number of workers.

The Industrial Disputes Act of 1947, which provides the basis of the industrial relations system, allows state-appointed labour officers to mediate in disputes between labour and management. Any union, irrespective of its membership, can bring up a dispute before the conciliating officer and seek redressal. This makes it possible for several unions to exist simultaneously without being recognized.

There have been occasional attempts to change the situation, but none of these have borne fruits so far. In 1947, an amendment to the Trade Unions Act was placed which provided for the right to organize and for compulsory recognition of trade unions, but it was never passed. In 1952, the then labour minister V.V. Giri tried to frame an Act for recognition of trade unions and for voluntary collective bargaining with minimal government interference, but was unsuccessful. He, ultimately, resigned in protest. The opposition was mainly from the ruling Congress Party. The INTUC leaders felt that such a law benefit the communist (AITUC) and socialist (HMS) unions as they were strong. More recently, in 1989, labour minister, Ram Vilas Paswan, framed a bill for remodelling industrial relations. This was the most widely agreed upon document by all the unions, but before it could be introduced in the Parliament, the government had to resign.

Compulsory recognition of trade unions as the bargaining agencies could bring about some order in the present trade union situation. Though most of the unions agree on principle to the recognition of the majority union in the enterprise, there are sharp differences on how this majority can be established. Unions, like AITUC, CITU, and HMS are strong advocates of the use of voting through secret ballot to decide the issue. The INTUC is equally strong in opposing this measure. It advocates recognition through verification of membership and has been arguing that voting would bring politics and corruption to the workplace. The prevalence of these two divergent views has, in fact, prevented the introduction of any law providing for compulsory recognition of trade unions. However, it should be noted that while discussing the draft of the Industrial Relations Bill of 1989, the INTUC finally agreed to accept the secret ballot to decide on the majority union. This had then raised hopes that the problem would be finally solved. Therefore, as things stand now, unless the government decides to change the existing industrial relations laws the working class will be plagued with the problem of fragmentation through multi-unionism.

# **Current Trends in Trade Unionism**

The expansion of the industrial base in India since 1950s and industrial growth using modern technology has given rise to a new section of educated and skilled workers. The social and educational backgrounds of workers engaged in large-scale heavy industries and the hi-tech industries are significantly different from those of the traditional workers engaged in the older industries, like textiles, jute, and plantations. These workers are less dependent on the outside leaders for managing their trade unions. The unions, too, as noted earlier, tend to be enterprise-based rather than industry-based. This makes it easier for internal leaders to control their unions. In most large public sector industries the union leadership at the enterprise level comprises almost exclusively of the employees, though at the industry level these unions may be affiliated to one of the trade union federations which are dominated by outside leaders. The distinction here is that at the industry level outside leaders may be required to conduct negotiations along with the inside leaders whereas at the enterprise level the workers themselves are capable of managing their affairs. This is quite different from unions in the textile industry in Bombay, the jute industry in Calcutta, and tea plantation in West Bengal and Assam where outside leaders are required to negotiate at the enterprise level or in several cases even at the shop floor.

Apart from the development of internal trade union leadership which is undoubtedly a healthy trend, there are some new trends in employment which have had their effects on the growth of trade unions. During the past two decades or so, two distinct trends have emerged in industrial employments which have had adverse effects on the development of the organized labour.

First, permanent employment has decreased in most of the industries. A part of this may be due to the adoption of labour-saving technologies. But, it has been observed that even in industries where such technologies have not been applied employment has fallen. A recent publication<sup>8</sup> containing studies on employment and unionization in twelve industries shows that employment has declined in absolute terms in all industries, even while these industries have grown as indicated by volume of production. If facts, as these studies indicate, there is an attempt to scale down permanent employment by replacing permanent workers by temporary, contract or casual labour. An unfortunate manifestation is that the reduction of permanent workers is more often the result of legal enactments and facilities gained by the workers through their trade union action. The employers find that casual or contract labour is cheaper and easier to control.

Secondly, the fall in permanent employment is due to ancillarization or the putting-out system adopted by many industries. This means that a large part of the manufacturing is contracted out to smaller industries. The cost of production falls because labour wages in the small-scale sector is much lower. This has resulted in the growth of the informal or unorganized sector. Since most of these units operate with low capital and small number of employees they do not come under the purview of the industrial or labour legislations. Hence their costs are further reduced. The unfortunate aspects of this process are that these workers are rarely unionized. The larger trade union organizations prefer to concentrate on the organized sector.<sup>9</sup>

The growing ranks of unprotected contract and casual labour without organized industry and in the unorganized sector are a result of the high level or unemployment in the wider society. The employers have no doubt taken advantage of the availability of large pools of cheap labour. However, they could not have adopted this strategy of cutting labour costs were it not for the insularity of the trade union movement. Unionized workers in the organized sector are able to get higher pay and more benefits. This increases costs for the employers hence in order to cut costs employers hire casual or contract labour. As these people are not unionized their wages are low and they can be hired or fired at will which gives the employers greater control over them. The contrast between permanent workers and casual workers would not have been so glaring had the latter been unionized. The unions of Shankar Guha Neogi, A.K. Roy, and Ela Bhat discussed earlier, have been successful in providing a great deal of protection to casual and contract labour in their respective areas of operation. The larger federations could have helped to ensure that workers elsewhere, too, get some protection in their employment and, fair wages. In the present state of affairs, casualization without union protection has gone so far as to threaten the interests of permanent workers and, of course, their unions as employers find it convenient to replace permanent workers by casual workers. By bringing them into the union-fold the unions could be in a position to regulate the competition for jobs which would have benefited the working class in general. We have discussed in the beginning while tracing the origins of trade unions that competition for jobs among workers in England actually worsened their conditions. In such a situation labour is the loser and the benefits go to the employers.

Reduction in costs due to casualization or the putting-out system does not necessarily result in lowering of prices of manufactured goods. In fact, we can often find that industries which resort to casualization or the puttingout system are those which produce expensive goods. For example, most of the large companies manufacturing clothes, hosiery, shoes, toiletry (soap, tooth paste, cosmetics, etc.) get a large part of their output through contracting out to small industries. Though costs are considerably reduced because of this, the prices of these goods do not fall. In fact, they show a tendency to rise. Thus, casualization and putting-out help neither the workers nor the consumer. The main beneficiaries are the employers who are able to amass high profits. Hence, in the present context, growth of casualization leads to greater inequalities within the industrial sector, and it threatens to take away from the permanent workers the gains they have made by organizing themselves into trade unions. This, in fact, is the greatest challenge to the trade union movement today.

Globalization and economic liberalization have raised new issues. In general, the trend towards informal work has increased and jobs in the organized sector have declined. At the same time, new types of employment have been created. At the lower level, employment has been created in logistics services, cable TV, private security, hotels,restaurants, etc. At the higher level, there are employment opportunities in the information and communication technology sector. Educated youths are finding jobs in call centres and other forms of Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). All these jobs are not unionized and neither are there any legal regulations. Hence, the trade union movement faces the challenge of unionization of these new workers. The International Labour Organization (ILO) has raised this issue in its annual report of 2001.<sup>10</sup>

### **Concluding Observations**

We have observed that the birth of the trade union movement in India has been an arduous process. There was severe opposition from the employers who had the backing of the colonial government. At the same time, the trade union movement has been to a large extent responsible for securing the basic rights of the workers and giving them dignity. The contribution of trade unions in developing a militant yet disciplined workforce cannot be denied. The necessity of the movement is far greater in the present phase as workers are losing their jobs and there is an increase in the number of cheaply available, unprotected labour. Trade unions can protect the interests of the various sections of the working class and influence the state to pass remedial legislation. However, to do so, trade unions have to, first, set their own house in order. A highly-fragmented trade union movement split on narrow political divisions can hardly be expected to protect employment as unions are too busy fighting each other. Compulsory recognition of trade unions is necessary to help reduce the prevalent inter-union rivalries. The Trade Union Act needs to be changed to ensure that only genuine unions with proper membership can be recognized. Industrial relations laws need to be modified to ensure that there is no unnecessary interference from the government. A decline in the trade union movement will help no one. Even employers have to realize that trade unions help to institutionalize industrial conflicts and solve them within the legal framework. Indeed, without trade unions there would be greater chaos in industry.