# **18 Unity and Diversity**

India is a vast country or rather a subcontinent. It spreads between latitudes 8° 4´ and 37° 5´ north and longitudes 68° 7´ and 97° 25´ east. Th e mainland measures 3214 km from north to south and 2933 km east to west. Th e total length of our coastline including Andaman and Nicobar measures to 7516.6 km. Its total area is 32,87,263 sq. km and its population is 1170 million. India shares its borders with seven countries: Pakistan, Afghanistan, China, Bhutan, Nepal, Myanmar, and Bangladesh. It is world's second-most populous country. Politically it is divided into 28 states and 7 union territories.

One of the unique features of Indian culture is unity·in diversity, which means that Indian social structure and cultural patterns are characterized by diversity as well as unity. Diversity signifi es collective diff erences, which mark off one group of people· from another group. Like diversity, unity also is a collective concept. A group of people sharing certain characteristics in common shows unity. It also stands for integration, that is, emotional bonds that bind the members of the society together.

# **INDIAN DIVERSITY**

**Geographical diversity:** Since the geographical location and environment of a place infl uence its culture; therefore, knowledge of Indian geography and environment may help to understand its social structure and cultural pattern. Th e Himalayan ranges, the river basins, and the long coastline have given India its distinct geographical regions. Th e climate varies from the near freezing temperatures of Kashmir to the dry hot climate of the Rajasthan deserts. Th e rainfall, too, ranges from very low in the north-west to the world's highest in the north-east. Th e agricultural crops are also not uniform all over India. While paddy is grown as the main crop in the south and the north-east, wheat is the main crop in the north-west.

Th e geographical conditions of diff erent places have infl uenced the distribution, size, and density of its population Th us, the plains in Uttar Pradesh are the most-density populated, whereas the mountains in Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir are sparsely populated. Th e population density in Uttar Pradesh is 689 per unit area, 880and in Bihar, 109 in Himachal Pradesh, and 99 in Jammu and Kashmir.

Th e topographical features aff ect the human habitation, diet, dress, and animal husbandry. Th e houses in mountains are made of wood and stone, whereas those in the plains of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar are built of bricks and cement. If rice is the diet of Bengalis, wheat is the diet of Punjabis. People living in hilly areas put on thick and woollen clothes, whereas those living in the plains wear cotton and silken clothes. Camels are found in Rajasthan, goats and sheep in the hills, cows and buff aloes in the plains.

Th e occupations that the people of an area generally follow are also largely infl uenced by the geographical factors. Th e main occupation of the people in the coastal regions of India is fi shing, while the main occupation in the north is agriculture.

Th e forests of central and north-east India have been the home for many tribes. Th eir customs and traditions are infl uenced by the fl ora and fauna of their regions.

**Racial diversity:** Th e population of India is racially diverse, containing elements from subracial types—Neglitos, Proto-Australoids, Mongoloid, Mediterranean, Nordic, and Western Brachycephals. A race is a large group of people having distinct physical characteristics such as skin colour, facial features, type of nose, lips, hair form, etc., presumed to be biologically inherited and remaining relatively constant through numerous generations. It is a biological concept. Th e Negritos are the people who belong to the black racial stocks found in Africa. Th eir physical features are black skin colour, curly hair, and thick lips, etc. In India, some of the tribes of south India like Katar have distinct features. Th e Proto-Australoid consists of an ethnic group which includes the people of South Asia and Pacifi c islands. In India, the tribes of north India belong to this race; for example, Bhils Mongoloids are the major racial stock native to Asia. Th e Mediterranean are characterized by their medium or short stature, slender built, and long head; for example, Parsis. Th e Nordics are characterized by tall stature, light skin, and long head; in India, they are found in diff erent parts of the north, especially Punjab and Rajasthan.

According to Sir Herbel Risley, India has seven types of races:

- **(i)** Pre-Dravidian type, surviving among primitive tribes of the hills and jungles, such as Bhils.
- **(ii)** Th e Dravidian type living in the southern peninsula up to the Gangetic valley.
- **(iii)** Th e Indo-Arya type living in Kashmir, Punjab, and Rajasthan.
- **(iv)** Th e Arya-Dravidian type in the Gangetic valley.
- **(v)** Th e Cyto-Dravidian type running east of Indus.
- **(vi)** Th e Mongoloid type found in Assam and the foothills of the eastern Himalayas.
- **(vii)** Th e Manglo-Dravidian type.

Th e Hindus are considered to be the subrace of Caucasians. Th e Indo-Aryan race is said to have entered India in about 1500 BCE.

**Religious diversity:** India is a land of many religions. Almost all major religions of the world such as Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Islam, Christianity, and Zoroastrianism are found in India. Besides these, the tribal communities have their own religious and cultural traditions. Not only that, there are numerous sects believing in diff erent gods and goddesses and following diff erent rituals. Th us, Vaishnavs and Arya-Samajis, Shias and Sunnis, Catholics and Protestants, Akali and Nirankaris, Digamber and Shvetamber are sub-religions of the main religions—Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, Sikhism, and Jainism, respectively. In fact, very few countries of the world have so many religions. Every religion has its own festivals and ceremonies, rituals, beliefs, celebrations, and places of worship—temples, mosques, church, and gurudwaras, etc. Th e existence of so many religions in India has often led to religious riots and social confl icts. Hindus form the majority (about 82 per cent), while Muslims constitute about 12 per cent of the population.

**Linguistic diversity:** Th e eighth schedule of the Indian constitution has recognized 18 languages in India: Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Malayalam, Marathi, Oriya, Punjabi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu, Sindhi, Konkani, Manipuri, and Nepali. Besides, the people of India speak nearly 227 diff erent mother tongues. So many languages and dialects spoken in India have served to separate one group of people from another and limit intergroup communication. An Indian from the north becomes a foreigner in one's own land when he visits a place in the south. It also creates linguistic ego. Th e people in the south have refused to learn Hindi the national language of India. Th e states in India were reorganized on linguistic basis in 1966, of course, other considerations of fi nancial viability and geographical nearness were also kept in view. Th at there is no single language spoken by the people of India is due to the fact that the population from the north belong to the Aryan race, whereas the people from south belong to the Dravidian race. Along with language diversity, there is diversity in food, dress, and customs, that is, in culture.

**Caste diversity:** Th e institution of caste is paradoxical, that is, on the one hand, caste stands for the way of life, which is distinctive and separate from others, on the other hand, caste of a region forms part of a single social framework. Th us, if at one level caste plays a divisive role, at the other level it has a unifying tendency. Th e divisive eff ect of caste can be seen from the fact that it separated more than 16 million Harijans from the main stream Hindus not only by religion but also by poverty and ignorance. It is not the place to describe the evils of caste system, however, what is relevant is the fact that caste-patriotism engenders opposition to other castes and creates an unhealthy atmosphere for the growth of national consciousness. In Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, there are internecine confl icts between the so-called upper castes and backward castes. Sometimes, the whole village has been put on fi re and Harijan families burnt. Whatever little our social reformers and Gandhiji did to rid the Indian society of casteism has been unfortunately undone by our present-day political leaders. Th ey have replanted the poisonous word of casteism, threatening national unity, perhaps in greater degree than in the ancient times.

Along with castes, we may also throw our glance towards tribes whose number exceeds 13 million. Th ey live in the remote areas surrounded by forests and jungles. Th ey have their own religious and cultural traditions, which diff er to such a great extent that one can fi nd among them diff erent cultural regions that are outside Hinduism. Th ey have built their own brigades and often take to killing innocent people. Th ey zealously guard their customs and traditions and do not tolerate even the least of any violation. Th ey do not hesitate to kill an intruder. Th ey have a peculiar political organization headed by their chief who enjoys supreme power over all the members of the tribe. Although new states of Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, and Arunachal Pradesh have been formed to appease the tribes of those areas, the demand for Bodoland is yet to be met. Insurgency in the tribal areas is a threatening force to national unity in India.

Finally, there is another element of diversity that has recently cropped up. It is the division between the mass of people and the educated middle class. Th is division is sharp not because of the poverty of the mass, but because the educated middle class are educated in the thought of an alien culture.

From the above account, it is clear that India does not have homogeneous population or culture. Diff erences in physical appearance, dress, diet, modes of living, manner of speech, kinds of entertainment, habits, traditions, and other aspects of culture may be seen in diff erent regions, cities, and villages. If one travels the length and breadth of the country, it would appear as if one has crossed several separate countries. India is a continent of varied cultures.

# **INDIAN UNITY**

Despite the above-mentioned diff erences of regions, population, race, language, region, and caste, etc. the existence of national unity in India cannot be questioned. Th e diversities of culture have not made India a weak nation. It is a strong and united nation that has faced its wars with Pakistan victoriously. In the world forum, it has its independent voice and its views are given due consideration by world diplomats. Th e people of India forget their diff erences whenever the country faces a calamity or an emergency and meet the situation as 'one people'. Th e sages and saints of diff erent regions of both ancient and modern times have called this vast country as one country and spoken of its culture as 'Indian culture'.

**Nation-building:** When India won her independence in 1947, the foremost task before her was the problem of nation-building, a problem faced by many new nations from which the colonial powers withdrew during the years following the Second World War. Th ey were also beset with the problem of maintaining political stability, which would require that their economic development is fast enough to ensure confi dence among the people, in the capacity of governance, to satisfy their economic needs. Most nations have to deal with the problem of civil war, instability of governments, outburst of violence, nation-wide strikes, and communal riots. Under these circumstances, India's nation-building can be regarded as successful, particularly in the context of its large size and diversity.

Th e Government took several measures to improve the economic and social conditions of the diff erent sections of the society so that they do not entertain the feeling of hatred, deprivation, violence, and isolation and remain united in the aftermath of partition of India. Th e immediate problem after partition was the integration of princely states into the Indian Union, which was very ably solved by Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel. Had these states or majority of them decided to remain independent or vacillated for a long time, there would have been political turmoil in the country. Jammu and Kashmir is a painful reminder in this direction. Likewise, the refugee problem of their proper rehabilitation was satisfactorily solved. Th e Indian economy and social structure were shattered by the British rulers, so another important task was to build the national economy and bring in social reforms. Accordingly, a Planning Commission was set up in March, 1950 to formulate development plans of both the central and state governments, allocate resources, and evaluate the progress achieved in the execution of diff erent programmes and schemes. Although it is not the place to examine the various developmental projects for both rural and urban development and the deprived sections of society like scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, workers, children, girls, and women, yet it may be said that (i) the villages of today are economically better than the villages of ancient India, (ii) the urban area population is increasing due to the attraction of city life, (iii) the lot of depressed classes is better (they have reached the highest ladder of status), (iv) there are various alveolus of progress open for young boys and girls, (v) the factory workers have been provided numerous amenities of life and better working conditions, and (vi) women in independent India have a bright future in view of the various massive programmes undertaken for their welfare.

To bring in social reforms the Government has enacted numerous laws regarding family, religion, caste system, education, drug addiction, delinquency, beggary, and social security.

Th e timely action taken by the Government and the eff orts to implement the programme of economic and social development along with the political steps undertaken to ensure stability and protect the country from disintegration helped to preserve and promote the unity of India. Presently, the mass media press, radio, television, etc. is contributing a lot to raise social awareness and make the people realize the need of national unity in view of the terrorist attacks in diff erent parts of the country.

**Indian constitution:** Th e concept of Indian unity is inherent in the fact that India is a political entity, every part of which is under the same constitution. In less than 30 months, the Constituent Assembly completed the diffi cult task of framing eight suitable constitutions, taking note of the political, geographical, and cultural diversity of the country. It was indeed a great achievement considering that India had to tackle the post-partition crises that arose over Jammu and Kashmir, Hyderabad, Junagarh, and rehabilitation of refugees pouring from the west and east Pakistan, and the one created by the abolition of British paramountcy over the 565 princely states and giving them the freedom to join any of the two nations—India and Pakistan. Th e acumen and practical wisdom of Sardar Patel led the princely states to join India which gave to it a unifi ed and integrated political shape. Th e Constitution of India has made several provisions to promote and maintain unity of the country. Th us, India has been declared to be a Union of States and no state has a right to secede from the Indian Union. Th e power to admit into the Union or establish new states has been given to the Parliament. Vast powers have been given to the Union Government over the states lest they become hostile and rebellious. Th e parliament can take over the government of a state if it violates the directions of the Union. Th e governors are appointed by the President on the advice of the Union Council of Ministers. Th ere is single citizenship and single judicial system. Th e laws enacted by the Union Parliament are enforceable in all the states except Jammu and Kashmir. Th ere is only one constitution (the states do not have their own constitution) except for Jammu and Kashmir, one national bird (peacock), one national fl ower (lotus), and one national animal (dark-striped tiger). Our national symbols—the national fl ag, the national anthem, the national song, and the national emblem act as a cementing force .Th ese are symbols of our unity and identity. Any disrespect shown to any of the national symbols is disrespect shown to the entire nation, punishable under law. On the occasion of celebration of national festivals such as Independence Day and Republic Day, people from far and wide, cutting across religious, social, and linguistic barriers come to witness these celebrations. Th ey celebrate these festivals as Indians and not as individuals representing diff erent states or religions. Th ese festivals strengthen the bonds of unity and oneness and make them lasting.

**Cultural unity:** Linguistic, regional, and religious diversities have made Indian culture rich. Th e music and dances of India represent a rich and colourful pageantry of distinct cultures. Th e western music, Khyal, Ghazal, and Rubai of Muslims, Bharatnatyam, Kathakali, Odissi, and other classical dances like the Bhangra of Punjab all have been assimilated in the Indian culture. It is because of their sense of oneness that people of diff erent regions of India have remained distinctively Indian with the same national heritage, moral values, and ideas despite the fact that they have retained diff erent languages, customs, food habits, and dresses. Th e uniqueness of Indian culture lies in its composite nature. From the dawn of its history, India has received successive waves of foreign people with diverse racial affi liations and cultures who have all mingled and merged. All the saints of the past were aware of this unity. As a matter of fact, the name 'Bharat' denotes not merely geographical boundaries, but actually the idea of a cultural unity. Despite the people following diff erent religions and observing diff erent rituals and forms of worship, there has been synthesis of all religions preaching

the idea of one god. India has been declared a secular state. Th e concept of secularism denotes that all religions are one and the state does not make any discrimination between diff erent religions. Although the Indian people speak diff erent languages in the diff erent parts of the country, yet the national language is only one, that is, Hindi, which when one speaks is understood by all the people.

From the above analysis, it is clear that in spite of their diff erences the people of India have an underlying sense of unity. During the freedom struggle, the people of all religions, castes, and regions including women unitedly took part to achieve the goal of independence. Now, after freedom they are equally zealous to protect their freedom and preserve and promote national unity.

# **NATIONAL INTEGRATION**

Along with the national unity we may also consider the problem of national integration, which is of paramount importance for the unity of our country. Th e process of dividing the country is going unchecked with the formation of new states. Th e number of states has gone up to 28 in place of 14 at the time of independence. Strangely, the demand for new states is still catching force; for example, the demand for Harit Pradesh, Vidarbha, and Bodoland. It may be interesting to note that the American society is also composed of racial groups and diverse identities, but they have not divided any state of the Union in 220 years of independence.

**Meaning of national integration:** National integration means unifi cation of all the forces social, political, and economic—in the country, so as to give the idea of one nation. It is a genuine realization of the fact that we are one despite our diff erences. Negatively defi ned, it is doing away with interstate, interlinguistic, interreligious, and intercultural diff erences and fostering a spirit of tolerance, respect, and appreciation of the viewpoint of those belonging to other states or other linguistic, religious, and cultural groups. Radhakrishnan once said, 'National integration is a psychological and educational process involving the development of feeling of unity, solidarity, and cohesion, in the hearts of the people, a sense of common citizenship and a feeling of loyalty to the nation'. Coexistence, tolerance, co-operation, mutual understanding, and unity are the fundamentals of national integration. It is unifi cation of emotions, thoughts, sentiments, and development of national understanding. National integration ensures peaceful environment wherein minorities and majorities live together peacefully and amicably with mutual trust and respect.

**National integration in India:** Th e problem of national integration has assumed great signifi cance in India where social, economic, cultural, religious, and linguistic diversities are manifest Th e problem is the legacy of British rule which is known for its policy of 'divide and rule', which created fi ssures in the well-knit Indian society. In order to ensure their survival, they divided Indian people into groups on the basis of religion, caste, regions, and language and created mistrust and discord among them. However, the struggle against the British rule unifi ed the divided Indian people. After India won independence, the country began its march on the road to social upliftment, economic development, and political unifi cation. On the way to realizing the above goals, India faced several problems.

**Economic backwardness:** Th e British rule destroyed the Indian economy, which threw the country into poverty, unemployment, and economic backwardness Th e various programmes and plans for economic development have of course, been launched by the Government, but the fact remains that India as a country stands at the bottom of poverty among the countries of the world. It has been ranked as one among the ten poorest nations of the world. One of every fi ve Indian youths is unemployed, and of every four Indian farmers, one is in utter poverty. About 30 per cent of the people live below the poverty line. Th e task of economic development in India is very gigantic. Th e evil of corruption has thrown the economy out of gear. Th e amount earmarked for economic development goes into the pockets of corrupt politicians and bureaucrats with the result that both agricultural and industrial development suff er for shortage of available funds. In the absence of any notable economic development during the last four/fi ve decades, the Indian people are groaning under the weight of poverty and shortages. Th e slum dwellers live in pitiable conditions. Th e economic backwardness off ers a fertile soil to the vested interests to hatch their plans to start secessionist agitations. Often the poor people and unemployed youth become a frustrated lot who can be instigated for any kind of violence. Th e main cause of the rise of militancy in Punjab was youth unemployment. Likewise, the terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir are the young boys who have been recruited for committing acts of terrorism. Most of the crimes such as murder, dacoity, rape, and abduction are committed by the youth. It is these groups who are hired for booth capturing and poll-rigging. As a matter of fact, what stakes do those below the poverty line and unemployed have in national integration? Th e Indian economy has been exposed to global competition. Th e multinationals have ousted the Indian entrepreneurs from the market. What sort of competition can there be between a multimillionaire and a semistarved craftsman? We are going away from the socialistic pattern and in the name of liberalization we are bringing in capitalism. Th e sale of public sector undertakings to private hands is a pointer in that direction Th e WTO (World Trade Organisation) has always favoured the European Union and the United States at the expense of developing countries in the world trade issues. India has to be economically strong to protect its political freedom and save the country from disintegration.

**Linguistic fanaticism:** Th e linguistic fanaticism is another major factor that is causing great threat to the unity of India. Myron Weiner in his book *Indian Paradox* writes, 'In the mid 1950's, violent confl icts erupted in several states, as a number of linguistic groups demanded states of their own. Th ough these were not secessionist demands, the call for linguistic states disrupted many state governments and led to confl icts'. Th e Central Government following a policy of appeasement reorganized the states in 1956. Prior to it, Andhra state of the Telugu-speaking people, after cutting a part of the then Madras state, was created in 1953 following the death of Potti Sreeramulu after 56 day hunger·strike for the cause of Andhra. It was the fi rst linguistic state created under pressure and threat. After 1956, the political map of India continued to change owing to the growing pressure of linguistic lobbies and regional groups. In 1960, the bilingual Bombay state was bifurcated into Gujarat and Maharashtra for the Gujarati- and Marathi-speaking people. Matters thereafter fl ared up in Punjab. Master Tara Singh, a Sikh leader, went on a fast for a Sikh homeland, and the situation took a communal turn. Consequently, the state of Punjab was bifurcated in 1966 into the states of Punjab and Haryana, giving some hilly areas to Himachal Pradesh, leaving the matter of the city of Chandigarh undecided, which till date continues to be the bone of confl ict between the two states. With a view to satisfy the hostile Nagas, the state of Nagaland came into being in 1963 and thereafter in 1969, Meghalaya was created, bifurcating the state of Assam. Recently, the states of Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, and Uttaranchal have come into existence by bifurcating the states of Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and Uttar Pradesh.

While the reorganization of states on linguistic basis may have appeased the local vested interests, it has created an anomalous position for many linguistic nationalities by making them a demographic majority in one state and a demographic minority in the other. Such a situation restricts mobility and hampers the growth of unity between diff erent linguistic groups, some times even creates disdain and hatred against each other, leading to alienation and discrimination.

**Religious fundamentalism:** India is a land of many religions where large number of temples, mosques, churches, and gurudwaras exist. Hundreds of seers and saints go round the country to preach their sermons. Round the year, every day one or the other group of people may be seen

celebrating a festival or performing a religious ceremony. While religion serves a unifying force, it has also proved to be a catastrophic force. In India, it has lost its divine character and assumed its fundamentalist and communal form. When we analyse its operational modalities, we fi nd that it has become a promoter of sectarian tendencies and religious fanaticism. When used for electoral purposes it acquires the dimensions of communal ideology, which is the operative mechanism behind communal violence rocking the Indian polity. India was partitioned in the name of religion.

**Regionalism:** India is a vast country in which people of diverse identities are found. People in different regions speak different languages, wear different dresses, have different life style, follow different customs, and believe in different religions. Although they show a common feeling of being Indian, yet they have a strong regional identity and call themselves Bengalis, Biharis, Maharashtrians, Madrasis, Assamese, Punjabis, etc. In the postcolonial period, regional identities have been strengthened and in certain areas there have been clashes between various regional interests and between regional and central interests. The regional–central clashes have led to autonomy movements, in certain situations bordering secessionism. The reorganization of states on linguistic basis in 1966 was the first recognition of regional identities in free India. The creation of states on linguistic basis created many complications, which include unsettled territorial disputes, problem of sharing river waters, control over the common projects and the promotion of minority language within these states. This led to disputes between various ethnic groups and ultimately created alienation and sense of deprivation among these groups. There has been no satisfactory solution to many interstate disputes. Punjab and Haryana have a dispute over the construction of Satluj-Yamuna canal, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have a dispute over the sharing of Cauvery water. Likewise, Chandigarh is a matter of dispute between·Haryana and Punjab. The status of minority language has also been a subject of dispute—status of Punjabi in Hindi-speaking state of Haryana, or status of Hindi in the southern states. The demand for decentralization of power at regional level is looked upon as a conspiracy to weaken the country.

Th e tension in centre–state relations has increased, with diff erent regional parties coming into power in the states. Punjab is ruled by the Congress; Uttar Pradesh by Samajwadi Party; Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh by Bhartiya Janta Party; Karnataka, Assam, Orissa, Delhi, by the Congress; Tamil Nadu by DMK; West Bengal by Communist Party (Marxist); Bihar by Rashtriya Lok Dal of Laloo Yadav; Haryana by Indian National Lok Dal. In some states, there is coalition government. On the other hand, Centre also has a coalition government, largely composed of regional parties. Th e political interests of the party in power at the state level confl ict with the interest at the central level. Th e central government is often charged of discriminatory treatments by a state government and deliberately try to create problems for it. Th ere are movements based on class struggle, caste tensions, communal clashes, linguistic tensions, and regional diff erences in several parts of the country that threaten national integration.

To conclude, national integration or unity is a psychological process involving the development of the feeling of oneness, solidarity, and cohesion in the hearts of the people, and the sense of common citizenship and national loyalty. National integration has to be a mass movement where people of all religions, castes, classes, and occupations should work unitedly in safeguarding and promoting the unity, integrity, and oneness of the country. For this, the forces of regionalism, parochialism, and communalism will have to be strongly and sternly suppressed through legislation and public opinion.

# **QUESTIONS**

- 1. What do you understand by 'Unity in Diversity'? Explain in the light of Indian society.
- 2. Describe the main aspects of Indian diversity.
- 3. Describe the features which show oneness of Indian society.
- 4. Describe the forces which threaten national integration in India.