# **Theoretical and Applied Issues in Cross-Cultural Health Research**

**Key Concepts and Controversies**

#### **Elisa J. Sobo**

# **INTRODUCTION**

From its earliest days, anthropology has included research regarding health. However, it is only within the past quarter-century that inquiry in this area has been systematized and synthesized into the area of specialization known (but not unequivocally so) as "medical anthropology". After discussing the concept "health," we review the history of medical anthropology's emergence. The historical divide between "applied" and "theoretical" medical anthropology is discussed. Our focus then turns specifically to cross-cultural or ethnological health research. Key conceptual models for understanding health-seeking and health systems cross-culturally will be described. We then contrast the explicitly comparative cross-cultural perspective with contemporary ethnography, where single cultures are generally the focus of inquiry, and we discuss the related debate over comparative research. Finally, popular research topic areas are reviewed.

## **What Exactly is Health?**

Anthropologists generally see "health" as a broad construct, consisting of physical, psychological, and social well-being, including role functionality. Such a definition works much better cross-culturally than one that links health only to "disease," which, technically, means simply a biomedically measurable lesion or anatomical or physiological irregularity. Disease is something that is either cured, or not. But disease itself does not spur people to seek medical treatment; illness does. "Illness" is the culturally structured, personal experience of being unwell and it entails the experience of suffering. The main goal of most people seeking medical treatment is to have their suffering removed. Illness thus underwrites

the entire medical enterprise (Hahn, 1984, p. 17; also see Mechanic, 1962).

"Illness" can refer to a variety of conditions cross-culturally. In some cultures, it is limited to somatic experiences; in others it includes mental dysfunction; in others it includes suffering due to misfortune, too. That is, some medical systems deal with human struggles related to love, work, finances, etc. Social, somatic, emotional, and cognitive troubles often are not separated at all but quite intertwined and even fused together.

This underscores a major criticism of the disease– illness dichotomy: that it recapitulates the mind–body dichotomy that biomedicine has been criticized for trafficking in. "Disease," as the dichotomy defines it, is anchored in the body; conversely, "illness" may be seen as anchored in the mind. Disease is thus attributed a real, concrete, scientific factuality or objectivity that illness, as a subjective category, may be denied (Hahn, 1984).

A second criticism of the dichotomy hinges on the fact that both disease and illness are located in the individual or experienced at an individual level. The term "illness" does refer to an individual's social relations, but generally it does so only insofar as these were the cause of the illness (e.g., when an offended party places a hex) or as the illness leaves the individual unable to fulfill social or role obligations. However, some scholars would link suffering more palpably to the social order by examining how macro-social forces, processes, and events (such as capitalist trade arrangements) can culminate in public health problems (such as HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, alcoholism, pesticide-induced anomalous pregnancy outcomes) and poorly functioning health systems (see Baer, Singer, & Johnson, 1986; Waitzkin, 2000).

Taking their cue from this movement, most social-cultural anthropologists have heeded the call to link individual illness experience with social context, at least minimally. Further, while it is the case that illness

may be defined in opposition to disease, at least in more recent anthropological work (especially that which considers the concepts of embodiment or lived experience), this has generally not been the case; illness is conceived as affecting the whole person, body included. The disease–illness distinction therefore retains contemporary currency, although the term "sickness" may be used when the distinction is not important (e.g., Young, 1982) or when larger social processes are being highlighted (e.g., Frankenberg & Leeson, 1976).

# **A BRIEF HISTORY OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL HEALTH RESEARCH**

While paradigms from all four fields of anthropology inform the work of medical anthropologists today, the roots of "medical anthropology" (a term that we later discuss) extend back in basically two directions, reflecting two kinds of anthropological orientations. If we looked back about 100 years, which is about as long as anthropology has existed in an organized fashion within the United States, then we would see a group of biological or physical anthropologists studying human growth and development, evolution and adaptation, and forensic issues. Secondly, we would see a group of social or cultural anthropologists interested in traditional or local healing practices (often linked with religion and magic). If we looked back about 70 years, the social-cultural group would also contain anthropologists interested in psychological issues related to cultural norms (this school of inquiry is often referred to as the "culture and personality" school).

With the end of World War II, medical anthropology (still at that time an unnamed specialization) received impetus and support from foundation- and governmentfunded applied work in the arena of international public health. The data collected by anthropologists in earlier times for non-medical purposes proved invaluable; anthropologists helped ensure that social and cultural aspects of health and healing were taken into account in ways that promoted international health program success (Foster & Anderson, 1978, pp. 7–8).

## **Application and Theory**

The incorporation of anthropology into international public health efforts called for a distinctly applied orientation, and medical anthropology was greatly influenced by this. Good (1994) refers to medical anthropology in the 1960s as a "practice discipline," dedicated to the service of improving the public health of societies in economically poor nations. Indeed, initial efforts at organizing a medical anthropology interest group occurred in the late 1960s under the auspices of the Society for Applied Anthropology (Todd & Ruffini, 1979).

The interest group settled in 1971 on an affiliation with the more generalist American Anthropological Association (AAA), and is now known as the "Society for Medical Anthropology" (SMA). Although this move firmly anchored the group within anthropology, the influence of applied perspectives remained strong. From the viewpoint of those seeking practical solutions to specific health problems, theory seemed abstract, obstructive, and sometimes even irrelevant. The authority of biomedical clinical culture, where curative work and saving lives takes precedence, was manifest (Singer, 1992).

The practical bent of much of the work of early SMA members was intensified by the fact that those anthropologists *not* interested in direct involvement in the application of their work tended purposefully *not* to identify with what was now referred to as "medical anthropology" (cf. Good, 1994, p. 4). Therefore, their health-related research, in which theory was more central, failed to provide much organizing force to the growing specialization in its early days.

As the century came to a close, medical anthropology grew dramatically, partly due to increased opportunities for applied medical anthropologists. But perhaps more importantly, non-applied anthropologists interested in health saw that they too had something to gain by identifying as "medical" anthropologists. For some, including those interested in cross-cultural health research, in which comparison and contrast is central, a key benefit was access to a community of scholars with a common interest in health issues—as well as health-related data from diverse cultures that might be shared. For others, the benefits included increased credibility in biomedicine and easier access to biomedical consumers, workers, and organizations. This facilitated anthropological investigations into the cultural construction of biomedicine, which have grown increasingly popular in the past 25 years. Investigations into the medicalization of pregnancy and birth were central to the growth of this area of research (Leslie, 2001, p. 431; Rapp, 2001). ("Medicalization"

#### **Health-Seeking and Patterns of Resort 5**

generally refers to the extension of biomedicine's authority into non-biomedical realms and the resulting regulation of everyday life.)

Once committed to the medical anthropology specialization, academically oriented scholars pushed theory into a more central role. They called their colleagues to task for forgetting that there can be neither data nor facts without theories as to what constitutes each. They promoted the notion that theory must be used or applied: through use, it is tested, revised, and strengthened (Singer, 1992). Thereby, the somewhat spurious distinction between applied and theoretical (or "basic") research has become less salient.

### **What's in a Name?**

There are still those anthropologists who prefer to self-identify as "cultural" or "social" anthropologists interested in health, rather than as "medical" anthropologists. In some cases they cling to the old-fashioned academic belief that applied work is *infra dig*. <sup>1</sup> In other cases, their concern relates to their narrow definition of the term "medical."

Technically speaking, the term "medical" refers only to those curative practices engaged in by Westerntrained, allopathic, biomedical physicians (and when hairs are split, surgeons are not included here). As effective as this type of curing may be, it is asocial and highly technologized, bureaucratized, and industrialized. It deals with body parts and systems rather than individuals. It values quantitative over qualitative data.

Naming the anthropological health specialty "medical anthropology" thus may be seen to suggest that the standard against which all other healing or curing practices should be measured is the "medical" model (as defined above). Such labeling may be understood to imply that an anthropology concerned with non-"medical" healing or based on the interpretive ethnographic method is unimportant or tangential.

On the other hand, many medical anthropologists' work has nothing to do with "medicine" as it is technically defined (i.e., as biomedicine; see above). For them, and even for many anthropologists working in biomedical settings, the term "medical" is used in a more generic, universalistic sense. It is understood to refer to *any* system of curing or healing—no matter what specific techniques are involved. The label "medical anthropology" is thus not problematic for them.

### **The Bigger Picture**

Semantic debates notwithstanding, over time, what has become known, for better or worse, as "medical anthropology" has become more influential in anthropology as a whole. Theoretical and methodological advances have informed and inspired the larger discipline, and larger disciplinary debates concerning culture, power, representation, social structure, and other issues increasingly reflect advances stemming from medical anthropology research and practice. This reverse in the flow of ideas marks medical anthropology's move from the margin into the mainstream of the field (Johnson & Sargent, 1990; see also Singer, 1992).

Medical anthropology has grown respectable. It is among the most popular areas of anthropological specialization today. Indeed, SMA's membership places it fourth among the 35 special interest sections of the AAA (and it is bested only by generalist sections).<sup>2</sup>

Medical anthropology also has grown more diverse as new areas of inquiry have developed. However, it is safe to say, as George Foster and Barbara Anderson did about 25 years ago, that most medical anthropologists take somewhat of a systems approach, considering health and health care within the context of cultural and social systems (Foster & Anderson, 1978). Among biological physical medical anthropologists today, major areas of study include bio-cultural phenomena such as diet, nutrition, health disparities, and evolutionary adaptation. Epidemiology is increasingly influential. In the socialcultural arena, there has been a longstanding ethnographic interest in both psychological aspects of health, and the cultural context of medical practices, knowledge, and beliefs. And it is not only anthropologists who are interested in medical anthropology: largely due to policy relating to diversity and health disparities, medical anthropology has slowly been making its way into medical and nursing school curricula and conferences as a specific topic of interest.

# **HEALTH-SEEKING AND PATTERNS OF RESORT**

Much medical anthropology focuses on what people do when they fall ill. In all cultures the household is the key unit in therapy-seeking; members influence each others' care either directly through resource allocation and care provision, or indirectly through examples set and modalities recommended. Individual problems are linked (in various ways in various cultures) to the well-being of the group and the group may therefore actually organize individual care. The less individualistic a culture is and the more it promotes a socially linked self, the more whole groups may be seen as being in need of therapy. In some cultures, an entire group (e.g., the extended family) may be seen as the patient and healing intra-group conflicts may be part of the treatment regime (Janzen, 1978).

Although for some conditions only one treatment modality will be necessary, this is not always the case. There exists a "hierarchy of resort" (Romanucci-Ross, 1969/1977) in which people first try one thing and then try another until their condition is fixed to their satisfaction. While the concept, as first used, related patterns of resort to acculturation issues, the phrase is often used today to mean that people try the most familiar or simplest and cheapest treatments first and seek more expensive, complex, or unfamiliar treatments later, if necessary.

Treatment choice can follow a hierarchical sequence, but patterns of resort often involve many treatment modalities at once. Further, people do not necessarily adhere to all the official rules related to each type of treatment. People often combine recommendations creatively, creating a regimen that they feel is right for them. Health seeking is a dynamic process; people constantly reevaluate their symptoms and revise their healthcare plans (Chrisman, 1978).

The recognition of symptoms is generally the first step in what Noel Chrisman (1978) long ago termed "the health-seeking process." Symptom recognition depends on cultural definitions of normal well-being, and understandings about the causes and contexts of sickness. Owing to cross-cultural differences, symptoms are not always grouped together in the same way cross-culturally. However they may be grouped, some of the important factors that people in all cultures consider when evaluating symptoms include how dangerous to life they are suspected to be, and the degree to which they interfere with lifestyle or function. Also considered is the visibility and frequency of the symptoms in others, and the way this compares with their visibility and frequency in the ill individual.

Another important aspect of health-seeking is preventive behavior, and much thinking in relation to this has come from anthropologists engaged in public and international health efforts. Again, symptom recognition is important, as is recognition that a given condition's long-term health costs outweigh the immediate social, cultural, economic, and other benefits of non-preventive behavior (e.g., Sobo, 1995). Research also has shown the importance of understanding popular interpretations of how new medical technology or pharmacology works, and of incorporating indigenous methods for knowledge transfer into health education efforts (e.g., Nichter & Nichter, 1996). Importantly, medical anthropology projects carried out in the context of international and public health research have been key proving grounds for many now-popular applied research methods (e.g., those used in focused ethnographic study or rapid ethnographic assessment; see Pelto & Pelto, 1997).

# **MEDICAL SYSTEMS CROSS-CULTURALLY**

What people do for health depends to a large degree on how they understand the causes of an illness. Etiological concerns have, for a long time, underpinned crosscultural health research because etiological notions provide an excellent focus for contrasts and comparisons. Much work has focused on categorizing so-called systems of healing and curing (herein, "medical systems").

One simple model casts illness as either "internalizing" or "externalizing." Internalizing systems focus on proximate physiological mechanisms. They give primacy to biological or physical signs that can mark a disease's progression (Young, 1976/1986). Illness is an individual problem, not a social problem. In contrast, externalizing systems ascribe importance to events outside of the ill individual's body. Such systems view pathogens as purposive; often they are human or anthropomorphized. Diagnostic activity focuses on discovering what brought the (now ill) individual to the pathogenic agent's attention, provoking the attack. Externalizing systems focus on ultimate causes, not proximate ones.

Using the externalizing–internalizing model, Young (1976/1986) offers some interesting suggestions regarding the evolution of health systems. He holds that internalizing systems evolve from externalizing systems when societies grow complex.

Externalizing systems focus on social and cosmological relations. They are interlinked with other cultural domains, such as religion, and have little conceptual autonomy (Young, 1976/1986). Many have noted that, in small-scale societies, beliefs about illness etiology often

#### **Medical Systems Cross-culturally 7**

connect with beliefs about all kinds of misfortune, including interpersonal conflicts and geological disasters. But internalizing systems are highly autonomous. So, for example, health is treated as separate from legal or religious issues. Young explains this in relation to the division of labor seen in complex societies.

In small-scale societies, specialization is uncommon and the division of labor is low. Young (1976/1986) argues that this explains the overlap between healing and other cultural domains. Large-scale societies have complex labor division patterns that include specialization and engender distinctions between cultural domains. The conceptual autonomy of internalizing systems is linked to this. The fragmentation of cultural realms in large-scale societies supports internalizing systems, which focus on the body, paying little heed to legal, religious, and other dimensions of life.

The contrast between "naturalistic" and "personalistic" medicine focuses directly on social relations (Foster, 1976). Naturalistic models explain sickness as due to impersonal forces or conditions, including cold, heat, and other forces that upset the body's balance. Personalistic approaches, however, ascribe illness to active external agents. The agent involved in a given case may be human (such as a sorcerer), or non-human (such as an evil force or ancestral ghost). Accident or chance have no role in illness here as they do in naturalistic explanations; in personalistic systems, illness is the direct result of an agent's purposive act. Therefore, people need to be certain that their social relations, with the living and the dead, and with deities and other agentic forces, are well maintained. If not, others may be provoked to take actions leading to one's ill health.

While etiological questions do have importance, categorization can also rest on the organizational characteristics of the systems in question. For example, medical systems can be categorized as either "accumulating" or "diffusing" according to whether they entail accumulated, formalized teachings or, rather, encourage the fragmentation of medical knowledge (Young, 1983). Practitioners in diffusing systems generally do not communicate with one another; their knowledge is often secretly held. Accumulating systems, on the other hand, amass knowledge, generally in written form. Knowledge is shared at conferences and through professional associations and formal training institutions. Biomedicine, Chinese medicine, and Ayurveda are examples of accumulating systems.

### **Oversimplification and Other Dangers**

Some controversy surrounds the fact that all the categorization schemes discussed above entail central contrasts. Many would argue that it is a mistake to cast medical systems as simply one or the other of a given contrasting pair. Rather, the contrasts may be thought of as occupying a continuum, with each system containing some of each emphasis. When determining a classification, the researcher must ask not which ideal type a given system represents but which of a given contrasting emphasis is most salient or primary in that system. So, for example, while biomedicine in practice may entail some personalistic touches (e.g., when a physician refers to an outcome as being in the hands of god), the overarching emphasis is naturalistic and for that reason it is classified as such.

On the other hand, not all systems will be easily classifiable because some systems explicitly accept both aspects of a contrast and focus on either one depending on the illness or condition in question. Take, for example, the old intrusion versus extrusion contrast (Clements, 1932). This model contrasts the bodily "intrusion" of substances or essences to the "extrusion" of such as the cause of illness. Extrusion would include, for example, soul loss, or the loss of blood, or even the non-absorption or leaching of nutrients, as with diarrhea. In intrusioncaused illnesses, on the other hand, noxious substances (e.g., poisons, germs, evil spirits) pierce or infiltrate the body's barriers. Illness due to bleeding and illness due to soul loss are classified together in this model as extrusion-caused; germs and evil spirits are both categorized as intrusive. However, treatments for germ-caused or spirit-caused illness can differ. In any case, one medical system can allow for both intrusion and extrusion illnesses. So in some cases the question is not which of a given contrast dominates, but how the two are linked and under what conditions one or the other predominates.

Here, it is worth noting that not all medical systems are all that systematized; sometimes, what is actually referred to as a system is only loosely aggregated. Care must be taken to avoid reifying the terminology used to talk about diverse ways of dealing with health and illness, thus creating the impression that a culture's loosely aggregated set of beliefs and practices is actually a highly systematized structure.

Further, systems (whether loosely or tightly systematized) typically entail sub-systems. For instance, the formal U.S. healthcare system includes not only medicine

as it is technically defined, but also nursing, the child-life specialty, social work, occupational therapy, etc. Medical systems generally include a diverse array of practitioners, such as herbalists, chemists, surgeons, bone setters or body workers, midwives, sorcerers, priests, and shamans (Loustaunau & Sobo, 1997). Within any given cultural group's medical system, diverse practitioners' work—and their understandings of how health is produced, maintained, and compromised—may or may not overlap.

When does a culture's loosely coupled system stop counting as one loosely coupled system and start counting as several distinct systems? This question has not been sufficiently considered as yet, but the answer may lie in the degree to which the various components compete with each other for clients. That is, in a loosely coupled system, the sub-systems each serve distinct, diverse needs. But in a pluralist system (comprised of two or more distinct medical systems) components may be in competition, each claiming to be able to meet the same needs, albeit in a different fashion. Again, the distinction is not an all-or-nothing one; there may be a continuum and some systems (using that term in its broadest sense) may be more or less pluralistic than others.

In addition to maintaining caution regarding all-ornothing contrasts, medical anthropologists must be aware that classifying a system is not the ultimate goal of our discipline. Classifications are helpful only as they propel us forward in theoretical contributions to the field, or make helpful action possible.

### **Within-System Distinctions**

One common typology describing complex medical systems is the tripartite scheme of popular, folk, and professional medicine (Kleinman, 1978). The key variables are: who provides care and in what context. In the "popular" sector, non-specialists, such as one's self, mother, friends, or other kin and relations, provide treatment. Treatment is based on shared cultural understandings, and generally occurs in a family or household context. Folk sector healers are specialists; their practice is based on cultural traditions and philosophies. Legally sanctioned official systems make up the "professional" sector.

This three-part scheme is an advance on simple public–private dichotomizing, in which private or household care is separated from care provided within the formal health care system, and discounted. But the typology does have an unanticipated shortcoming in relation to its potential for cross-cultural application: although it specifically allows that some non-biomedical practices, such as Ayurvedic or traditional Chinese medicine, should be classed as professional medicine due to their routinized, formalized, professionalized nature, this is easily forgotten by those who would view those therapeutic modalities as so-called folk practices.

Bonnie O'Connor's model (1995) has only two parts: conventional medicine, and vernacular medicine. "Vernacular" medicine subsumes Kleinman's (1978) folk and popular sectors; "conventional" medicine consists only of the official, authorized, authoritative, dominative health care industry or system—whatever that may be in a given cultural context. The contrast is simple but important, because it explicitly highlights the dominative position held by conventional medicine. Anthropologists can apply this lesson cross-culturally because the power dynamics and medical status hierarchy that O'Connor's model reflects are, to at least some extent, universal (all systems have conventional medicine of some kind).

# **CROSS-CULTURAL (ETHNOLOGICAL) VERSUS MONO-CULTURAL (ETHNOGRAPHIC) RESEARCH**

In the preceding sections we reviewed some of the key concepts and models used in medical anthropology. In doing so we concentrated on cross-cultural research, in which numerous groups are compared in order to generate insights that will apply across all cultures. However, not all anthropologists work with multiple cultures concurrently. Some choose to scrutinize one group intensively, either staying with that group for the duration of their career, or moving slowly and serially between groups. The choice between cross-cultural ("ethnological") and mono-cultural ("ethnographic") research depends on many things, including where one stands on the controversial question of epistemology—what kind of knowledge is possible.

Cross-cultural research assumes that comparison is possible. Those who conduct cross-cultural research believe that fruitful comparisons can be made because the culturally constructed, health-related categories that they would study are universally, or at least regionally, meaningful (e.g., flow and blockage; see Sobo, 2003); or because historical connections justify comparisons

#### **Research Interests 9**

(e.g., between humoral systems; see Foster, 1994); because human physiological processes are similar around the world (Browner, Ortiz de Montellano, & Rubel, 1988); etc.

In contrast, ethnographers—especially those concerned with the particulars of meaning and symbolism within given cultures—may hold that comparative, crosscultural approaches are invalid. They may argue that the act of comparison involves forcing complex, contextspecific ethnographic data into simplistic categories that are themselves culture-bound. They may argue that there is in fact no objective, universally applicable perspective.

However, many believe that all ethnography is comparative: ethnographers—explicitly or implicitly, selfconsciously or not—compare and contrast the culture under study with the culture that they or their audiences are most familiar with (generally, their own). The question then is not whether comparison is possible, but how much of it is reasonable to expect if a valid, in-depth, meaning-centered analysis is intended. Related to this is the question of how to maintain as much objectivity as possible, both for mono- and cross-cultural studies.

Some ethnographers do deal with more than two cultures or make within-society comparisons (e.g., Jordan, 1993; Rubel & Moore, 2001). But, because careful ethnography takes so much time, full-scale, cross-cultural studies—those dealing with more than a handful of cultures—are generally undertaken with the use of more than one scholar's data. Scholars engaged in full-scale, crosscultural research may work collaboratively with others, or they may use others' published data or ethnographic accounts to make their comparisons. For example, they may use the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF), a collection of over 7,000 ethnographic accounts concerning over 380 cultures from around the world. The accounts have all been coded and indexed so that researchers may examine how given cultural traits are expressed in various types of groups, or how various physiological processes are dealt with by different cultures.

Ethnographers, as opposed to cross-culturalists, are generally concerned more with local details than with global cultural patterns. They prefer describing a specific culture's health-related logic or sensibility or ethos and its impact on lived experience. Or they are fueled by the previously noted macro-social orientation that links specific, local health-related phenomena with the larger political and economic world. Scholars adopting this approach use in-depth ethnography to demonstrate how social processes and forces become embodied, literally, in human suffering (e.g., Farmer, 1999). (Cross-culturally oriented anthropologists would seem well positioned to work from a political–economic viewpoint but in fact, with few exceptions, scholars doing full-scale, cross-cultural research rarely situate cultures in a total world context. They generally compare and contrast according to variables such as geographic or ecological region, or subsistence type, rather than global political-economic ties.)

# **RESEARCH INTERESTS**

Applied or theoretical, comparativist or not, today's medical anthropologists remain very interested in issues relating to health education and promotion. Medical and popular social representations of the body and of disease—for example, the differing ways in which medical and scientific rhetoric has, across time, anchored popular theories of gender in the body (e.g., Lacquer, 1990; Martin, 1987)—have also received a good deal of attention. The ways in which people come to experience their bodies, according to how they are brought up to believe that their bodies work and should feel or function, has been another very productive topic for exploration, and has generated theories of embodiment and lived experience which sometimes even posit the body and its physiological and anatomical reality as a crucial foundation for the creation of culture itself (e.g., Csordas, 1990; Lakoff, 1987; Sobo, 1996).

Issues related to the therapeutic alliance between patient and practitioner have been perennially popular topics of inquiry for ethnographers, who have long been interested in the psychological aspects of health and in the social and cultural context of medical knowledge and practice. More and more recent works have examined how professionally dominated knowledge and practice patterns are socially established, maintained, expressed, or negotiated—or subverted—during patient–practitioner interaction (e.g., Lindenbaum & Lock, 1993). Other aspects of the therapeutic alliance that have garnered attention include the role of narrative employment and interlocutionary storytelling in healing (e.g., Delvecchio Good & Good, 2000; Mattingly & Garro, 1994), the impact of illness on identity (e.g., Green & Sobo, 2000), and the moral and ethical dimensions of the alliance, especially in relation to new biomedical technology (e.g., Brodwin, 2000; Lock, Young, & Cambrosio, 2000).

#### **10 Theoretical and Applied Issues in Cross-Cultural Health Research**

Medicalization also has continued appeal as a framework for anthropological health studies.

The pluralistic approach that many patients take to their own health and the impact of the latter on biomedicine, which generally assumes that it is the only medical system being consulted, is also an increasingly important area of inquiry. [For example, self-care in relation to biomedicine, either as a supplement or adjunct to biomedical care or as an alternative when biomedicine fails to meet people's needs or in the case of uninsurance, has received increasing scrutiny (e.g., Vuckovic, 2000).] The impact and approaches of pharmaceutical advertising on selfcare patterns are bound to garner increased attention as such advertising becomes routine practice in the United States. The organizational aspects of the failure of systems to meet people's needs, also already an area of concern within international health circles (Justice, 1989), promises to become a more popular area for inquiry as medical anthropology's alliance with health services research at home begins to burgeon.

# **CONCLUSION**

Anthropologists have always been interested in health. This interest has recently been systematized and synthesized into the area of specialization called "medical anthropology," and key concepts have been developed. Controversies in this growing specialization have concerned, among other things, the label "medical," cross-cultural versus ethnographic orientations, and applied versus theoretical approaches.

Much of the cross-cultural research in this field has concentrated on categorizing medical systems, understanding patterns of health-seeking, and, more recently, comparing cultural responses to universal physiological processes as well as comparing variations on universal (or at least regionally or historically common) cultural constructions related to health. Much of the in-depth ethnographic research on health has focused on questions relating to suffering, and its link to the relationship between individual and society, as mediated by culture. Patient–practitioner communication and relations as well as the role of the body have also been salient concerns of late.

After several decades of marginalization on the basis of its practical (i.e., applied) orientation, medical anthropologists have begun to move toward the center of the larger anthropological discipline. This move was underwritten by an overt acceptance of the importance of not only pragmatic action but also the theory that inevitably drives it, and a growing agreement that the relationship between theory and action is neither oppositional nor simply complementary; it is circular, dialogical, and coherent. Just as mind and body only exist as a duality theoretically, so too are theory and action only hypothetically divided. Experientially, and in good anthropology, they are a unity. Advances made within the field of medical anthropology once the false dichotomy was exposed have helped to ensure its continued growth and development as well as its value to those outside of the academic arena.

# **NOTES**

- 1. Literally, beneath one's dignity.
- 2. These are: the Society for Cultural Anthropology, the General Anthropology Division, and the American Ethnological Society (Carlo Simpao, personal communication, March 28, 2002).

# **ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

Great thanks are due to Carole Browner and Elisa Gordon for providing invaluable comments and suggestions.

# **REFERENCES**

- Baer, H. A., Singer, M., & Johnson, J. H. (1986). Toward a critical medical anthropology. *Social Science and Medicine, 23*(2), 95–98.
- Brodwin, P. (Ed.). (2000). *Biotechnology and culture: Bodies, anxieties, ethics*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Browner, C. H., Ortiz de Montellano, B. R., & Rubel, A. J. (1988). A methodology for cross-cultural ethnomedical research. *Current Anthropology, 29*(5), 681–689.
- Chrisman, N. J. (1978). The health-seeking process: An approach to the natural history of illness. *Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry*, *1*(4), 351–377.
- Clements, F. (1932). Primitive concepts of disease. *University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, 32*, 185–252.
- Csordas, T. J. (1990). Embodiment as a paradigm for anthropology. *Ethos, 18*(1), 5–47.
- Delvecchio Good, M. J., & Good, B. J. (2000). Clinical narratives and the study of contemporary doctor–patient relationships. In G. L. Albrecht, R. Fitzpatrick, & S. C. Scrimshaw (Eds.), *Handbook of social studies in health and medicine* (pp. 243–258). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

#### **References 11**

- Farmer, P. (1999). *Infections and inequalities: The modern plagues*. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Foster, G. M. (1976). Disease etiologies in non-Western medical systems. *American Anthropologist, 78*(4), 773–781.
- Foster, G. M. (1994). *Hippocrates' Latin American legacy: Humoral medicine in the new world*. Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach.
- Foster, G. M., & Anderson, B. G. (1978). *Medical anthropology*. New York: Wiley.
- Frankenberg, R., & Leeson, J. (1976). Disease, illness and sickness: Social aspects of the choice of healer in a Lusaka suburb. In J. Leeson (Ed.), *Social anthropology and medicine, No. 13* (pp. 223–258). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
- Good, B. J. (1994). *Medicine, rationality, and experience: An anthropological perspective*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Green, G., & Sobo, E. J. (2000). *The endangered self: Managing the social risk of HIV*. London: Routledge.
- Hahn, R. A. (1984). Rethinking "illness" and "disease". *Contributions to Asian Studies: Special Volume on Southasian Systems of Healing, 18*, 1–23.
- Janzen, J. M. (with Arkinstall, W.) (1978). *The quest for therapy: Medical pluralism in Lower Zaire*. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Johnson, T. M., & Sargent, C. F. (1990). Introduction. In T. M. Johnson & C. F. Sargent (Eds.), *Medical anthropology: Contemporary theory and method* (pp. 1–9). New York: Praeger.
- Jordan, B. (1993). *Birth in four cultures: A crosscultural investigation of childbirth in Yucatan, Holland, Sweden, and the United States* (4th ed., revised and expanded by R. Davis-Floyd). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Justice, J. (1989). *Policies, plans, and people: Foreign aid and health development*. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Kleinman, A. (1978). Concepts and a model for the comparison of medical systems as cultural systems. *Social Science and Medicine, 12*, 85–93.
- Lacquer, T. (1990). *Making sex: Body and gender, from the Greeks to Freud*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Lakoff, G. (1987). *Women, fire, and dangerous things*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Leslie, C. (2001). Backing into the future. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* [Special issue, P. J. Guarnaccia (Ed.), *The contributions of medical anthropology to anthropology and beyond*], *15*(4), 428–439.
- Lindenbaum, S., & Lock, M. (Eds.). (1993). *Knowledge, power, and practice: The anthropology of medicine and everyday life*. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Lock, M., Young, A., & Cambrosio, A. (2000). *Living and working with the new medical technologies: Intersections of inquiry*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Loustaunau, M. O., & Sobo, E. J. (1997). *The cultural context of health, illness, and medicine*. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Martin, E. (1987). *The woman in the body: A cultural analysis of reproduction*. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
- Mattingly, C., & Garro, L. C. (1994). Narrative representations of illness and healing: Introduction. *Social Science and Medicine, 38*(6), 771–774.

- Mechanic, D. (1962). The concept of illness behavior. *Journal of Chronic Diseases, 15*, 189–194.
- Nichter, M., & Nichter, M. (Eds.). (1996). *Anthropology and international health: Asian case studies*. Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach.
- O'Connor, B. B. (1995). *Healing traditions: Alternative medicine and the health professions*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Pelto, P. J., & Pelto, G. H. (1997). Studying knowledge, culture, and behavior in applied medical anthropology. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 11*(2), 147–163.
- Rapp, R. (2001). Gender, body, biomedicine: How some feminist concerns dragged reproduction to the center of social theory. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* [Special issue, P. J. Guarnaccia (Ed.), *The contributions of medical anthropology to anthropology and beyond*], *15*(4), 466–477.
- Romanucci-Ross, L. (1969/1977). The hierarchy of resort in curative practices: The Admiralty Islands, Melanesia. In D. Landy (Ed.), *Culture, disease and healing: Studies in medical anthropology* (pp. 481–487). New York: Macmillan.
- Rubel, A. J., & Moore, C. C. (2001). The contribution of medical anthropology to a comparative study of culture: *Susto* and tuberculosis. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly* [Special issue, P. J. Guarnaccia (Ed.), *The contributions of medical anthropology to anthropology and beyond*], *15*(4), 440–454.
- Singer, M. (1992). Theory in medical anthropology. *Medical Anthropology* [Special issue, M. Singer (Ed.), *The application of theory in medical anthropology*], *14*(1), 1–8.
- Sobo, E. J. (1995). *Choosing unsafe sex: AIDS-risk denial among disadvantaged women*. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Sobo, E. J. (1996). The Jamaican body's role in emotional experience and sense perception. *Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 20*, 313–342.
- Sobo, E. J. (2003). Prevention and healing in the household: The importance of socio-cultural context. In E. J. Sobo & P. S. Kurtin (Eds.), *Child health services research: Applications, innovations, and insights* (pp. 67–119). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
- Todd, H. F., & Ruffini, J. L. (1979). *Teaching medical anthropology: Model courses for graduate and undergraduate instruction* (Society for Medical Anthropology Special Publication No. 1). Washington, DC: Society for Medical Anthropology.
- Vuckovic, N. (2000). Self-care among the uninsured: "You do what you can do." *Health Affairs, 19*(4), 197–199.
- Waitzkin, H. (2000). *The second sickness* (2nd ed.). New York: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Young, A. (1982). The anthropologies of illness and sickness. *Annual Reviews in Anthropology, 11*, 257–285.
- Young, A. (1983). The relevance of traditional medical cultures to modern primary health care. *Social Science and Medicine, 17*(16), 1205–1211.
- Young, A. (1986). Internalising and externalising medical belief systems: An Ethiopian example. In C. Currer & M. Stacey (Eds.), *Concepts of health, illness, and disease* (pp. 139–160). [Original: 1976, Social Science & Medicine, *16*, 43–52.] Oxford: Berg.