# **Culture-Bound Syndromes**

#### **L. A. Rebhun**

Every known cultural group has ways of describing things that go wrong in body and mind. Although biological causes can be identified for many sicknesses, the way local groups identify, understand, classify, interpret, and respond to conditions is cultural, not biological (Kleinman, 1980). Differences in how local groups understand normality and abnormality are particularly marked for psychological and behavioral syndromes. The term "culture-bound syndrome" developed out of the attempts of psychiatrists and anthropologists to make sense of named syndromes observed in groups outside the middle class, Western European, and North American setting in which contemporary medicine developed.

Pow Ming Yap, a psychiatrist, coined the term "culture-bound syndrome" in the 1960s (Yap, 1962, 1969) when he noted that scholars working in Asian, Pacific, and tribal societies described behavioral syndromes unknown to mainstream psychiatry at the time and denominated only by terms in local languages. Describing these as "atypical psychogenic psychoses" (1962) and later "atypical culture-bound reactive syndromes" (1969), he argued for their inclusion in psychiatric literature as local variations of universal psychiatric disease categories described in psychiatric manuals, and urged his colleagues to work on their organized classification. Although he believed that local beliefs, values, and social structure influenced the symptomatic presentation of such ailments, at base, they reflected universal disorders of the human mind (Yap, 1969).

Since the 1960s, the way theorists have used the term "culture-bound" and interpreted the various syndromes falling under that category has reflected not only different approaches of disparate disciplines to medical classification but also disputes over the meaning and significance of the concept of culture itself as well as greater attention by theorists to both intra-cultural variation and inter-cultural connections. While the term has been attacked as inaccurate and ethnocentric by some, others have sought to expand its use to a greater range of phenomena, including behavioral syndromes described by U.S. and international psychiatry. Anthropologists, sociologists, psychologists, and psychiatrists use and argue over the term, and debates on its meaning and use reflect not only theoretical changes within disciplines but conflicts in orientations of these different disciplines. Definitional debates bring up thorny issues of the philosophical relationship between culture and biology as well as of the universality of medical categories.

### **A CONTROVERSIAL TERM**

In 1994 the American Psychiatric Association decided to include an appendix on culture-bound syndromes in its *Diagnostic and Statistical Manual*, version Four (*DSM-IV*). This marked a turning point in psychiatry's treatment of culture, and together with revisions in other parts of the *DSM* to use more culturally and ethnically inclusive language (Good, 1996), constituted a major step in attempts to reconcile the approaches of anthropology and psychiatry to human psychological variation. This reconciliation remains an on-going and controversial process.

At the same time as anthropologists have increasingly attacked what they see as problems in the basic concept of culture-boundedness, psychiatrists have shown increasing interest in cultural variation and made greater attempts to include awareness of cultural variation within official diagnostic categories. The *DSM-IV* defines culture-bound syndromes as follows:

Recurrent, locality-specific patterns of aberrant behavior and troubling experience that may or may not be linked to a particular DSM-IV diagnostic category. Many of these patterns are indigenously considered to be "illnesses," or at least afflictions, and most have local names …. [C]ulture-bound syndromes are generally limited to specific societies or culture areas, and are localized, folk, diagnostic categories that frame coherent meanings for certain repetitive, patterned, and troubling sets of experiences and observations (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).

Anthropologists have challenged this definition on a number of grounds, while recognizing that the inclusion of culture-bound syndromes within the *DSM-IV* represents a positive step toward greater cultural inclusiveness in otherwise ethnocentric diagnostic definitions. One problem arises with the idea of cultures as bounded entities: contemporary anthropology regards culture as both internally differentiated and constantly changing, and has a strong focus on how members of different cultures and subcultures interact with and adapt ideas and practices from one another. Anthropologists have also debated whether the various phenomena described in the literature are properly conceived as syndromes.

Regarding the boundedness of cultures, some syndromes originally described as culture-bound in the literature turn out on further investigation to appear in a variety of sometimes loosely related cultural settings, but not to actually be confined to just one local area or language group. For example, *koro*, in which men (and sometimes women) believe their sexual organs are shrinking or disappearing, was originally described as a South Chinese culture-bound syndrome, but has also been reported among other Asian groups. The term *koro* itself is of Malayo-Indonesian origin and the syndrome has been observed in Indonesia as well as Singapore, Hong Kong, Thailand, and parts of India (Jilek & Jilek-Aal, 1985). Similarly, "nerves" first described as a Guatemalan syndrome has been described all over the Mediterranean and the Americas as well as in the Middle East (see below for more detail). Jilek and Jilek-Aal (1985) reject attempts to classify human behavior as either universal or culturally specific, arguing that what get defined as "culture-bound syndromes" in the literature reflect reactions to geopolitical, and socio-economic conditions in local areas in reaction to local ideologies, and that groups in similar situations will manifest similar reactions under different names.

Theorists have also disputed whether the concept of a "syndrome" occurs in all cultural settings. Anthropologists often use the word "emic" to describe phenomena as viewed from within a particular cultural perspective and "etic" to describe phenomena as viewed from an imposed non-native perspective, especially when an imported definitional or interpretive category is used to describe some local phenomenon. The very concept of a syndrome can be seen as etic for it reflects the ways in which the psychiatry of Western Europe, the United States, Canada, Australia, and similar societies classify experience and behavior.

Some theorists dispute the possibility of direct translation from one cultural setting to another. Yap (1969) saw the phenomena he discussed as local variations of universal human psychiatric disorders, all translatable into some variety of schizophrenia or depression or mania or hysteria, etc. as defined in Western medical nosologies. Arthur Kleinman (1977), a psychiatrist who has also had a major influence on medical anthropology, calls this a "category fallacy," arguing instead that such local psychiatric phenomena cannot be understood outside of the cultural context in which they occur. Similarly, Nichter (1981), in a discussion of cases from South India, argues that many types of sickness are best understood as "idioms of distress" rather than as syndromes per se: each describing local reactions to particular forms of psychiatric distress that arise in the differing situations of disparate cultures. Some of these ways of expressing distress become formalized with names in local languages, but do not necessarily become as rigidly defined as are psychiatric diagnoses.

An example of this can be found in *kitsune-tsuki* (fox possession), first described by that name in written sources in 12th century Japan. Unlike medically defined syndromes, the symptoms of fox possession vary widely, and seem to encompass any deviant behavior (night terrors, dizziness, jumping into rivers, making piles of stones, eating gravel, chewing hair, wandering, etc.) as well as experiences of communication from fox entities not perceptible to others (Eguchi, 1991). The central diagnostic criteria of fox possession is the declaration by a religious specialist that the patient is possessed by the spirit of a wild fox or a fox-deity, both common figures in Japanese folklore (Etsuko, 1991).

In the past, when most Japanese lived in small rural villages, a person possessed by fox spirits might become a religious leader, for the signs of possession would have been taken as indications of contact with the divine. However, in contemporary Japan, with a decline in folkloric beliefs, the signs of possession are defined as deviant. Eguchi (1991) argues that the historical change in significance of fox possession indicates that scholars should approach illness as an event or series of events rather than as a rigidly defined thing. He takes issue both with those who try to universalize such phenomena, as in the argument that fox possession constitutes a local form of schizophrenia, and also with particularist arguments that claim that fox possession is unique to its setting and incomparable with any other psychiatric phenomenon. Diagnosis and analysis, in this approach, is more complex than simple labeling with a disease name, but requires a careful delineation of context and meaning as well as presentation.

#### **Types of Syndromes 321**

In addition to defining "culture-bound syndrome" in general, the *DSM-IV* gives examples of named syndromes that have been mentioned in the anthropological and psychiatric literature. Some have only one or two articles devoted to their description, while others inspire extensive literatures. These may also be described by more than one name in the literature. For example, the *DSM-IV* lists *taijin kyofusho* as a Japanese syndrome of intense fear of offending others through bodily appearance or function (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). The International Classification of Mental and Behavioral Disorders (ICD-10) calls the same phenomenon "anthrophobia" (World Health Organization, 1992), emphasizing a particular avoidance of eye contact among sufferers (Zhang, Yu, Zhang, Tang, & Draguns, 2001). In general, the literature on culture-bound syndromes suffers from these kinds of irregularities, complicating attempts to characterize it as a whole, and adding to inconsistencies in descriptions of phenomena.

#### **TYPES OF SYNDROMES**

Despite controversies over the term "culture-bound syndrome" the concept remains important in the medical anthropology literature. A number of theorists have attempted to classify syndromes named in the anthropological and psychiatric literature into types. For example, Simons and Hughes (1985) divide culture-bound syndromes into:

- startle matching (as in *latah*)
- sleep paralysis (a reference to a number of syndromes in which people experience choking and/or paralysis during sleep or while falling asleep, often attributed to attack by spirits and possibly related to sleep disorders of physiological origin) (Hufford, 1982; Simons & Hughes, 1985)
- genital retraction (*koro*)
- sudden mass assault (*amok*)
- running (*pibloctoq* or "arctic hysteria" in which suffers tear off their clothes and run about in a state of high agitation)
- fright illness (*susto*), and
- cannibal compulsion (*windigo*) (see below for discussions of syndromes).

Simons and Hughes (1985) posit that startle matching (*latah*) and sleep paralysis have a neurophysiological basis, whereas genital retraction (*koro*), sudden mass assault (*amok*), and running (*pibloktoq*) do not, and they further state that fright illness (*susto*) and cannibal

compulsion (*windigo*) probably ought not to be considered culture-bound syndromes, because they do not have specific enough descriptions to be useful as psychiatric terms and because they make the category "culture-bound syndrome" too heterogeneous to be really useful. In addition, the theorists mark *windigo* as a problematic term because of controversies over whether it ever actually existed. This division of phenomena remains in line with Yap's original idea (1962, 1969) that culture-bound syndromes constitute local variations of universal phenomena, and adds a more critical appraisal of existing literature by rejecting some terms as non-specific or inaccurate.

In the case of windigo, Marano (1985), in Simons and Hughes' collected volume, claims that despite an extensive literature on the phenomenon, in fact there never has been such a syndrome among Northern Algonquin peoples. Literary descriptions posit that some Northern Algonquins suffer from fits in which they experience a compulsion to kill and eat human beings. Marano claims that some Algonquin peoples believed that compulsive cannibals lived among them as part of their understanding of witchcraft, and that some individuals were accused of being *windigo*, and even executed on the basis of that accusation.

But just in the same way that the majority of people accused of witchcraft in Western and Southern Europe in the 16th century actually were not casting spells, cavorting with demons, or holding black masses, and the majority of people accused of vampirism in Eastern Europe at the time were not in fact undead blood suckers, the unfortunates accused of being *windigo* were not really cannibals. At the time that many Algonquins were fearing *windigos*, and many anthropologists were collecting data, Native Americans were undergoing severe hardships from disease, conquest, and both political and economic domination. Like other societies under stress, they expressed their trauma through fear of attack by witches. The Algonquin belief that witchcraft took the form of cannibalism was mistaken by early researchers for the presence of actual cannibalism (Marano, 1985).

Hall (2001) provides an even more critical typology of how the term "culture-bound syndrome" is used. He posits that theorists use the term to refer to:

- 1. apparent psychiatric illnesses not attributable to an identifiable organic cause or corresponding to a Western disease category;
- 2. locally recognized and named psychiatric syndromes;

- 3. discrete disease entities not or not yet recognized by Western medicine;
- 4. named local illnesses which elaborate symptoms found in Western populations but not named as syndromes in the West;
- 5. culturally accepted explanatory models of sickness not matching allopathic categories and which in Western settings might indicate delusions;
- 6. states or sets of behaviors involving communing with spirits, or possession by spirits, or loss of one's soul not necessarily seen as pathological within their own cultural setting, but indicating delusion, psychosis, or hallucination in Western nosology;
- 7. syndromes reported to anthropologists or other foreigners but not directly observed, which may be used to justify punishment or execution of an outcast.

Hall's formulation more clearly presents the idea of "culture-bound syndromes" as a result of theorists in the United States, the British Commonwealth, and Western Europe looking at societies they consider exotic and trying to make sense of what they categorize as foreign illness categories and bizarre behaviors. Although an exhaustive list is beyond the scope of this entry, I now turn to more extended considerations of particular syndromes named in the literature to more fully elucidate the points made above.

#### **"NERVES"**

Although there are cross-cultural differences in the description of "nerves," there are also so many crosscultural similarities that it can no longer be considered so much a culture-bound phenomenon as a widespread label for similar experiences in cultures with sometimes tenuous historical links (Finkler, 1989; Low, 1985, 1989). The syndrome appears in the literature in various languages: "nervios" in Spanish, "nervos" in Portuguese, "nevra" in Greek, etc. The African American "worriation" can also be considered a variant of "nerves" (Camino, 1989). In English, it is usually written within quotation marks to distinguish it from the anatomical word.

Patients with "nerves" usually complain of headache, dizziness, fatigue, weakness, and abdominal pain and attribute their symptoms to sadness, anger, fear, or worry (Davis & Guarnaccia, 1989), although symptoms and etiology vary. While some theorists discuss "nerves" among men (Duarte, 1986; Koss-Chioino, 1989; Low, 1985, 1989), others see it as either a specifically feminine disorder (Barnett, 1989; Davis, 1983, 1989; Finerman, 1989; Kay & Portillo, 1989; Low, 1989; Slutka, 1989) or the female presentation of stresses expressed differently by men (Camino, 1989; Davis & Low, 1989; Rebhun, 1999; Slutka, 1989). Anthropologists have put forth interpretations of "nerves" which may reflect differences in the local communities in which they work. For example, Low sees "nervios" in Guatemala as a folk illness of strong emotion related to family stresses (Low, 1985, 1989; see also Guarnaccia, DeLaCancela, & Crillo, 1989), whereas both Barnett (1989) and Davis (1983) see connections with menopause. Finerman emphasizes the stresses of female overresponsibility (Finerman, 1989), while both Rebhun and Krieger analyze how women may use "nerves" as part of interpersonal manipulation (Krieger, 1989; Rebhun, 1993). Scheper-Hughes (1988, 1992) prefers to emphasize the symptoms of hunger and the stresses of economic deprivation (see also Dunk, 1989), while other theorists see "nerves" as a means for women to express socially unacceptable emotions (Clark, 1989; Lock, 1990, Rebhun, 1999), and as a folk model of anxiety or depression (Kay & Portillo 1989; Koss-Chioino, 1989).

Although today a folk category, "nerves" has its origins in the same ancient Greco-Arabic forms of medicine that lie in the history of biomedicine as well. Related to such categories as hysteria, neurasthenia, and melancholia, it reflects the idea that the body possesses a finite amount of "nervous energy" which can be exhausted if too excited, especially in women (Cayleff, 1988; Davis & Whitten, 1988). As such it is similar to such concepts as "stress." While mainstream medicine moved away from older concepts in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the ideas that underlie the various presentations of "nerves" were retained in the folk medicine of Western Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, the Americas, and historically related areas.

#### **SUSTO**

The Spanish word *susto* means "fright" or "fear." Although Simons and Hughes (1985) argue that *susto* ought no longer be considered a culture-bound syndrome because it is too non-specific in its description, nonetheless the DSM-IV lists it in its appendix. The basic idea in *susto* is that either a sudden shock as in being startled, or an emotional shock, or a series of traumatic events, or a frightening encounter with a ghost have damaged a person, often by startling their soul out of their body.

Other terms used similarly include *espanto, perdida del alma, pasmo, tripa ida*, and *chibih*. Typically a sufferer has trouble sleeping or sleeps too much, feels sad and listless, may stop eating, and experiences headaches, diarrhea, and assorted aches and pains, similar to depression or post-traumatic stress disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Although most associated with Latin America, similar fright complexes have been reported in other areas of the world as disparate as the Phillipines and New Guinea (Simons & Hughes, 1985). In Latin America, *susto* is often connected with "nerves" as when a person's problems with "nerves" start because of a *susto* (Rebhun, 1993).

Simons and Hughes (1985) express discomfort with the broad, non-specific nature of *susto*, but many anthropologists have found that very characteristic valuable, allowing them to understand how the people they study think about adversity through their use of all-encompassing terms such as *susto* and "nerves." Crandon (1983), for example, in a study of how mothers in an Andean community come to label their sick infants with the term *susto*, concludes that designating a particular infant as *assustado* (shocked) rather than corresponding to any specific symptomatology, is a way for the community to comment upon the particular vulnerability of specific infants due to the social and economic conditions of their families.

In another study, Baer and Bustillo (1993) found that even though folk terms such as *susto* and *mal de ojo* (evil eye) do not correspond to specific biomedical conditions in infants, mothers in a community of Mexican migrant farmworkers in Florida who brought children to doctors for treatment of these complaints in fact were identifying serious maladies such as infectious diarrheas, severe dehydration, fevers, etc. They conclude that even if doctors regard folk syndromes as superstitions, they should still regard mothers who ask about their sick infants in such terms as able diagnosticians of potentially serious medical conditions. The difference between the doctors' and the mothers' or folk healers' approaches lies in the explanatory model (Kleinman, 1980) applied to the condition rather than in the ability to recognize potentially serious illness (Baer & Bustillo, 1993). Terms such as "nerves" and *susto* express philosophical attitudes about human vulnerability and emotional suffering in the face of misfortune (Rebhun, 1999; Rubel, O'Nell, & Collado, 1984, 1985; Dobkin de Rios, 1985). Both are better understood in terms of Nichter's (1981) idea of "idioms of distress" rather than as discrete disease entities.

#### **KORO**

Like "nerves", *koro* has been described in a variety of locales mostly in Asia and among Asian immigrants to other areas. A few individual cases of men panicked that their genitals are shrinking have also been recorded in other cultural settings, but here the phenomenon does not seem to have become formalized as a widespread belief (Chowdhury & Bera, 1994; Earleywine, 2001; Fishbain, Barsky, & Goldberg, 1989). *Koro* sufferers are usually male, and during episodes they become convinced that their genitals are shrinking up inside their bodies. *Koro* sufferers also manifest acute anxiety, and often believe that full genital retraction will result in death. Cases of women fearing breast and genital shrinkage have also been recorded, but more rarely (Cheng, 1996; Jilek & Jilek-Aal, 1985). *Koro* was first mentioned in Western medical texts in 1895, although its mention did not become widespread until the 1960s (Chowdhury, 1998). Although often described as a Chinese culture-bound syndrome, the word *koro* itself is of Malay origin, and refers to the head of a turtle. The equivalent term in Mandarin would be *suoyang*, but that is not the term commonly used in English language literature (Cheng, 1996).

In addition to reports of individuals manifesting *koro*, some researchers have reported on widespread outbreaks or "epidemics" of *koro* (Bartholomew, 1994; Cheng, 1996; Jilek & Jilek-Aal, 1985). Jilek and Jilek-Aal posit that the epidemics of *koro* they analyze in Thailand and India were related to the movement of ethnically distinct political refugees into new areas or anticipated military attacks from ethnic rivals, where local people feared engulfment or destruction from their adversaries. They theorize that the belief in disappearing sexual organs is a metaphor for the fear of being unable to reproduce and sustain families, to dying as a people due to perceived aggression from ethnically distinct others, and compare *koro* epidemics to the ghost dance religion of the Coast Salish people under military attack from colonists as a reaction to the stresses of conquest. Rather than look at *koro* as an individual phenomenon related to Oedipal castration fears, they argue for its comprehension as an idiom of distress (Nichter, 1981), incomprehensible outside its political setting (Jilek & Jilek-Aal, 1985).

Interestingly, some theorists have adopted the term *koro* to refer to any case of believed genital shrinkage or disappearance, no matter the cultural setting (Earleywine, 2001; Fishbain et al., 1989; Moodley, 1985; Yap, 1965). The increased use of the term *koro* by physicians to describe patients outside its historical cultural settings seems a further development of Hall's "named local illnesses which elaborate symptoms found in Western populations but not named as syndromes in the West" (Hall, 2001) in which the non-English term has been usurped to fill a nosological need.

#### **AMOK**

British colonial officials in Malaysia were so impressed with the idea that native Malays might suddenly grab a weapon and embark on a frenzied homicidal attack, that they adopted the Malay word *amok* into the English language to refer to any sudden, violent, chaotic behavior. Such attacks, usually following a period of brooding, may have their origin in forms of warfare in historical Malaysia, although by the time they were described by the British, they had become individual attacks (Carr, 1985). Historical accounts from Southern India, Malaysia, and Indonesia describe elite warriors known by a variety of names including *amouco, amok*, and *amokos* and famous for their willingness to die in furious attacks. However as early as the 15th century, historical accounts describe civilian men who suddenly took on an apparently indiscriminate homicidal fury (Spores, 1988). John Spores points out, however, that *amoks* often attack members of their immediate family (Spores, 1988) and is among those theorists who question whether *amok* attacks are in fact indiscriminate and whether *amoks* do not actually remember their actions, as claimed (Burton-Bradley, 1985; Carr, 1985; Hughes, 1985; Spores, 1988).

Although Carr (1985) argues that *amok* is properly understood as a specifically Malay phenomenon, others see similarities with sudden, homicidal attacks in other parts of the world, as in mass shootings in schools and workplaces in the United States, for example (Arboleda-Florez, 1985). Theorists who like to compare similar events in disparate settings might also ask whether ostensibly politically motivated attacks such as suicide bombings in Israel, Palestine, and other world areas share similarities with these other described assaults. Although Simons and Hughes (1985) argue to retain *amok* within the culture-bound syndromes, the frequency of mass homicidal and homicidal/suicidal attacks in a variety of world areas tends to indicate, once again, that the idea of culturebounding remains problematic. However, the proliferation of sudden homicidal and homicidal/suicidal attacks in many parts of the world indicates that understanding such behavior, however classified, should remain a priority.

#### **KURU**

Unlike other culture-bound syndromes, *kuru* has been identified with a biomedical condition. First appearing among Fore tribal people in New Guinea in the late 1920s, *kuru* (meaning shaking with fear) manifested with tremors and progressive dementia concluding in inevitable early death and was most common among women. The Fore at first attributed it to assault by ghosts, but eventually concluded that it was caused by sorcery. By the early 1960s, the Fore were a community in crisis with increasing numbers of women dying from *kuru*, and they responded with community meetings to denounce sorcery and increasing attempts to identify the witches they believed were killing their wives and mothers (Lindenbaum, 1979, 2001). However, by the 1990s the incidence of *kuru* had dropped to the point where it is today a rare condition (Lindenbaum, 2001).

In 1979, physician D. Carleton Gadjusek won the Nobel Prize in medicine for his discovery of an infectious origin for *kuru*, which his research revealed to be caused by what he called a "slow virus" but later researchers call a prion similar to those that cause Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, scrapie, and, more recently, bovine spongiform encephalitis ("mad cow disease"). In combination with research by anthropologist Shirley Lindenbaum, his work showed a possible transmission path through the practice of consuming parts of the remains of deceased relatives as an aspect of funerary practices, allegedly an increasing practice in the early 20th century, but ceasing by the 1960s (Lindenbaum, 1979). This contention has attracted controversy because there has been no firsthand observation of endo-cannibalism among the Fore (Lindenbaum, 2001).

*Kuru* fits two of Hall's classifications of culturebound syndromes (Hall, 2001): "culturally accepted explanatory models of sickness not matching allopathic categories and which in Western settings might indicate delusions" (the attribution of witchcraft) and "discrete disease entities not or not yet recognized by

Western medicine" (during the time before Gadjuzek's discovery).

#### **LATAH**

Latah, from the Malay word for "ticklish," denotes a person who responds to being startled by temporarily entering an altered state in which she or he will obey commands, imitate movements or sounds repeatedly, utter rude or obscene language, and/or act in sexually inappropriate ways (Winzeler, 1995). Like *amok, latah* has been described in English language literature for some time, with earliest mentions dating from the 19th century. From the late 1960s to the present, anthropologists have debated the significance of *latah*. Starting with Hildred Geertz's discussion of the "latah paradox," which she described as the problem that while *latah* is culturally specific to Malaysia, similar forms of hyperstartling behavior have been observed in other cultures (Geertz, 1968), anthropologists have tried to account for both generalizability and specificity in *latah* behavior (similar to problems with the definition of other culture-bound syndromes). Together with *amok* and *koro, latah* became a common literary topic that some have seen as part of the making of stereotypes of both exoticism and uncivilizeability about Malays and similar peoples by Western colonialists (Winzeler, 1995).

Simons (1985) posits that although individuals in all cultures vary in how they respond to startling, and some individuals respond with brief periods of *latah*-like behavior, in Malaysia, popular amusement with hyperstartling has led to a cultural complex around this behavior, which establishes a social role for people who exhibit it, and encourages people to induce it by deliberately startling *latahs* repeatedly until they perform as expected. While English-language commentary tends to refer to *latah* as a problem, Malaysian villagers studied seem to regard it as an amusing personality quirk instead (Simons, 1985).

However, Kenny (1985) finds this explanation too limitingly biomedical in nature, preferring to see *latah* as only lightly related to cultural elaborations of hyperstartling. Instead, he posits that the behavior finds meaning within a complex of beliefs about marginality and distress, in the context of culturally specific notions of spirit possession and shamanism. The hilarity with which villagers address *latahs* and their clowning social role

reflect their state of marginality, according to Kenny (1978, 1985).

## **CULTURE-BOUND SYNDROMES AND SOCIAL CHANGE**

Although the term "culture-bound" refers to a concept of culture that comes from an earlier period in anthropological theory in which culture was seen as relatively unchanging and localized, contemporary anthropologists increasingly see such syndromes as not only characterized by the same historical changes and globalization that affect all cultural phenomena, but as derived from such changes directly. For example, Carr posits that the incidence of *amok* may have risen under colonialism and with urbanization in Malaysia because Malaysian rural culture had insufficient ways of dealing with the sharp rise in interpersonal conflict when the society came under stress (Carr, 1985). Eguchi (1991) theorizes that phenomena such as fox possession became psychiatric syndromes, defined as disease, only when the religious context in which they originally appeared changed. When most people no longer believed in fox spirits, those who did were labeled as delusional, and therefore sick. Jilek and Jilek-Aal (1985) discuss *koro* epidemics as manifestations of anxiety about violent ethnic conflicts, and Lindenbaum (1979) describes how the Fore people responded to an epidemic in their midst through concepts of sorcery. Marano (1985) believes that the whole concern of Western observers with *windigo* psychosis derives from a misunderstanding of a rise in witchcraft accusation within a colonial context, and Winzeler (1995) discusses early descriptions of both *amok* and *latah* as part of the creation of stereotypes of deficiency in colonized Malaysians.

These approaches suggest that culture-bound syndromes are involved with culture change in several ways. For one, the incidence and types of expressions of distress may rise with rapid and forced cultural change. In addition, as beliefs change, those who hold to older patterns may become newly classified as sick within their home communities. And in addition, the very concept of culture-bound syndromes may result from misunderstandings that ensue when members of politically dominant groups attempt to study dominated groups and classify their behaviors.

Theorists of diverse disciplines do not agree on how to understand behavior and emotion cross-culturally and debates over culture-bound syndromes in the current literature reflect their differences. Theorists continue to debate which named syndromes ought to be included in the category "culture-bound syndrome," whether such a theoretical category has any utility, and how to understand cross-cultural differences and both how and whether to include more cultural diversity within biomedical disease classifications. These debates as well as the interest of the ethnographic material itself make the field of "culture-bound syndromes," whether one accepts or rejects the term, continually lively.

#### **REFERENCES**

- American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
- Arboleda-Flores, J. (1985). *Amok*. In R. C. Simons & C. C. Hughes (Eds.), *The culture-bound syndromes: Folk illnesses of psychiatric and anthropological interest* (pp. 251–262). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel/Kluwer Academic.
- Baer, R. D., & Bustillo, M. (1993). *Susto* and *mal de ojo* among Florida farmworkers: Emic and etic perspectives. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 7*, 90–100.
- Barnett, E. A. (1989). Notes on nervios: A disorder of menopause. In D. L. Davis & S. M. Low (Eds.), *Gender, health, and illness: The case of nerves* (pp. 67–78). New York: Hemisphere.
- Bartholomew, R. E. (1994). The social psychology of "epidemic" koro. *International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 40*, 46–60.
- Burton-Bradley, R. G. (1985). The *amok* syndrome in Papua and New Guinea. In R. C. Simons & C. C. Hughes (Eds.), *The culture-bound syndromes: Folk illnesses of psychiatric and anthropological interest* (pp. 237–250). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel.
- Camino, L. (1989). Nerves, worriation, and black women: A community study in the American south. In D. L. Davis & S. M. Low (Eds.), *Gender, health, and illness: The case of nerves* (pp. 203–222). New York: Hemisphere.
- Carr, J. E. (1985). Ethno-behaviorism and the culture-bound syndromes: The case of *amok*. In R. C. Simons & C. C. Hughes (Eds.), *The culture-bound syndromes: Folk illnesses of psychiatric and anthropological interest* (pp. 199–223). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel/Kluwer Academic.
- Cayleff, S. (1988). "Prisoners of their own feebleness": Women, nerves and western medicine—a historical overview. *Social Science & Medicine, 26*, 1199–1207.
- Cheng, S. (1996). A critical review of Chinese koro. *Culture, Medicine, & Psychiatry, 20*, 67–82.
- Chowdhury, A. N. (1998). Hundred years of koro: The history of a culture-bound syndrome. *International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 44*, 181–188.
- Chowdhury, A. N., & Bera, N. (1994). Koro following cannabis smoking: Two case reports. *Addiction, 89*, 1017–1020.

- Clark, M. H. (1989). Nevra in a Greek village: Idiom, metaphor, symptom, or disorder? In D. L. Davis & S. M. Low (Eds.), *Gender, health, and illness: The case of nerves* (pp.103–126). New York: Hemisphere.
- Crandon, L. (1983). Why susto? *Ethnology, 22*, 153–168.
- Davis, D. L. (1983). Woman the worrier: Confronting feminist and biomedical archetypes of stress. *Women's Studies, 10*: 135–146.
- Davis, D. L. (1989). The variable character of nerves in a Newfoundland fishing village. *Medical Anthropology, 2*, 63–78.
- Davis, D. L., & Guarnaccia, P. J. (1989). Health, culture, and the nature of nerves: Introduction. *Medical Anthropology, 2*, 1–13.
- Davis, D. L., & Low, S. M. (Eds.). (1989). *Gender, health, and illness: The case of nerves*. New York: Hemisphere.
- Davis, D. L., & Whitten, R. G. (1988). Medical and popular traditions of nerves. *Social Science & Medicine, 26*, 1209–1221.
- Dobkin de Rios, M. (1985). *Saladera*—a culture-bound misfortune syndrome in the Peruvian Amazon. In R. C. Simons & C. C. Hughes (Eds.), *The culture-bound syndromes: Folk illnesses of psychiatric and anthropological interest* (pp. 351–370). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel/Kluwer Academic.
- Duarte, L. F. D. (1986). *Da Vida Nervosa Nas Classes Trabalhadores Urbanas*. Rio de Janeiro: Jorge Zahar.
- Dunk, P. (1989) Greek women and broken nerves in Montreal. *Medical Anthropology, 2*, 29–45.
- Earleywine, M. (2001). Cannabis-induced koro in Americans. *Addiction, 96*, 1663–1666.
- Eguchi, S. (1991). Between folk concepts of illness and psychiatric diagnosis: *Kitsune-tsuki* (Fox Possession) in a mountain village of western Japan. *Culture, Medicine, & Psychiatry, 15*, 421–451.
- Etsuko, M. (1991). The interpretation of fox possession: Illness as metaphor. *Culture, Medicine, & Psychiatry, 15*, 453–477.
- Finerman, R. (1989). The burden of responsibility: Duty, depression, and nervios in Andean Ecuador. In D.L. Davis & S.M. Low (Eds.), *Gender, health, and illness: The case of nerves* (pp. 49–66). New York: Hemisphere.
- Finkler, K. (1989). The universality of nerves. In D.L. Davis & S.M. Low (Eds.), *Gender, health, and illness: The case of nerves* (pp. 79–87). New York: Hemisphere.
- Fishbain, D. A., Barsky, S., & Goldberg, M. (1989). "Koro" (Genital Retraction Syndrome): Psychotherapeutic interventions. *American Journal of Psychotherapy, 43*, 87–91.
- Geertz, H. (1968). Latah in Java: A theoretical paradox. *Indonesia, 5*, 93–104.
- Good, B. (1996). Culture and DSM-IV: Diagnosis, knowledge, and power. *Culture, Medicine, & Psychiatry, 20*, 127–132.
- Guarnaccia, P., DeLaCancela, V., & Carrillo, E. (1989). The multiple meanings of ataques de nervios in the Latino community. *Medical Anthropology, 2*, 47–62.
- Hall, T. M. (2001). Culture-bound syndromes. (September 6, 2001). Retrieved from http://weber.ucsd.edu/~thall/cbs\_intro.html.
- Hufford, D. (1982). *The terror that comes in the night: An experiencecentered study of supernatural assault traditions*. Philadelphia: The University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Hughes, C. C. (1985). Commentary: The sudden mass assault taxon. In R.C. Simons & C.C. Hughes (Eds.), *The culture-bound syndromes: Folk illnesses of psychiatric and anthropological interest* (pp. 263–266). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel/Kluwer Academic.