## Chapter 8

# Protective Discrimination: Why the Scheduled Tribes Lag Behind the Scheduled Castes

The groups identified as scheduled castes and scheduled tribes suffer from certain disabilities. Hence, the Constitution of India made certain provisions for their welfare and upliftment. However, these provisions are far from uniform for the two groups. Indeed, there are more provisions for the scheduled tribes than for the scheduled castes. Articles 15(4), 16(4), 19(5), 23, 46, 330, 332, 334, 335, and 338 are common to the two categories. Articles 29, 164, 244, 244(A), 275(1), 339(1), and 339(2) pertain only to the scheduled tribes. Articles 371(A), 371(B), and 371(C) are in force only in certain states of the north-eastern region, either in the whole state or in a part of it (Verma 1990).

Of the provisions provided for the social and educational advancement of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes, the policy of protective discrimination has been one of the most debated and discussed. Based on this policy, the government has laid down three kinds of arrangements. First, seats have been reserved for them in Parliament and the state legislatures. Second, jobs have been reserved for them in government and semi-government services. Third, seats have been reserved for them in educational institutions, especially in institutions of higher learning, such as colleges and universities. To this end, a certain percentage of seats or a quota was earmarked in Parliament and the state legislatures, government services, and educational institutions for members of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes. The quota was fixed keeping in mind the size of the population of the two groups in the 1950s when India adopted the policy of protective discrimination. It was 15 per cent for the scheduled castes and 7.5 per cent for the scheduled tribes. The percentage so fixed has remained the same until today, although the population of the two groups has

increased. As per the 1991 Census, the scheduled castes constitute 16.5 per cent of the population and the scheduled tribes constitute 8.01 per cent.

Though the reservation policy has been in force for five decades and the population of the two communities has grown over the years, the filling of the quota as fixed by the government is a problem even today. This is far more the case at the upper levels of the government and semi-government services. There are many reasons as to why the quota reserved for the two groups could not be filled. Much has already been written on the subject. The reasons put forward range from apathy and indifference on the part of the government to the unavailability of suitable candidates from the scheduled caste and the scheduled tribe categories on account of their social, economic, and educational backgrounds (Ram 1981). Hence, the focus of this chapter is not on this aspect of the reservation policy. Instead, the chapter will consider the following issues: (1) a comparison between the scheduled tribes and the scheduled castes in relation to the benefits derived by them from the facilities extended to them so far; and (2) an analysis, although tentative, as to why one category has fared better than the other, or alternately, as to why one has not fared as well as the other. It is interesting to note that though the filling of the quota falls short of the government requirement with respect to both the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes, and particularly with respect to the higher grade services, the availing of the benefits by the two categories has been uneven.

Relative Positions of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes

As pointed out earlier, the provision of reservation for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes has been made in three areas: Parliament and the state legislatures (politics), government services, and educational institutions. In politics, the provision of reservation was initially meant for a period of ten years, but ever since then, it has been renewed on a regular basis. It is worth noting here that such time limits, contrary to general belief, were not fixed in the areas of government services and educational institutions (Galanter 1984: 46). Unlike the scheduled tribes, which have been unable to create a space for themselves at the national and regional levels, the scheduled castes have been able to do so, especially in cases where the two groups have been sharing these facilities.

#### Politics

Let us start with the sphere of politics. As noted earlier, 15 per cent and 7.5 per cent of seats in Parliament are reserved for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes respectively. In the state legislatures, the percentage of seats earmarked for them varies according to the size of their respective populations in the concerned state. Now the question is: how have the two categories fared at the regional and national levels? In the areas of government services and educational institutions, the relative positions of the two groups can be discerned from statistical figures. After all, statistical figures are to a greater or lesser extent related to performance. In the area of politics, one cannot judge the relative positions of the two groups in terms of their share in parliament and the state legislatures for two reasons. First, the share of each group is invariably related to the size of its population. Second, and more importantly, there exists in the political sphere a correspondence between what is stipulated and what the actual situation is. In 1999, the number of seats occupied by scheduled caste and scheduled tribe candidates in Parliament was 79 (14.5 per cent) and 41 (7.5 per cent) respectively. The corresponding figures for the state legislatures were 562 (13.8 per cent) for the scheduled castes and 539 (13.2 per cent) for the scheduled tribes (Planning Commission 2000a; Planning Commission 2000b). The higher share of the scheduled tribes in the state assemblies is because of the creation of tribal states, mainly in the northeastern region. The reasons for the different performances of the two groups in politics, therefore, have to be found elsewhere. Over the question of what these parameters should be, there is surely going to be a difference of opinion among scholars. All the same criteria, such as political appointments to Parliament and the state legislatures or to government posts (such as membership of the council of ministers or the standing committees, or even offices in political parties), may be considered of critical significance in this context. Yet the share of the two categories in the above position may depend greatly on the nature of their participation and the mobilization process. The two together may, therefore, be taken as the domain where the relative performance of the two categories can be assessed. There are, however, no data at our disposal on the aspects corresponding to the ones that we have on government services and educational institutions. All the

same, some evidence, although sketchy, is available. In the area of democratic politics, the numerical strength of the groups or categories is of crucial importance, both at the national and regional levels. The numerical strength of the scheduled castes gives them an advantage over the scheduled tribes in national politics. It is true that the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes do not constitute a homogeneous and cohesive social group either in Parliament or in the state legislatures. They are fragmented along political, linguistic, and regional lines. Yet no government can ignore the issue of adequate representation of groups described as scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. In all these spheres, the scheduled castes have had an edge over the scheduled tribes over the years. The scheduled castes have invariably had better representation in the government in terms of holding ministerial portfolios and other positions like state governorships. Further, whereas the scheduled castes can boast of having produced leaders and administrators such as B. R. Ambedkar and Jagjivan Ram in the past, and K. R. Narayanan, Buta Singh, Ram Vilas Paswan, Kanshi Ram, and Mayawati in more recent times, it is hard to find any leaders of a similar stature from among the scheduled tribes. P. A. Sangma may be considered one such leader, though he does not have a following even within a region, let alone among tribes across regions. In short, the scheduled tribes have not been able to carve out a space akin to that of the scheduled castes in national politics. Even at the regional level, where the scheduled tribes have been sharing power with the scheduled castes, their presence is hardly noticeable.

## Government Services

If one examines the relative positions of the two categories in government services, one finds that the scheduled tribes have not fared as well as the scheduled castes in availing of the facility of reservation extended to them by the government. This is shown clearly in the table given below. The data are based on information available as on 1 January 1995.

It is evident from the table that the share of the scheduled tribes in respect of the A, B, C, and D groups of government services was 2.89, 2.68, 5.69, and 6.48 per cent respectively as against 10.15, 12.67, 16.15, and 21.26 per cent respectively in the case of the scheduled castes. The

scheduled tribes thus fell short of the stipulated quota both in respect of the aggregate and the individual groups of government services. Moreover, the shortfalls at the higher levels were far greater compared to those for the scheduled castes. In contrast, the scheduled castes fell short of the stipulated quota only in respect of group A and B services, and that too not to a substantial degree. In respect of C and D services, their share exceeded the required quota of 15.5 per cent.

| Group | Total no. of<br>employees | No. of SC | %     | No. of ST | %    |
|-------|---------------------------|-----------|-------|-----------|------|
| A     | 65,408                    | 6.637     | 10.15 | 1,891     | 2.89 |
| 'B'   | 1.08.857                  | 13,797    | 12.67 | 2,913     | 2.68 |
| 'C'   | 23,41,863                 | 3.78.179  | 16.15 | 1,33,179  | 5.69 |
| D'    | 10,41,082                 | 2,21,380  | 21.25 | 67,453    | 6.48 |
| Total | 35,57,210                 | 6.19,986  | 17.43 | 2,05,436  | 5.78 |

**Table 8.1:** Share of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes at Various Levels of Government Services

Note: 'D' excludes sweepers.

Source: Report of the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, Vol. 1, 1996–97 and 1997–98.

The position of the scheduled tribes with respect to their share in academic or teaching posts in colleges and universities is no better. In Delhi University, until 1995, out of 700 teachers in the university departments, there were only nine teachers from the scheduled caste and the scheduled tribe categories. Out of these, only two were from the scheduled tribe category. If one were to include the undergraduate colleges of Delhi University, the scenario would be even worse. The picture is no different in the other universities in the country, as shown by the data given below.

**Table 8.2:** Designation-wise Position of SC/ST Teachers in University Teaching Departments/University Colleges, 1992–93

| Designation | Total  | SC  | Percentage | ST | Percentage |
|-------------|--------|-----|------------|----|------------|
| Professor   | 3,338  | 32. | 0.96       |    | 0.33       |
| Reader      | 5,837  | 104 | 1.78       | 31 | 0.53       |
| ecrurer     | 10,191 | 328 | 3.22       | 81 | 0.79       |

Source: UGC, 'Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Enrollment, Teaching and Non-Teaching Staff in University Teaching Departments/University Colleges', p. 55.

They are also more sparsely distributed in the field of science and technology compared to other areas of employment. It has not been possible to furnish detailed and comprehensive data in support of the above statement. There is no dearth of data, fragmented though they may be, in support of the point made above. In public sector undertakings such as Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., Bharat Electronics Ltd., and Bharat Dynamics Ltd., the share of the scheduled castes in Class I jobs was 3.39, 2.38, and 7.90 per cent as against 1.88, 14.37, and 23.70 per cent for Class II jobs respectively. In contrast, the share of the scheduled tribes was 0.12, 0.20, and nil respectively for Class I jobs and 0.26, 0.90, and again nil in respect of Class II jobs respectively (Report of the Commissioner for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes 1975–77).

## Educational Institutions

One of the major prerequisites for filling positions reserved for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in government and semi-government services is the attainment of the minimum educational qualification specified for these jobs or positions. Hence, reservation has also been provided for in educational institutions, especially those of higher education. However, the scenario with respect to the enrollment of the scheduled tribes in institutions of higher learning such as colleges and universities is almost similar to the situation in the sphere of government services. The following data substantiate this point.

| Faculty     | SC   | ST  | SC & ST |
|-------------|------|-----|---------|
| Aris        | 8.0  | 3.9 | 11.9    |
| Science     | 5.8  | 21  | 7.9     |
| Engg/Tech   | 8.1  | 2.1 | 10.2    |
| Mexicine    | 11.9 | 4.4 | 16.3    |
| Agriculture | 10.7 | 5.4 | 16.1    |
| Law         | 11.7 | 27  | 14.4    |

**Table 8.3:** Faculty-wise Percentage Position of SC/ST Enrollment, 1992–93

Note: Enrollment faculty-wise includes levels ranging from undergraduate to research plus diploma/certificate courses.

Source: UGC, 'Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Enrollsment, Teaching and Non-Teaching Staff in University Teaching Departments/University Colleges', p. 5.

It is obvious from the above that the presence of the scheduled tribes at the national level is weaker than that of the scheduled castes. In addition, the share of the scheduled tribes in fields such as science, engineering, technology, and law is much smaller than in other fields. The data that we have from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur for the period between 1969–70 and 1973–74 corroborates the existence of this pattern. Since then there has been marked improvement in the share of the tribes.

| Year        | No. of candidates<br>applied for [EE |        | No. of<br>candidates<br>in merit list?<br>and called for<br>interview |      | No. of<br>candidates<br>offered<br>admission |         | No. of candidates<br>actually admitted |    |              |                          |
|-------------|--------------------------------------|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|------|----------------------------------------------|---------|----------------------------------------|----|--------------|--------------------------|
|             | Total                                | SC     | ST                                                                    | SC   | ST                                           | SC      | ST                                     | SC | ST           | Total                    |
| $1967 - 68$ | 62                                   | 47     | 15                                                                    | Sec. |                                              | invest. |                                        |    |              | $\overline{\phantom{a}}$ |
| 1968-69     | 47                                   | 2      | $\sim$                                                                |      |                                              |         |                                        |    |              | $\sim$                   |
| $1969 - 70$ | 35                                   | 29     | 6                                                                     | 7    | 1                                            | 7       |                                        | 7  | 1            | 8                        |
| $1970 - 71$ | 2.8                                  | $\sim$ | $\sim$                                                                | 6    | 1                                            | 6       |                                        | 6  | 1            | 7                        |
| 1971-72     | 35                                   | $\sim$ | $\overline{ }$                                                        | 1    | $\mathbf{a}$                                 |         | $\sim$                                 |    | $\mathbf{m}$ | 1                        |
| 1972-73     | 79                                   | $\sim$ |                                                                       |      | $\overline{ }$                               |         |                                        |    | $\sim$       | 1                        |
| 1973-74     | 98                                   | 86     | 12                                                                    | 42   | 6                                            | 42      | 6                                      |    |              | 46                       |

**Table 8.4:** Admission of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe Students in IIT, Kanpur, 1967–78

Source: K. N. Sharma et al., Educational Arithmetic of Social Inequality: A Study of Admission and Adjustment of IIT, Kanpur Students, 1974 (mimeograph).

One finds that the enrollment of the scheduled tribes in various courses offered at the higher levels of education falls below that of the scheduled castes. Moreover, the share of the scheduled tribes in the various courses offered is very uneven. One finds that in comparison to the natural sciences, more scheduled tribe candidates prefer the arts and humanities. This is apparent from the enrollment data given above as well as from the employment data of the scheduled tribes in sectors, departments, and

faculties where science and technology training is crucial. The employment pattern of the scheduled tribes in public sector undertakings has been referred to earlier. The pattern is similar in colleges and university departments. In the North-eastern Hill University, Shillong, for example, of the 30 teaching positions held by scheduled tribe candidates in 1986, only three were in the faculty of sciences. The scenario at Delhi University or elsewhere is no different. Even within the sciences, more scheduled tribe candidates opt for courses such as agriculture and medicine rather than other science courses. Of equal significance is the fact that the enrollment of scheduled tribe members in arts and humanities courses, contrary to general belief, is lower than it is in medicine and agriculture courses. The situation in NEHU since then has improved. There are about 20–25 scheduled tribe teachers in the faculty of sciences in NEHU today. Even at the regional level, where the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes share in resources, the performance of the scheduled castes, as can be seen in the table below, has been invariably better. Paradoxically, this is the case even in those states where the scheduled tribes easily outnumber the scheduled castes. Madhya Pradesh and Orissa may be taken as two appropriate cases. The scheduled tribes constitute between 22 to 23 per cent of the total population in each of the two states as against 4 per cent and 7 per cent for the scheduled castes respectively.

| State          |      | Undergraduate |      | Postgraduate |
|----------------|------|---------------|------|--------------|
|                | SC   | ST            | SC   | ST           |
| Gujarat        | 3.6  | 1.9           | 6.4  | 12.8         |
| Karnataka      | 23.3 | 2.6           | 21.7 | 6.4          |
| Madhya Pradesh | 13.9 | 6.1           | 12.5 | 4.8          |
| Maharashtra    | 11.4 | 3.0           | 12.1 | 2.0          |
| Orissa         | 14.1 | 4.8           | 13.1 | 5.2          |
| West Bengal    | 11.2 | 0.5           | 7.3  | 0.4          |

**Table 8.5:** State-wise enrollment of SCs and STs in UG and PG Courses

Source: UGC, 'Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Enrollment, Teaching and Non-Teaching Staff in University Teaching Departments/University Colleges', pp. 12–18.

## Explaining the Phenomenon

Though reservations have been provided for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes, the filling of these seats, especially in government services and institutions of higher education, is not routine and mechanical. Rather, it is dependent on the candidates' performances in tests, examinations, and interviews, besides, of course, in their meeting the appropriate educational requirements. This partly explains why the state has not been able to fill these posts and seats for both the scheduled tribes and the scheduled castes. This has been the case especially with the scheduled tribes. It is striking that the scheduled tribes have invariably played second fiddle to the scheduled castes when it comes to taking advantage of the benefits and facilities extended to them, whether it is in education, science and technology, the civil services, or politics. An attempt is made here to examine why the scheduled tribes have not achieved as much as the scheduled castes. The aim is not to examine the basic assumptions underlying the educational system, with its overriding focus on individual performance and competitiveness. The provision of reservation by itself does not question the basic premises.

Why have the scheduled tribes not performed as well as the scheduled castes? Does the difference in their relative performances have anything to do with factors such as demographic size, literacy rate, and geographical mobility? It is true that the scheduled caste population is twice the size of the scheduled tribe population, but for our purposes here, this factor is hardly significant, as the issue under examination is in keeping with the size of the respective populations of both groups. In terms of overall literacy, the scheduled castes have fared better than the scheduled tribes. As per the 1991 Census, their literacy rate was 37.4 per cent as against 29.6 per cent for the scheduled tribes. In 2001, the literacy rate of the scheduled castes stood at 54.34 per cent as against 46.42 for the scheduled tribes. The geographical mobility of the scheduled tribes, especially the educated sections, is not as pronounced as that of the scheduled castes both in regard to intra and inter-state migration. within and outside of the states. It is precisely these differences that need to be problematized rather than be taken for granted or ignored as corollaries of the reservation policy.

Any attempt at understanding such problems entails a discussion of two aspects or levels, which are intimately related to one another. The relative

positions of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes in availing the benefits provided by the government are to a great extent dependent on two factors. One is the relative position of the two groups with respect to their general educational attainment, especially at the level of higher education. The other factor is their overall performance at these levels. For it is not only their enrollment in higher education courses, but also the quality of their performance over the duration of the courses and their successful completion of the same that is critical in assessing their eligibility for jobs and positions at different levels. It may not be out of place to point out here that the dropout rates for the scheduled tribes between classes I and X are higher than those for the scheduled castes. The figures for the scheduled tribes in 1980–81 and 1990–91 were 91.18 and 86 per cent respectively as against 86.91 and 80.58 per cent for the scheduled castes (Planning Commission 2000a; Planning Commission 2000b).

Before one explores the above question, it is important to note that a certain degree of arbitrariness is invariably involved in dividing the population into categories such as scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. There have been groups, small though in number, which have been categorized as tribes not because they share attributes characteristic of tribes but on considerations such as political and administrative manoeuvring. Such arbitrariness extends to the demarcation of the population into various other categories as well. However, they are more exceptions than the general rule.

One could begin exploring the above question by examining the logic of the reservation policy for the two categories. It must be mentioned here that the logic of reservation for the two categories, in contrast to conventional belief, is not identical. The scheduled castes were extended reservation because they suffered from certain disabilities arising from their segregation from the dominant community. The scheduled tribes, on the other hand, were granted reservation not because they were segregated from the dominant community but because they lived in complete isolation from the dominant community. This difference is hardly ever pointed out, let alone explicated. Rather, the general tendency is to treat the two similarly.

This may be taken as the starting point for a discussion as to why the scheduled castes have fared better than the scheduled tribes. The scheduled castes generally have been described as those falling outside the varna system. Though outside the varna system, the scheduled castes, or the former untouchables, are integral to the dominant community, whether in the village or the town, the only difference being that the untouchables were unjustly segregated from the community and were subjected to forms of disabilities and discrimination. The scheduled castes have, therefore, had greater exposure to the larger society as compared to the scheduled tribes. This is to say that the opportunities made available to the larger society or to the higher castes in the form of knowledge, information, technology, employment, etc. were also in sight for the scheduled castes, even though they were denied access to it. Such advantages were absent for the scheduled tribes. The tribes thus suffered the disadvantage of isolation in this regard.

It is highly unlikely that educated Indians are unaware of the categories 'scheduled castes' and 'scheduled tribes'. Yet, while they may be familiar with the scheduled caste category and have an idea of what it means, the same cannot be said, with a similar degree of certainty, about the scheduled tribe category. To begin with, despite being segregated, discriminated against, and oppressed, scheduled castes are seen invariably as a part of Hindu society. Since Hindu society can be understood effectively at the regional level, scheduled castes are an integral part of the regional community. This regional community is also at the same time a linguistic community. Hence, though divided on the basis of caste, scheduled castes share the language, culture, tradition, etc. of the larger linguistic community. They constitute a part of the dominant community of the region. This is not the case with the scheduled tribes, and this turns out to be one of the most serious handicaps before them. Indeed, an average Indian cannot figure out where the scheduled tribes fall in the social structure. Members of tribes are, therefore, invariably seen as outsiders, as those who not only do not speak their language but also as those who do not share their customs, traditions, and values. Belonging to the scheduled tribes, though advantageous at the local level, is hardly so at the regional and national levels. Indeed, tribes suffer from all the disadvantages associated with ethnic minorities and communities. Hence the scheduled castes have generally been able to fill the jobs earmarked for them at the

lower levels. Jobs allocated for tribes at such levels, however, remain vacant mainly for two reasons. Either scheduled tribe candidates are generally not available, or when available, face general discrimination or prejudice being outside of the majority or dominant language and religion. Further, to get these jobs, members of the scheduled tribes also have to learn the language of the dominant community, an advantage that the scheduled castes already possess. In short, whereas scheduled castes are acceptable to the dominant community, scheduled tribes are not.

The presence or absence of exposure, though important, is not a sufficient explanation for the differentials between scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in their ability or willingness to make the most of reservations. The scheduled tribes, as we know, is not a homogeneous category. Not only do the tribes differ in terms of size, language, regional origin or religion, they also differ in terms of their exposure to the larger society. The contact of the tribes with the larger society, though not altogether absent, was tenuous and limited prior to the arrival of the British. The situation changed with the onset of colonial rule. Tribes were increasingly brought into contact with the larger society through modern means of transportation and communication like roads and railways, growth of trade and commerce, and expansion of market forces. This process intensified in the post-independence period as a result of the geographic, economic, and political integration of the country. Of course, the degree and nature of this integration varies from tribe to tribe. Yet tribes with a history of such contacts and exposure to the larger society, especially lasting more than a century, have not necessarily fared better than those that have had minimal exposure.

Hence, to seek the reasons as to why scheduled tribes have not fared as well as scheduled castes, we have to go beyond the aforementioned explanations. My contention is that exposure per se is not as important as the social structure they represent and of which they are a part. Besides being considered outside of 'civilization', tribes in India represented a different type of society. Tribal societies on the whole are small in size and are marked by a great deal of homogeneity despite being differentiated along the lines mentioned above. They are characterized more by similarity and resemblance than by differentiation and heterogeneity, especially in

terms of their structural features. Thus, tribal societies are marked by an absence of interdependence, division of labour and occupation, and correspondingly by a heterogeneity of values, skills, knowledge, income, wealth, status, and privilege.

The structure specific to tribal society gives rise to certain disadvantages. Tribes are small-scale societies and are not part of the larger society, though they may have some kind of contact and interaction with it. The description of tribal society as small scale is relative, that is, in relation to the dominant community, but it varies in size, from over 7 million in the case of the Gonds and the Bhils to less than 1,000 in the case of many tribal communities. Nevertheless tribal societies are characterized by a great deal of homogeneity in their social structure, a point that has already been made. Interestingly, there seems to be no correlation between the size of the population of the different tribal groups and their performance in literacy and other development related indicators. Rather, the pattern seems to be that the larger the size, the lower is the literacy rate, educational attainment, and share in the facilities extended by the government. This means that the size of the population has nothing to do with the differential share of tribal groups with respect to the facilities extended through reservation. The case of the Gonds, the Bhils, and the Santhals, the three major tribal communities in India, will be examined in this context.

A lack of heterogeneity in terms of the social division of labour, occupation, skill, class, access to power and modes of living has been considered characteristic of tribal societies. This being the case, there is hardly any group or stratum that can be taken as the reference point for emulation by the scheduled tribes. Of course, there have been tribal societies with some forms of stratification, if one may use the term, but they have been rudimentary and mainly based on clan or lineage. Moreover, they were not characterized by status differentiation, though privileges of some kind were not ruled out entirely. Further, there is hardly anything like tribal identity among the scheduled tribes at the pan-India level. If at all there is anything like tribal identity, it is confined either to a locality or region, or at best to an institution or organization. Moreover, such an identity is at work more at the levels of the political or interest articulation than at the social or cultural planes. Even when there has been an identity such as this, it has not

been assertive and active. Such an identity among scheduled castes, both at the regional and national levels, is more pronounced in comparison to that of the scheduled tribes. One of the reasons why such an identity is much stronger among the scheduled castes is that they have gone through a common historical experience of oppression and discrimination for centuries. This was not the case with the scheduled tribes. Further, the oppression and exploitation of the tribes took an economic and political form. It did not percolate to the social and cultural levels, as was the case with the scheduled castes. The reason for this is that the scheduled castes were part of the larger community, where as the scheduled tribes were not. The scheduled castes, therefore, have had reference points not only within the system of which they were a part, viz. higher caste groups, but also within their own social category. They have been able to develop a very strong sense of identity both at the regional and national levels despite being regionally and linguistically heterogeneous. This has been helpful and important not only in social networking, but, more importantly, also in the areas of interest articulation and social and political mobilization.

Tribes have now been exposed to the market, the bureaucracy, the state, and the wider world. But earlier they had little knowledge of or interaction with these outside forces, largely because they had little to do with people they considered different. Even if they had to interact with outsiders, they did so minimally. Not only did the non-tribes treat the tribes as outsiders, the tribes themselves considered the non-tribes outsiders, and hence not worthy of emulation. Of course, there were exceptions to this rule. The incorporation of tribes into the larger society paved the way for more intense interaction between tribes and non-tribes, leading to increasing exploitation of and discrimination against tribes. This was, broadly speaking, confined to the economic sphere. In the social and cultural spheres, tribes lived a life outside of the larger society. This is not to deny that certain sections among the tribes sought to adopt the lifestyle of the castes and groups of the larger society. Such emulation, however, remained confined to the cultural sphere and failed to be adopted at the structural level. Where it did succeed in being adopted, tribes by virtue of being absorbed into the larger society lost their distinct identity. The desire for integration with the larger society, and the impulse to be identified with it,

was, on the whole, missing. The larger society was seen as exploitative and oppressive, something to be opposed and fought against. In the process, it could never become a standard for evaluation, emulation, and aspiration.

An equally important aspect worth noting is that it is collectivity and not individuality that dominates the larger part of tribal life. Hence, the principle of individuality, and the celebration of individual performance and excellence, is less acceptable as the ethos of tribal societies. Collectivity is still the central value or ethos among tribes despite the existence of certain forms of inequality among them. Of course, with their incorporation into the wider world and the provision of protective discrimination aimed at the advancement and welfare of tribal people, tribal societies are becoming increasingly differentiated. The processes are, however, uneven among them. Despite these developments, egalitarianism to a greater or lesser degree continues to be the guiding ethos or spirit of tribal societies. In view of values such as these, the significance of the individual and of individualism does not assume the place that it assumes among other groups. Hence, performance and achievement stemming from the spirit of individualism are not reflected adequately in tribal societies. That such a tendency or spirit is also partly responsible for the poor academic performance of tribal students cannot be denied.

It is also important to bear in mind that tribes are by and large dependent on nature, viz. land and forest, for their survival and livelihood. They make their living mainly as food gatherers, hunters, livestock holders, cultivators, or follow a combination of these occupations. In view of this, magic and ritual, or at best rational adaptation rather than rational calculation and domination, characterize their orientation towards life. The fact that the scheduled tribes are relatively better represented in terms of enrollment and employment in disciplines connected with agriculture and medicine may have something to do with the link that they have with the organic world. In comparison, the scheduled castes are less rooted in nature and hence are more attracted to abstraction the sine qua non for science and mathematics. The scheduled castes are engaged in occupations that are either service or craft-oriented; these occupations are characterized to some degree by calculation, reciprocity, and commitment, and hence go beyond the rhythms of nature. This may partly explain the higher ratio of enrollment and

employment of the scheduled castes in the fields of science and technology in comparison to that of the scheduled tribes. By virtue of being engaged in such fields, they had the advantage of being absorbed in industries that came up during the period of British rule. They thus had the historical advantage of being not only a part of modern industrial organizations but also of participating in the processes of urbanization and urbanization, that were accelerated under British rule.

Given the structural setting in which the scheduled castes lived compared to that of the scheduled tribes, the constitutional provision turned out to be a major breakthrough for them, but not for the scheduled tribes. With the adoption of the Constitution, the ideology of hierarchy and inequality was formally replaced by the ideology of equality and social justice. For the first time in the history of India, the scheduled castes were offered the same civil and political rights as the other citizens. The harmonic system, viz. congruence between the ideology and the social structure that characterized Indian society, gave way to a disharmonic system with the adoption of the Indian Constitution (Béteille 1974). Now there was disharmony between a structure that was inherently non-egalitarian and an ideology that called for the abolition of discrimination based on race, caste, religion, etc. The actual social system, then, was far from conducive to the realization of the ideal that was set in motion in independent India. Hence, various kinds of provisions were extended under the Constitution for the benefit and protection of those affected by the system. Of these provisions, reservation has come to be the most important. As noted above, the scheduled castes were a part of the larger society and had faced discrimination at almost all levels of social life for centuries. The extension of the constitutional provision marked the beginning of the phase aimed at reversing this process. Hence, the scheduled castes aggressively seized the opportunities made available by the Constitution. The fact that they were a part of the dominant community, and were exposed to whatever the dominant community was exposed to, helped them in taking advantage of the facilities extended by the government under the constitutional provision. Their position in the social structure helped the scheduled castes in availing of these benefits. Since discrimination was experienced at all levels of social life, the scheduled castes made use of any opportunity provided to

them for reversing such an arrangement. Since their traditional occupations determined their low social status, they were desperate to abandon these. In the context of new and diversified occupations made available under the British, the processes of industrialization and urbanization assumed critical importance, opening up space not only for geographical mobility but also for social mobility in view of the increased scope for interaction provided for the scheduled castes. Indeed, industrialization and urbanization acted as major catalyst. The adoption of the Indian Constitution in 1950 and the constitutional provision for the scheduled castes therein gave a major boost to the process of social and geographical mobility unleashed by the forces of industrialization and urbanization.

This was not the case with the scheduled tribes. They did not experience the kind of discrimination experienced by the scheduled castes, primarily because they were not an integral part of the dominant society. What they did experience under colonial rule was exploitation at the economic level and domination at the political level. They sought to fight this through a stronger articulation of their rights over land and forest, on the one hand, and a demand for political autonomy, on the other hand, rather than by demanding a share in government jobs. The Constitution, however, did not extend such a guarantee to them. Industrialization did not benefit them in the way that it did the scheduled castes, mainly because of the nature of their occupations. The scheduled tribes also did not dislike their occupations as was the case with the scheduled castes. First, there was no stigma attached to their occupations. Second, there was little inclination to abandon traditional occupations (agriculture, hunting, and food gathering) among the tribes. They were more interested in acquiring land and pursuing life as agriculturists at the first opportunity made available to them. Third, tribes face disadvantages that have accumulated with the passage of time. Since they have been independent of the larger community, and hence are not part of the dominant linguistic and religious community, they have invariably been seen as alien to that society, and hence not as legitimate claimants to a share in the state's resources. They live mostly in relatively inaccessible areas, and hence have been the last to be exposed to the modern world, especially the state, along with its legal–bureaucratic

structures, and the market. Even when they came to be exposed to these forces, it was not as a part of the social structure but as the victims of it.

In the sphere of politics too, as noted earlier, the impact made by the scheduled castes at the national and regional levels has been greater than that made by the scheduled tribes. This is partly because of their numerical strength, but, more importantly, because of the better articulation of their demands, more effective manoeuvring strategy, and better mobilization. The mobilization process in the case of the scheduled castes, unlike that in the case of the scheduled tribes, cuts across districts, regions, and even states. In the course of time, the latter have invariably emerged as national leaders, with followers from social groups cutting across different regions and states.

Since the scheduled castes have been a part of the dominant community, they are spread over the length and breadth of the country. Hence, their presence is felt much more strongly at the national and regional levels. Their presence becomes even more visible and significant because of their numerical strength. In addition, they enjoy greater unity compared to the scheduled tribes because of certain common experiences that they have undergone, irrespective of the region or the state to which they belong.

Unlike scheduled caste leaders, the impact made by scheduled tribe leaders, even when they are nationally recognized figures such as P. A. Sangma, has been less visible. It is most evident at the level of the articulation and championing of the tribal cause. Tribal leaders, including Sangma, are unable to pursue and protect the interests of the scheduled tribes as aggressively as the scheduled caste leaders. Sangma is not seen as a liberator by the tribes he represents, which is evidently the case with Paswan, Kanshi Ram, and Mayawati in relation to the scheduled castes. The reasons for this are rooted mainly in the nature of tribal society, which within any given region is divided along the lines of language, territory, and culture, on the one hand, and the needs, interests, and aspirations of its various constituent elements, on the other hand. The scheduled tribes also face difficulty in negotiating with members of the larger community, for the latter invariably see them as alien and do not regard them as an integral part of their society. Hence, there has been an inherently centrifugal rather than centripetal tendency among the scheduled tribes in India. At the subregional or local levels, the scheduled tribes have, however, succeeded in making an impact to some degree, but only in areas where they are in a numerical majority.

## Why Some Tribes have Fared Better than Others

As mentioned above, the scheduled castes have, in general, fared better than the scheduled tribes. But within these categories, some castes or tribes/communities have fared better than the others. Among the scheduled castes, for example, the Mahars of Maharashtra and the Chamars and the Jatavs of north India have done better than the other groups. Similarly, among the scheduled tribes, there are some that have done better in comparison to other tribal groups, if not as well as the scheduled castes. Indeed, there are cases where some tribal groups have done better than some scheduled caste groups. It would be interesting to explore the reasons for such differences in the case of these groups. The focus here is not so much on castes as it is on tribes. Hence, differences among the scheduled castes have not been highlighted as much as the differences among the scheduled tribes. Some tribal communities that have done relatively well are the Minas of Rajasthan, the Mizos of Mizoram, the Khasis of Meghalaya, and the Oraons of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh. Of these, the Minas are particularly noteworthy.

The Minas and the Oraons, with a population ranging between two and three million each, are smaller than groups such as the Gonds, the Bhils, and the Santhals. The Khasis and the Mizos are even smaller groups. What seems to account for the better representation of the Minas in government services is that they constituted a fairly differentiated community. Among them were large and small landowners as well as chowkidars. They were also differentiated into other categories depending on factors such as their geographical spread, nature of their social relations with caste groups such as the Jats, the Ahirs, and especially the Rajputs, and the adoption of specific occupations. As land lords or zamindars, many Minas lived off the land as extractors of rent. As lords, they were also in more regular interaction with their counterparts in other communities and also with the state authorities. The privileged section of the Mina community was thus in a position to take advantage of opportunities that were also available to

similarly placed sections in other communities. The provision of reservation gave an added advantage to members of the Mina community. Once such processes were set in motion within the community, the less privileged among them also began to take the path set by the more privileged.

Besides the Minas, other tribal groups that have done relatively well are the Mizos and the Khasis of north-eastern India and the Oraons of eastern and central India. The Mizos and the Khasis with a population of less than one million each were ruled by chieftains. They also observed a degree of social differentiation based on rank, status, and lineage. The spread of Christianity and modern education opened up new opportunities for those seeking higher rank and status. The growth of townships in the tribal heartland resulting from the establishment of new administrative systems and the rise of trade and commerce gave not only a major boost to the process of social differentiation in these societies but also led to intense interaction among the groups living there, including the tribes. There was also a strong correlation between urbanization and a higher literacy rate among the tribes.

The Oraons, unlike the Mizos and the Khasis, did not have a strong system of chieftains and kings, and hence was relatively egalitarian. The spread of Christianity and modern education among them, however, opened up the path towards social differentiation, viz. the distinction between Christian and non-Christian, educated and non-educated. It also introduced a certain degree of occupational differentiation within the community, seen in the emergence of a priestly class, teachers, and other occupational groups, which were accorded a high status. The emergence of such groups fairly early helped communities such as the Oraons to take advantage of the services provided by the modernization process. This explains, although only partially, why the Oraons have done better than the others in availing of the facilities provided by the government under various constitutional provisions.

These then are some of the structural features that help explain the better performance of the scheduled tribes and the scheduled castes.

#### References

Béteille, Andre. 1974. *Studies in Agrarian Social Structure*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

- Galanter, M. 1984. *Competing Equalities: Law and the Backward Classes in India*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 1998. Report of the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, Vol. 1, 1996–97 and 1997–98.

Planning Commission. 2000a. *Tribes in India (A Data Sheet)*.

——— . 2000b. *Scheduled Castes in India (A Data Sheet)*.

Ram, Nandu. December 1981. 'The Limited Education.' *Seminar* 268: 20–24.

- Report of the Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, Part II, 1975–76 and 1976– 77 (Appendices).
- Sharma, K. N. et al. 1974. 'Educational Arithmetic of Social Inequality (A Study of Admission and Adjustment of IIT Kanpur Students)', Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur (mimeograph).
- University Grants Commission. 1992–93. 'Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Enrolment, Teaching and Non-Teaching Staff in University Departments/University Colleges' (mimeograph).
- Verma, R. C. 1990. *Indian Tribes Through the Ages*. New Delhi: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India.