# 7

# **The Parliament**

*Mahendra Prasad Singh and Roopinder Oberoi*

## ❑❑ **Introduction**

Looking back to the historical roots of Indian Parliament, we do not find feudal antecedents like the Lords and Commons in the United Kingdom and the Estates in France. Ancient *Sabhas, Samitis,* and *Vidhatas* in the North and the self-governing local institutions in South India in the premodern times may be regarded as hoary antecedents, but they were presumably instruments of direct democracy rather than those of representative democracy.<sup>1</sup> Moreover, *Panchayats* is also supposed to have existed in the past before their statutory revival after independence in rural communities, but they are essentially instruments of local self-government.<sup>2</sup> In addition, the Sultans of Delhi were supposed to be elected by the Turkish and Afghan nobles, and liberal and orthodox factions in the Mughal court in alliance with the monarch influenced the state policy as well as successions.<sup>3</sup> But they lacked the crystallization and institutionalization of medieval European political institutions.

Hence, the historical antecedents of the Parliament must be found in the Government of India Acts of 1909 and 1935, and their feebler predecessors in the post-1857/58 period during the British Raj.<sup>4</sup> But, these British Indian experiments suffered from two basic limitations. First, these bodies were elected (earlier mostly nominated) on an extremely limited franchise based on property and education. Second, they lacked legislative autonomy from the executive power of the Governor-General and Governors. The Nehru Report (1928) and Sapru Report (1945) produced by leaders of the nationalist movement abortively advocated parliamentary federalism with certain degree of proportional representation. The Constituent Assembly retained this basic framework sans proportional representation in the 1950 constitution. The historical importance of the first Parliament elected in 1952 is that its popular chamber, the Lok Sabha, was the first legislative body in India elected on universal adult franchise and endowed with complete legislative autonomy unencumbered by any undue executive prerogatives to interfere with the legislative process; second, the Parliament is the first full-fledged national institution representing the free will of the entire Indian nation historically bedeviled by a recurrent pattern of political divisiveness and fragmentation. Third, it is the first institutional mechanism created as a built-in device for political and socio-economic change in a country whose only experience of change was through rebellion, wars, and dynastic revolutions. The principle of government based on popular and parliamentary sovereignty purports to provide an instrument of change through electoral and institutional politics among groups and classes. In the contexts of articulation of political demands for new bases of legitimacy, participation, integration, and distribution during the nationalist movement and the post-independence period the Parliament has become the formal focal point of allegiance and resolution of conflicts in the political system.

For reasons of their different patterns of institutional evolution and constitutional system, Britain and the United States feature the contrasting constitutional doctrines of parliamentary supremacy and judicial supremacy, respectively. The American constitutional doctrine of separation of powers among three more or less coequal organs of government—executive, legislature, and judiciary—does not create a supreme legislature; it circumscribes the powers of the legislature through a system of checks and balances among the three governmental organs. The principle of parliamentary supremacy as it has evolved in Britain has at least the following four corollaries: There is no legislative authority higher than the Parliament, there is no limitation on the scope of the legislative competence, no Parliament can bind its successor, and no court can declare enactments of Parliament invalid.<sup>5</sup>

Parliamentary sovereignty in India is modified by a number of circumstances and factors specific to India. First, the combination of a parliamentary system with a federal system in the Indian constitution entails the resultant division of powers between the Union Parliament and state legislatures. The simplistic legal view of the constitution earlier tended to argue that state legislatures are basically non-sovereign, but the more comprehensive constitutional and behavioural view holds that, except during periods of constitutional emergencies, state legislatures' competence is protected by a written constitution interpreted by an independent judiciary. Besides, the balance of political forces in the political system also puts practical constraints on the purely legal view of the constitution and opens up the possibility of new constitutional conventions. Second, the constitution incorporates the guarantees of Fundamental Rights of citizens and Directive Principles of State Policy that amount to constitutional limitations on the powers of the Parliament. Although the Directives, unlike the Fundamental Rights, are not legally enforceable by courts in the normal way, the courts have indeed invoked them in interpreting the constitution, and thus clothed the Directives with selective legal sanction in an indirect way. Third, as a corollary of the first and the second points, the principle of judicial review of the acts of the Parliament/State Legislatures and Executive(s) is an integral part of the Indian constitutional system. It is this perspective that explains not only the great concern with the independence of the judiciary in the constitution, but also the expanding scope of judicial review in the recent decades. Fourth, there are some temporary and special constitutional provisions (*e.g.,* Articles 370-6, 371-A-l and G relating to the states of Jammu and Kashmir, Nagaland, and Mizoram) arising out of peculiar problems of regional autonomy and national integration. They are limitations on unilateral powers of the Parliament.

From the foregoing it is evident that the Indian constitutional system is a mixed one: while the parliamentary part of the government directs attention to the supremacy of the Parliament in the system, the federal part, coupled with constitutionally entrenched Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy and traditions of regionalism in the country, compromise parliamentary supremacy by complementing it with constitutional supremacy featuring judicial review.

### ❑❑ **Legislative-Executive Relationship**

Consistent with the principle of parliamentary government, the Indian Parliament, like its British counterpart, presents the picture of fusion rather than separation of legislative and executive powers. The President being, by and large, the figurehead and the Parliament normally being under the thumb of the majority party led by the Prime Minister, the principle of parliamentary sovereignty has really come to mean the executive or cabinet domination of the Parliament. The growth of disciplined party system in parliamentary systems may be regarded as a functional response to the structural necessity of maintaining a stable parliamentary government. For a parliamentary government, unlike a presidential executive of the American type, springs from the Parliament itself, instead of being elected directly by the people and is perpetually dependent on the confidence of the parliamentary majority.

In addition, the Parliament has also yielded ground to the executive in the field of law-making. Most bills are drafted by civil servants and piloted in the Parliament by ministers. Private members' bills form a negligible proportion of legislation.<sup>6</sup> Besides, the government often presents legislative *fait accompli* to the Parliament in the form of presidential ordinances, although one must hasten to add that these are constitutionally expected to be used sparingly and only in pressing circumstances. The constitution also expects them to be replaced by legislation at the earliest convenience.<sup>7</sup>

The committee system in parliamentary system is, generally, less vigorous than in presidential systems. For parliamentary committees are overshadowed by the cabinet, which, in a sense, is itself the most important committee of the Parliament. *In contrary,* presidential systems feature a stronger committee system as the presidential cabinet is external to the legislature. The committee system in the Indian Parliament is no exception to this rule. Moreover, it has introduced a new committee system in the early 1990s designed to enhance the quantum and quality of committee work in the legislative process and parliamentary scrutiny and control of the executive. (This new committee system is discussed in a subsequent section of this chapter).

Besides these developments, practical difficulties and executive greed tend to shorten the duration of parliamentary sessions<sup>8</sup> to say nothing of parliamentary procedures that put limit on the length of parliamentary debates.<sup>9</sup> These trends in India (and elsewhere) have given rise to the thesis of the decline of the Parliament as a sovereign decision-making body.<sup>10</sup> However, this decline of the Parliament's law-making function does not signal the utter irrelevance and impending atrophy of the legislative branch of the government. Parliament still performs the important function of representing the mass public in the governmental process and of legitimising the formation, maintenance, and actions of government. Moreover, in the event of the party system failing to throw up a majority party government, the powers of the Parliament (and the President) may come into a less constrained play, as happened with the minority governments of Indira Gandhi (1966-71), Chaudhary Charan Singh (1979-80), and those in the aftermath of the 1989 parliamentary elections. During these minority/coalition governments, the powers of the Parliament have tended to increase.

#### **Parliament and Judiciary**

The fusion of legislative and executive powers typical of the parliamentary systems does not extend to the judiciary. For the concern with judicial independence is as old as the conflict between the absolute monarchy in Britain and the Parliament in the 17th century. However, it would be wrong to say for this reason that the parliamentary system is based on a limited principle of separation of powers between the Parliament and the cabinet, on the one hand, and the judiciary, on the other. Indeed, in their original intent, both the parliamentary and presidential systems seem to be more concerned with the idea of designing a judiciary which is sufficiently independent of the legislative and executive branches of the government (even though the judges are actually appointed by the executive) than with creating a judiciary with full-scale and overriding powers of judicial review, which is actually a feature of the federal system, whether in combination with presidential or parliamentary system. This is evident from the fact that even in the American presidential-federal system the Supreme Court did not actually derive the power of judicial review from an express provision of the constitution. It invented this power subsequently and circumstantially from a written constitution and the federal context that made it an umpire for purposes of interpreting an evenly matched written constitution. Article 13 of the Indian constitution expressly provides for judicial review inasmuch as it declares all extant and future laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the Fundamental Rights in Part III of the constitution null and void.<sup>11</sup> Moreover, the court naturally becomes the arbitrator in cases of dispute between the federal and state governments over their respective legislative competence and over the residuary powers which, under the constitution, belong to the union Parliament (Part XI of the constitution and the 7th Schedule).

However, the power of judicial review in India is *prima facie* somewhat limited than in the United States. For under the 'due process' clause of the American constitution (5th and 14th amendments) the court has assumed enormous power of judicial review of any law depriving a person of his liberty save by the due process of law determinable by the court itself. In contrast, the Indian constitution has opted for the 'procedure established by law' in place of the due process of law: 'No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty, except according to procedure established by law' (Article 21). The Indian Supreme Court earlier held the view that left the matter entirely in the hand of the legislature so far as the establishment of the legal procedure was concerned (*Gopalan Vs. State of Madras*, 1950). The current view of the court is, however, different. Since the *Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India* case (1978), the court has come to hold the view that almost verges on due process inasmuch as it expects that fundamental freedoms under Article 19 and life and personal liberty under Article 21 must not be subjected to a legal restriction and a procedure that is arbitrary, unfair or unreasonable.

The Indian political system has witnessed phases of headlong collisions between the executive swearing by the principle of parliamentary sovereignty and the judiciary seeking to assert its independence and power of judicial review. Lloyd I. Rudolph and Susanne H. Rudolph (1987, ch. 3) metaphorically term it "The Struggle over Stateness; Judicial Review versus Parliamentary Sovereignty." Under Nehru and early years of Indira Gandhi, the conflict centred on a government seeking to promote land reforms, to bring about abolition of Privy Purses of former princely rulers, nationalization of banks, etc., and a Supreme Court purporting to protect Fundamental Rights. There followed an extremely suspenseful drama of a series of parliamentary legislations, adverse judicial reviews, and constitutional amendments by the Parliament to get around the judicial reviews putting limitations on the power of the Parliament. In constitutional terms, the conflict shaped up as one between the executive pleading for the primacy of the welfare goals of Directive Principles of State Policy and the Supreme Court clinging to the jurisprudence of the original intentions of the founding fathers of the republic and express provisions of the constitution in relation to the Rights and the Directives. The judges argued, among other things, that all parts of the constitution were designed in perfect harmony with the chapter on Fundamental Rights, and that all legislations and constitutional amendments contravening them must be constitutionally invalid. In the 1970s (pre-Janata phase) during the hegemonic premiership of Indira Gandhi the confrontation between the executive and the judiciary took the unsavoury form of a self-serving Prime Minister hell bent on perpetuating herself in power by virtually dismantling the framework of the liberal-democratic state through constitutional amendments and repressive administrative measures. Under extreme pressure, the Supreme Court conceded to the executive on some points, but it did continue to somehow hedge in its power of judicial review.

The major landmarks in this story of confrontation are the *Golaknath*  case (1967), the 24th constitutional amendment (1971), the *Keshavananda Bharati* case (1973), the 42nd constitutional amendment (1976) during the Emergency, the *Maneka Gandhi* case (1978), and the *Minerva Mills* case (1980)*.* <sup>12</sup> During the period of Nehruvian consensus (1952-64), which was structurally buttressed by the predominance of an internally democratic and pluralist Congress party at national as well as state levels, the Supreme Court had pursued 'harmonious construction' of the constitution's Directive Principles (Part IV) and Fundamental Rights (Part III). Hence, confrontation between the Parliament and the judiciary was avoided. From 1967-77, a series of changes in the political system brought about recurrent conflicts between the two. The wave of political turmoil witnessed during this decade included the first major breach in Congress predominance at state level and reduced majority at the national level in 1967, the split in the Congress party in 1969, the restorat ion of Congress predominance under Indira Gandhi within a highly centralized and internally undemocratic party organization in 1971-72 onwards, the anti-corruption movements in Gujarat, Bihar, and subsequently almost whole of North India in the first half of the 1970s, and the internal Emergency (1975-77). It was in this political backdrop of growing authoritarianism on the part of the executive that the Supreme Court asserted in *Golak nath* that the Parliament's amending power under Article 368 did not extend to the chapter on Fundamental Rights, which was amendable only by a new Constituent Assembly. The Parliament overrode the *Golak Nath* case through 24th amendment by making Fundamental Rights amendable by it. The Supreme Court upheld the 24th amendment, conceding that even the Fundamental Rights were amendable by the Parliament, but then added a caveat that the power to amend does not extend to destroying the 'basic structure' or 'essential features' of the constitution developed in 1950. The Emergency regime of Indira Gandhi mounted the most serious assault on constitutional government through the 42nd amendment. It aimed, among other things, at undoing *Keshavananda* by barring the Supreme Court from reviewing constitutional amendments: 'there shall be no limitation whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend' the constitution. The *Minerva Mills* restored *Keshavananda* by striking down two clauses of the 42nd amendment on the ground that it sought to destroy the basic structure of the constitution by: (1) prohibiting judicial review of a legislation contravening Fundamental Rights on the specious ground that such a legislation was to give effect to the Directive Principles; and (2) proscribing judicial review of constitutional amendments. The court declared judicial review, among other features, as part of the basic structure of the constitution and, hence, indestructible.

#### **Bicameralism**

In a parliamentary system, the collective responsibility of the council of ministers to the popularly elected chamber gives it a special status vis-a-vis the second chamber. But the second chamber is still valued as a forum for deliberation and debate and amendatory restraints on the popular passions of the first chamber. In addition, with the growing volume of legislation in a modern state, the second chamber may also be used as the chamber for the initiation of legislation to lessen the burden of the first chamber, so that by the time a bill reaches the first chamber, the major initial and time-taking scrutiny would have already been done. In a parliamentary-federal system, the second chamber acquires an added relevance as the house giving representation to be units of the federation.

The Rajya Sabha seems to be originally designed by the makers of the constitution with a certain measure of ambivalence with regard to the two axial principles of government: (1) parliamentarism, and (2) federalism. At first glance, it appears that the Rajya Sabha is typically a parliamentary second chamber: (1) It gives representation to the states on the same principle of the proportion of population as in the Lok Sabha rather than equal representation as federal units irrespective of their size; (2) It is legally subordinate to the Lok Sabha so far as collective responsibility of the council of ministers to the Parliament and money bills are concerned; (3) Even though it has been given equal powers with the Lok Sabha in legislation and constitutional amendment, the provision for a joint session of the two chambers, in cases of conflict, would mean that the Lok Sabha with its larger membership would usually win, barring one-party majority or multi-party coalitional majority cutting across the two houses. Most commentators seem to have taken this line of interpretation, one even going to the extent of arguing that instead of being cast as a defender of state rights, the Rajya Sabha instead can only take away the rights of the states by resolving through a 2/3rd majority that: (1) the Union Parliament legislate in national interest on a subject enumerated in the State List, and (2) the Central government create a newall-India service.<sup>13</sup> Even W.H. Morris-Jones (1957) in his classic study of the Indian Parliament fails to find any appreciable federal relevance for the Rajya Sabha:

"The Upper House is a Council of States of the Union and its members are elected by the State Assemblies. This, however, does not seem to have made the floor of the Council a battle-ground between Centre and States; a defence of 'states-rights', an expression of regional demands, is just as likely to be heard in the other house' (p. 256)."

K.V. Rao (1961), too, takes a critical view of the utility and relevance of the Rajya Sabha. Even as a parliamentary second chamber, Morris-Jones (1957) did not find the Rajya Sabha greatly relevant or useful: similar in members' socio-economic and political career backgrounds as well as in rules of procedure, the Rajya Sabha 'provided neither for technical revision nor for a wider and more leisurely debate'. The only saving grace for the Rajya Sabha as a second chamber that Morris-Jones found were two: (1) The government that had started using it as the site for first initiation of bills in conjunction with the Lok Sabha to lessen the burden of the primary initiation in the Lok Sabha; and (2) the Rajya Sabha was 'beginning to try its wings as a forum for grand and soaring debate'. (Though the two houses have similar procedure, the debate in the Rajya Sabha is less restrictive time-wise on account of its smaller size.)

The Rajya Sabha today does not function in a way radically different from what Morris-Jones portrayed in the 1950s. However, the federalization of the party system in the 1980s at the state level since 1989 at the national level has invested the Rajya Sabha with greater potentiality as a federal second chamber. Indeed, we are inclined to argue that even the modest designed Rajya Sabha in the constitution can have a greater federal relevance that the commentators have generally attributed to it. This is for the following reasons. First, it has equal powers with the Lok Sabha in the federally important matter of constitutional amendments. Second, the joint sitting of the two houses, instead of always dividing on the house-basis, may shape up in a more complex way in terms of coalitions among parties and groups in the Parliament as a whole. This may bring victory to the point of view championed by the Rajya Sabha. Third, the Rajya Sabha can block the intentions of a federal government to legislate in a certain contingency on a State List subject and to create a new all-India service. So, it would appear that the essential parliamentary interpretation of the powers of the Rajya Sabha was a by-product of the one-party dominant system in the early decades of the Indian republic. The federal relevance of the Rajya Sabha is likely to increasingly become more salient with the growing regionalization and federalization of the political system.

An amendment in law, in the early 2000s, abolished the residence or domiciliary requirement for Rajya Sabha members in relation to the State of the Union they were elected from in view of the fact that they were often elected on false certificates in this regard. A case, arguing that this will destroy the credential of the Rajya Sabha as the federal second chamber, was rejected by the Supreme Court. By the same amendment voting in Rajya Sabha elections has ceased to be by secret ballot on the consideration that open voting by MLAs in these biannual elections will discourage/stampout cross party voting in violation of party discipline. Strange logic, to say the least as it may only increase the price of the vote of an MLA in the Rajya Sabha elections.

#### **The Speaker**

The Rajya Sabha is better served by a politically more neutral presiding officer (the Vice-President of India) than the Lok Sabha. The Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha are neither required to disaffiliate themselves from the parties on whose ticket they are elected nor is the Speaker allowed an uncontested return to the house in re-election. The Speaker of the British House of Commons snaps party tie on being elected to the office and extends the courtesy of an uncontested return to the house. We would do well to develop these salutary conventions to make the presiding officers more effective instruments of impartial and orderly conduct of business in the house. This will reduce the frequent recourse to judicial review of Speaker's decisions in disputes under the Anti-Defection Law (1985). Such cases have been multiplying recently.

#### **Parliamentary Privileges**

Parliamentary privileges of the members have been another controversial problem often leading to litigation. After guaranteeing freedom of speech in Parliament (subject only to the constitution and procedure of Parliament) and immunity from any legal procedure for speech and vote in Parliament or any committee thereof, the constitution proclaims:

"In other respects, the powers, privileges, and immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each House, shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by law, and until so defined, shall be those of that House and its members and committees immediately before coming into force of Section 15 of the constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment Act, 1978" (Article 105-3).

Until 1978, these privileges and immunities were declared by the same Article to be 'those of the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom'.

Chetakar Jha makes a strong plea, citing the opinion of the Press Commission, for definition and codification of parliamentary privileges in a law. He also cited the case of *M.S.M. Sharma Vs. S.K. Sinha,* arising out of the Bihar legislature, in which the Supreme Court concurred with the Bihar Legislative Assembly that publication by the press of an expunged portion of the proceedings of the Assembly constituted the breach of privilege of the House. He considers it 'disturbing' as it not only smacks of intolerance, but also suggests that the right to freedom of speech and expression is subordinate to the parliamentary privileges. He also considers it repugnant to open government. The case for the codification of parliamentary privileges has over the years become, if anything, more pressing.

The uncodified nature of parliamentary/legislative privileges has continued to cause problems over the years. It led to a confrontation between the U.P. Assembly and the Allahabad High Court (*Keshav Singh v. Speaker* 

*of U.P. Assembly, 1965*) and between the *Tamil Nadu Assembly* and the editor and his colleagues of *the Hindu* newspaper early in the 21st century. The question of parliamentary privileges also came ahead in the JMM bribery case in the Supreme Court in connection with a confidence vote against the Congress government headed by P.V. Narasimha Rao in the late 1990s. The problems are somehow provisionally settled by the Supreme Court, but codification would make the situation less problematic and more settled.

#### **Parliamentary Committees**

Historically, the parliamentary Committee system in India may be traced back to the Montagu-Chelmsford reforms that led to the Government of India Act, 1919. The Indian Legislative Rules made under sub-section 67(1) in the section 129A of the Act and the standing orders of the legislative assembly made by the Governor-in-Council under sub-section 67(6) of the same Act, provided for the appointment of several committees. The standing orders provided for the committees, namely, the committee on petitions relating to bills, select committee on Amendments of standing orders, and select committee on bills. There was also a provision for Public Accounts Committee and a joint committee on bills. These committees also served as standing advisory committees attached to various departments of the Government of India. Purely advisory in nature, the committees were neither free from government interference nor were they endowed with privileges.

After the adoption of the constitution (1950), the committee system was significantly restructured in numbers and powers and privileges.

Committees are a microcosm of the reflecting the political complexion. They were small and compact groups of 20-30 member interacting regularly over an issue to hammer out a consensus or 'nearconsensus' in otherwise highly polarized positions in the House (for changes see the section below). They are a device to streamline the function of the legislation. In a relatively relaxed atmosphere away from the cameras, details are laid bare which provides acceptability and finesse to the also serve as an alibi for inaction and postponement of controversial bills, and often times; it is a springboard for a prelude to purposeful legislative action.

A good deal of parliamentary business is transacted in the Committees as the timely disposal of the Houses is savant and insufficient to make a through and detailed examination of the varied and voluminous legislative proposal. The magnitude, complexity and multifarious nature of work done by the parliament can be assessed by the fact that India's first 13 parliaments passed more than 3,200 bills. However, due to coalition governments, there has been a relative fall in the number of legislative and consequent reliance on ordinance which it can be considered as a travesty of democracy.

#### **The New Committee System**

Ministry-based specialized standing committees for detailed scrutiny of expenditure, administration, and policy by Parliament is probably the most important reform in parliamentary government in the last quarter of the 20th century. In 1979, the Birtish House of Commons moved in this direction by formally establishing fourteen departmentally related select committees, to which a fifteenth, Liaison Committee, consisting of chairmen of departmentbased and other select committees, was added in 1980. The committees were empowered to send for persons and governmental records, enlist services of specialists, and appoint sub-committees, in respect of three departments (home affairs, treasury, and foreign affairs). The developments have been viewed positively by the participants as well as by the Procedure Committee's formal inquiry ten years after the establishment of departmental select committees. The reform has also been welcomed by the media and the pressure groups. The journalists are much better informed about the parliamentary process than they were before these reforms. The pressure groups, generally, see themselves 'as forming a triangle of influence, the other two corners of which are occupied by departmentally-related Select Committees and the media'.<sup>14</sup>

Following the recommendations of the Royal Commission on Financial Management and Accountability chaired by Allen Lambert, the Canadian Parliament also streamlined its Committee system in 1989. The reformed departmentally-related standing committees then introduced are empowered to review and report on statute laws, programs and policy objectives and their implementation, expenditure plans and their implementation, and performance of the departments falling within the purview of the parliamentary committees.<sup>15</sup>

The Indian Parliament made a beginning with three select subject committees one each on agriculture, science and technology, and environment and forests in 1989.<sup>16</sup> Encouraged by the experiment, the Rules Committee in its Third Report of the Lok Sabha in March 1993 recommended the establishment of 17 standing select committees of Parliament for the various ministries and departments. The committees were formally inaugurated on 31st March 1993.<sup>17</sup> Established under Rule 331C the members of the committees are nominated by the Rajya Sabha Chairman and Lok Sabha Speaker and their chairman are appointed by the Speaker. The Committee membership is for a year.<sup>18</sup> While this allows for a larger number of MPs to gain experience of committee work, the turnover is too quick to allow deeper interest and specialization. It may not be a bad idea to make the membership of committees co-terminus with the term of a Lok Sabha.

Each of these committees consists of 45 members (30 from Lok Sabha and 15 from Rajya Sabha). Party representation in committees broadly reflects their parliamentary strength. The expectation of the Rules Committee is that consensus culture would prevail in the committees, but in case a member wants, 'he can be allowed to give a dissenting note or minutes of dissent'.<sup>19</sup>

The experience so far confirms this norm. As Subhash Kashyap, presumably on the working of the three pioneering select committees, observes:

"There does develop in these committees a distinct committee approach to looking at problems of administration. This approach can be easily distinguished from the approach on the floor of the house. In short, though the strength of the political parties in the house may be the basis for nomination to the committees, it does not affect the functioning of the committees in any way impairing its impartial and non-partisan approach".

The chairmanship of some of the committees is allocated to the Rajya Sabha as also to opposition parties. In addition to the usual stuff of committee concern, both the Speaker and Rajya Sabha chairman may refer any 'other matters of the concerned ministeries' to them. In deference to the government's view, policy matters are not supposed to be discussed by the committees 'for the present'. Also, 'ministers would not be called before the committees'. Besides, 'while the committees could discuss matters of basic and important policies referred to them, they would, however, not discuss minor details, like appointments, transfers, day-to-day administration, etc'.<sup>20</sup>

The committees are instruments of Parliament, not of government. Their role is advisory; obviously they are not meant to dislodge the cabinet, only to improve their performance by scrutiny and control. The formulation of policies is the province of government which it does with Parliament's government which it does with Parliament's approval. The committees are meant 'to examine and oversee the implementation of policies by the administration'. To conclude with Kashyap:

'Without weakening the parliamentary system, the concept of departmentally related standing select committees provide to parliament sharper and more effective surveillance tools, restore the balance between parliament's legislative and deliberative functions and its role as a representational body, and above all, save valuable parliamentary time to the mutual advantage of both parliament and government'.

#### **Notes and References**

- 1. For these Vedic political institutions which gradually lost their popular character and tended to become aristocratic before suffering a decline, see R.S. Sharma (1991) and Romila Thapar (1984). On self governing local institutions of *Brahumadeyam*  villages *(sabhas)* and *nagarams* of traders and local institutions of peasant villages *(urs),* See Burton Stein (1980), and Kesavan Veluthat (1993).
- 2. The tradition of *panchayats* goes back at least to the *Mahabharata.* See the 'Sabha Parva', V. 81.
- 3. See I.H. Qureshi (1971 & n.d.) and Satish Chandra (1979).

- 4. For a historical sketch of constitutional reforms in India in the British period, see MV Pylee (1984) and Subhash C. Kashyap (1992), ch. 1.
- 5. The classic formulation of the British constitutional doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty was made by A.V. Dicey (1885). For a classic statement of the American constitutional principle of judicial supremacy, see Charles A. Beard (1912).
- 6. Private members' bills are not only rarely introduced but are also unlikely to be enacted.
- 7. See Pushpa Bali (1989).
- 8. Parliamentary sessions are usually three in a year and they generally tend to get shorter *over* time.
- 9. Limits of time on parliamentary debates may be prescribed by the Speaker 'after taking the sense of the House'. Parliament (India) (1989), p. 10. Such limitations are regular and frequent.
- 10. The decline of Parliament' thesis was originally formulated by Lord Bryce in 1921 in his classic *Modem Democracies* (relevant chapter excerpted in Philip Norton, ed., 1990, ch. 3). The phenomenon is mainly attributed to stricter parliamentary party discipline, rise of the Press and extra-parliamentary class and group organizations, complexity of policy issues and legislations in the Parliament, loss of 'class' and calibre in the bulk or parliamentarians etc. Part of the decline in his estimation is also psychological, stemming from exaggerated hopes 'entertained of the services they [legislatures] were to render' (p. 53). And, partly the decline was a function of the passing out of historical moments of insurgent idealism in new societies transplanting parliamentary institutions: 'The next generation did not in days of peace rise to the standard set in the days of conflict' (p. 53). Yet Bryce's conclusion is not entirety pessimistic. The utility which Mill and Bagehot saw in them remains, if perhaps reduced' (p. 56). This residual utility of the Parliament is seen by Bryce in its representative role and 'the watchful supervision needed to ensure honest and efficient administration' (p. 56). To a modern reader even these claims may appear a bit exaggerated though not entirely hollow.
- 11. To quote Lal Narain Sinha (1993, pp. 134–135); "Previous laws were continued by Article 372, but by the very term of this article, these laws continued only on the extent that they were consistent with the present constitution. Limitations were imposed directly by numerous Articles of the constitution and also by valid enacted laws. Whenever limitations were to be imposed, the extent of the limitation, thus abridging the right and the nature and the contents of such right, were indicated so as to make the provisions of the constitution dealing with the freedom of trade, commerce, and intercourse within the territory of India. Likewise. Part III deals with certain aspects of freedoms, the rights and liberties of the individual. The plenary powers of legislature are granted by detailed provisions of Part XI dealing with the legislative relations between the Union and the States beginning with Article 245. This clearly corroborates the oft-stated cliche that the Indian constitution is a 'lawyers' paradise".
- 12. For more details, see the relevant constitutional amendment Acts and the relevant volumes of *All India Reporter* for the Supreme Court judgments.
- 13. If my memory serves, this argument was made by Professor Chetakar Jha in his lectures on Indian politics in Patna College which I attended as an undergraduate student in the early 1960s.
- 14. British House of Commons (1990, 2 Vols.). The quote is from Vol. 1, Clause 219. Available with Parliament Library, New Delhi.
- 15. Information obtained through the courtesy of the Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute's Library in New Delhi.
- 16. Subhash C. Kashyap (1990, p. 2275).