(Eds.), *The mental health consequences of torture* (pp. 159–174). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.

- Silove, D., McIntosh, P., & Becker, R. (1993). Risk of retraumatisation of asylum-seekers in Australia. *Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 27*(5), 606–612.
- Silove, D., Sinnerbrink, I., Field, A., Manicavasagar, V. (1997). Anxiety, depression and PTSD in asylum seekers: Associations with premigration trauma and post-migration stressors. *British Journal of Psychiatry, 170*, 351–357.
- Silove, D., & Steel, Z. (2002, 21 January). Matters arising: Asylum seekers and healthcare. *Medical Journal of Australia, 176*, 86.
- Silove, D. Steel, Z., McGorry, P., & Mohan, P. (1998). Trauma exposure, postmigration stressors, and symptoms of anxiety, depression and posttraumatic stress in Tamil asylum seekers: Comparisons with refugees and immigrants. *Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 97*(3), 175–181.
- Silove, D., Steel, S., & Mollica, R. (2001). Detention of asylum seekers: Assault on health, human rights, and social development. *The Lancet, 357*, 1436–1437.
- Silove, D., Franzcp, M. D., Steel, Z. M., & Watters, C. P. (2000). Policies of deterrence and the mental health of asylum seekers. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 284*(5), 604–611.
- Simpson, M. A. (1993). Traumatic stress and the bruising of the soul. In J. P. Wilson & B. Raphael (Eds.), *International Handbook of Traumatic Stress Syndromes*. New York: Plenum.
- Sinnerbrink, I., Silove, D. M., Manicavasagar, V. L., Steel, Z., & Field, A. (1996). Asylum seekers: General health status and problems with access to health care. *Medical Journal of Australia, 165*, 634–637.
- Steiner, N. (2000). *Arguing about asylum: The complexity of refugee debates in Europe*. NewYork: St Martin's Press.
- Summerfield, D. (1999). Sociocultural dimensions of war, conflict and displacement. In A. Ager (Ed.), *Refugees: Perspectives on the experience of forced migration* (pp. 113–135). London: Pinter.

- Summerfield, D. (2000). Conflict and health: War and mental health: A brief overview. *British Medical Journal, 321*(7255), 232–235.
- Summerfield, D. (2001). The invention of post-traumatic stress disorder and the social usefulness of a psychiatric disorder. *British Medical Journal, 322*, 95–98.
- Sundquist, J., & Johansson, S. E. (1996). The influence of exile and repatriation on mental and physical health. A population based study. *Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 31*, 21–28.
- Szasz, T. (1991). Diagnoses are not diseases. *The Lancet, 338*(8782), 1574.
- Toole, M. J., & Waldman, R. J. (1990). Prevention of excess mortality in refugee and displaced populations in developing countries. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 263*, 3296–3302.
- United Nations. (2001). *Note on international protection*. General Assembly, Executive Committee of the High Commissioner Programme. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (1951). *Convention relating to the status of refugees*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (1967). *Protocol relation to the status of refugees*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author
- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2000). *Global refugee trends. Analysis of the 2000 provisional UNHCR statistics*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2001a). *The 1951 Refugee Convention. Questions and answers*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author, Public Information Section.
- United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. (2001b). *Protecting refugees: Questions and answers*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author, Public Information Section.
- Van der Kolk, B., & Fisler, R. (1995). Dissociation and the fragmentary nature of traumatic memories: Overview and exploratory study. *Journal of Trauma and Stress, 8*, 505–525.
- World Health Organization. (2002). *World report on violence and health*. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

# **Social Stratification and Health in the Western Context**

#### **Arushi Sinha and Tyson Gibbs**

## **INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS**

The concept of social stratification and the concept of health embody two areas of research interest to social scientists. Social stratification is a commonly accepted term in the social sciences, particularly in examining of the ways that humans organize themselves into various cultural and social groupings. For the purposes of this discussion, social stratification is:

plurality of strata within a single society, with some sense of their internal identity, of their internal similarity, of their external differences vis a vis other strata…These qualities by which strata identify themselves and others, are frequently referred to by shorthand terminology such as wealth or poverty, or rulers or people, or workers or bosses. These terms refer to positions on particular distributions such as wealth…income, power and occupational role…The connections between positions of the individual on different distribution are of two sorts. One is…through life chances, opportunities to enter into a higher position on any distribution from lower position in that distribution. [The other is the ideal that]…there is widely experienced aspirations to bring positions on a series of distributions into an appropriate correspondence with each other. (Shils, 1970, pp. 446–447)

The behavior of humans is not rooted in our genetic structure to the degree that it cannot be changed,

#### **198 Social Stratification**

#### **Introduction and Definitions 199**

modified, or otherwise channel behavior. As Krauss (1976, p. 3) states, "the way we act is based on the meaning we attach to things…physical objects, specific individuals, categories of persons and other activities such as commands and requests. The meanings are not intrinsic but social products." Social stratification is the term that describes the way humans group themselves, based on characteristics ascribed to one another or passed from one generation to the next. Such characteristics take on a life of their own in the day-to-day functioning of human beings within a cultural and social context.

Everything that humans do is part of a social construct, attaching meaning to the objects, people, and activities in which they engage. The meaning becomes part of the process by which places are created in the fabric of human organization. Each culture and social group emphasizes different components of the human existence. For some cultures, the critical element separating one person from another might be the family of origin. In another group, it could be access to wealth. And in yet another group, gender affiliation may determine where one is placed in that society. Religion, appearance, body type, and many other human attributes determine where one is placed. Also, each society differs on when the placement of that person is made, for example, such placements might be made across the life spectrum—at birth, at puberty, at adulthood, at old age.

Whatever the basis for classifying people into various groupings, such judgments are made in each society, and these classifications result in creating differential levels of human interaction. And these groupings are not equal for each person. As Tumin (1994, p. 47) commenting on the ubiquity of social inequality writes, "Every known society (above the band level of organization) distributes its scarce and demanded goods and services unequally. And there are attached to the positions which command unequal amounts of such goods and services certain highly morally tined evaluations of their importance to society."

The types of groups that result from the need to place individuals within a social hierarchy are complex in their manifestation. That is to say, one's position can change depending on the circumstance. Humans can play the roles of mother, father, husband, wife, sister, brother, lover, friend; each role carries certain responsibilities and can occur in activities outside of the family. Each group requires that individual members understand these various roles thrust upon them, and the expectation is that each person will fulfill certain responsibilities ascribed to those roles. The socialization process of each human within a culture does not always adequately prepare one to assume the responsibilities that accrue to these roles. Thus, the concept of social stratification offers researchers the opportunity to understand how people function within a given culture.

The area of health is one component of human existence. Each society has created a mechanism for explaining the changes to their biological functioning. The explanations for these changes range the gamut of possibilities. For example, in many Chinese groups the presence of energy bands within the body, called meridians, along with the balance of yin and yang dominate the explanation for health status. In Mexico, one can have a hot or cold illnesses based on humoral explanations. And in parts of Africa, the presence of witchcraft can explain many sicknesses that befall the individual. Because the world is changing as a result of globalization, and the interaction of cultures across previously closely guarded borders, many societies have adopted a mixture of explanations for changes in body function that include their own local explanation, plus the more Western explanation that focuses on disease at the cellular level.

The question is: How does social stratification in a group have an impact on issues of health? The definition of health, like the definition of social stratification, is not one on which researchers readily agree. The concept of health is not easily defined. Mascie-Taylor (1995, pp. 101–102), quoting Talcott Parsons, defines health as "the state of optimum capacity of an individual for the effective performance of the roles and tasks for which he has been socialized." The World Health Organization defines health as the state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease (Brearley et al., 1978, p. 7). *The American Heritage Dictionary* describes health as the state of an organism with respect to functioning, disease, and abnormality; the state of an organism functioning normally without disease (Pickett et al., 2000). Health can also mean that the chakras are balanced, the absence of malevolent spirits, or the flow of positive *Qi*. These multiple definitions necessarily imply that cultural groups manage health on many levels, depending on what has been identified as having changed body function. Such management also connotes that defining the state of health of an individual may require multiple players, each with his/her role—the individual, the family, the health practitioner, and the care-givers. It is this mixture of local and other health practices that has created a health system structure worldwide. As Wilkerson (1996, p. 1) states,

research findings focused attention on the wider features of the social and economic structure…we have, in effect, been learning about the interface the between the individual and society, and the structural factors on health; about how people are affected, by social position, by wealth and poverty, by job insecurity and un(/under) employment, by education, by social mobility; about why taller people move up the social hierarchy; about the importance of social networks … and about social organization of work.

## **HEALTH AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION**

One could argue, quite cogently, that social stratification clearly delineates human activity and behavior on multiple levels in a society. Linking social stratification to health issues constitutes a structural approach to understanding health issues at the local and global, public and private sector levels. It also means understanding the ways in which patients' and health care providers' choices are circumscribed (Anagnost, 1995; Morsy, 1995; Navarro, 1981; Pearce, 1995; Singer, 1990). At the individual level, as Gramsci (1971) argues, the healer, like the priest, is a mediator between the elite and the non-elite, and health and disease are defined by the elite for the purposes of controlling the non-elite. Others have described healing systems as the meeting ground between the elites and the proletariat (Waitzkin, 1979) and as "the locus of hegemony" (Csordas, 1988). Medicine often defines the "Other" as diseased or unhygienic, and in doing so, places it under medical control, the realm of the elites (Comaroff & Comaroff, 1992; Douglas, 1966).

Because health is negotiated at so many different levels, it is important not only to identify the different levels but also to understand their interaction. What are the tools available to anthropology to examine the structural determinants of health care? Health care at the macro level is determined by the confluence of politics, economics, and ideology. Such interactions determine the path governments choose in determining health standards, in providing health for their populous, and in endorsing one health care system over another. The macro, structural, is separated from the micro, experiential, phenomena only as matter of analysis (Singer, 1990, p. 191). In practice, individual and structural features work simultaneously to determine health decision-making.

**200 Social Stratification**

As Morsy states, "the political economic orientation forces anthropology to redefine its field of inquiry in global processual and relational terms" (Morsy, 1990, p. 27). As such, the political economy of health addresses the issue of power in the production of health. For example, in Egypt *uzr* is described as a sickness that preys upon young brides and younger sons in the family. The disease is understood as being induced by the powerlessness of these familial positions, and the sick role is seen as an embodiment of this inefficacy. In a Nigerian example, the uncertain political future of the nation-state has prompted people to utilize simultaneously a variety of health solutions, including reliance upon familial "therapy managing groups" and a renewed interest in faith healing and indigenous medicine, in addition to the statesupported biomedical system (Pearce, 1993). Wilkerson further demonstrates the linkage between social position and health. He writes about a study of electoral wards in Northern England in which death rates were four times higher in the poorest 10% of the wards, as in the richest 10% (Wilkerson, 1996, p. 53). He writes, "numerous studies have shown health differences are not confined to differences between the poor and the rest of society, but instead run across society with every level of society having worse health than the one above it" (Wilkerson, 1996, p. 53).

## **BIOMEDICINE AND MEDICALIZATION**

In the Western context, and in the United States specifically, biomedicine has assumed the role of the dominant health system (Singer & Baer, 1995). By focusing on the modes of biomedical production, anthropologists can look at the ways in which capitalism has been resisted or transformed by the individual participants (Morgan, 1987). Foster and Anderson (1978) define biomedicine as an ethno-medical system which has both its genesis and its sustenance within Western political, economic, and ideological institution. It is variously called cosmopolitan medicine, capitalist medicine, Western medicine, and urban medicine. Importantly, Foster and Anderson (1978) point out that biomedicine is an ethno-medical system, just like *curanderismo* in Latin America, *Ayurveda* in India, and *Qi*-based systems in China. Biomedically informed health providers blame the victim. Indeed, in capitalist medicine (Navarro, 1986) the system is rarely implicated, while the worker is further burdened. Among

#### **Constructing Hierarchy 201**

migrant agricultural workers in the United States, public health researchers conclude that the way to alleviate cancer among this population is to provide cancer screening clinics (Lantz, Dupuis, Reding, Kerauska & Lappe, 1994) instead of enforcing the occupational safety laws already in place.

In an effort to emulate the capitalist world and its institutions, non-Western governments may further the causes of Westernization. In the Egyptian experience, this has allowed pharmaceutical companies access to human subjects for drug testing, such as Norplant (Morsy, 1993). In the Indian example, the state policy of controlling overpopulation, a Western definition (Sowell, 1983) espoused by elite Indians, led to the forced sterilization of several thousand men during the 1977 emergency. The memory still haunts the Indian rural populous today and makes them wary of government-sponsored health intervention programs (Banerji, 1982).

Given biomedicine's historical influences, its spread has definite implications for the negotiation of health care both within and outside the industrialized world.

## **NEGOTIATING HEALTH AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION**

What are the factors that influence the ways in which people understand and express their health/illness behavior? The anthropological record shows that expressions of the sick role are mediated by individual determinants, such as ethnicity, age, education, "racial" classification, class, gender, and occupation, and structural determinants such as health policy, economic policy, and national policy.

If health is a negotiated process by which a standard of values is defined as "health," then communication lies at the base of determining the health of individuals within a society. Because the definition of health is a collective determination, it must have room for debate and negotiation of the standard by which individuals are to be judged (Habermas, 1970, p. 372). In biomedicine, as in other healing cultures, it is often the case that a small, but powerful minority decides definitions of health and the standard for a "healthy" individual.

Kleinman's (1980) was the first model that acknowledged that definitions of health and disease are arbitrary, culturally conditioned, and vary across space and time. The model could thus be used for analysis of culture-bound syndromes (such as premenstrual syndrome) as well as biomedically defined diseases such as tuberculosis. The model did not distinguish between biomedically and nonbiomedically constructed illness and imparted the same legitimacy to each. Secondly, the explanatory model took into account and legitimated both patient and practitioner (healer) roles and participation in the health process. By demonstrating that health and disease are negotiated by individuals in the context of cultural and social experience, the explanatory model also provided a theoretical foundation, establishing communication as the crux of the health care encounter. At its simplest, the health experience is the meeting of patient and healer; at its most complex, health care is where biomedicine meets the global marketplace. Each of these represents points of articulation and communication.

The sick role is a mode of communication and the first step in the healing process because it is the acknowledgment of illness or abnormality. In assuming the sick role, the individual communicates several important messages: the first is a wish to be absolved of regular duties; second, a desire to validate illness via a healer; and third, an acknowledgment that this is not a normal or usual state. The patient might visit the doctor, ensuring "formal medical validation, and the submission of the sick person to the ministrations of the physician" (Foster & Anderson, 1978, p. 146). The sick role may be undertaken for utilitarian purposes. *Nervios, susto*, and stress may be excuses individuals use to separate themselves from expected social roles. Sufferers from legitimate illness are often excused from daily duties, including housework, occupational responsibilities, and child care.

## **CONSTRUCTING HIERARCHY**

Structural forces are implicated in the production of illness as well as with the provision of health care and treatment. There is a variety of socioeconomic and structural parameters on which health care is not only defined but also delivered. These parameters may be ethnicity (including "racial" classification), sexual orientation, class, and gender.

### **Ethnicity**

Though issues of discrimination based on skin color were the foundations of political activism in the 1960s and 1970s, "race" did not constitute a central focus of anthropological study until much more recently (Harrison, 1999). It is only within the last two decades or so that anthropologists have taken the position that "race" is a social category, not a meaningful biological category as applied to humans. By focusing attention on the perceived ethnic differences, the physician defers attention from clinical shortcomings (Stein, 1985). For example, the African American experience has been well studied (e.g., Powdermaker, 1939; Stack, 1974). Among the medical community, the importance of ethnicity and race as a basis for the provision of health care are only now becoming apparent. In the case of cardiovascular disease, recent studies document that African Americans are less likely to receive the same types of preventive screening measures as European Americans, resulting in a higher morbidity and mortality rates, with African American women being the most disadvantaged group. As Brown (2002) states, "Overall, the general pattern of care suggests that African-American women may receive high-technology cardiac treatment significantly less often than all other race and sex categories." Racial disparities in the provision of health care are corroborated by other researchers (e.g., Funk et al., 2002) and represent the tip of the iceberg into the inquiry of ethnicity and race and as a determinant of health care status.

By demonstrating the different socialization patterns of European American and African American youth, anthropology has provided a context for understanding variances in health behavior and practice based on racial categories (Boone, 1989; Heurtin-Roberts & Reisin, 1993; Wilson, 1985). For instance, young African American women have a less stereotypical body image, and they are more comfortable with their own bodies (Parker et al., 1995). In addition, among African American women condom use is motivated not by economic considerations but by affective ties and notions of self-esteem (Sobo, 1995). Self-supporting women with strong kinship ties demonstrate a higher incidence of condom use, while those women who depended upon their male partners for both affection and/or income are less likely to insist upon condom use. Variation in such behavior has definite implications for health status.

Another more recent example is an analysis of the push–pull factors influencing alcoholism among Native Americans (Spicer, 1997). Among members of this group, alcohol is considered a communal commodity and is thus shared freely; drinkers must be willing to provide alcohol in a reciprocal manner. Those who partake of this communal resource without contributing to it are publicly shamed and ridiculed, though they may still be allowed to drink. Individuals may go to great lengths to contribute to this communal resource, selling household items in order to obtain money for liquor, which is then shared among friends. Anthropological research has demonstrated that health is inextricably linked to the social indices of "racial" categories and class in the American experience.

### **Sexual Orientation**

While pre-Boasian anthropology was interested in maintaining Victorian morality, contemporary research has little use for such prudery, and actively lobbies against it (e.g., Deacon, 1997; Hare, 1985; Jacobus, 1990; Mead, 1928; Roscoe, 1995). AIDS was and continues to be a controversial issue, not just because of the politics of identification and prevention, but also of treatment, such as in the case of needle exchange programs. In activist gay communities, alternative therapies for AIDS—that is, those that do not conform to the standards of the medical community—became normal and no longer "alternative" (Eisenberg et al., 1993). AIDS has the highest percentage of alternative therapy use of any chronic ailments. Estimates of alternative therapy use among AIDS patients range from 36% to 73%, compared with 7% for cancer patients, and 5% among the general population (Furin, 1997). The disease came to be identified as a punishment for unacceptable lifestyles, and disease as caused by "sin" re-entered mainstream discourse about the disease. Because of the AIDS epidemic, anthropological research focused upon and found encouragement for studying the drug subculture and the subculture of the homosexual community within the United States (Furin, 1997; Singer & Baer, 1995; Whitehead, 1997). Since AIDS was initially categorized as a gay disease, and because some men who engaged in homosexual activity did not necessarily think of themselves as gay, they did not think the warnings about AIDS applied to them. This has resulted in the high frequency of AIDS among men who are members of "racial" minorities. In the American context, African American men who engage in homosexual behavior use the term "gay" only in reference to homosexual European American men (Whitehead, 1997). In the Washington, DC, area, 66% of the new AIDS cases are African American men who have low survival rates after diagnosis (Whitehead, 1997, p. 412). Whitehead (1997)

#### **Constructing Hierarchy 203**

argues that contemporary sexual behavior has historical precedent in the plantation system. The northward migration of slaves meant the transportation of plantation lifestyles. One of the features of plantation culture was the idea that "the more children a man has, the more of a man he is" (Whitehead, 1997, p. 414). By examining the roots of social behavior, Whitehead joins historical to presentday health indices, a process that has been borne out by Caribbean research (i.e., Jones, 1994). Similarly, Latino men are also hesitant to display openly homosexual behavior because it constitutes grounds for violent attacks (Singer, 1996; Singer & Marxuach-Rodriguez, 1996).

### **Class**

Strickland and Shetty (1998, pp. 25–26) posit that "measures of health status, a relatively long-term property of the individual…tend to show more marked social class differences." In the American context, the medical marketplace is the primary mode of health care delivery. As a consequence, Heurtin-Roberts and Reisin (1993, p. 223) point out that just as "American affluence is not equitably distributed, neither are our basic health care services."

In the American context, Appalachia is often described as enamored of "folk" remedies. Cavendar and Beck (1995, p. 140) argue that in fact, members of this community are pragmatic, and though pious, are not overly given to superstition or faith healing. "Traditional" remedies, such as turpentine or onion poultices to treat upper respiratory ailments, have slowly been replaced with commodities available in today's health market, namely pharmaceuticals and professional services. Younger generations may express disdain for the backward ways of their parents and grandparents because they have internalized the "primitive" characterization of this type of healing as it has been expressed to them by outsiders (Cavendar & Beck, 1995, p. 140). The changing health practices, namely a preference for health commodities, are reflective of the changing subsistence base of this area.

As a class structure, incarcerated criminals constitute the lowest social order in society. They are deprived of rights, privileges, and often personhood itself (Foucault, 1975). Prisons are a particularly intriguing area of study, especially from an anthropological perspective. Coupled with the legal mandate of 1976 which required prisons to provide adequate and timely medical care to inmates, correctional systems have been searching for ways to

provide both safe and timely response to inmate health care. Federal prisons alone held over one million inmates, and the incarceration rate increased from 139 per 100,000 in 1980 to 373 per 100,000 in 1994, a tripling in just over a decade (Hipkins, 1997, p. 375). Disease is endemic in the prison system because prisoners have lower health indicators to begin with and are exposed to highly potent and communicable diseases such as AIDS. Endemic also are high rates of mental illness among inmates as they are shunted out of a shrinking mental health system and into the prison system (Hipkins, 1997). Given the large numbers of individuals living in prisons in the United States and around the world, a systematic analysis of the articulation of health and social control as it is expressed in the criminal justice system is long overdue.

### **Gender**

Perhaps one of the foremost determinants of social status in the cross-cultural record is gender. The contemporary feminist movement in anthropology dates to the 1970s when Rosaldo and Lamphere (1974) published their revolutionary work, and Ehrenreich and English (1978) realized the feminist agenda through a meticulous critique of the biomedical establishment. Their work added to the existing literature on the health of minority groups, but underscored the notion of biomedicine as a means to enforce an amassed set of Euro-American values (Jacobus, 1990). After examining the historical relationship between women and biomedicine, they proposed that the goal of medicine was to legitimate a "masculinist society, dressed up as objective truth" (Ehrenreich & English, 1978, p. 5; also Keller, 1985; Martin, 1991). As patients, women are subordinate to physicians and also to medical technology (e.g., Frank et al., 1998). With respect to pharmaceuticals, women are more likely to be prescribed psychotropic drugs than men, owing to a higher incidence of what Estroff (1993) terms "I am" diseases, such as anorexia. Thus, women not only suffer from such diseases, but also from complete identification with them (see also Davis-Floyd, 1992). In the genetic counseling industry, Rapp (1988) describes the process from the points of view of the patient and provider. The people who work in this industry tend to be young women. However, because the job requires a fair bit of emotional involvement with parents and helping them to understand the meaning of genetic assay in their unborn child, the rate of employee turnover tends to be fairly high. In another examination of biomedicine, Cassell (1996) described the role of women, not as patients, but as health care providers. In the accounts of female surgeons, their femaleness provided a basis for vilification, continually reinforced and frowned upon. Snide remarks ("Surgery is no good when a woman is in the room") and questions about sexual orientation ("Put on lipstick, or people will think you're a lesbian") undermine the self-esteem and effectiveness of these professionals (Cassell, 1996). It is an atmosphere of belittling confirmed by women doctors themselves (Levy, 1987, p. 536).

The dominion of masculine over feminine and its effects upon health has been extensively covered in the medical anthropology literature, and any discussion here will be cursory at best. Some of the earliest accounts are those by Gilman (1993). First published in 1891, Gilman describes the way in which women are confined and coerced by biomedicine. Since that time, many writers have commented upon their mistreatment at the hands of the biomedical establishment (Davis-Floyd, 1992; Ehrenreich & English, 1978; Laurence & Weinhouse, 1994; Martin, 1991; Rapp, 1988).

While women are more susceptible than men to the sick role, they may use their illness experience to their advantage (Low, 1989). Using the example of *nervios* or "nerves," Rebhun finds that "a woman's manipulations are more or less successful depending upon her skill at orchestrating perceptions of her situation" (Rebhun, 1993, p. 131). A woman may somatisize an unhappy marital relationship, using it as a tool by which to bring about favorable behavior on the part of her husband while simultaneously mobilizing community support for her cause. In Andean Ecuador, women use the *nervios* sick role as a "coping mechanism for excessive responsibility and unrealistic social expectation," namely trying to successfully manage home, family, livestock, and cultivation duties (Finerman, 1989). This type of approach to lived experience enters the realm of definitions of resistance (e.g., Coplan, 1992; Foucault, 1963, 1975), where resistance is described as a bargaining and coping tool for the overtly disenfranchised members of the group. In these cases, illness provides a mode of escape, a temporary empowerment, or a method for dealing with powerlessness.

The examination of reproduction and reproductive technologies also affords a window into the "politics of reproduction," synthesizing local (birth and parenting) and global (socioeconomic) structures. Just as contraception made possible sex without reproduction, so reproductive technologies offer the possibility of reproduction without sex (Whiteford & Poland, 1989). The danger is that the flow is unilateral, where infertile women are used as guinea pigs for drug testing, and poor, but fertile women may rent out their wombs for bearing others' children. Birth technologies have also altered the birthing process itself. Thousands of years of women kneeling or squatting during childbirth gave way to women lying on their backs in hospital gurneys, their legs elevated by stirrups. This unnatural, iatrocentric posture was pioneered by Louis XIV, so that he could have a royal ringside seat at one of his "favorite events" (Whiteford & Poland, 1989, p. 2).

Aging studies are another avenue of examining the effects of medicalization. Lock's work illuminating the experience of menopause in women cross-culturally, ranging from its absence in Japan to its over-medicalization in the United States, has shown us that the latter is the result of two confluent forces: the medicalization of women as the "other" and the medicalization of aging (Lock, 1993). Martin describes that for women, aging is a derogatory process, causing atrophy (Martin, 1991). In medical advertisements, women are described as having "outlived her ovaries" (Martin, 1991).

## **CONCLUSIONS**

In taking a structural approach to the production of health and disease, medical anthropology brings together socioeconomic determinants and clinical practice in the analysis of biomedicine. The result of this approach demonstrates that definitions of health and health care have a correlation with ethnicity, class, sexual orientation, and gender that serve as lenses through which the biomedical establishment may be viewed. If good health is a scarce commodity in a complex society such as the United States, its distribution is necessarily dependent upon social status. Anthropological contributions to discussions of health and disease demonstrate that the administration of health care is a means of social control. Despite new health technologies and methods of health care delivery, their patterns of use are largely informed by entrenched social and political mores (e.g., Sinha, 2000). The advantage to the anthropological approach is that issues of power and agency are inserted into the dialogue of clinical biomedicine that otherwise narrowly focuses on pathogens and individual biological processes. By using the tools of social analysis, medical anthropology

#### **References 205**

broadens the discussion forum to include issues of social control and social process into the realm of health care and disease treatment.

## **REFERENCES**

- Anagnost, A. (1995). A surfeit of bodies: Population and the rationality of the state in post-Maoist China. In F. D. Ginsburg & R. Rapp (Eds.), *Conceiving the new world order* (pp. 22–41). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Banerji, D. (1982). *Poverty, class and health culture in India*. New Delhi: Prachi Prakashan.
- Boone, M. (1989). *Capital crime: Black infant mortality in America*. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- Brearley, P. et al. (1978). *The social context of health care*. London: Martin Robertson.
- Brown, S. L. (2002). Race and sex differences in the use of cardiac procedures for patients with ischemic heart disease in Maryland. *Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 4*, 526–537.
- Cassell, J. (1996). The woman in the surgeon's body: Understanding difference. *American Anthropologist, 1*, 41–53.
- Cavendar, A. P., & Beck, S. H. (1995). Generational change, folk medicine, and medical self-care in a rural Appalachian community. *Human Organization, 2*, 129–142.
- Comaroff, J., & Comaroff, J. (1992). *Ethnography and the historical imagination: Studies in the ethnographic imagination*. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Coplan, D. B. (1992). Fictions that save: Migrants' performance and Basotho national culture. In G. E. Marcus (Ed.), *Rereading cultural anthropology* (pp. 267–295). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Csordas, T. (1988) The conceptual status of hegemony and critique in medical anthropology. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 2*, 416–421.
- Davis-Floyd, R. (1992). *Birth as an American rite of passage*. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- Deacon, D. (1997). *Elsie Clews Parsons*. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Douglas, M. (1966). *Purity and danger: An analysis of the concepts of pollution and taboo*. New York: Pantheon Books.
- Ehrenreich, B., & English, D. (1978). *For her own good: 150 Years of the experts' advice to women*. New York: Doubleday.
- Eisenberg, D. M., Kessler, R. C., Foster, C., Norlock, F. E., Calkins, D. R., & Delbanco, T. L. (1993) Unconventional medicine in the United States. *The New England Journal of Medicine, 4*, 252–256.
- Estroff, S. (1993). Identity, disability, and schizophrenia. In S. Lindenbaum & M. Lock (Eds.), *Knowledge, practice, and power* (pp. 247–286). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Finerman, R. (1989). The burden of responsibility: Duty, depression, and nervios in Andean Ecuador. In D. Davis & S. Low (Eds.), *Gender, health, and illness* (pp. 141–157). New York: Hemisphere.
- Foster, G., & Anderson, B. G. (1978). *Medical anthropology*. New York: Knopf.
- Foucault, M. (1963). *The birth of the clinic: An archaeology of medical perception* (A. M. Sheridan Smith, Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.

- Foucault, M. (1975). *Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison* (A. Sheridan, Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.
- Frank, A. G. (1966). The development of underdevelopment. In Wilber and Jacobsen (Eds.), *The political economy of development and underdevelopment* (pp. 107–118).
- Frank, G., Blackhall, L. J., Michel, V., Murphy, S. T., Azen, S. P., & Part, K. (1998). A discourse of relationships in bioethics: Patient autonomy and end-of-life decision making among elderly Korean Americans. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 4*, 403–423.
- Funk, M. et al. (2002). Racial differences in the use of cardiac procedures in patients with acute myocardial infarction. *Nursing Research, 3*, 148–157.
- Furin, J. J. (1997). "You have to be your own doctor": Sociocultural influences on alternative therapy use among gay men with AIDS in West Hollywood. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 4*, 498–504.
- Gilman, C. P. (1993). In T. Erskine & C. Richards (Eds.), *The yellow wallpaper*. (Reprint of … edition) New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Gramsci, A. (1971). *Selections from the prison notebooks*. London: Lawrence & Wisheart.
- Habermas, J. (1970). Towards a theory of communicative competence. *Inquiry, 4*, 360–375.
- Hare, P. (1985). *A woman's quest for science: Portrait of anthropologist Elsie Clews Parsons*. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books.
- Harrison, F. V. (1999). Introduction: Expanding the discourse on race. *American Anthropologist, 3*, 609–631.
- Heurtin-Roberts, S., & Reisin, E. (1993). Folk models of hypertension among black women: Problems in illness management. In J. Coreil & J. D. Mull (Eds.), *Anthropology and primary health care* (pp. 222–250). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Hipkins, J. H. (1997). Telemedicine in correctional systems. In R. Bashshur, J. H. Sanders, & G. Shannon (Eds.), *Telemedicine: Theory and practice* (pp. 375–390). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
- Jacobus, M. (1990). In parenthesis: Immaculate conceptions and feminine desire. In M. Jacobus, E. F. Keller, & S. Shuttleworth (Eds.), *Body/politics: Women and the discourses of science* (pp. 11–28). New York: Routledge.
- Jones, R. (1994). *Songs from the village: An ethnography of gender, reproduction, and sexuality in St. Lucia, West Indies* (Doctoral dissertation, Southern Methodist University, 1994).
- Keller, E. F. (1985). *Reflections on gender and science*. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Kleinman, A. (1980). *Patients and healers in the context of culture : An exploration of the borderland between anthropology, medicine, and psychiatry*. Berkeley: University of California.
- Krauss, I. (1976). Stratification, class, and conflict. New York: Free Press.
- Lantz, P., Dupuis, L., Reding, D., Kerauska, M., & Lappe, K. (1994). Peer discussions of cancer among migrant farm workers. *Public Health Reports, 4*, 512–520.
- Laurence, L., & Weinhouse, B. (1994). *Outrageous practices: The alarming truth about how medicine mistreats women*. New York: Fawcett Columbine.
- Levy, M. (1987). A piece of my mind: Dr Mom. *Journal of the American Medical Association, 4*, 536.
- Lock, M. (1993). The politics of mid-life and menopause: Ideologies for the second sex in North America and Japan. In S. Lindenbaum &