# **12 Education**

# **MEANING OF EDUCATION**

According to Aristotle, to educate means 'to develop man's faculties, especially his mind so that he may be able to enjoy the contemplation of supreme truth, beauty and goodness'. Summer defi ned education as the attempt to transmit to the child the mores of the groups, so that he can learn, 'what conduct is approved and what disapproved, how he ought to behave in all kinds of cases, what he ought to believe and reject'. According to Anderson, 'Education is the social process by which an individual learns the things necessary to fi t him to the life of his society'.

Education is a process of transmission of social heritage. In its broadest sense, education may be defi ned as the process whereby the social heritage of a group is passed on from one generation to another and whereby the child learns the rules of social behaviour. It is a conscious training of the young for the later adoption of adult roles. It is synonymous with socialization. In a limited sense, education is training by a body of instructors within the institutional pattern of the schools, colleges, and universities.

# **THE OBJECTIVES OF EDUCATION**

Education has a great social signifi cance. Since earliest times, philosophers have devoted to it a good deal of attention, defi ning its nature and objectives. In modern times too, eminent educational philosophers and outstanding teachers have accorded education a high place in their works. Following Arnold, the objectives of education may be briefl y described as follows:

**(i) To complete the socialization process:** Th e fi rst and the foremost objective of education is 'to complete the socialization process'. Modern family has failed to perform the role of a

### **144** Chapter 12

 socializing agency. Now, it is felt that it is the school's business to instill in the child the qualities of honesty, fair play, consideration of others, and a sense of right and wrong.

**(ii) Transmission of cultural heritage:** Education should aim at the transmission of cultural heritage, that is, the knowledge of the past, its art, literature, philosophy, religion, and music. Th rough history text books and indirectly through celebration of patriotic holidays the child is acquainted with his cultural heritage.

**(iii) Reformation of attitudes:** Education should aim at the reformation of attitudes wrongly formed by the children already. Within his family group, the child often comes to absorb a host of attitudes, beliefs, loyalties, and prejudices. To reform these beliefs and prejudices is the function of education.

**(iv) Occupational placement:** Education should enable one to do a productive task and earn enough for himself and his family.

**(v) To instill the sense of competition:** Th e school's main emphasis is upon personal competition. Each child is compared with his companions by the percentage of marks or division. Th e school not only ranks all those within its walls, but also sifts its raw material, passing some and rejecting others on the basis of intelligence and diligence. It thus acts as a social selector.

Th e Radhakrishnan Report on University Education in India adds, 'Th e purpose of all education, it is admitted by thinkers of East and West, is to provide a coherent picture of the universe and integrated way of life'. And in fact if education can achieve this objective then any product of our educational institutions could well play his role in life and help in building a better world.

'Herein, it may also be remarked that education is sometimes used as a medium of indoctrination. In the communist countries, the students are taught lessons in communism, while in Islamic countries they are taught Islamic fundamentalism. In India, although the old forms of social stratifi cation based on caste are coming to an end, yet social stratifi cation is making its appearance in a new form. Th e public school system has given birth to a new class—the upper class children. An 'elite' class of children taught western style of living has come up.

Education has accelerated the rate of social mobility. An educated youth fi nds no avenues open in the village and consequently migrates to the city where he gets employed in a lucrative job that enhances his social status. Th e modern society is more 'open' than the traditional one, and one of the reasons is education explosion.

# **CHALLENGES TO EDUCATION**

Within the context of our civilization, education faces numerous challenges. First, it faces the problem of the curriculum and the methods of executing it. What shall be taught at the school and college level? What subjects a student will be required to off er and what contents will be included in each subject? We fi nd our universities and boards changing the syllabi of diff erent classes off and on under the pressure of political and other extraneous considerations, leading to confusion and sometimes even to repetition.

Second, the present education sharpens only the memory of the students. It does not develop his physical and spiritual faculties. To be meaningful, education should attempt to develop body, mind, and heart. Th ird, the educationists have to fi nd an answer to the following issues:

**(a)** To what extent shall formal education follow the lead of the social education movement, which attempts to inculcate values through indoctrination, and even propaganda?

**(b)** Does formal education include extracurricular or co-curricular activities on the campus?

**(c)** Can we bypass the moral education from our formal education?

**(d)** To what extent should the state control the management and aid the fi nances of an educational institution and prescribe what is to be taught at the school and higher levels?

**(e)** Should the so-called 'public schools' be abolished to implement the theory of democracy in education?

**(f)** What should be the place of examinations in testing the achievements of the students and what should be the system of examination?

Fourth, certain subjects are never brought to the attention of the child on the plea that they are beyond his comprehension. Th ese 'tabooed' subjects are taught at the secondary or college level. What happens to the child who does not go through college? Does the exclusion of certain subjects from the school curriculum not handicap his growth as a full man?

Fifth, what should be the place of vocational education in our system of education ? Should education concern itself with turning out expert craftsmen or should it lay emphasis on liberal education?

Last, how can education preserve our culture and also train people to explore and introduce new values?

# **CRISIS IN INDIAN EDUCATION**

**Defects during British rule:** Th ere are various defects in our present system of education. In, spite of some reforms introduced here and there in the educational system, the hard fact is that the system as a whole remains as we inherited it from our British rulers. Th e British designed the educational system as means of establishing British imperialism fi rmly in India. No eff ort was made by them to keep it in harmony with the social and cultural conditions in the country or to make it an instrument for inculcating intelligent citizenship among the people. No emphasis was laid on technical and vocational education. It did not fi t the young men for practical life, who often found themselves incapable to face the struggle for existence. In addition to it, even the literary education was so expensive that it became the more or less exclusive privilege of the well-to-do. Th ere were no good schools and colleges in the rural areas. It neglected the education for women and was notoriously examination-ridden. Th e salaries of the teachers were low and they did not enjoy any social status.

**Th e defects continue:** Th ese defects still exist in the educational system of the country. Perhaps some more defects have added themselves to the system. Th ere are too few schools, too few teachers, too obsolete equipment, and too few buildings. Every year hundreds of students are refused admission to the schools and colleges. Th e problem of unemployment among the educated ones has assumed serious proportions. Th e engineers and other technically trained persons are idle in the country. Th ere is no planning of education in conformity with the political and economic structure of the country. Th e emphasis on literary education continues, syllabi are outdated, examination system is the same; the lot of the teachers has not improved and the students are no better equipped and disciplined to face the hard realities of life. Recently, they have taken even to violence, burning buses, pulling down the telegraph and telephone poles, putting 'gheraos', manhandling the teachers, indulging in mass-copying during examination, and forcing the authorities to close down the institutions. Even the introduction of NCC or NSS has not made them better-disciplined citizens. Politics has made deep inroads into the educational structures.

#### **146** Chapter 12

**Th e real crisis:** However, the crisis in modem education does not result from the low salary of the teachers, the poor buildings, obsolete equipment, and too few schools. Th e crisis results from the school's inability to decide what it is going to do with the students and what to teach them. In other words, it is uncertainty and ambivalence of purpose that create the crisis. Modern education lives in the past and has not kept pace with the changes that have overtaken our civilization. Our schools have failed to give due consideration to the content of education needed to fi t the masses to operate in a democracy. Instead of devising a curriculum suitable to democratic objectives and national needs, our education has permitted the teachers to continue with a type of instruction and a method of examination that had been worked out in the nineteenth century for the purpose of forming a class of clerks, 'Indian in blood and colour, but English in taste, opinion, words, and intellect'. Th e content of education is still oriented towards the past. Th ere is little direct connection between what the boy reads at the school and the problems that press to the forefront of his attention in fi nding the girl to marry and making a place for himself in the society. Th e schools are overcrowded because we have little place for the youngsters to go elsewhere. It is strange to see that students in India want more holidays than days of instruction. Rather than preparing students for society, it alienates them from it. Formal education has generated urban values, competitiveness, and consumerism. Although it is claimed that education is a mobility multiplier and an equalizer, in actual practice it legitimizes inequality and creates new class diff erences. Rather than leading to a dynamic transformation of society, the present education system actively works for the maintenance of the status quo. Finally, the educational system of today provides only a routine information package. As said, education is not purposeful if it aims at imparting 'knowledge plenty and wisdom scanty'. Learning without wisdom is a load of books on an ass's back.

**Post-independence eff orts to reform educational system:** Since the attainment of freedom, a defi nite trend towards reformation of educational system is discernible. From time to time committees have been appointed to probe into the defects and suggest means for improvement. Th e Mudaliar Report on Secondary Education (1952) stressed the need of training Indians in the democratic way of life. Th e Report reads 'Citizenship in a democracy is a very exacting and challenging responsibility for which every citizen has to be carefully trained. It involves many intellectual, social and moral qualities which cannot be expected to grow of their own accord'. Similarly, the Radhakrishnan Report on University Education emphasized that the purpose of education was to provide a coherent picture of the universe and an integrated way of life. On the basis of these reports, some reforms were introduced in the educational system of the country; for example, the introduction of higher secondary scheme along with three-year degree course, and the opening of more and more vocational and technical schools and colleges. Th e Education Commission, 1964, reviewed the existing system of education— primary, secondary, university, and technical, in all its aspects. In the main, the commission stressed that Indian education needs a drastic reconstruction, almost a revolution. Th e commission has said that there is need to bring about major improvement in the eff ectiveness of primary education: to introduce work-experience as an integral element of general education, to vocationalize secondary education, to improve the quality of teachers at all levels and to provide teachers in suffi cient strength to strengthen centres of advanced study and strive to attain higher international standards, to lay special emphasis on the combination of teaching and research, and to pay particular attention to education and research in agriculture and allied sciences. Th e commission has stated that if education is to develop adequately in India, educational expenditure in the next 20 years should rise.

In 1986, the Parliament adopted the National Policy on Education prepared under the leadership of Sh. Rajiv Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of India. In order to implement the national policy, a programme of action was prepared for the guidance of policy executors. Th e national policy has laid emphasis on elimination of disparities in the educational system, improvement in the quality of school education, involvement of the community with the educational process, reorientation of the whole system to promote women's equality, and made special provisions for the scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other educationally disadvantaged sections, for the minorities, the physically and mentally handicapped, and for the areas that need special attention. It has also given priority to eff ective universalization of elementary education, eradication of illiteracy and skill development in the 15–35 year age group, vocationalization of education and preparation of the manpower needed for the developmental needs, improvement in quality at all levels, and scientifi c and technological research.

Th e National Policy on Education was of course a laudable eff ort to meet the new challenges of national development. But it too, like previous policies, failed to make any impressive dent in the education system. Actually, what ails the Indian educational system is the lack of proper planning, effi cient administration, and eff ective implementation. Th ere is no dearth of suggestions for the solution of defects in our education system; what is required is a determined political will to implement the various reforms suggested by diff erent committees and commissions. It must be clearly recognized that without education no progress is possible. Th e nations that have 100 per cent literacy are great, glorious, rich, and powerful. Th e countries that are world leaders in education are also international leaders in progress and prosperity. We want better men, more educated women, and still more educated children to make the nation great. As Baker said, 'He who opens a school, closes a prison'. At present, India is spending only 2 per cent of its national income on education. Many eminent educationists have said that the education budget should be raised to 6 per cent of our national income. Th e education budget is a country's barometer of its dynamism, wealth, and power.

Th e Eighth plan laid emphasis on universalization of primary education in the 6–14 year age group, promotion of adult literacy to achieve 80 per cent literacy among the population in the 15–40 year age group, establishment of secondary schools in unserved areas and Navodaya Vidalayas in all districts, improvement of teacher education facilities, consolidation and strengthening of college and university education, and creation of teaching and research facilities in areas of emerging technologies. While some steps have been taken, much remains to be done. Actually, what is required is a bold and determined eff ort on the part of all concerned—rulers, administrators, teachers, students, and society—to make education more meaningful and purposeful. And in the absence of such eff ort, education in India has failed to serve as a catalyst of human social development.

# **QUESTIONS**

- 1. What do you understand by education? Describe its objectives.
- 2. What are the main defects in the Indian system of education?
- 3. What eff orts, if any, have been made in India to reform the system of education?
- 4. 'Th e teacher is the soul of education'. Discuss the statement in connection with the position of the teachers in India.
- 5. Describe the contents of New Education Policy. Has it made any dent in the education system?
- 6. Critically examine the present system of education in India.