**8**

## **Borderlands and Oceans**

With a total length of nearly 3,000 kilometres, the Brahmaputra is one of the longest rivers of the world. It originates in the Angsi Glacier north of the Himalayas, and then flows for more than 1,620 kilometres through Tibet before it enters India and cascades down to the Assam plains. It then flows through Bangladesh, joins the Ganges and other rivers with which it forms a delta, and, finally, empties into the Bay of Bengal. The Brahmaputra, known as the Yarlung Tsangpo in Tibet and the Jamuna in Bangladesh, is the lifeline of tens of millions of people. There was, therefore, alarm in India when it became known in 2009 that China was building a 116-metretall and 389-metre-long dam to support a 540-megawatt power station at Zangmu in Tibet. The Chinese had until then denied that it had any plans to build a mega dam just north of India and Bhutan. In January 2013, the Chinese government approved the construction of three more dams on the river, at Dagu and Jiexu upstream and at Jiacha below Zangmu Dam. Altogether 28 dam projects in Tibet have been proposed.

Causing more alarm, Li Ling, a Chinese scientist, published a book called *Save China, Through Water From Tibet*<sup>1</sup> in November 2005 in which he mentioned that Chinese water experts had conducted a survey on the viability of transferring water from Tibet's rivers to central China to alleviate water shortage there.<sup>2</sup> Most of China's big rivers originate in the Tibetan highlands, and the idea to divert waters from the tributaries and actually reroute the Brahamputra to the Yangtze-Huang He, or the Yellow River, was not even new. The PLA had entertained such ideas at least since the 1980s.<sup>3</sup> Although 70 per cent of the waters of the Indian stretch of the Brahmaputra comes from direct rainwater collected south of the border and from tributaries from Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, and Bhutan, the fact that

China controls almost a third of it has been enough to cause serious concern in India. The Chinese view on the matter was expressed by a retired general, Guo Kai, in an interview with the official government paper *Global Post*. 'So much water in the Yarlung Tsangpo runs out of China, it's a waste'.<sup>4</sup> He went on to make the claim that India and Bangladesh get so much rainfall that they suffer from flooding, so if China diverted the water from the Brahmaputra, all three nations would benefit.

It is understandable that the fast-expanding Chinese economy needs vast amounts of electricity, but less so that the damming, and possible diversion, of the Brahmaputra is being done without consultations with the countries downstream. The initial Indian response to China's plans was meek. India's former minister for Development of the Northeastern Region, Praban Singh Ghatowar, told the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) in March 2014 that 'our foreign ministry has checked with China and we have been told that the flow will not be affected, and we will make sure that the people's lives are not affected by the dams'.<sup>5</sup> In response, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesman told the BBC that, 'all projects go through scientific planning and feasibility studies and the impact on both upstream and downstream will be fully considered'.<sup>6</sup>

But, many people remain sceptical, and even highly critical of the plans, as there is no water-sharing deal between India and China, just an agreement to share monsoon data. Information provided by the Chinese has also been incomplete and often contradictory, and, as the BBC pointed out, 'It is hard to know where the truth lies. The dams are hidden from view, on remote valleys and in deep mountain gorges. It is there that the neverending tension between politics, development and environment is now being played out.'<sup>7</sup> Part of the equation is also that China controls the sources not only of the Brahmaputra but of other major Asian rivers as well, among them the Mekong and the Salween, and Chinese dams on the Mekong, known there as Lancang, have become a major problem for downstream countries by withholding water supply. A plan to build a cascade of at least five large dams on the Salween, known as the Nujiang in China, which flows into Myanmar and later in part marks the border between Myanmar and Thailand, was postponed only after vocal protests in Thailand and Myanmar, and even from Chinese NGO Green Watershed in Kunming.<sup>8</sup>

Spokesmen for the Chinese authorities claim that 'there are cooperation mechanisms for China and the five Southeast Asian countries (Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam) that can help co-ordinate sustainable use of water resources in the Lancang-Mekong River and share information'.<sup>9</sup> The problem is that there are actually very few such 'cooperation mechanisms' between China and the downstream countries. China is not a member of the Mekong River Commission, an intergovernmental body for co-ordinating water resources comprising representatives of Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam. Myanmar, which does not significantly rely on or tap the Mekong, attends meetings as an observer, as does China, but the Chinese only provide water level data to the Commission during floods. None of the downstream countries was consulted before China built its dams on the Mekong. China has built seven such dams so far, and plans to build 21 more.<sup>10</sup>

In Myanmar, Chinese plans to build a mega dam at Myitsone, where the Mali Hka and the Nmai Hka join to become the Irrawaddy River, rivers that do not flow from China, provoked mass protests until the country's new quasi-civilian government under President Thein Sein announced on 30 September, 2011, that the joint Myanmar-Chinese mega-hydroelectric project was suspended. The US\$3.6 billion Myitsone Dam would have been world's 15th tallest dam, submerging 766 square kilometres of forestland, an area bigger than Singapore.<sup>11</sup> The suspension of the construction of the dam marked the beginning of rapidly deteriorating relations between Myanmar and China. Until then, Myanmar had been one of China's most faithful allies in Southeast Asia.

Hu Weijia, writing in the *Global Times* in October 2016, argued that 'it is understandable that India is sensitive to China's water exploitation on the Brahmaputra as a downstream country, but China is unlikely to use the waters of the river as a potential weapon … China-India relations should not be affected by an imaginary "water war".'<sup>12</sup> The problem is that there already is a 'water war', although it has not led to armed conflict and may never do so. But the dispute is bound to exacerbate the already strained relations between India and China.

India is building dams, too, to meet its growing needs for electricity: first in Bhutan and Nepal and now in Arunachal Pradesh. Revenue from the sale of electricity from dams built by India in Bhutan provides the

Himalayan kingdom with a substantial source of income that has been used for the country's development. In Nepal, India has become the largest hydropower developer as well, most recently with an agreement signed in November 2014 to build a 900-megawatt dam and power station in the eastern part of the country. In August, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi signed a deal with the Nepalese for the first 900-megawatt dam, in western Nepal. The deals are not without controversy and some politicians and NGOs are demanding they be terminated.<sup>13</sup>

Hydroelectric development in Arunachal is also controversial. The state has a tremendous potential for generating electricity, and all its rivers flow down into the lowlands of Assam below the mountains. Construction of a dam on the Siang River, a tributary of the Brahmaputra that flows through Arunachal's Upper Siang District, began in April 2009 and, when completed, it will be the largest hydroelectric dam in the Indian subcontinent. In 2010, a local student organization appealed to the Indian government to scrap the Siang project and other dams that it has plans to build in Arunachal. The government responded by saying that the projects will not be cancelled and that necessary precautions will be undertaken to ensure minimal environmental impact.<sup>14</sup>

It is inevitable that those huge projects on the rivers flowing south from the Himalayas will adversely affect the environment. But there is a fundamental difference between hydroelectric power development in India and China. India is a democracy where such issues can be discussed freely, and it is legitimate to protest the government's decisions and plans. This is not the case in China. The suspension of the Salween dams was a rare exception, but was possible because some of Green Watershed's organizers have high-level contacts and, therefore, some protection for their activities.

But India's strength, its democracy, also makes it vulnerable to unwanted, internal pressures. Protests against the plans to build dams in Arunachal have been exploited by India's Maoists. The Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist), which is engaged in armed insurrection against the Indian state, may be an unlawful organization, but it operates openly through a number of civil society groups and other fronts. Anti-dam activists have stalled the construction of a dam on the Subansiri River since 2011. In April 2015, *The Times of India* quoted Minister of State for Home Affairs Haribhai Parthibhai Chaudhary as saying that the Upper Assam Leading Committee of the CPI-Maoist is 'presently operating in Assam and

Arunachal Pradesh and has been involved in the looting of weapons and extortion activities in the local villages'.<sup>15</sup> The minister went on to say that the CPI-Maoist had been engaged in recruitment and training of cadres for its units in Assam. 'These cadres have been involved in extensive propaganda against mega dams in Assam. Against this backdrop, the Assam-Arunachal border has emerged as another theatre of Maoist activity,' the minister said.<sup>16</sup>

India's Maoist movement may be dwindling and is not as strong as it was in the first decade of the twenty-first century. But it is still active mainly in the tribal belt in central India—and it has been able to find new fertile ground for its revolutionary message among some tribal communities in Arunachal precisely because the state is developing fast, and hydroelectric power generation is part of economic development. As Akhil Ranjan Dutta, a professor of political science at Guwahati University, explains, the projects have been marred

by pursuing aggressive corporate friendly development paradigm as is evident in the case of commissioning of large river dams in the region. Relative egalitarian societies have … witnessed a transition towards hierarchical class divisions once the political elites have joined hands with the Indian ruling class … along with it has evolved a new middle class—the contractors, clerks etc. who have gradually disassociated from the communities.17

The extent of Maoist penetration of Arunachal became known in August 2011, when arrested Maoist cadres told their interrogators that they used to hold regular 'revolutionary meetings' at their hideouts in Lohit and Lower Dibang Valley districts in Arunachal. Such meetings were attended by between 150 and 200 villagers and cadres, the captured Maoists said.18 The CPI-Maoist has, over the past few years, also established links with ULFA and leftist rebels in Manipur. According to ULFA commander Paresh Baruah, 'if the Maoists can launch a successful war against the Indian state, it will be beneficial for ULFA. We have a strategic understanding with the Maoists on our common enemy.'<sup>19</sup> Most Manipuri rebels have been leftists since the days of their hero Hijam Irabot, who formed the first revolutionary movement in the state in the 1940s.

Even so, the possibility of a widespread CPI-Maoist insurgency in Arunachal is extremely remote. And, as was the case in Nepal during the Maoist insurrection there, the Chinese have shown little interest in the Indian Maoist movement and are unlikely to support it, with 'Maoism'

being an anachronism even in China. It is an entirely different matter with India's ethnic, northeastern insurgents who have a long-standing relationship with China's intelligence services. After the death of Mao Zedong in 1976 and the introduction of Deng Xiaoping's market-oriented reforms, China was no longer exporting world revolution—only consumer goods and other products from its fast-growing industries. But China's secret services did not, as the April 2004 arms bust in Chittagong clearly showed, give up their contacts with India's ethnic rebels. And contacts had to be maintained through northwestern Myanmar, to where the Naga rebels in the 1970s, and ULFA in the 1980s, had retreated after successive Indian military operations in the northeast. Headquartered at their camp in Taka, northern Sagaing Region, they have been able to carry out cross-border attacks into India.

Myanmar's military, preoccupied with its own ethnic insurgencies elsewhere in the country, has paid little attention to the presence of rebels from India on its turf. Undisturbed by nearby Myanmar Army outposts, a meeting of Assamese, Naga and, Manipuri rebels took place at their camp at Taka near the Chindwin River in April 2014. They formed a new outfit with the peculiar name, the United National Liberation Front of Western Southeast Asia (UNLFWSA), to co-ordinate their activities—and to emphasize their ethnic affinity with the peoples of southeast Asian roots rather than with those in India. The chairman of the new alliance, Shangwang Shangyung Khaplang, a Naga from Myanmar, had been fighting for self-determination for his Myanmar Naga tribes for several decades. In the late 1960s, Khaplang met and escorted Indian Nagas on their way to China for training. When the Indian Nagas could no longer maintain camps on their side of the border, a joint-Naga base area was established on the Myanmar side.

Khaplang sided with Thuingaleng Muivah and Isak Chishi Swu, both China-trained rebels, when the Naga movement split in the late 1970s. When the NSCN was formed in 1980 with Isak as its chairman and Muivah as general secretary, Khaplang was appointed vice-chairman. But it was an alliance that was doomed to fail. The Myanmar Nagas, tired of being treated as serfs by their Indian cousins, drove them out of the area in 1988. The NSCN then split into NSCN (Isak-Muivah), or NSCN-IM, and NSCN (Khaplang), or NSCN-K.

After the loss of its sanctuaries in Myanmar, the NSCN-IM had little choice but to enter into peace negotiations with the Indian government, with which it agreed to a ceasefire in 1997. But, ignoring the accord, Anthony Shimray, the NSCN-IM's main arms procurer who was arrested in 2010, continued to acquire guns from China and other sources until the 2004 Chittagong arms haul put an end to any attempts to get any large shipment of weapons into Nagaland on the Indian side. Shimray first visited China in 1995 and made his initial contacts with the Chinese arms manufacturer North Industries Corporation (NORINCO) as well as a firm based in the coastal province of Guangzhou called the Xin Li Yuan International Investment Company, which was to act as a middleman for weapons purchases. Shimray also held regular meetings in Ruili in Yunnan with Chinese intelligence officers, including one who used the name 'Allan Chang'.<sup>20</sup> In Thailand, Shimray dealt with a local gunrunner called Wuthikorn 'Willy' Naurenartwanich, and through him attempted to procure a huge consignment of Chinese-made guns. In other words, Wuthikorn was another middleman for China's 'grey' arms market, acquiring weapons from a Chinese front company in Bangkok known only as TCL.<sup>21</sup>

But the deal fell through. And, two years after the arrest of Shimray, the Indian government managed to persuade Thai authorities to extradite Wuthikorn to India.<sup>22</sup> Since then, the NSCN-IM's activities have been confined to occasional murders of opponents in Manipur and 'tax collection' from businesses, government officials, ordinary citizens, and some local politicians in Nagaland. Under the ceasefire agreement with the Indian government, the group cannot engage in any violence in Nagaland. The NSCN-IM's troops are confined to a number of camps, where they carry out drills using mostly wooden guns.

The NSCN-K also entered into a ceasefire agreement with the Indian government in 2001 and with Myanmar in April 2012, making it the only insurgent group in the country to have ceasefire agreements with the governments of two sovereign states. Since the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Myanmar government has made peace with a number of ethnic rebel armies within its borders while engaged in war with others such as the powerful Kachin Independence Army (KIA) in the far north of the country.

The NSCN-K kept its ceasefire agreement with Myanmar, but abrogated its peace deal with India in March 2015, and ambushes on the Indian side began. The UNLFWSA guerrillas' fiercest strike occurred on 4 June, when

18 soldiers were killed and 15 wounded in an ambush on an Indian military convoy in Manipur's Chandel District. The guerrillas, who had come from across the Myanmar border, retreated to their sanctuaries on the other side after the ambush.

For years, Indian authorities had tried to press the Myanmar military to take action against the rebels from India, but to no avail. Suggestions that the armies of the two countries should carry out joint, or at least coordinated, operations against the rebels were also ignored. But the Chandel ambush prompted Indians to take matters into their own hands. So, on 9 June, Indian soldiers crossed into Myanmar and attacked camps belonging to the UNLFWSA.

It is clear that as long as the Indian rebels do not bother the Myanmar Army, they are left alone. According to a testimony by an Indian soldier, who took part in the June 2015 cross-border raids, which was published in the Indian press, the operation was kept secret even from the Myanmar Army officers in the area so they would not tip off the Indian rebels in advance. Several of those officers were collecting protection money from the Indian rebels, the soldier alleged. It is also clear that the Myanmar government was not informed about the Indian cross-border raid until after it had taken place.<sup>23</sup>

It is unclear, however, what prompted the NSCN-K's decision to scrap the ceasefire agreement with the Indian government. The brain behind the ULFWSA, however, was not Khaplang, who was in his mid-70s when he was made the official head of the alliance only because of his age and stature in the Naga Hills of Myanmar, but the younger and much more dynamic ULFA leader Paresh Baruah. A charismatic former footballer from Dibrugarh who has been with the Assamese underground movement since the early 1980s, Baruah is now known to be spending most of his time in Ruili in Yunnan as well as in other parts of China. He was, for instance, spotted at an International Trade Fair in Guangzhou in November 2009. Ruili, just north of Muse in Myanmar, is also the base for several Manipuri rebels. Khaplang died on 9 June 2017 and although one of his closest associates, Khole Konyak, has taken over as NSCN-K leader, a new chairman of the UNLFWSA has not yet been appointed.

Weapons not made in China are acquired from a gun factory at Pangwa, just across the border inside Myanmar's Kachin state. Pangwa is in an area controlled by Zakhung Ting Ying, a former commander of the CPB who

made peace with the Burmese government in 1989 and then went on to head a local government-recognized militia force. Before the November 2015 election in Myanmar, Ting Ying was also a member of the Amyotha Hluttaw, the upper house of the national parliament. As a former CPB commander, he also has contacts in China. No one from the tribal communities in his area would know how to make sophisticated weaponry, which is why technicians from China have to handle the Chinese machinery at the factory.

Ting Ying's factory is known to be capable of producing automatic rifles, pistols, revolvers, and shotguns and, among his customers are the rebels from India's northeast. The guns are transported in vehicles along the road down to Myitkyina and on to Mogaung and the jade mining area at Hpakant. From there, in order to bypass areas controlled by KIA rebels, who would levy 'taxes' in cash or in kind on the shipments, the guns are transported along smaller roads to Singkaling Hkamti and beyond. Guns acquired in China are smuggled across the Myanmar border at Ruili and then trucked via Lashio, Mandalay, and Monywa up to the Indian border. 24

ULFA is also known to have contacts within the United Wa State Army (UWSA), which China arms and uses to provide leverage when dealing with the increasingly pro-Western Myanmar government. The wellequipped, 20,000–30,000-strong UWSA keeps most of its new, Chinese arsenal to itself, but is known to have sold old stocks to other rebel groups, including those from India's northeast. And the UWSA would not be permitted to sell anything without the approval of the Chinese security officers who always accompany its leaders. While Chinese support for the UWSA is mainly aimed at maintaining a solid foothold inside Myanmar, it cannot be ruled out that the group could also be used as a middleman for arms supplies to organizations like ULFA, as it has already supplied its ally, the Myanmar National Democratic Alliance Army, and some other Myanmar groups with weapons.

So, to what extent is China involved with the Indian rebels? Mostly indirectly through arms dealers, but it is evident that Chinese security services, at the very least, are turning a blind eye to the traffic, which serves China's geopolitical interests in the region. Apart from sheltering Baruah, Chinese intelligence officers are also known to have visited the camp near Taka on more than one occasion.

The Chinese may not want to set India's northeast ablaze, but it is in Beijing's interest to cause frictions and disruptions in Myanmar's relations with India. Since the suspension of the Myitsone dam project in 2011, Myanmar has distanced itself from its old ally China and established closer contacts not only with the West but also with India. But a closer, more cordial relationship between Myanmar and India is not in China's interest. Instability along the border—rebel raids into India and retaliatory, Indian cross-border attacks—would serve that purpose. It is also to China's advantage that Myanmar's authorities are paying only scant interest to events along the country's western border. It keeps Myanmar closer to China, which has not given up hope of improved relations.

For this and other more compelling reasons such as its own ethnic insurgencies, it is highly unlikely that Myanmar would ever agree to take part in any joint operations with the Indian Army against the rebels from India's northeast. On the formal level, the Myanmar government continues to have a ceasefire agreement with the NSCN-K—and while attacks in India and cross-border raids by the Indian Army into Myanmar were taking place, Khaplang himself was recuperating in a hospital in the old capital, Yangon, where he was visited by Aung Min, then a government minister who was also engaged in ongoing peace talks with Myanmar's many rebel groups.<sup>25</sup>

The borderlands between India and Myanmar are more likely to be the scene for further military action rather than the Himalayas. The only potentially serious conflict on the border between Arunachal and Tibet since the 1962 War began in July 1986, when an Indian patrol found about 40 Chinese soldiers erecting what appeared to be permanent buildings in the Sumdorong Chu Valley, an area which the Indians believed was on their side of the border or straddling it. Reinforcements were sent in to keep an eye on developments and, by August, the Chinese had constructed a helipad in the area.

In order to diffuse the situation, India suggested that if the Chinese vacated the area during the coming winter, Indian troops would not enter it the following summer. Beijing rejected the proposal.<sup>26</sup> The Indian army chief at the time, General Krishnaswamy Sundarji, decided it was time for India to show its teeth and sent an entire brigade into Zeimithang just south of the border. Operation Falcon had begun. A helipad was constructed on a hilltop overlooking the Sumdorong Chu Valley, heavy guns were placed in

position, and long-range patrols were sent into surrounding areas. According to an Indian Army officer who was on active duty along the border at the time, 'Sundarji wanted to show the Chinese that this is not 1962. He wanted to flex his muscles and demonstrate to the Chinese that it's a different Indian Army they are facing today.'<sup>27</sup>

Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was alarmed at the developments along the northeastern border and came to the area in October. But he was unable to visit Zeimithang because, the officers said, 'the weather was bad'. Helicopters could not land there. The prime minister had to be content with a briefing at the army camp in Tawang. He reportedly said, 'A nice presentation, but I'm not convinced'.<sup>28</sup> Sundarji did not back down and sent more troops and heavy artillery into the area.

By early 1987, the Chinese had moved 20,000 of their troops to the mountains overlooking the Sumdorong Chu Valley, and Indian and Chinese soldiers were also standing literally face-to-face at Bumla and other mountain passes. The situation was not defused until Narayan Dutt Tawari, then Indian minister of External Affairs, stopped over in Beijing in May of that year on his way to North Korea's capital, Pyongyang. As a result, the two sides met at Bumla on 5 August and decided to solve problems over border incidents through talks rather than armed confrontation.

It is extremely rare for an Indian army officer to challenge the elected government like Sundarji did in 1986–7, but that was such an occasion. When Sundarji died in 1999, *India Today* published an obituary saying that his

place in history will probably rest on the lesser-known Operation Falcon …Western diplomats predicted war and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's advisers charged that Sundarji's recklessness was responsible for this. But the general stood firm, at one point telling a senior Rajiv aide, "Please make alternate arrangements if you think you are not getting adequate professional advice." The civilians backed off, so did the Chinese.29

The Chinese were far more careful in their dealings with Indians after the confrontation in the Sumdorong Chu Valley. Rajiv Gandhi, invited by his Chinese counterpart Li Peng, paid an official visit to China between 19 and 23 December 1988. It was the first such visit by an Indian prime minister, since his grandfather Jawaharlal Nehru travelled to Beijing in October 1954. Rajiv Gandhi held meetings with China's top leaders, climbed the Great Wall, and, at official banquets, the exquisitely carved

vegetable decorations were in the shape of a dragon, symbolizing China, a peacock, symbolizing India, and two doves, symbolizing peace.<sup>30</sup> Perhaps because of the recent incidents along the border, the Indian prime minister was received with utmost respect. China had certainly changed a lot since 1962, but so had India.

Rajiv Gandhi's landmark visit marked the beginning of a thaw in Sino-Indian relations. In December 1991, Chinese Premier Li Peng reciprocated Rajiv Gandhi's visit by going to New Delhi. High-level visits became routine in the 1990s and, when, in September 1993, Pamulaparti Venkata Narasimha Rao, then prime minister, visited China, agreements were signed on maintaining peace and tranquillity along the crest of the Himalayas. In November 1996, China's President Jiang Zemin visited India, and the two countries agreed to a set of confidence-building measures to be implemented along the common border. 31

After decades of confrontation, Sino-Indian relations were improving. While significant progress was made, it also became clear, once again, that China and India were fundamentally different civilizations with incompatible political systems. During Rajiv Gandhi's visit, many had hoped for a breakthrough on the border question. But that was not to come. In 1960, China had proposed a straight east-west territorial exchange, including India, abandoning Aksai Chin in the west in return for China accepting the Himalayan crest line or the McMahon Line in the east. In other words, the Line of Actual Control would become a new, demarcated border. 32

It would not have been difficult for the Chinese to agree to such a deal, as no one in China would dare oppose the government's policies on matters of vital strategic concern. India, on the other hand, is a democracy where leaders and politicians have to face the public in general elections. It would be political suicide for any Indian politician to suggest that India should give up Aksai Chin, an area which it considers part of its territory, in return for recognition of sovereignty over land it already controls, that is, the NEFA. Complicating matters even further, since 1985 China has extended its claim to include a demand for territorial concessions in the Tawang area. India perceives this as part of a broader encirclement strategy, which includes inroads into Bhutan, and would make India more vulnerable than it already is.<sup>33</sup>

In October 2014, Narendra Modi's new government announced a plan to build 2,000 kilometres of new roads in Arunachal to improve its infrastructure and help develop remote, neglected areas in the state. The government also pledged to allocate more resources to build schools, clinics, and bridges, and to improve telecommunications. The Indian minister of State for Home Affairs, Kiren Rijiju, who is a native of Arunachal, later told *Bloomberg* that 'the people along the border have migrated down where amenities are available. People native to the region should not have to move out.'<sup>34</sup> None of the roads, however, would link the state with China. 'I don't want to link it with China,' Rijiju told *Bloomberg*. 'We are not doing anything to disturb relations. It's not in terms of challenging or competing with China, but in terms of securing our own territory.'<sup>35</sup>

The Chinese authorities reacted immediately to India's plans. On 14 October, Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Hong Lie said, 'We still need to verify the specifics. The boundary issue between China and India is left by colonial past. We need to deal with this issue properly … Before final settlement is reached we hope that India will not take any action that may further complicate the situation.'<sup>36</sup>

In February 2015, after Modi paid a visit to Arunachal's state capital, Itanagar, Chinese Vice-Foreign Minister Liu Zhenmin said that 'the Chinese government has never recognised the so-called "Arunachal Pradesh" unilaterally set up by the Indian side'.<sup>37</sup> The official Chinese news agency *Xinhua* reported in the same vein, 'The so-called "Arunachal Pradesh" was established largely on the three areas of China's Tibet— Monyul, Loyul and Lower Tsayul, currently under Indian illegal occupation. These three areas, located between the illegal "McMahon Line" and the traditional customary boundary between China and India, have always been Chinese territory.'<sup>38</sup>

Even if the rhetoric these days is not quite as gross and bombastic as it was in the 1950s and 1960s, the Chinese position remains the same and, in essence, it has not changed since the 1913–14 Shimla conference. But the Chinese are unlikely to do anything more nowadays than issuing such official statements every time India does something noteworthy in Arunachal Pradesh, and sending occasional patrols across the border to show that they still do not recognize the McMahon Line. And India's

defences along the border are stronger than ever, making such incursions little more than irritants. The stalemate in the border negotiations is, therefore, likely to continue with no solution in sight.

A much stickier point in bilateral relations is the status of Tibetan exiles in India. During Rajiv Gandhi's 1988 visit, his Chinese hosts devoted most of the time to the Tibetan issue. A communiqué was signed at the end of the visit, which said that 'The Chinese side expressed concern by anti-Chinese activities by some Tibetan elements in India. The Indian side reiterated the long-standing and consistent policy of the government of India that Tibet is an autonomous region of China and that anti-Chinese activities by Tibetan elements are not permitted on Indian soil.'<sup>39</sup>

Then the wording of joint Sino-Indian declarations became even stronger. According to American China specialist John W. Garver,

By linking Tibetan activities in India to 'splitting China,' Beijing was actually intensifying pressure on New Delhi rather than defusing the situation.

Despite declarations of friendship and collaboration, the differences between China and India were obvious even on this issue. Cracking down on demonstrations and other forms of popular protest is standard practice in China, but, as Garver points out, India could agree on such restrictions of free speech only to a limited degree: 'India's core political values are, after all, liberal, holding such things as free expression and travel to be intrinsic human rights'.<sup>41</sup>

India can, at most, restrict, but not ban, political activities by the Tibetan exiles who want the world to know what is happening in their homeland. Between September 1987 and March 1989—that is, before, during, and after Rajiv Gandhi's visit to Beijing—Tibet was rocked by a series of proindependence protests, which proved that Tibetans, despite the region's economic development, had not become any more pro-Chinese than they

By the time of Li Peng's December 1991 visit to India, the Chinese expression of "concern" in the final communiqué had expanded from fourteen words in the 1988 communiqué to forty-nine words: "The Chinese side expressed concern about the continued activities in India by some Tibetans against their motherland and reiterated that Tibet was an alienable part of Chinese territory and that it was firmly opposed to any attempt and actions aimed at splitting China and bringing about 'independence' of Tibet".40

had been in 1959. Demonstrators were killed and injured during the riots, and all foreigners, including journalists, were expelled from Tibet.

The bloodiest incident took place in March 1989. Officially, only about a dozen people were killed when Chinese security forces clamped down on the protesters. But a former Chinese journalist, who was in Tibet during the unrest as a representative of the Chinese Journalists' Association, told reporters after he had got out of China and settled in France that he had a copy of a report from the Chinese Public Security Bureau and the Tibet Military District Command, dated 11 March 1989, stating that '387 Lhasa citizens have been killed … the majority by bullets …721 were injured, 2,100 have been arrested or detained … 354 have disappeared … 82 religious people have been killed, 37 injured, 650 arrested or detained'.<sup>42</sup>

Concern over Tibetans and the activities of the Dalai Lama and his followers in exile is another reason, apart from geopolitical interests in Myanmar's borderlands, why China retains contacts with India's northeastern rebels: it is a means of putting pressure on India, and it gives China some leverage on other bilateral issues, including the sharing of water resources. The Chinese may not admit this, but the very fact that they are permitting Paresh Baruah and his comrades access to China, and to its not-so-black arms bazaar, is enough to keep India on edge. Chinese authorities, much to the annoyance of Indians, also continue to give stapled visas to residents of Arunachal Pradesh when they want to visit China.

On the other hand, rapid economic development in both countries has created an entirely new dimension to Sino-Indian relations. Trade between the two countries is booming. China has become India's largest trading partner and they co-operate as members of the trading association BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa). Bilateral trade between India and China stood at US\$70.73 billion in 2015–16. Major imports from China include telecom instruments, computer hardware and peripherals, fertilizers, electronic components, consumer goods, chemicals, and raw materials for drugs, while exports to China consist of ores, iron and steel, tin, raw hides, leather, plastics, and cotton. But it is a trade where China is the main beneficiary. India's trade deficit with China rose to US\$52.68 billion, from US\$48.48 billion in the previous fiscal year. <sup>43</sup> China's increasingly assertive economic—and, therefore, political—role in the Asia-Pacific has inevitably caused concern among other countries in the region. The conflict in the South China Sea between China on the one side

and Southeast Asian countries and the United States on the other has received much international attention, as has the ongoing a tug-of-war between the United States and China for influence over small island territories in the Pacific with huge, surrounding economic zones. But there is also what could be described as a new Cold War emerging in the Indian Ocean. And, it is there that China's strategic interests collide with India's and an informal alliance is emerging between India, Japan, the US, and Australia.

China's interest in opening a corridor down to the Indian Ocean was first articulated in September 1985 as the country was moving from rigid socialism to a market-oriented economy. In an article in the official mouthpiece *Beijing Review*, Pan Qi, a former vice-minister of communications, outlined the possibility of finding an outlet for trade for China's landlocked southwestern provinces of Yunnan, Sichuan, and Guizhou, with a combined population of 160 million people, through Myanmar down to the Indian Ocean.<sup>44</sup> The article mentioned the Myanmar railheads of Myitkyina and Lashio in the north and northeast, and the Irrawaddy River as possible conduits for Chinese exports.

The first border trade agreement between Yangon and Beijing was signed in early August 1988, only days before a nationwide uprising for democracy broke out in Myanmar. After the movement had been crushed, and Western sanctions put in place, China moved in with trade, loans, and credits to a regime that otherwise would have crumbled under internal and external pressure. Apart from becoming Myanmar's largest foreign trade partner, Beijing exported more than US\$1.4 billion worth of military equipment to Myanmar and helped upgrade its naval facilities in the Indian Ocean. In return, the Myanmar junta gave Beijing access to signals intelligence from key oil shipment sea lanes collected by the Myanmar Navy, using equipment supplied by China. The strategic balance of power in the region was shifting in China's favour. Not only India but also the United States was watching these developments with increasing concern. The construction of oil and gas pipelines from the Myanmar coast to China added to the anxieties in the West and India.

Western sanctions may not have caused Myanmar's economic and strategic push into the hands of the Chinese, as many foreign observers have argued. But Western policies certainly made it easier for China to implement its designs for Myanmar. This, in turn, caused the West to

rethink its Myanmar policy. US strategic concerns were outlined as early as June 1997 in a *Los Angeles Times* article by Marvin Ott, an American security expert and former CIA analyst. 'Washington can and should remain outspokenly critical of abuses in Myanmar. But there are security and other national interests to be served … it is time to think seriously about alternatives,' Ott concluded.<sup>45</sup>

Geostrategic concerns, rather than issues such as human rights and democracy, caused a shift in Washington's Myanmar policy at the same time as many staunchly nationalistic Myanmar military officers were becoming increasingly dissatisfied with their country's heavy dependence on China. In order to understand Myanmar's policy shift, it is also instructive to look behind the façade of democracy that was introduced after the 2010 election. A classified military document written by Lieutenant Colonel Aung Kyaw Hla, who is identified as a researcher at Myanmar's prestigious Defence Services Academy, was completed and circulated internally as early as August 2004. Entitled 'A Study of Myanmar–US Relations', the main thesis of the 346-page dossier is that Myanmar's recent reliance on China as a diplomatic ally and economic patron had created a 'national emergency' that threatened the country's independence. According to the dossier, Myanmar would be able to normalize relations with the West only after implementing political reforms and electing a government instead of being ruled by a junta. In this way, the regime can deal with the outside world on more acceptable terms, Aung Kyaw Hla suggested.<sup>46</sup>

And it worked, although the turn took some doing. It was not until a general election had been held in Myanmar in November 2010 that relations with the United States improved. In early December 2011, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton paid a high-profile visit to Myanmar, the first such trip by a top-ranking US official in more than 50 years. This was followed by a visit by President Barack Obama in November 2012, and, in May 2013, Thein Sein became the first Myanmar president to visit the United States since 1966.

Diplomatic exchanges between Myanmar and the West—and especially Myanmar's scrapping of the Myitsone dam—prompted China to start searching for new ways to salvage the relationship. In 2012, academic-style journals in China ran several articles analysing what went wrong with Beijing's Myanmar policy and what should be done to rectify it. One

proposed measure has been to launch a public relations campaign in Myanmar aimed at overhauling China's current negative image in the country and to extend promises of help with the government's peace process. Many countries support this process financially and a host of Western NGOs are involved as advisers to the government's peace committee—but only China can wield a carrot as well as a stick: aid, loans, and trade and guns to the UWSA.

China cannot give up its newly-won access to the Indian Ocean and Myanmar's strategic importance to Beijing cannot, therefore, be overestimated. More than 60 per cent of the world's oil shipments pass through the Indian Ocean, from the Middle East's oil fields to China, Japan, and other strong economies in the region, as does 70 per cent of all container traffic to and from the Asian industrial countries and the rest of the world. While traffic across the Atlantic has diminished and that across the Pacific is static, trade across the Indian Ocean is increasing. Parts of the ocean, especially in the west around the Horn of Africa and next to the Strait of Malacca in the east, are areas where pirates are active and terrorists have been shipping arms to various conflict zones in the region, which has prompted tighter regional co-operation. But there are more fundamental, geopolitical, threats to stability in the Indian Ocean. Not only the United States but also Japan and India distrust China. For India, it began with the border conflicts which culminated in the 1962 War and Japan has for decades been involved in a dispute with China on the ownership of a group of islands in the East China Sea, called Senkaku in Japanese and Diaoyutai in Chinese.

With two nationalists now as prime ministers of their respective countries, Shinzo Abe of Japan since December 2012 and Narendra Modi of India since May 2014, the battle lines and alliances have become clearer. Although regional naval co-operation actually began in 2007 with annual joint exercises, called Exercise Malabar, by India, Japan, Australia, Singapore, and the United States, they were initially held with relatively informal arrangements in the sea off Japan. But, in 2015, Exercise Malabar was upgraded, with more participants after an agreement between Modi and Obama, and a joint naval exercise was held by the United States, India, and Japan in the Bay of Bengal.

India's fleet is the strongest in the region, with aircraft carriers, submarines, and over 90 other kinds of ships. The Indian Navy is currently

undergoing a modernization drive to upgrade its submarines and other vessels, especially those that can detect foreign submarines. Meanwhile, China has invested in a number of port projects in the region: Kyaukphyu in Myanmar, Chittagong in Bangladesh, Hambantota in Sri Lanka, and, most important of them all, Gwadar in Pakistan. The deep-sea port in Gwadar combined with the Karakoram Highway, which was opened in 1979 and connects northern Pakistan with Xinjiang, gives western China a direct outlet to the Indian Ocean. China is basically a huge inland empire with a relatively short coastline for a country of its size and its landlocked inland provinces depend on outlets through neighbouring countries for trade with the outside world. Kyaukphyu in Myanmar was designed to fulfil the same function for Yunnan and other southwestern Chinese provinces, from where it is a long way to China's own ports. Chinese plans to open a trade route from Tibet through Sikkim down to the port of Kolkata have not been met with enthusiasm in India, and may never materialize.

The future of the Kyaukphyu port facility, and pipelines for oil and gas that China has built from there to Yunnan to bypass the potential chokepoint at the Malacca Strait, through which most of its oil supplies now have to go, is also not clear since the Myanmar government has adopted a new foreign policy and the country no longer wants to be seen as a Chinese client state. So, while arms continue to flow to the UWSA, here, too, as in India's northeast, China does not want to see another war break out. It is China's way of putting pressure on its neighbours in order to exert its influence over them in the post-Mao era.

It may seem as if China's interests are only about trade and economic development, but given the importance of the transportation of China's oil supplies from the Middle East, it is hardly surprising that Beijing is also pursuing a defence umbrella to secure such vital lines of communication. In 2005, the US consulting firm Booz Allen Hamilton coined the expression 'String of Pearls' to describe China's port projects in the Indian Ocean, which now also include Obock in Djibouti in the Horn of Africa. China calls the new initiatives 'The Maritime Silk Road' and the 'One Belt One Road' and reiterates its assertion that its only aim is to peacefully promote trade in the region.<sup>47</sup>

The port project in Obock will, according to China's own admission, become a base for anti-piracy operations which its fleet carries out in the

area and, therefore, represents no threat to other powers. But Obock will nevertheless be China's first military base abroad, as Chinese planes will be stationed there. Even Gwadar will have an airfield and combined with the facility at Obock, this means increased freedom of movement for the Chinese Air Force outside the country. The US is already in the area, in Djibouti as well as on Diego Garcia, a British possession in the Indian Ocean where it established a large air and naval base in the 1970s. Diego Garcia has been used extensively during the United States' wars on Afghanistan and Iraq.

Meanwhile, Chinese submarines have already been observed in the Indian Ocean, mainly around the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, north of the entrance to the Strait of Malacca. The Indian Navy says it encounters Chinese submarines at least once a month, which is not so surprising given the volume of Chinese trade and oil supplies through the Indian Ocean. But it is a completely new development in a maritime region where, only two decades ago, China was not present at all. India and the United States now co-operate to detect and identify Chinese submarines.

France is another, almost unknown, Indian Ocean power with close relations to India and the United States. There are two inhabited French *départements d'outre-mer* (overseas departments) in the Indian Ocean, Mayotte and Réunion, which thus also are part of the European Union. In addition, France controls the relatively large Kerguelen Island, the smaller St. Paul and Amsterdam Islands, the Crozet Archipelago, and a series of small islands around Madagascar. Only Mayotte and Réunion have permanent populations, but there are French scientists and military personnel on the other islands and Kerguelen has a satellite monitoring station. In total, France's Economic Exclusive Zone in the southern Indian Ocean consists of more than 2.5 million square kilometres.

Australia, another partner in the informal alliance, possesses Christmas Island, south of Java and, further out in the Indian Ocean, the Cocos (Keeling) Islands. These territories have a combined population of just over 3,000, but there is a big airstrip on the Cocos, as well as extensive installations for electronic surveillance.<sup>48</sup> The United States reportedly has plans to use the Cocos as a base for drones to monitor sea traffic in the region, an action which the Chinese certainly would perceive as directed against them. Proposals have also been made in Australia to allow the Indian Navy to use the facilities on the Cocos.

China's long-term plans for its presence in the Indian Ocean are still unclear, especially as to whether there will be more ports and if those will actually be used by the Chinese military. But the fact that China is now there, in all probability to stay, has prompted India to upgrade its Indian Ocean fleet and to co-operate with other countries in the region. Although the situation in the Indian Ocean is nowhere near as worrisome as in the South and East China Seas, there can be no doubt that it is about to become a new focal point in the cold war that few want to talk about but that everyone knows is already a reality.

Some Western scholars have dismissed the notion that there is a new 'Great Game' being played out in the region.<sup>49</sup> But, as Colonel Stuart Kenny at the Australian Defence College in Canberra points out, there is indeed a New Great Game 'founded on historic mistrust and current competition'.<sup>50</sup> It has to do with border disputes in the Himalayas, the competition for influence in Nepal, Bhutan, and Myanmar, cross-border insurgencies, the sharing of water resources, and strategic rivalries in the Indian Ocean. And this time, it is not between Imperial Russia and the British Empire, but, after a long, complicated, and often violent history, between an independent India and China, a communist-ruled country that has risen from famine, chaos, and anarchy to become the world's new economic superpower.