# 4

## Political Sociology in india

Surendra K. Gupta\*

## **The Beginnings**

Political sociology as a specialized field of teaching and research in India is of fairly recent vintage. Though the study of the political aspects of tribal and rural society was an integral part of ethnographic research for a long time, the orientation of such studies was somewhat different. While describing rural and tribal life, scholars also studied factionalism, group dynamics, and leadership to provide a holistic picture of the life of the community. Changes in leadership and power structure became a part of these studies after the introduction of the Community Development Programme and Panchayati Raj. Such studies paved the way for the study of the role of caste and caste organizations in local and national politics.

Election studies began somewhere in the 1960s. The first two general elections, held in the country in 1952 and 1957, did not attract much social science attention. Such studies received a spurt during the fourth general elections held in 1967, when the Research Programmes Committee (RPC) of the Planning Commission funded studies on voting behaviour in different parts of the country. The RPC brought together the project directors working on general elections with a view to developing a comparable framework of research. These studies were carried out not only by political scientists but also by sociologists and social psychologists. The changing political scenario in 1967 and the evolving social science culture in India made such collaboration possible.

The founding of the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), under the inspiring leadership of Rajni Kothari, played a vital role in encouraging election studies all across the social sciences. Amongst the political scientists, he was the one who pioneered empirical studies in political science. So profound was his influence that he is now regarded as the progenitor of a 'new Political Science'. Sociologists and psychologists joined political scientists in this movement.

\*I am grateful to Professor Yogesh Atal for his critical comments on the earlier drafts of the paper before it was presented at the ICSSR meeting of experts on 8 and 9 March 2007. My thanks are due to Dr Rowena Robinson, Professor Prasant Ray, Dr N.K. Das and others who participated in the discussion and gave suggestions. Dr Ranjit Sinha and Dr K.L. Khera and their team of dedicated workers at the ICSSR also deserve thanks for their cooperation and help.

#### 186 Surendra K. gupta

The special features of the socio-political environment in 1967 that made these studies of voting behaviour so significant have been succinctly summarized by Yogesh Atal in his book *Local Communities and National Politics* (1971), the first ever study of Indian elections by a sociologist:

- 1. After the last elections in 1962 India lost two of her Prime Ministers. Their sudden deaths threw new challenges to the ruling party. With the disappearance of Nehru's charisma, the congress party suddenly lost its grip.
- 2. During the period 1962–67, India underwent two serious crises, one after the other, of external attack. These challenging situations, it was believed created considerable mass awareness and evoked popular participation in national politics.
- 3. The language question, the food shortage and drought problem, and the devaluation of the Indian Rupee were additional challenges that warranted people's involvement.
- 4. Most of the states of the Indian Union had, by then, implemented the Democratic Decentralization Programme and it was hoped that the participation of the villagers in the democratic process must have been greatly activated. This was expected to reflect in their voting behaviour and in the degree of perception of national aims and social goals.
- 5. A good number of new voters were added to the electoral list, who had lived most of their intelligent lives in free India and most of whom were presumably literate (pp. 8–9).

### *Teaching of Political Sociology in India*

While tracing the history of political sociology in India, B.S. Baviskar (1974) has pointed out that in 'India one can trace the early beginning of the subject in a rudimentary form during the early decades of this century' (Baviskar 1974: 432). He has cited a few studies in his report which, though not written by professional sociologists and social anthropologists, they provided '…some useful insights into the politics of the period' (ibid.: 432). He further writes that the village studies, which became a craze among Indian and some foreign scholars during the 1950s, contained valuable data and observations on political organizations of the villages. Gradually, these scholars extended their field from village panchayats to those of political parties and legislatures.

It appears that sociologists and social anthropologists were studying political organizations at the village level as a part of sociology of politics and not as political sociology. The sociology of politics, a sub-field of sociology treats 'political phenomena as dependent variables and accepts the underlying social phenomena as the explanatory variables' (Mukhopadhyay 1977: 7). On the other hand, 'political sociology believes in a two way relation between sociology and political science giving equal emphasis on both the social and political variables' (ibid.: 9). This might be the reason that the first survey report in sociology and social anthropology, which covered the period from 1900 to 1969, carried a chapter on the sociology of politics and not political sociology.

It may not be possible to pinpoint exactly the year when political sociology was introduced as a specialized field in the teaching curricula in India; themes related to political sociology began to be taught sometime in the mid-1960s1 . Around 1965, the department of anthropology and sociology at the University of Saugar, under the chairmanship of the late Professor S.C. Dube, took the lead in offering an optional paper in political sociology and anthropology. Almost at the same time, Amal Kumar Mukhopadhyay of Kolkata University began teaching this paper to the students of political science at the Master's level. While not many universities offered this subject, research in the area of political sociology became quite fashionable. India's democratic elections provided the needed stimulus, resulting in the publication of survey-based books and articles on political behaviour. Professor Amal K. Mukhopadhyay's textbook on political sociology was also published in 1977. Gradually, more and more departments of sociology in the country started offering this subject. However, the response of most of the departments of political science in the country was lukewarm in the beginning. There were a few departments of political science which offered this paper as a part of the M.Phil. course work but then later introduced it at the Master's level. In fact, in his trend report 'Caste and Politics', D.L. Sheth wrote: 'Political Sociology in India has not yet acquired the status of an independent discipline. It is a joint protectorate of sociologists, social anthropologists, and political scientists, interested in borderline areas of inquiry in their respective disciplines' (Sheth 1981: 1).

## **Earlier Surveys**

In the first report surveying the trends of research in political sociology, which covered the period from 1900 to 1969, B.S. Baviskar (1974) classified the researches into five broad sections: (i) the role of social institutions such as caste, kinship, and religion in politics; (ii) the study of political associations and structures; (iii) political processes; (iv) the levels of politics; and (v) political history. The survey focussed on the studies of the political process at the level of micro studies but did not provide enough indications of the growing trend of election studies. True, the monographs based on the 1967 election studies had not yet been published, but the research papers published in reputed journals also did not attract the attention of the reviewer. Interestingly, the same studies were covered in the parallel ICSSR survey of literature in political science.

In the second survey, covering the period from 1969 to 1976, Imtiaz Ahmad (1986) reviewed the studies under two headings: (i) growing awareness among the Indian electorate, and (ii) Indian political elite and Panchayati Raj institutions. Somehow Ahmad's report also failed to take proper notice of the emerging trend of election studies. Thus, while trend reports in the field of political science took note of contributions made by sociologists and anthropologists to the election studies (for example, the Sense of Political Efficacy Index—SPE), the sociology trend report simply ignored such contributions. Work in the area of political sociology that was beyond the two categories chosen by Ahmad for his analysis did not, therefore, find place in his review. The report, for example, makes no references to books such as *Local Communities and National Politics* (Atal 1971), described by Norman D. Palmer as a 'path breaking study'; *The Urban Elite* (Lal 1974), and *Citizen in the Making* ( Surendra K. Gupta 1975).

The third survey report, by Dipankar Gupta, covered the period from 1977 to 1987. He discussed the trends of sociology and political anthropology under four broad categories: (i) power structure; (ii) crisis of governance; (iii) ethnicity and politics; and (iv) peasant or farmers' movements. Dipankar Gupta was also very selective in his review and ignored many studies which appeared during that period.

The three reports, however, provide a good working base for a future researcher to fill the lacunae and write an objective history of the growth of this sub-speciality in India.

## **Brief Account of Studies in Political Sociology up to 1988**

Let us, therefore, begin with a brief account of the studies in political sociology in India carried out prior to 1988 to serve as a backdrop for the present review.

Scholars conducting village studies in the 1950s and 1960s also analysed the ways factions were formed and the personality traits of the faction leaders. These kinds of studies were inspired by the writings of Oscar Lewis based on his study of a north Indian Village. He discovered the 'existence of small cohesive groups within castes which are locus of power and decision-making' (Lewis 1958: 195). Taking his cue from Lewis, Atal studied the factional politics in two villages, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, and came to the conclusion that both permanent and ephemeral or short-lived alliances existed in the villages, and these alliances cut across caste lines. 'In ephemeral factions, varied types of group alliances can coexist at a given point of time and membership in different situational contexts may vary greatly. Cohesiveness is not so consistent in groupings and fusion and fission go together' (Atal 1979: 174). Bernard J. Siegel and Allan R. Beals (1960) classified the factions in two categories, i.e. schismatic and pervasive. In the schismatic category, conflict may occur between cohesive subgroups within the larger groups, and in the pervasive category, the composition of groups may change rapidly and radically. Factions may also be formed on the basis of particular disputes and persons may change their alliances from one case to another. Gradually, the focus shifted from the identification of the traits of factional leaders to the study of their behaviour, attitude, and also their position in the community.

M.N. Srinivas' (1959) concept of 'dominant caste' gave rise to many studies of the power structure at the village level. The Role of caste and caste organizations in politics at the micro and macro levels also drew the attention of scholars many of whom contributed essays reviewing the concept of the dominant caste based on fieldwork. Prominent among these were the writings of S. C. Dube (1968), Yogesh Atal (1973a), and T.K. Oommen (1970). Srinivas' use of the term 'Vote Bank' as an attribute of the dominant caste has now become a part of the vocabulary of Indian politics.

The introduction of the Panchayati Raj system provided further opportunities to analyse its impact on village politics. Several studies related to democratic decentralization were carried out in the 1960s and 1970s. This interest has not yet waned. The process of decentralization is now being examined as an instrument for the empowerment of the weaker sections of the society, including women.

Rajni Kothari has had a singular influence on the growth of empirical studies of Indian polity. In 1961 he published a series of six articles titled 'Form and substance in Indian Politics' in the *Economic Weekly* (which was later renamed, and presumably because of the considerable influence of Rajni Kothari, as *Economic and Political Weekly*). Richard Park, who was heading the Indian Bureau of the Asia Foundation, regarded these essays as a 'breath of fresh air' in understanding Indian politics. On behalf of the Asia Foundation, Park offered a generous grant to Rajni Kothari which was utilized to set up the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS). Under the auspices of the CSDS, a movement for the study of Indian elections was launched. Kothari became the progenitor of the 'New Political Science' that brought political science closer to sociology and other social sciences, and emphasized empirical research to replace the normative orientation of the discipline of political science. Rajni Kothari's book *Politics in India* (1970) became the textbook in both sociology and in political science, and has now attained the status of a classic (Kothari 2002b: 37–40).

Studies of elections to the Parliament and Legislative Assemblies have become almost a regular feature, both in sociology and in political science, contributing to the growth of political sociology and psephology in India. Some of these studies describe the general characteristics of the voters in terms of their age, sex, education, occupation, and rural/urban background. A few have also studied the role of religion and caste in politics. Other studies on the voting behaviour of specific communities. The impact of election campaigns and their role in changing the voting pattern of the people has also been analysed. Role of communications in elections drew the attention of some scholars. To analyse changes in the voting intentions of the electorate during the election campaign, V.M. Sirsikar (1965) applied the panel technique for the first time in India; however, it fell short of the strict norms of a panel study. A more rigorous panel study was carried out during the 1967 general elections in a constituency in Uttar Pradesh This study (Atal 1972) focussed on the communication links and patterns of political participation (called Project CLAPP). The methodology employed in this major study has been reported in a book called *Beyond the Village*, edited by Satish Saberwal.

The credit for initiating opinion polls in India goes to the Indian Institute of Public Opinion (IIPO), New Delhi, and the Marketing Research Corporation of India, which started conducting surveys in 1954–55 to assess the attitudes of the Indian public towards a vast range of political, social, and economic subjects. Till 1966, they conducted three surveys in the four metropolitan cities of Calcutta (now Kolkata), Madras (now Chennai), Bombay (now Mumbai), and Delhi. In the first three surveys, the sample consisted of only literates but the fourth survey, published in December 1966, included illiterates as well. The sample in the fourth survey consisted of 1,000 people. They were interviewed to estimate the share of the Congress votes and elicit opinions about Indian leaders, especially those of the Congress Party. Some questions on the voting intentions of the sample population in the 1967 Lok Sabha elections were also included. Age, education, religion, and city were taken as independent variables to find out the voting intention. The major finding of the survey was that the vote share of the Congress was continuously on a decline. The percentage of the Congress popular vote in Bombay in January/February 1966 was 67, which came down to 51 in December 1966; in Calcutta it declined from 43 to 35; in Delhi, from 67 to 41; and in Madras from 62 to 26. The attitude of the electorate towards opposition electoral alliances, which were actually formed in Calcutta and Madras, were also studied in December 1966. Though 37 per cent of the sample did not answer the question, 40 per cent among those who answered were in favour of a opposition alliance. Only 23 per cent were against such an alliance. It is important to note that this disillusion with the Congress Party was also reflected in the outcome of the 1967 elections.

Since 1967 election studies have been in vogue. The Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) funds such studies. However, market-oriented psephological studies have overshadowed the in-depth studies of voting behaviour that were the hallmark of the 1970s and 1980s. The so-called psephological studies, which focus more on forecasting election outcomes through opinion polls or exit polls, have developed new and more sophisticated tools and methodologies. Practitioners of this new branch have contributed to the spread of social science culture, including its vocabulary, among the lay public besides earning a name and fame for themselves. But since these studies are not reported in monographs or books they serve only the temporal cause. There is a need to both document the methodologies employed by different agencies in pre-poll and post-poll forecasts, and also to analyse the emerging political behaviour. The database created by these exercises is certainly a good resource for further theoretical work.

Besides elections, students of political behaviour also continued to study the growth and development of political parties, leadership and factionalism within political parties, the role of pressure groups in Indian politics, mass movements, communalism, nation-building, urban politics, and political socialization. Being the oldest, the Congress Party has attracted a lot of research. Notable are the studies by Paul R. Brass (1965), Rajni Kothari (1964), and Myron Weiner (1968). There are also several studies related to the Bharatiya Janata Party and its predecessor the Bharatiya Jan Sangh. The role of pressure groups in politics, however, has not attracted many scholars.

The language issue has divided the nation into two clear-cut blocks, the north favouring Hindi and the south opposing the imposition of the north Indian language and showing preference for the continuation of English. This problem has been studied in the context of national integration and nation-building (Dasgupta 1970).

Analysing the process of nation-building, Yogesh Atal (1973b) proposed the concepts of *Insulators* and *Apertures* and developed a communication model for the analysis of nation-building. In his Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Lecture, delivered in 1973 at the University of London, he introduced these concepts and developed a paradigm combining the structural with the historical approach to examine the Indian experience in nation building (Atal 1981). Rajni Kothari (1976) wrote extensively on nation-building. The social and political consequences of internal migration, which can also create problems in national integration and may ultimately affect nation building process, has been discussed by Myron Weiner (1978).

Some scholars (Harrison 1960; Rudolph and Rudolf 1967; Srinivas 1962; Weiner 1962) have examined the relationship between the traditional social organizations such as castes and tribes, and the newly introduced democratic institutions and procedures. Most of these studies have revealed that electorates are becoming increasingly more conscious and responsible in their voting behaviour. Secular, political, and socio-economic considerations, rather than membership of traditional social organizations and ascriptive status or values, affect the voting pattern of the people. While reviewing the studies of minority participation, it has been found that 'Muslim voting behaviour in a particular constituency or State has more things in common with non-Muslim voting behaviour in the same area than with the Muslims of any other area or region' (Ahmad 1986: 5). However, it must be said that there are very few studies regarding the participation of minorities in elections or in the nation-building process. Another interesting finding noticed in Ahmad's review is that the gap between urban and rural electoral participation is gradually reducing (ibid.). Studies of Panchayati Raj institutions have shown that they have failed to bring about expected changes and development.

Some studies on power structure were reviewed in the third trend report covering the period 1978–87. The issue of governance and systematic strains in the political structure was the focus of some scholars like Paul Brass, Francine Frankel, and Rajni Kothari, especially after the declaration of Emergency in 1975. This was also the period when not only the politicization of the civil services began and violence and corruption entered the political life. The gap between what the political parties professed publicly and what they practised began widening. Atul Kohli characterized the emerging trends as '(i) the de-institutionalizing role of national and regional leaders; (ii) the impact of weak political parties; (iii) the undisciplined political mobilization of various castes, ethnic, religious and other types of groups; and (iv) the increasing conflict between the haves and havenots in the civil society' (1990: 387).

Rajni Kothari, D.L. Sheth, and Ashish Nandy examined the crisis of governance of the Indian State from a cultural and ethical point of view. Kothari (1988) argued for a viable state structure which would be sensitive to the civil society. For this he regards it as necessary to have a new socio-economic coalition through grass-roots initiatives in order to develop new institutional structures. Sheth (1984) emphasized the creation of grass-roots initiatives outside the government agencies and pleaded that they should not contest for power. Nandi (1984) would like to view the State and its activities from the standpoint of the indigenous and authentic culture of the country.

Other aspects included in the third survey report were ethnic movements such as the Shiv Sena in Maharashtra, the Punjab crisis, the Sikh killings in 1984, and the anti-reservation movement after the implementation of the Mandal Commission's recommendations according to which 50 per cent of the seats in government and educational institutions were to be reserved for people of the backward castes. Analyses of farmers' movements led by Mahendra Singh Tikait in Uttar Pradesh and Sharad Joshi in Maharashtra were also the part of the third survey report.

## **The Present Report: 1988–2001**

The decade of the 1990s witnessed many social and political developments in the country. It is against this background that the studies carried out during this period should be viewed. The major developments of the decade were the following:

- 1. Violent reactions in north India against the acceptance of the Mandal Commission recommendations on reservations of seats in public services in 1990 by the then prime minister, V.P. Singh. To counter this, and to have a United Hindu identity, the BJP mobilized the masses for the construction of a Ram temple at Ayodhya.
- 2. Politics of caste initiated by V.P. Singh was further promoted by Mulayam Singh Yadav in Uttar Pradesh and Laloo Prasad Yadav in Bihar, when they mobilized the scheduled castes and backward classes. Similarly, Kanshi Ram formed the Bahujan Samaj Party and mobilized other Dalit castes. Thus, the old dominant castes from the upper strata were challenged by the backward castes such as the Yadavs, Kurmis, and Jats and by the Dalits in the emerging political milieu. This was the

beginning of fragmented and fractured politics on the basis of caste and community.

- 3. This period also witnessed the emergence of a large number of regional political parties. These regional parties succeeded in wresting power at the regional level and weakened the support base of the national parties to such an extent that no political party could obtain absolute majority at the Centre. This development contributed to the growth of coalition politics—a feature which characterizes the present-day Indian polity.
- 4. The coalition politics put an end to the era of the dominance of the oneparty system and allowed for the first time a non-Congress coalition to form the government. It has been argued by many scholars that the BJP succeeded in coming to power as 'it has deftly and intelligently used the strategy of coalition formation with many secular parties' (Bhambhri, 2001: 50). In the 1996 Lok Sabha elections, when no single party gained the majority to form a government, the BJP with 160 seats formed a block of 194 with the support of some regional parties. Though Atal Behari Vajpayee was invited to become prime minister he tailed to win the vote of confidence and resigned. The 1999 elections mandated the BJP-led coalition National Democratic Alliance (NDA) to form the government at the Centre. This coalition government lasted the full term.
- 5. The politics of Ram Janam Bhoomi and the Babri Masjid have dominated the Indian political scene since 1989. The demolition of the mosque in December 1992 led to communal violence in many parts of the country, and the Ayodhya issue has become a key factor in political mobilization.
- 6. Globalization, liberalization, and privatization of the Indian economy since 1991 opened the floodgates for foreign investors. A good deal of discussion, both in the political arena and in the academe, surrounds the process of globalization.

Studies in the area of political sociology in India have been affected by the abovementioned developments. All the studies reviewed in this area have been broadly classified into the following four categories:

- 1. National and local politics
- 2. Election studies and political parties
- 3. Democracy, civil society, ethnicity and nation-state
- 4. Studies on communalism

Of the 164 studies included in this trend report about 41 per cent are published books. These figures have been computed mainly from the *ICSSR Journal of Abstracts: Sociology and Social Anthropology* published between 1989 and 2002. Though care has been taken to include all the studies, it is likely that some may

| Table 4.1 | Studies in Political Sociology 1             |                                      |       | 988–2002                                 |                                                   |                                        |         |              |       |          |       |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|-------|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|---------|--------------|-------|----------|-------|
|           |                                              | National<br>Politics<br>Local<br>and |       | Elections<br>Political<br>Parties<br>and | Civil Society,<br>Ethnicity<br>State<br>and<br>De | mocracy,<br>Nation                     | m<br>Co | m<br>munalis |       | Total    |       |
| Year      | Books                                        | Articles                             | Books | Articles                                 | Books                                             | Articles                               | Books   | Articles     | Books | Articles | Total |
| 1988–90   | 6                                            | 3                                    | 2     | 2                                        | 8                                                 | 6                                      | 3       | 2            | 19    | 13       | 32    |
| 1991–93   | 3                                            | 2                                    | 1     | 16                                       | 2                                                 | 1                                      | 2       | 5            | 8     | 24       | 32    |
| 1994–96   | 1                                            | 2                                    | -     | 2                                        | 1                                                 | 2                                      | 5       | 1            | 7     | 7        | 14    |
| 1997–99   | 9                                            | 6                                    | 5     | 14                                       | 7                                                 | 5                                      | 3       | -            | 24    | 25       | 49    |
| 2000–02   | -                                            | 2                                    | 2     | 4                                        | 3                                                 | 16                                     | 5       | 5            | 10    | 27       | 37    |
| Total     | 19                                           | 15                                   | 10    | 38                                       | 21                                                | 30                                     | 18      | 13           | 68    | 96       | 164   |
|           | Source: ICSSR Journal of Abstracts and Revie |                                      |       |                                          |                                                   | ws: Sociology and Social Anthropology. |         |              |       |          |       |

have been inadvertently missed out. In listing the publications, the author has not imposed any quality criteria. Irrespective of the standard of the publication an attempt has been made to include all the studies on India in the domain of political sociology carried out and published by Indians and foreigners, during the period 1988–2002. The year-wise distribution of these publications in different theme areas is presented in Table 4.1.

About one-third of the total studies considered in the survey report are on elections and political parties. Another one-third have discussed some aspect of democracy, civil society, ethnicity, and the nation-state in India. In fact, the debate on civil society and the nation-state was quite prominent as special symposia were organized at the All-India Sociological Conferences held in 1998 and 2000. Local and national politics have been covered in 21 per cent of the studies and the remaining 19 per cent are on communalism.

The period from 1988 through 1993 was an eventful era in Indian politics. During these six years, as many as 64 studies, with an average of more than 10 studies per year, were published. Of these, 27 were books and the rest were articles. Onefourth of the studies during this period were on elections and political parties.

The maximum number of studies (49 in all) were published during 1997–99. Of these publications were 49 per cent full-length monographs including edited volumes. In fact, the year 1999 was of special significance in Indian politics as for the first time after independence a coalition government led by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won the mandate and completed a full term of five years in office. Out of the 24 books published in these three years, nine covered some aspect of local and national politics, five others were related to elections and political parties, seven focused on issues of ethnicity and nationhood, and another three were researches on communalism.

#### *Local and National-Level Political Studies*

Out of 34 studies on local and national politics, 19 are books and 15 research articles. Fifteen of the 19 books are full-length empirical studies; the rest are edited books. Of the 15 articles, 14 are based on empirical research.

The theme-wise distribution of these studies is given in Table 4.2.

About 56 per cent of the total studies considered have focused on some aspect of rural politics and the remaining 44 per cent have concentrated on urban politics. More than 47 per cent of the rural political studies have attempted to analyse the impact of the 73rd Amendment to the Constitution, which gave more 'powers, authority and responsibilities to Panchayats'. According to the amendment, 33 per cent of the seats are reserved for women. The studies examined the effectiveness of this important amendment. Of the total urban political studies, 40 per cent, are on the socio-economic background of the elected members of the legislative assemblies. One-third of the total urban studies have analysed the different types of conflicts.

#### 196 Surendra K. gupta

| Themes                    | No. of<br>Studies | Percentage of<br>Rural Urban<br>Studies | Percentage<br>of Total<br>Studies |
|---------------------------|-------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| I. Rural Politics         |                   |                                         |                                   |
| a) 73rd Amendment and PRI | 9                 | 47.4                                    | 26.5                              |
| b) Rural Power Structure  |                   |                                         |                                   |
| c) Rural Violence         | 3                 | 15.8                                    | 8.8                               |
| d) Kisan Unions           | 2                 | 10.5                                    | 5.9                               |
| e) Caste and Politics     | 2                 | 10.5                                    | 5.9                               |
| f) Women Panchayat        | 2                 | 10.5                                    | 5.9                               |
| Members                   | 1                 | 5.3                                     | 2.9                               |
| Total                     | 19                | 100                                     | 55.9                              |
| II. Urban Politics        |                   |                                         |                                   |
| a) Political Elites       | 6                 | 40.0                                    | 17.6                              |
| b) Conflict Studies       | 5                 | 33.3                                    | 14.8                              |
| c) Urban Power Structure  | 1                 | 6.7                                     | 2.9                               |
| d) Others                 | 3                 | 20.0                                    | 8.8                               |
| Total                     | 15                | 100.0                                   | 44.1                              |
| All Studies               | 34                | —                                       | 100.0                             |

#### **Table 4.2** theme-wise distribution of Studies

#### **Table 4.3** States covered

| Name of States      | Number of Studies |
|---------------------|-------------------|
| More than one state | 12                |
| Uttar Pradesh       | 4                 |
| Maharashtra         | 3                 |
| Bihar               | 2                 |
| Assam               | 2                 |
| Karnataka           | 2                 |
| Andhra Pradesh      | 1                 |
| Kerala              | 1                 |
| Orissa              | 1                 |

| Name of States | Number of Studies |
|----------------|-------------------|
| Punjab         | 1                 |
| Tamil Nadu     | 1                 |
| Goa            | 1                 |
| West Bengal    | 1                 |
| North East     | 1                 |
| Rajasthan      | 1                 |
| Total          | 34                |

Table 4.3 (*Continued*)

*Source: ICSSR Journal of Abstracts and Reviews: Sociology and Social Anthropology.*

A theme-wise coverage of States along with sources of data is given in Table 4.4.

There are an equal number of studies based on fieldwork and on secondary sources. One edited book on decentralization contains articles which are mainly analyses of secondary data, except two which are based on field research. More studies were carried out in the states of south India, followed by eastern and northern India. Maharashtra is the only state studied from the Western region.

There are 19 studies that have analysed some aspect of rural politics in India. Snehlata Panda (1997) and K.C. Vidya (1997) examined the impact of the political empowerment of women at the grass roots in Orissa and Karnataka respectively. Panda concentrated on the performance of women panchayat members whereas Vidya focused on the structural and functional aspects of the Panchayati Raj and the scope of women's participation in decision-making and development planning. Manu Bhaskar (1997) analysed the socio-economic background and political motivation of women panchayat members in Kerala. Anupama Roy (2001) expressed the hope that the primacy given to women as members would certainly have its ramifications on the overall status of women in rural India. The 73rd Amendment to Panchayati Raj institutions has not succeeded due to the high degree of illiteracy among women, argued Dilip K. Ghosh (1997). Indira Hirway (1989) carried out case studies of Panchayati Raj in different states and came to the conclusion that it has failed to involve the weaker sections in the development and planning process. S.P. Jain (1997) critically reviewed the working of gram sabhas in different states before the 73rd Amendment to the Constitution became effective. O. Palanithurai (1999) and G. Thimmaiah (1999) also studied the implications of the 73rd Amendment to the Constitution. In a book jointly edited by S.N. Jha and P.C. Mathur (1999) on decentralization and local politics, the contributors have concentrated on Panchayati Raj, urban local government, and decentralization and local politics.

| Themes                      | States                                                         | Sources of data                                                                 |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| I. Rural Political Studies  |                                                                |                                                                                 |
| a) 73rd Amendment and PRI   | Multistate (7)<br>Karnataka (1)<br>Orissa(1)                   | Primary (2)<br>Secondary (6)<br>Both Primary and<br>Secondary (edited book) (1) |
| b) Rural Power Structure    | Andhra Pradesh (1)<br>South India (1)<br>Uttar Pradesh (1)     | Primary (3)                                                                     |
| c) Rural Violence           | Bihar (2)                                                      | Primary (2)                                                                     |
| d) WomenPanchayat Members   | Kerala (1)                                                     | Primary (1)                                                                     |
| e) Kissan Unions            | Punjab (1)<br>Uttar Pradesh (1)                                | Primary (2)                                                                     |
| f) Caste and Politics       | Multistate (1)<br>Uttar Pradesh (1)                            | Primary (1)<br>Secondary (1)                                                    |
| II. Urban Political Studies |                                                                |                                                                                 |
| a) Political Elites         | Maharashtra (2)<br>Rajasthan (1)<br>Multistate (3)             | Primary (2)<br>Secondary (4)                                                    |
| b) Conflict Studies         | Assam (2)<br>Karnataka (1)<br>Tamil Nadu (1)<br>North-East (1) | Primary (2)<br>Secondary (4)                                                    |
| c) Urban Power Structure    | Rajasthan (1)                                                  | Primary (1)                                                                     |
| d) Others                   | Tamil Nadu (1)<br>Goa (1)<br>Multistate(1)                     | Secondary (3)                                                                   |

**Table 4.4** themes, States and Sources of data

*Source: ICSSR Journal of Abstracts and Reviews: Sociology and Social Anthropology.*

*Note:* Figures in brackets indicate the number of studies.

The role of NGOs as part of the planning and implementation process has also been analysed. Regarding the institution of urban local government, the authors have pleaded for change in the instrumentalities to make the provision of the amendment effective. The role of women in PRI elections has also been investigated in different states. It is shown that changes in the rural power structure are taking place with the emergence of a new type of leadership which is more concerned with marginalized and oppressed groups.

Marguerite S. Robinson (1988) studied the dynamics of power in a small village in south India. In this village, rural elites controlled the political system till the mid-1970s, but things have changed with the weakening of the role of landlords as creditors due to the availability of credit through other formal institutions. The role of caste in the local elections of village panchayats and the attitude of the rural masses towards the exploitation of caste feelings in Uttar Pradesh constitute the subject matter of S.M.I.A. Zaidi's study (1990) published in the journal *Social Change*. The leadership structure and its functional cohesiveness in rural Andhra Pradesh is the focus of T. Chandra Mohan Reddy's article (1992) published in *Man in India*. G.K. Lieten and Ravi Srivastava (1999) surveyed six village panchayats in three different regions of Uttar Pradesh to analyse the dynamics of power relations at the grass roots. They have given a comprehensive account of the functioning and potentials of Panchayati Raj institutions and the process of rural transformation.

Kehar Singh's book-length study (1990) on farmers' movements and pressure group politics focussed on the leadership of Punjab Khetibari Zamindara Union from 1972 through 1980 and the Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU) from 1980 through 1988. He has argued that farmers can mount considerable pressure through non-party peasant organizations. They also symbolize the rising expectations and aspirations of a sizable section of Punjab peasantry, particularly its middle segment. No political party competing for power in Punjab can ignore the Union any more. Similarly, Dipankar Gupta (1997) studied the organization and working of the Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU) in western Uttar Pradesh. The author distinguishes between the movements of peasants, agricultural labourers, and marginal farmers and the movements of the relatively better-off owner-cultivators who produce marketable surplus. The movements of rural poor tend to be more local in their impact, while the farmers' movements are more wide-ranging, remedial, multi-pronged and future oriented. Their targets are both central and state governments and may focus on such issues as agricultural prices, the lowering of rates for electricity and water, easy conditions of loans, etc. The BKU has also used traditional symbols of mobilization, such as Jat *khaps* and the *sarv khaps* to strengthen the support structure of the Union.

The period under review has also seen some studies on caste violence. In his full-length book of 151 pages, Bindeshwar Pathak (1993) analysed the pattern of caste violence in the villages of Bihar. On the basis of 30 incidents, the author has demonstrated how the Yadavas, Kurmis, and the like have tortured the scheduled caste and scheduled tribe people. The book contains a chronological account of annihilation, looting, and burning of houses, rape and cold-blooded murders, and also the apathy of the government towards the afflicted scheduled castes.

The politicization of the caste system in Bihar has increased the atrocities against scheduled caste people according to S.N. Chaudhary and Pratima Chaudhary (1994).

While comparing the political developments in north and south India, Ashutosh Varshney (2000) observed that caste-based politics is much more intense in the south as compared to other regions of India. He concluded that India is still far from becoming a democracy from below, but democratic power is increasingly moving downwards.

In his study of the two cities of Udaipur and Bhilwara in Rajasthan, C.L. Sharma (1992) examined the nature of the local-level power structures. The data were collected way back in the 1970s and the delay in its analysis makes the study somewhat outdated on two counts: (i) the descriptions would not fit the presentday situation in the two towns; and (ii) with more experience now available with Sharma, even the quality of data gathering would be different. Sharma's analysis is based on the institutional bases of power. He comes to the obvious conclusion that higher caste people occupy higher positions, whereas the persons of lower castes and Muslims are at the lower echelons of power structure. While examining group dynamics at the local level, he found that party affiliation determines the membership of the political elites. Sharma also discussed factional politics at the local level. With the rise in literacy and the emergence of powerful pressure groups amongst the Dalits today, one wonders whether the description would fit the current reality. It would have been ideal had Sharma also examined the phenomenon of ephemeral factions earlier discovered by Atal (1962) in his study of a Rajasthan village.

There are a few studies of legislative members. R.C. Swarankar (1988) studied the members of the Seventh Legislative Assembly in Rajasthan. Khadija Ansari Gupta (1989) edited the papers presented at a seminar on political elites which included studies of bureaucrats, managers in textile mills, industrial entrepreneurs, doctors, women social workers, and tribal and caste elites. Gautam Vohra (1993) outlined the profile of newly elected members of a legislative assembly in Maharashtra. S.M. Dahiwale (1994) examined the role of scheduled caste elites in the socio-economic development of the downtrodden in Kolhapur City. In an article published in *Asian Survey* titled 'Elite Incorporation in Multiethnic Societies', Kanchan Chandra (2000b) discussed the pattern of incorporation of scheduled caste elites by the Congress and the Bahujan Samaj Party in three states, namely Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, and Karnataka.

The Assam agitation of the 1980s raised the issue of the legitimacy crisis that independent India had experienced. The movement was organized mainly against the so-called 'foreigners. The leaders of the agitation demanded 'detection, deletion and deportation of all foreigners from Assam'. This nativistic movement in the state raised several issues and offered an opportunity to assess the role of communication. The Assam movement of 1979 is the only movement in independent India that engulfed an entire state. Since the issue affected all the natives of Assam, all of them participated and supported the movement in one way or the other. The analysis of printed material such as booklets, pamphlets, and newspapers by Surendra K. Gupta and Indira B. Gupta (1990)2 , revealed that they played a significant and crucial role in escalating the violence. The content analysis of newspapers showed the biased attitude of regional newspapers which gave more emphasis to regional identity than to national identity. Another study of the Assam crisis was attempted by Sajal Nag (1990) in which he delineated the role played by the various strata of Assamese society in the development of the nationality question. N. Vijaylakshmi Brara (1998), in her study of politics, society and cosmology in Indian's north-east, analysed contemporary politics and ethnic relations in the north-eastern region.

T.M. Joseph (1998) studied the linguistic nativism movement in Bangalore City. The study deals with the ethnic conflict beginning with the consolidation of the Kannada linguistic identity, and its crystallisation of the cultural differences between Kannadigas and non-Kannadigas. Arthur G. Rubinoff (1998) studied the pattern of integration between Goa and its neighbouring regions and the Indian nation as a whole. The essays contained in the book edited by A. R. Kulkarni and N.K. Wagle (1999) concentrated on the issues of region, nationality, and religion in the context of Maharashtra. Most of the authors focussed on changing political, and socio-economic trends in Maharashtra. The arguments revolve around political power and the struggle between tradition and modernity.

How ethnic parties transact with social groups in Tamil Nadu was the objective of Narendra Subramanian's (1999) study. According to his analysis, it is the interaction between ethnic parties and social groups that explains the relative absence of volatile ethnic conflict in Tamil Nadu. Sara Dickey (1993) studied the role of cinema in the production of politicians in south India. She focused on the images created through films and the political activities of the fan clubs in Tamil Nadu.

In Zoya Hasan (1994), the contributors have argued that the interaction between the Indian State and Muslim leaders results in a single, religiously defined notion of community. This identity of Muslims as a monolithic religious category has affected them more than anything else.

#### *Election Studies and Political Parties*

**Election Studies.** In all, 38 election studies (including books and articles in various journals and books) appeared during the period under survey. While there have been many studies of the general elections held in 1989, 1998, and 1999, there have also been studies of Assembly elections in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu during the period under survey. The theme wise coverage of election studies is shown in Table 4.5.

| S.<br>No. | Themes Covered                     | No. of Studies | Percentage of total<br>Election Studies |
|-----------|------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------------------------------|
|           | 1. Political Parties and Elections | 8              | 21.0                                    |
|           | 2. Factors for Defeat of Parties   | 6              | 15.8                                    |
|           | 3. Hindutva and Elections          | 4              | 10.6                                    |
|           | 4. Women and Elections             | 3              | 7.9                                     |
|           | 5. Weaker Sections and Elections   | 3              | 7.9                                     |
|           | 6. Caste and Elections             | 1              | 2.6                                     |
|           | 7. Alliance and Elections          | 1              | 2.6                                     |
|           | 8. Terrorism and Elections         | 1              | 2.6                                     |
|           | 9. Corruption and Election         | 1              | 2.6                                     |
|           | 10. Media and Elections            | 1              | 2.6                                     |
|           | 11. Security and Elections         | 1              | 2.6                                     |
|           | 12. State Politics and Election    | 1              | 2.6                                     |
|           | 13. Others                         | 7              | 18.5                                    |
|           | All Themes                         | 38             | 100.0                                   |

**Table 4.5** theme-wise coverage of Election Studies

*Source: ICSSR Journal of Abstracts and Reviews: Sociology and Social Anthropology.*

About one-fifth of the studies included in the report have analysed the performance of political parties in elections, whereas 16 per cent have attempted to diagnose the causes for the defeat of the Congress Party, National Front as well as the BJP/Shiv Sena alliance. Another 16 per cent have studied the participation of the weaker sections, including women, in the 1999 elections. The role of Hindutva as a factor in elections has been analysed in about 11 per cent of the studies. The rest of the studies have analysed the role of other factors such as caste, alliance, terrorism, corruption, and security.

More than 60 per cent of the election studies considered in this report have concentrated on more than one state. Eight per cent of the studies were done in Bihar, followed by Haryana (5.2 per cent). The other states covered in single studies are Maharashtra, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kashmir, Goa, Orissa, Punjab, and West Bengal.

The distinguishing feature of these studies is that they are analyses of election data, rather than field studies. There are two studies, including one full-length book, which were based entirely on secondary sources like newspaper and magazines reporting.

Escalation of electoral violence such as booth-capturing was a disturbing factor which emerged during the 1989 Parliamentary elections in some states, which adversely affected the participation of women and other weaker sections of the society (Kishwar 1989). In her study, Madhu Kishwar found that violence during elections negatively affects the participation of women. Subverting of political institutions by political parties and the use of money and muscle power further contributes to the peripheralization of women (ibid.). Studying women's participation and their involvement in elections in Bihar, Nutan Sinha (1991) found that though women did take active part in the elections in 1989 their level of political awareness and involvement was quite low. Most of her respondents preferred to vote for non-Congress parties. Even this decision was mostly influenced by their menfolk; very few expressed an independent opinion.

In the context of the general elections of 1989, an International Conference on National and State Politics in India was organized by the Department of Politics, Hull University, in collaboration with the Centre for South Asian Studies, Cambridge University. The papers presented at this conference have been put together in a volume entitled *Electoral Politics in India: A Changing Landscape* edited by Subrata K. Mitra and James Chiriyankandath (1992). The book has four sections besides, the 'Introduction' and 'Appendix: (1)'. 'The Campaign and the Vote'; (2). 'The Issues'; (3). 'Centre and the States'; and (4) 'Minority Perspectives'.

In this volume Subrata K. Mitra outlined the perspectives in which the 1989 General elections in India were held. The declining authority of the government that led to corruption at high levels, organizational confusion within Congress Party and its general lack of sense of direction as well as the escalation of separatist movements and communal violence are some of the political developments that took place before the 1989 General elections, which had their repercussions on election results. Susanne Hoeber Rudolph (1992) in her 'Keynote Address' compared the histories of state formation in India and Europe. She holds the view that the major social institutions in India are the creation of the British and, unlike Europe, the State in India is the product of neither industrial nor political revolution. She also highlighted the role of the State in the electoral process in India.

'The campaign and the vote' was the theme of the first section of the book. Christiane Hurtig, in her article 'A Vote for Change but no mandate', discussed the factors responsible for the defeat of the Congress in the 1989 elections. The Congress-I won 193 seats and retained 40 per cent of the votes, but the party that formed the government had only 141 seats and 17 per cent of the votes at the all-India level. Questions were naturally raised about the stability of the Janata Party government. The government actually fell before completing its full term. In his article, Nicholas Nugent pointed out the errors committed—particularly the Bill related to Muslim Women—by Rajiv Gandhi as prime minister, which led to the defeat of the Congress Party.

There are five articles in the section titled 'The Issues'. The authors of this section have contradicted the general view that politics in India revolves mainly around money, muscle power, and patronage. James Chiriyankandath in his article 'Tricolour and Saffron Congress and the Neo-Hindu Challenge' examines how 'Hindu' identity was used to generate political passion and to mobilize electoral support.

Culture became an issue in the elections of 1989 which was reflected in a paper by Lloyd Rudolph (1992). According to him, cultural politics and the struggle over the means and contents of cultural production had begun to play a significant role in Indian politics much before the growth of the electronic media as a vehicle of public culture. Ashis Nandy, in his article 'Terrorism as a Political Issue in Popular Politics' (1992), analyses the process through which terrorism entered the electoral arena. According to Nandy, terrorism has created a new consciousness around it among the Indian middle classes. Levelling of corruption charges against rival candidates as a vote-catching device was a characteristic feature of the 1989 Lok Sabha elections. On the basis of pre-poll surveys conducted by the India-Today group and Marg, Philip Oldenburg (1992) highlighted this aspect in his article 'Corruption as an issue in the 1989 Election in India'. Bharat Wariavwalla (1992) discussed the role of the 'Security Issue in Domestic Politics'. Prior to 1967, foreign and security issues were never crucial in India's electoral politics. They reached a high point during the regimes of Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi.

The significance of the regional arena in national politics was the theme of the next section 'Centre and the State'. The weaknesses of the National Front government that led to its downfall have been discussed by Ashis Banerjee in his paper 'The Federal Dimension in Contemporary Indian Politics'. Ranbir Singh, in his paper 'National and State Politics in Post-election India: A study in Haryana', identifies some salient characteristics of Haryana politics such as the interconnection of caste alignments, caste cleavages and intra-caste conflicts among the Jats, which affected the entire politics of the state. Local Punjabi cleavages in Haryana also became sharper, according to Ranbir Singh (1992). The Ayodhya– Ram Mandir issue did not have much influence in Haryana politics. According to Singh, Haryana is a traditional society juxtaposed with agrarian capitalism, fast economic growth, and a weak regional identity. The analysis of Pravin Sheth (1992) based on the 1989–90 Lok Sabha and Assembly elections in Maharashtra and Gujarat shows that the emergence of Hindutva as an alternative ideology for the majority has strengthened the conservative forces in both these states. Sheth's analysis reveals that social cleavages are getting sharpened due to the increasing number of volatile Dalits, tribals, women and farmers.

The minority perspective is the theme of the last section of the book, which has three papers. The minorities selected by the authors are women, Muslims and Harijans. Usha Thakkar's (1992) paper 'Women and recent elections in India' gives an account of the limited opportunities women have for effective participation. Though most political parties have shown concern for women in their election manifestos, the data analysed by Thakkar from 1957 to 1989 contradict this assertion. The analysis shows that very few women were given tickets with the result that the number of women Parliamentarians has always remained very small. Violette Graf (1992) studied the significance of 'The Muslim Vote' in the Parliamentary elections in 1989 in various states of the country. Her analysis reveals that Muslims played significant role in those elections. In most cases they aggravated the difficulties of the 'established party'. Graf also does not support the observation of Llyod and Susanne Rudolph, which is based on the analysis of the elections in 1977, 1980 and 1984. The Rudolphs wrote that there is an inverse relationship between the proportions of Muslims in the population and Muslimvoting support for national centrist parties; the lower the proportion of Muslims, the more likely it is that Muslim voters will vote for national centrist parties. In constituencies with a high proportion of Muslims, however, Muslims tend to vote for class and Muslim confessional parties and candidates (other parties and independents) (Graf 1992: 235). Because of their poor socio-economic condition the lower-caste Hindus are generally characterized as a politically docile group. These castes found a platform in the form of the Bahujan Samaj Party and the Samajwadi Party, particularly in Uttar Pradesh. This development was the focus of the study by V.B. Singh, titled 'Harijans and their influence on the election in Uttar Pradesh' (1992).

The analysis of the swing factor in the election results has been presented by David Butler (1992) in his article 'The Predictability of Indian Election Results' as an appendix in the book. On the basis of the Congress Party's share of votes from 1952 to 1991 at the all-India level and in some states from 1980 to 1984 and 1984 to 1989 and 1991, Butler analysed the swing factor for Congress Party as it has been around from the beginning and has also contested the majority of the seats in the elections. He has used the Index of Opposition Unity, a measure devised by Roy and Lahiri by using the following formula:

$$\text{Index of Opposition Unity} = \frac{\text{Votes of the Largest Non Congress Party} \times 100}{\text{Sum of Votes of all Non-Congress Parties}}$$

K. Srinivasulu (1994) studied the participation of the 'Chamars' during the 1993 Assembly elections in Uttar Pradesh. According to him, this the first time the Chamars participated en masse in the voting. Srinivasulu suggests that to counter the BJP's mobilization moves it is necessary that political parties like the Bahujan Samaj Party and the Samajwadi Party join hands and evolve a politically viable strategy.

Caste and social factions figured more prominently in Bihar in the absence of a concrete political agenda during the 1996 general elections. According to Binoy S. Prasad (1997), elections in Bihar are being used to establish a 'phoney' social dominance. Bihar also has a distinct political culture with a majority of illiterate but politically alert voters. Corruption and violence characterize Bihar politics.

To observe the functioning of democracy in India and its social consequences Subrata K. Mitra and V.B. Singh (1999) conducted an all-India survey in the wake of the 1996 elections. They found that voters generally expressed satisfaction regarding the functioning of the Election Commission and the Judiciary, but were not satisfied with the performance of individual politicians. There was a lack of confidence in elected representatives and in the civil servants responsible for the implementation of various policies. Concerns were expressed about the functioning of government officials and the police and also about the involvement of political leaders in scandals and corruption. A positive correlation was also found between the exposure to campaigns and political meetings and the legitimacy of the political system.

Pushpendra (1999) analysed the post-poll survey results carried out during the 1996 and 1998 elections. His analysis revealed that scheduled caste voters are gradually shifting their traditional party loyalties in favour of new parties espousing their interests. However, the growing class differentiation amongst them has resulted in the lower class Dalits opting for exclusively scheduled-caste based parties like the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), the Left Front or the left-of-the-centre regional parties.

While analysing the role played by caste in the Ninth Lok Sabha elections of 1989, Balraj Puri (1990) found that caste and ideology have stemmed the Hindu wave in some states and regions in various forms.

In Ramashray Roy and Paul Wallace (1999). The majority of the contributors attempted to analyse the factors that affected the outcome of the 1998 elections. Some authors concentrated at the national level whereas others analysed the situation in different states—the states covered in the volume are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Karnataka, Kashmir, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, and Uttar Pradesh. A brief account of the arguments developed by the scholars is presented below.

Three major strands were identified by Paul Wallace in his Introduction: (i) Hindutva—the Hindu Nationalist Philosophy of the BJP which also formed the core of the new governing coalition; (ii) The regional parties whose strength varied from 18 to 1 facilitated the formation of the coalition government at the Centre; and (iii) the decision of the BJP to go ahead with the nuclear test. He further argued that 'the national party system can now be described as a bi-modal, multi-party system (ibid.). In practical language, India now has two major or national political parties manoeuvring within a large vortex of small regional parties. Neither of the major parties—the BJP and the Congress—emerged from the March-April 1998 elections with close to a majority in the Lok Sabha' (ibid.: 17). Another significant observation made by Wallace was that when two political parties with two distinct social bases form an alliance, they can sweep the polls, as happened in Punjab in 1998 when the Akali Dal with its rural base, and the BJP with its urban base, formed an alliance.

Pradeep K. Chhibber and Irfan Nooruddin (1999) in their joint paper in Roy and Wallace (1999) analysed party competition and fragmentation in Indian national elections from 1957 to 1998. They used the measure of mobilization to analyse the performance of various parties at the district level. Mobilization was measured by multiplying the vote share with the turnout in the elections. The result indicates the extent to which the party was able to mobilize the electorate into voting for them. Chhibber and Nooruddin found that the BJP was the biggest gainer in the Hindi belt. Their analysis also revealed that the shift from one-party-dominance to two-party competition has had its effect on the turnout and mobilization of voters. The analysis also shows that a district with two effective parties is more successful in mobilizing the voter than a single-party-dominant district.3

Kanchan Chandra (1999) and Virginia van Dyke (1999) independently explored the changing party system and bases of support from two different perspectives. Whereas Chandra concentrated on the impact of ethnification, Van Dyke analysed religious mobilization by the BJP and its allies. Chandra's study highlighted the emergence of a party system in which all major political parties base their political campaign to get support on the basis of ethnicity. Van Dyke argued that though the political party controls the organization and structure, the religious leaders are used for mass mobilization.

Binoy S. Prasad (1999) analysed the 12th Lok Sabha elections in Bihar and found that a majority of the winners were successful because the votes against them were split amongst the several opponents. The defeat of the BJP/Shiv Sena alliance by the Congress alliance in the 12th Lok Sabha elections in Maharashtra was the focus of Sikata Banerjee's (1999) study. The factors identified by her for the BJP/Shiv Sena alliance were 'the popularity of a candidate, shifts in crucial OBC and Dalit/Muslim voting as well as the division of Maratha-Kunbi votes between the Congress and the BJP or Shiv Sena' (180). Harold A Gould's (1999) analysis of the 12th general elections in Karnataka revealed that for the first time in this election, the BJP, with the help of the regional party of Ramkrishna Hegde, succeeded in making inroads in Karnataka. The BJP, which was regarded as a large regional party anchored in the Hindi heartland, has spread its influence in peninsular India.

The performance of the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) in the post-NTR phase was analysed by K. Srinivasulu (1999) during the 12th Lok Sabha elections in Andhra Pradesh. The results indicate that during the 1998 general elections there was a considerable subterraneous stirring in the social support structure of the TDP and the Congress. A section of the TDP's support coalition—especially the poor, farmers and the youth—showed a strong inclination for the BJP. This happened due to the failure of the TDP in giving representation to the elite of the backward castes and its lack of policy support to artisans, small/middle peasants, and the agrarian poor of these castes.

The fall of the Congress fortress in Orissa during the 1998 general elections was analysed by Ramashray Roy (1999). In these elections, the Congress could retain only 4 of the 16 seats it had won in the 1996 elections. Even their poll percentage declined. The Congress lost the seats, argued Roy, due to factional fights. Moreover, the image of many Congress leaders and candidates was tainted by corruption and the failure of the Congress to give effect to the much publicized Korput-Balangir—Kalahandi Plan announced by Prime Minister Narasimha Rao.

Arthur G. Rubinoff (1999) studied the performance of candidates and political parties and changing alliances in Goa's Parliamentary elections in 1998. The changing political scenario in elections in Punjab was analysed by Promod Kumar (1999). Reeta Chowdhari-Tremblay (1999) analysed the 'Elections in Kashmir' in a historical perspective.

In his analysis of the 1999 Parliamentary elections in West Bengal, Bidyut Chakrabarty (2001) found that despite the popularity of the Left Front its share of votes declined significantly. The BJP provided a strong forum for the ruling coalition. On the basis of the 1996 elections in Haryana, N.R. Kaswan and Pradeep Varma (2001) discussed the association between the performance of political parties and the sociogeographic variables. Kanchan Chandra (2000a) analysed the strategy of ethnic demography adopted by the Bahujan Samaj Party in Hoshiarpur (Punjab). While comparing the strategy of the BSP with that of the Congress and the BJP, she found that the comparative ability to provide political representation is the key explanation for its success. Nagindas Sanghavi and Usha Thakkar (2000) regarded the 1999 elections as a contest between proelectoral fronts and alliances.

A significant study of the 1999 elections, which incidentally was also the first book to be published on the 1999 elections, was Yogesh Atal's (2000) *MaNDAte for Political Transition: Re-emergence of Vajpayee*. The book encapsulates the intense political activity of 1999 that culminated in mid-term Parliamentary elections which brought back, the Vajpayee-led NDA to power. Atal analysed the factors that led to the fall of the Vajpayee government, describes the machinations to put up an alternative government, and also analysed the fracture in the Congress Party caused by dissensions on the issue of Sonia Gandhi's leadership. He has meticulously reconstructed the pre-election scenario and objectively narrated the major events and happenings related to the entire political process of elections. The book is an example of the use of the technique of ethnography at the wider national level. Unlike other election studies, this work did not use the techniques of survey research, neither did it engage in election forecasting. It is a brilliant narrative of the nationwide process of government formation. Deceptively simple and descriptive, the book offers theoretical insights and objective comments on the emerging Indian polity that is moving from the one-party-dominance system to coalition politics in which the two-party system would operate at the level of alliances.

**Political Parties.** Only ten studies—two articles and eight books—have been written on political parties during the period under review. The distribution of studies on political parties included in the survey is given in Table 4.6.

| Total                 | 10             |
|-----------------------|----------------|
| More than One Party   | 1              |
| Shiva Sena            | 1              |
| Congress Party        | 3              |
| Bhartiya Janata Party | 5              |
| Political Parties     | No. of Studies |
|                       |                |

**Table 4.6** Political Parties covered

In 1988, two books—both collections of essays—(one by Kapil Kumar and the other by Ram Joshi and R.K. Hebsur, appeared on the Congress Party. The former contains articles which mainly highlight the role of the Indian National Congress in thwarting the class struggles of peasants and workers during the pre-independence period. The latter book, viewes the overall role of the Congress in Indian politics in a centenary perspective, which is also the title of the book. The third book by Zoya Hasan (1998), analyses factors responsible for the decline and fall of the Congress Party in Uttar Pradesh that culminated in its virtual extinction by the end of 1990. According to Hasan, the Congress in UP failed to adapt to the changing political and social environment in the state. Due to the changes in the economy, the class structure of Indian society also changed and new political formations arose which affected the grass-roots support structure of the Congress. Earlier, Congress politics in UP was dominated by Brahmins and Thakurs, but the Green Revolution and the emergence of Charan Singh as a Jat leader led to the downfall of the Congress. Due to the disintegration of Congress in Uttar Pradesh, it also lost the support of the backward classes, the scheduled castes, and the Muslims. The political vacuum thus created by the Congress was filled by the BJP and a number of smaller parties like the SVD, BKD, SP, and BSP, which changed the face of UP politics.

B. Graham (1990), Yogendra K. Malik and V.B. Singh (1994), Partha S. Ghosh (1999), and Sunil Kumar (2001) wrote full-length monographs on the Bharatiya Janata Party. Graham did a comprehensive and perceptive study of the Bharatiya Jan Sangh—the precursor of the present-day Bharatiya Janata Party—through the first two decades of its history from 1951. Malik and Singh traced the origins of Hindu nationalism and examined its role in pre- and post-independence politics. The authors used documents of the party, and conducted extensive interviews with key party leaders and the intellectual exponents of Hindu nationalism to analyse the circumstances that led to the rise of the BJP as a major political force in the 1990s. They also discussed the organizational and leadership structure, factional politics, electoral support, and programmes and policies of the BJP. By espousing an explicitly Hindu nationalist agenda, the BJP has questioned the non-sectarian basis upon which the Indian State was formed. Ghosh traced the growth of Hindu nationalism from the early days of the Indian renaissance in the late nineteenth century to the present. He also assessed the future of political hinduism in general and the BJP in particular. Sunil Kumar analysed the ideology, organization, leadership, electoral base and also the Hindutva doctrine of BJP with the broader consolidation of communal and secular politics in Indian politics. In an interesting article on the BJP, published in the *Economic and Political Weekly*, Priyavadan Patel (1999) analysed the rise and fall of the party in Gujarat.

Jayanth Lele (1995) traced the history of the Shiv Sena over the last fifty years in are article aptly titled 'Saffronization of Shiv Sena: Political economy of City, State, and Nation'. In passing, it may be said that Sudha Gogate of the SNDT Women's University in the 1960s wrote, a full-length monograph on the Shiv Sena for her Ph.D. degree in Sociology but because of her sudden death that work has remained unpublished.

Zoya Hasan (2002) edited a collection of previously published articles by various scholars, except one which was especially written for the volume. The book has five parts besides an Introduction by the editor. The first part deals with the dominance and decline of the Congress, whereas the second part is devoted to the rise and growth of Hindu nationalist politics. The third part contains two articles discussing the radical politics of the left parties. The Janata phase and the politics of lower castes, especially in north India, discussed in the fourth part. Political competition and the transformation of the party system is the subject matter of the last part. The article by E. Sridharan, especially written for the volume, deals with the overview of the party system and focuses on the electoral records of the parties and their position in the party system.

#### *Studies on Democracy, Civil Society, Ethnicity and Nation-State*

In all, 51 studies have been considered in category of democracy, civil society, ethnicity and the nation-state. Of these 21 are books and 30 articles, there are ten books on democracy, and on the relationship between the state and society. Three books are on civil society, and three on nation-building, including two edited volumes. There is another work on the criminalization of politics; the rest are on ethnicity and the nation-state (see Table 4.7).

| Themes                            | No. of Studies | Percentage of<br>Total Studies |
|-----------------------------------|----------------|--------------------------------|
| 1. Ethnicity and Civil Society    | 15             | 29.41                          |
| 2. Nation-Building/Nation-State   | 11             | 21.57                          |
| 3. Some Aspects of Democracy      | 14             | 27.45                          |
| 4. Secularism                     | 2              | 3.92                           |
| 5. Coalition Governments          | 2              | 3.92                           |
| 6. Criminalization of Politics    | 1              | 1.96                           |
| 7. Cultural and National identity | 1              | 1.96                           |
| 8. Tribal Development             | 1              | 1.96                           |
| 9. Others                         | 4              | 7.85                           |
| Total                             | 51             | 100.0                          |

**Table 4.7** Studies on democracy, civil Society, Ethnicity, nation-State

Almost one-third of the studies discussed some aspects of ethnicity and civil society followed by the nation-state and nation-building. Secularism and the weakness of coalition government were highlighted by 8 per cent of the scholars. About 22 per cent discussed some aspects of democracy.

James Manor (1988) has dealt with the contemporary political scene in India. According to him, two continuous trends, i.e. political awakening and political decay, mark the contemporary Indian political scene. Despite socio-economic barriers, various interest groups, classes, and demand groups, have been moving ahead due to self-awareness and assertiveness making India a more genuine democracy, though political institutions have undergone decay and are not able to respond adequately to pressures from social groups. Manor identifies five major categories of violence in contemporary India: (i) insurrectionary violence against the state and reaction by the latter; (ii) non-insurrectionary violence between the state and a social group; (iii) violence between social groups; (iv) violence among political parties; and (v) criminal violence. He, however, argues that India will not explode into a sprawling volcano due to the following factors: first, the perception of violence by the Indian political elite as an explanation for a greater tolerance of violence and a belief that mayhem would yield to an equilibrium; secondly, the social structure of India is such that most of the violence remains localized and does not develop into widespread conflagration; and finally, the resilience and regenerative capability of the Indian political system to restore normalcy.

#### 212 Surendra K. gupta

N.K. Das (1989) has analysed the pattern of ethnic mobilization and identity formation among the tribes of north-east India. He also examines the process of state formation and socio-cultural development among some of the larger and smaller tribes of the region.

Seven books discussing democracy in India were published between 1988 and 2002. In his book, Rajni Kothari (1988) is critical of the emerging political culture of corruption and criminality, but at the same time he is hopeful about democratic spirit in India. He diagnoses society's ailments and also offers a veritable list of prescriptions. In Atul Kohli's (1988) collection of essays on India's democracy focussing on the changing relationship between the State and the Society, the authors have examined the evolution and functioning of certain major institutions of Indian democracy and reflected on the future of Indian democracy. Pradeep K. Chhibber (1999), writing on the transformation of the party system and the phenomenon of social cleavages, has argued that regional differences are better predictors of votes than social variables such as caste, language, and religion. The success and failure of a political party is better explained by the specific strategies used in different states.

On the basis of three case studies—the food crisis in Kalahandi, the Shahbanu case along with the Muslim Women's Act of 1986, and the Narmada project— Niraja Gopal Jayal (1999) examined the three main functions of the Indian State, namely, welfare, secularism, and development. Each of these case studies is based on extensive background information. Governmental apathy, reluctance to assume responsibility, retreat in the face of difficult situations, and a complete subservience to powerful vested interests are the main features of her findings. In each of the three cases, according to Jayal, the principles of equality and justice have been compromised. Both in Kalahandi and the Narmada project, it is the tribal population that has been adversely affected. The law and order machinery has been used to suppress the voice of the people in the Narmada project. As all political parties are constrained by electoral consideration, none of them are ready to take a bold and impartial stand, concludes Jayal.

The contributing authors in Frankel and Rao (1989–90) have mainly highlighted the issues of domination and subordination expressed in structures of caste, class, and land control in different states of the country. The states covered are Bihar, UP, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka (vol. 1); and Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa, West Bengal, Punjab and Tribes of Middle India (vol. 2).

Gurpreet Mahajan (1998) discusses the aspects of liberal democracy in India. In her book, she concentrated on the rights of minority communities, especially the Sikhs, Parsees, Anglo Indians, and Indian Christians, to show that despite the constitutional guarantees to them the Indian democracy failed to create an environment to give them adequate protection.

The growing crisis of governability in India has been highlighted by Atul Kohli (1988).

Ananta Kumar Giri (1996) argued that the globalization of democracy as a form of legitimate government has not been accompanied by genuine efforts to tackle the problem of democracy.

There are a few scholars who have discussed the issues of ethnicity, nationalism, civil society and citizenship in India. The main contention of Brass (1991) is that culture has been used at will by ethnic elites to attain political goals. T.K. Oommen (1997a, 1997b) has argued that peoples of diverse racial, cultural, linguistic and religious backgrounds have a right to claim common nationality and citizenship rights if they share territory, communicate with one another, and affirm a sense of belongingness. Béteille (1999) has pleaded for the empowerment of people at the expense of the state to create and invigorate civil society. Just as the state and civil society are complementary, so are the state and citizen, argued Béteille. Dipankar Gupta (1990) has proposed that culture and linguistic differences are the enduring bases on which politics in India is played out. Uberoi (1999) examines the civil society from two opposite aspects, namely, culture and power. The background of the state and civil society concepts and their place in theoretical traditions and the fallacious understanding of the relationship between the two have been scrutinized by Vikas N. Pandey (1999). John Harries (1999) argues for differentiating the political system of different states on the basis of the balance of caste.

Both T.K. Oommen and Anand Kumar have written extensively on nationbuilding. Anand Kumar published two books on this aspect including one edited book. Oommen's (1990) book is a collection of essays on nation-building, which he wrote between 1982–89. His main argument is that nation-building can be successful by preserving and fostering genuine cultural pluralism and by empowering the collectivities through linguistic based institutions of self-governments to decide how their culture and values would change. Anand Kumar (1989) focussed on the understanding of the pattern of relations between the state, the power-matrix and political movements in the context of the modern world system emphasizing on the state agenda in India between 1917–77. In Anand Kumar's (1999) edited volume, the authors have evaluated the responses of the Indian polity to the challenges and imperatives of nation-building since independence with reference to religion, gender, caste, class, region, language, and the impact of international trends. The authors also have examined the theoretical and empirical dimensions of the dynamic relationship between culture, power, and society in the context of nation-building.

D.L. Sheth and Gurpreet Mahajan's (1999) edited volume examines the minority claims within the context of the nation-state and democratic politics. The authors have also explored the sources of minority consciousness. The tensions between the democratic-political rights and the cultural claims of minorities within the framework of the nation-state have also been discussed in the volume.

There was a growing concern in the 1990s in most countries of the world that they were not in a position to handle the collective predicaments of their own subjects. A debate is still continuing among Western scholars to find out 'which politics are likely to prove able to meet such challenges by transforming themselves with fluency and decisiveness, and what types of challenges are likely to prove lethal to even the most resilient and hallowed polity' (Dunn 1995: 2). Scholars from six countries, including India, were invited by Dunn to analyze the situation in their respective countries.

The chapter 'Crisis of the Nation-State in India' in Dunn (1995) has been contributed by Sudipto Kaviraj. He has provided a refreshing perspective to the crisis of nation-building in India. He contends that in the pre-colonial period, the caste system 'governed boundaries and controlled transactions between social groups (p. 116). Even the state had to function under the rigid rule of the caste system. An individual during this period belonged to 'his village, local community, caste group, religious sect, language, kinship complexes' (ibid.). Though the British rulers made India a geographic and demographic entity, ambivalence remained regarding the national identity; people were not sure whether they belonged to a nation of Bengalis, of Hindus, or of Indians. Nehru's strategy of making independent India industrially self-reliant by developing capital goods industries worked very well for first three decades. But things changed in 1975–77, especially after the Emergency. 'What initially appeared the crisis of government has slowly spread to become a crisis of the Indian nation-state, at least in its current institutional forms' (126). Kaviraj argues for replacing the Nehruvian imagination of nationalism with other forms. According to him 'if the present Indian state suffers disintegration, its present space would most likely be occupied by a number of smaller, more homogeneous, less democratic states within their own insecure narratives of being a nation from immemorial antiquity' (129).

The significance of the concepts of nation and nation-state can be derived from the fact that the Indian Sociological Society selected it as the main theme for its 25th All India Sociological Conference held at Aligarh in 1998 (S.L. Sharma 2000; *Sociological Bulletin* vol. 48, 1999). S.L. Sharma (2000: XV) has made a distinction between 'nation as a supra-local entity and nation as a culturally distinct locational entity'. The term nation has been used in the Indian subcontinent in both the senses. 'In terms of a civilizational category, it signifies a supra-local entity. Notably, the civilizational notion of nation is open to both interpretations: communal and secular. Used in terms of Hindu civilization or *Hindutva*, it takes on a communal character, while used as composite culture or as a plurality of cultural entities it takes on a secular character. These usages pertain to macro-level conceptualization of nation. At the micro-level, again the term nation is amenable to two interpretations—as a culturally distinct territorial entity and as a culturally grounded imagined political community' (ibid.). The main contention of Sharma is that the definition of a nation may depend on the context. 'Any attempt at reducing it to one single definition is bound to leave out some of its other important conceptual constituents.' (ibid.).

T.K. Oommen identifies nation in seven different ways: ancient civilizational entity, composite culture, political entity, religious entity, geographical territorial entity with a specific cultural ethos, a collection of linguistic entities and a unity of great and little nations. A 'fusion between territory and culture', according to Oommen, is the most proximate definition of a nation, especially in the context of South Asia.

Language and region according to M.N. Karna (2000) define the nation-state relationship in India. Jaganath Pathy (2000) has criticized the nation-state for depriving the tribals of their land, livelihood, language, religion, and culture. The vision of nationhood and religiosity among a select group of freedom fighters is the focus of Proshanta Nandi's (2000) paper. G. Aloysius (2000) has discussed how caste has been implicated with nation and religion in modern India. The role of women in the making of the Indian nation is the theme of Maitrayee Chaudhuri's (2000) paper.

In his collection of essays written between 1987 and 1995, Oommen (2002) has attempted to develop a conceptual and theoretical framework to understand the issues of cultural and national identity. In the process, he has discarded Furnivall's concept of 'Plural Society' and suggested that pluralism consists of several societies or nations. He describes India as a multinational nation, different from a multicultural society. Pluralism, according to Oommen, means the attitude of the in-groups i.e. Hindus towards the out-groups, which he calls as natives. For him, pluralism is an attitude of accommodation and should not be equated with the equality of opportunity. Another controversial issue raised by Oommen in the book is that nations only exist and one cannot build a nation. The issues raised by Oommen in the book, however, need intensive debate4 .

A special symposium on civil society was organized as part of the 26th All India Sociological Conference, held at the University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, in December 2000. Papers presented at the symposium were revised and printed in *Sociological Bulletin* (September 2001. Of the eight articles on civil society published in this issue, seven are the revised versions presented at the symposium, while André Béteille's (2001) article is an expanded version of the 12th Zakir Hussain Memorial Lecture.5

André Béteille emphasized that 'civil society is a feature of modern world, and it will serve little purpose to look for alternative forms of it in the medieval or ancient world' (ibid.: 294). He made a distinction between good society and civil society. Béteille believes that religious movements and assemblies for moral, ethical and spiritual discourses may contribute to the formation of a good society, but he seems sceptical about their role in the formation of civil society.

The following scholars also presented their papers at the symposium mentioned above: D.N. Dhanagare, Satish Saberwal, P.K.B. Nayar, T.K. Oommen, Rowena Robinson, Vikas N. Pandey, and Ananta Kumar Giri.

'Autonomy of individual, protection of individual right to equal citizenship, and access to decision making apparatus and participatory democratic framework are necessary conditions of civil society', believes Dhanagare (2001: 188). Civil society, according to Satish Saberwal, means a social space which has four qualities: (i) decisions and choices have to be made on the basis of reason and of knowledge; (ii) members have to relate to each other open-endedly, without exclusion on grounds of religion, gender and so forth; (iii) decisions and choices should be free from coercive pressures; and (iv) to enhance the members capacity of intermediate associations to cope with the kind of coercion that arises in primary groups like family and in agencies of the state (Saberwal 2001: 192–94). P.K.B. Nayar is of the opinion that India has a comparatively well developed civil society, and some of its CSOs (Civil Society Organizations) have made commendable contributions both to the cause of democracy and to national development. At the same time, he believes that the socio-political conditions in India are not conducive for a healthy growth of civil society (2001: 215). The associations and movements organized on the basis of religion, caste and language are instruments of establishing equality between the privileged and the deprived groups and communities argues T.K. Oommen. He further asserts that 'mobilization by the underprivileged social categories are geared to bring about dignity also for them, the thrust being emancipatory identity. In contrast, mobilization by the dominant categories are efforts to reinforce and perpetuate their hegemony. Both these tendencies must be recognised as different aspects of civil society' (ibid.: 234). Rowena Robinson (2001) believes that religion, rather than caste or language, is the main marker of Indian identity. The main argument of Anant Kumar Giri is that 'identity based movements have been important agents of change and political contestation in the contemporary world, but their mobilization now needs a hermeneutic and spiritual supplement of recognizing and identifying with the suffering of others' (Giri 2001: 282). Identity politics needs to be transformed through openness to recreate civil society as a space of ethico-political mobilization of the subject.

Harnik Deol (2000) has examined the growth of national sentiments among the Sikh community in Punjab. She has outlined the reasons for the rise of Sikh militancy in the 1970s and 1980s. The after-effects of the Green Revolution on the young, semi-literate Sikh peasantry and the commercialization of agriculture in Punjab contributed to the Sikh separatist movement. She has also explored the role of the print media in the revitalization of religion in the 1980s and the emergence of sharper religious boundaries. She argues that the theory of nationalism in India cannot be derived from the European experience. Analysis of cultural and historical specificities would provide clues to the rise of nationalism in India.

Dipankar Gupta (2000) used the analytical framework of the concept of culture to interpret governance, citizenship and fraternity. The significance of culture, according to him, lies in the fact that it informs the way people interact with each other in defined spaces. The nation-state, he argues, being one such space should be seen as an important cultural phenomenon.

Jaganath Pathy (1991) has argued in an article that the technological deterministic model of development has depleted tribal resources and devastated the ecological balance. Increasing centralization of power, and processes of nation, building, have diminished the cultural and linguistic autonomy of the tribal people. M.K. Sandhu (1990) assessed the nature of student protest to figure out the differences in the political orientation of the activists and non-activists. Anirban Banerjee (1989) attempted a cross-cultural analysis of student movements. Manjit Singh (1992) studied political socialization among university students.

Manoranjan Mohanty (1989) attempted to evolve a non-hegemonic concept of secularism. The fight for real secularism, according to him, should be directed against the ruling class or state hegemony. Such an orientation would require a redefinition of secularism. He further argued that secularism is a part of the democratic struggle against social and class domination. According to him, the social base of religion must be exposed and its democratic content must be differentiated from its hegemonic rule. Sumanta Banerjee (1990) is of the opinion that all of us suffer from some sort of social myopia at various levels, which often leads us to recognize some manifestation as violent actions, but makes us indifferent to various other political and economic actions that indirectly violate our democratic rights.

The criminalization of politics in India has emerged as a most alarming issue in recent years. But unfortunately not many scholars have worked in this area. In order to focus on this issue the Institute of Peace Research and Action organized a seminar in August 1990, in which many social scientists, writers, journalists, and activists participated. The proceedings of the seminar were edited by Susheela Bhan (1995) and published as *Criminalization of Politics*. The participants in the seminar expressed concern over the increasing nexus between criminals and politicians, which is threatening the very bases of the country's civil society. Earlier, the politicians protected criminals, but now the criminals themselves are trying to hold power and are refusing to play second fiddle to politicians.

C.P. Bhambhri (1999) and M.P. Singh (2001) analysed the phenomenon of coalition governments in India. Bhambhri's main argument is that in a coalition there is no commonality of policies and the only binding factor is desire for governance. Singh has analyses the phenomenon of federal coalition governments in India with special reference to the National Front and the United Front, both left-of-centre formations led by the Janata Dal in the early and later half of the 1990s.

#### *Studies on Communalism*

Communal violence in India is a legacy of the colonial period. The policy of divide and rule pursued by the British sowed the seeds of communalism in the country. The first communal riots in Independent India occurred in 1962 in Jabalpur, on account of economic competition between Hindu and Muslim *beedi* manufacturers. However, the root cause of this riot was the decision of the daughter of the Hindu *beedi* manufacturer to marry the son of the Muslim *beedi* manufacturer. The communal riots of 1969 in Ahmedabad were engineered by some political parties to oppose the 'unchallenged hegemony' of Indira Gandhi. They were followed by riots in Bhivandi and Jalgaon in 1970. Major riots also occurred during the Janata Party regime in Jamshedpur, Benaras, Aligarh and a few other places in 1977–78. Communal riots also took place in Moradabad (1980), in Biharsharif (1981), Meerut (1982), Baroda (1982), Bombay-Bhivandi (1984), and Ahmedabad (1985).

In the late 1980s, there were several incidents of communal violence in different parts of the country. The floodgates for communal violence in the country were opened in February 1986 when the Faizabad district judge ordered the opening of the Ram Janam Bhoomi and the Babri Masjid complex for worship by the Hindus, which had been closed in the early 1950s by the Government of India. This was followed by large-scale protests by Muslims resulting in the setting up of the Babri Masjid Coordination Committee in March 1986. They also organized a nation-wide Muslim mourning. The issue took an ugly turn in December 1992, when the Babri Masjid was demolished. The demolition of the mosque led to communal violence in many parts of the country.

Of the 15 books on communalism two are on communal politics in India in the historical perspective and one is a collection of articles. The rest of the studies are either on the Ayodhya issue or on communal violence in different parts of the country. Among the articles, 10 are on communal violence, one is on the historical development of Hinduism, while another two papers attempt to conceptualize communalism (Table 4.8).

| Themes                     | No. of Studies | Percentage of<br>Studies |
|----------------------------|----------------|--------------------------|
| 1. Study of Communal Riots | 12             | 38.7                     |
| 2. Hinduism and Politics   | 7              | 22.6                     |
| 3. Ayodhya Crisis          | 6              | 19.4                     |
| 4. Communal Politics       | 4              | 12.9                     |
| 5. Others                  | 2              | 6.4                      |
| All studies                | 31             | 100.0                    |

**Table 4.8** Studies on communalism

Forty per cent of the total studies on communalism have concentrated on communal riots. The cities where riots have been studied are Bhagalpur, Moradabad, Mumbai, Surat, and Udaipur. There are few scholars who have analysed the riots in the entire state of Maharashtra and Gujarat. One-fourth of the studies discuss the politics of Hindutva of the BJP, and one-fifth studies are concerned with the Ayodhya crisis.

While conceptualizing communalism, K.N. Panikkar (1992) argued that communalism in both minority and majority communities draws heavily from their respective pasts. Since the ideology of communalism is derived from the assumptions of history, any dialogue between secularism and communalism is not possible. On the basis of empirical data based on Maharashtra and Punjab, Dipankar Gupta (1991) says that 'ethnicised' politics is communalism and not fundamentalism. He further argues that communalism can function only when an ethnic order has been antagonistically identified as it operates in a situation of dyadic opposition.

The analysis of the communal riots in Udaipur and Ahmedabad by Zenab Banu (1989) led her to conclude that communalism is essentially a political phenomenon. Beneath group prejudices, communal contradictions, tensions and riots, there is a struggle for control over resources of power. To gain economic and political dominance, certain individuals exploit the illiterates and the traditionbound masses.

The role of a police officer in handling the communal violence in Moradabad city of Uttar Pradesh has been analysed by A.P. Maheshwari (2000). He has also identified the causes of communal violence and discussed the administrative counter-strategies and line of control, as also the role of citizens in diffusing the volatile situation.

Sheldon Pollock (1993) discussed the controversies over the Babri Masjid issue and related violence and examined the symbology of these events. He traced the long history of the relationship between the Ramayana and political symbology. Four more publications on the Ayodhya controversy appeared after 1986. Koenraad Elst (1990) chose the Ram Janam Bhoomi controversy as illustrative of the Hindu-Muslim behaviour pattern. He attempted to develop the story of controversy step by step in all its aspects—historical, political, and judicial. David Ludden (1996) and John McGuire, Peter Reeves and Howard Brasted (1996) came out with two anthologies relative to the Ayodhya issue. They highlighted the rise of communal politics and that of the BJP, and proposed an interdisciplinary framework for studying communalism simultaneously via culture, society, economy, media, history, and politics. S. Gopal (1991) also edited a book on Ayodhya and the rise of communal politics in India. Post-Ayodhya perspectives were also analysed in a seminar in 1994, the proceedings of which have been published in a book edited by Madhusree Dutta, Flavia Agnes, and Neera Adarkar (1996). The book contains the views of trade unionists, civil rights activists, lawyers, educationists, and researchers. Three reasons for the outbreak of violence in Maharashtra after the demolition of the Babri Masjid are given by Gopal Guru (1993) (i) The rising tide of Muslim protest all over the state; (ii) the cross-section communalism of the masses; and (iii) certain developments in the state which confused even the liberal and progressive forces. Lancy Lobo (1993), on the other hand, blames socio-economic factors for the post-Ayodhya riots while analysing the communal violence in Surat city. Reckless industrialization, according to her, caused a acute housing problem for migrants and the tone was set by communal propaganda by the press, parties, and various other organizations. Political parties fermented the riots; the indifference of the police further escalated the problem. The aftermath of the 1992 communal riots in Mumbai has also been analysed by Helen Joseph (2000). The communal riots which also spread to south India were studied by Wright (2000). The erosion and breakdown of the institutions built by Gandhi, and the society which supported them, is the main reason for the recurring violence argues Howard Spodek (1989) on the basis of his analysis of the 1983 riots in Ahmedabad. While writing on the culture of communalism in Gujarat, Rajni Kothari (2002a) examines the larger and rapidly spreading communalization of the Indian polity and attempts to identify the individuals and groups spreading the culture of violence. Girish Patel (2002) traced the socio-political history of Gujarat to find some clues about communal violence there.

On the basis of his study of communalism in India, Asghar Ali Engineer (1995) came to the conclusion that communalism is not a religious phenomenon but a phenomenon connected with the interest group of a religious community. According to him, 'communalism, right from the 19th century, has been generated by conflicting interests of educated elites, not the masses' (ibid.: xiii). This is based on his analysis of the behaviour of political leaders of various communities. On the basis of his analyses of various communal riots at different places, he identified the macro—as well as the micro—factors responsible for communal riots. Macro factors are (i) the class nature of the society and the underdevelopment of the economy including scarcity of resources; (ii) an urban phenomenon rooted among the petty bourgeoisie; and (iii) the socio-economic changes bringing about a deep sense of insecurity among those strata who are adversely affected by them. The micro-factors are 'Competition between rival traders or small manufacturers from the two communities, competition between two gangs of hoodlums dealing either in smuggling, illicit arms or liquor, or similar other anti-social activities, scheming by local industrial magnates to weaken trade unions by raising some communal issues, election to local bodies or contest over some assembly or parliamentary seats' (ibid.: 119). Another micro-characteristic of communal conflicts is that they have a tendency to occur more in medium-sized towns, especially in those towns where the Muslim population varies between 20 to 50 per cent. It further gets intensified if there are some Muslim entrepreneurial classes competing with Hindu businessmen.

While analysing the role of Hinduism in Indian politics in socio-historical development, Gail Omvedt's (1990) main contention is that there has been a gradual process of recognition of a 'Hindu' community and also of rendering it increasingly militant. According to her, the political weakness of secular and socialist forces led to the rise of militant Hindu ideology. Achin Vanaik (1997), in his collection of essays on communalism, argues that secularism is the only legitimate ground on which to confront communalism. Thomas Blom Hansen (1999) finds a close relationship between nationalism and communal ideology. He relates the growth of the Hindu Right in Maharashtra in the 1980s due to the emergence of 'majoritarian democracy' and the populist form of 'governmentality', especially during Rajiv Gandhi's regime. Due to the advent of the satellite in the 1980s the explosion of the electronic media like TV and video culture made certain serials like *Mahabharata* and *Ramayana* popular not only in urban India but also in rural India, which contributed to the growth of the Hindu Right. John Zavos's (2000) study on the emergence of Hindu nationalism is based on the analysis of those movements striving to construct a monolith Hindu identity, which may lead to the emergence of the supremacy of the Hindus. He has given a historical account of the construction and consolidation of Hindu national identity.

Rajni Kothari (1998) focusses on the communal upsurge in India starting from the attack on the Golden Temple and the anti-Sikh killings of 1984 to 6 December 1992 when the Babri Masjid was destroyed followed by large-scale killings of Muslims in many parts of the country including Mumbai, Surat and Ahmedabad. He raises the fundamental issues about the communal shifts, in the nature of the Indian state and civil society. Kothari pleads for a distinctive and pluralistic model for India in which all religions are respected and special consideration is given to the minorities and their rights.

In his study Harish Sharma (2000) focusses on the 1980s, which saw the worldwide rise of Islamic fundamentalism and analyses the emerging political culture of communalism in India. On the basis of the analysis of the Shah Bano case and the Ram Janam Bhoomi–Babri Masjid controversy, he has attempted to identify the factors responsible for the growth of communalism and its interface with democracy.

A few scholars have studied the historical aspects of communalism and attempted to link it with Hindu Nationalist Movement. Gyanendra Pandey (1990) has provided a historiography of nationalist and communalist movements in colonial north India. The Hindu Nationalist Movement from 1925 to 1990, with special reference to Central India, has been discussed by C. Jaffrelot (1996). While analysing the Khilafat Movement, Mushirul Hasan (1991) has argued that Islamic tradition contained the basis of an ideology of unity. His argument is based on the work of religious Muslim nationalists like Jamaluddin Afghani and Maulana Azad; and he has demonstrated the possibilities of a nationalism unified in Islamic thought.

How the conversion of the scheduled castes to Islam in Meenakshipuram in Tirunelveli district in 1981 became an important catalyst in the growth of communalism in Tamil Nadu has been discussed by Frank S. Fanselow (2000). Collective violence needs to be understood in terms of the ideology that underpins it and the form and organization it takes, argues Rowena Robinson (1996) on the basis of her analysis of the Bhagalpur riots in 1989.

The burning of Hindus at the Godhra railway station in Gujarat on 27 February 2002, and the aftermath of this incident raised questions about the identity of the Indian State. People from various fields including journalists, social scientists and social activists have attempted to present the incident in different perspectives. M.L. Sondhi and Apratim Mukarji (2002) make an attempt to 'understand the phenomenon at two levels: by documenting the physical manifestation of the riots as achieved in substantive measure by exhaustive, on-the-spot, investigations and subsequently published reports, such as those of the NHRC and the Human Rights Watch, New York. It also includes the order issued by the Election Commission of India' (pp. IX, X). The first part of the book contains articles where the writers both Indian and non-Indian—have attempted to understand the special nature of the riots. The second part of the book contains the report of the NHRC and the order issued by the Election Commission of India. Rafiq Zakaria also deals has dealt with, the Godhra incident. In the first four chapters of his book (2002) he describes what happened in Godhra and thereafter in the rest of Gujarat. In the subsequent chapters he has 'discussed both the grievances of Hindus against Muslims and the religious misrepresentation and historical distortions pertaining to Islam and the Muslims which have been used as cannon fodder by communal Hindus in their tirade against Muslims.' (p. xx).

It is to be hoped that the next trend report, which will cover the period from 2003 onwards, will include more studies on the Godhra incident.

## **Emerging Trends and Gaps**

On the basis of the studies reviewed, an attempt has been made in this section to delineate the emerging trends in the field of political sociology in India, especially between 1988 and 2002.

Sociologists and social anthropologists are not insulated from the social, economic, and political developments in the country. A cursory scanning of the trend report reveals that sociologists have responded positively to any development or crisis situation and have made attempts to reach the depth of the problem or its impact on the people and the society as a whole. Whether they have come to a definitive conclusion or not is a different matter, but attempts have been made. This is a healthy sign.

The initiative taken by the Congress Party under the prime ministership of Rajiv Gandhi in 1989 for the decentralization of power at the local level received Constitutional status in 1992 with the 73rd Amendment. The amendment provides for the reservation of seats for SCs and STs, besides also providing one-third reservation of seats for posts of members as well as of chairperson in Panchayati Raj institutions for women. This was considered a right step towards the empowerment of women. Many scholars in different states conducted empirical studies in order to work out its implications. Most of them have confirmed the participation of women in different bodies, but their effectiveness in decision-making has been questioned by all. Some of them have attributed this to the high degree of illiteracy among women.

Caste violence in the rural areas of some states has posed serious problems. Though caste violence has taken place in many states, it has been studied by a only few scholars in Bihar. The factors responsible for violence may differ from region to region, but a comparison can certainly provide some useful insights.

The reservation of seats for SCs and STs under decentralization of power has also affected the rural power structure. But not many scholars have studied its. Similarly, the urban power structure has also remained more or less unstudied.

It is important to know the socio-economic profile of the members of Legislative Assemblies as well as of members of Parliament. Equally important is the analysis of their contribution in the decision-making process, especially their participation in various debates in Parliament and assemblies. Unfortunately, this aspect has not attracted the attention of scholars.

Election studies in recent years have a totally different perspective from the studies carried out in the 1960s. During the 1960s and 1970s, scholars doing election studies mainly highlighted the socio-economic background of the voters as well as their preferences for different political parties and candidates. A few scholars, like Sirsikar and Atal, also used the panel technique to discover the changers, non-changers, as well as the direction and factors for change. But nowadays, scholars are concentrating more on the analysis of data provided by the election office, including the performance of different political parties. How the election results have been affected by pre-poll alliances has also drawn the attention of some scholars.

Another trend that emerged was the analysis of elections on the basis of secondary sources, especially print the media such as newspapers and magazines. The reporting of election details in various newspapers and magazines was used by Yogesh Atal to write a complete monograph on the 1999 elections. He did it for the Parliamentary elections but, following his model, similar attempts can be made for Assembly elections in various states.

Psephologists have used the swing factor while analysing election results on television. Butler for the first time used the swing factor for the Congress and measured the index of opposition unity to see its impact on the election results. Similar attempts can be made for other political parties. In the past few years many techniques have been tried to predict election outcomes. There is no study which describes these techniques. Such a study on psephological techniques would be an important contribution to social science research methodology, and the ICSSR can take the initiative in this regard.

The emergence of the BJP as a political force in the 1990s has drawn the attention of many scholars. As a result, quite a few scholars have researched the growth and development of the party. Another development that affected the political equation in the country was the emergence of a large number of regional political parties which virtually prevailed over national political parties. But no attempt has been made to depict the rise and growth of these parties. Some case studies of these political parties may provide useful insights into the prevailing political process.

#### 224 Surendra K. gupta

A significant observation made by Paul Wallace while analysing elections in Punjab is that when two political parties with two distinct social bases form an alliance, the chances of their sweeping the polls enhance. This hypothesis needs more empirical studies.

Doubts have been raised by some scholars about the decay of political institutions, which might affect the working of democracy in India. The emergence of the political culture of corruption and criminalization of politics may also affect the credibility of the democratic system. Issues related to the protection to minority groups also deserve careful investigation. Studies are needed to examine whether the policies favouring the minorities and the depressed groups have played the counter role of subverting secularism and promoting casteism and communalism. Issues related to the functioning of civil society organizations also deserve priority attention.

Some scholars insist that communalism is not a religious phenomenon but is part of a struggle to capture control over resources of power both economic and political. Illiterate and tradition-bound masses are exploited by a few individuals to gain dominance over resources. Communal hatred is further escalated due to partisan propaganda by political parties, the mass media, and various other organizations. It has also been observed that communal violence is mainly an urban phenomenon; it remains to be seen which factors facilitate the rise of communalism in different types of human settlements.

The review of literature suggests that the following areas need careful empirical investigation, and therefore may be considered while identifying priorities of research in the coming years:

- 1. Role of communication, interpersonal as well as that of the mass media, especially the print media, in a crisis situation such as communal violence;
- 2. Case studies of regional parties to know their genesis, development, functioning, and also their role as pressure groups in coalition politics at the national as well as the state level,
- 3. Content analysis of the election manifestos of various political parties over the years to reveal how the policies of these parties have changed and to what degree the manifestoes of different parties have a common platform;
- 4. How the criminalization of politics affects the system;
- 5. How the politicization of caste affects the functioning of democracy and the pursuit of secularism; and
- 6. The impact of economic development on the rural power structure.

Somehow, interest in political sociology has not retained the momentum of the 1970s. Interest in election studies, particularly voter behaviour, has almost died down. Simultaneously, sociologists have moved to other arenas of social protests, such as farmers' movements. Since all such actions form part of the political life of the society, it is necessary to bring together these varied interests and synthesize them in the framework of political sociology.

notes

- 1. The Institute of Social Sciences, Agra University, for example, introduced political sociology as an optional paper in 1965.
- 2. This study was part of a UNESCO-sponsored project, on *Communication and Nation Building*, directed by Yogesh Atal, then UNESCO Regional Adviser for Social and Human Sciences in Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok.
- 3. It is interesting to note that a similar conclusion was reached by Atal in his study of the 1967 elections (see Atal 1971). He suggested: 'When contending parties join hands to challenge the erstwhile ruling group, political participation of the electorate is likely to register an increase. Where there is no challenge to the ruling group, the electorate gets indifferent and apathetic' (358). He wrote further: 'Greater unity in the opposition, exhibited by a lesser number of contestants, made it impossible for the Congress to cash in on the split vote of the opposition to the same extent as in previous years' (ibid.). However, he also says that 'a larger number of candidates means a bigger battery of political workers and intensive campaigning, both congenial for political socialization of the masses'. But Atal cautions that the better informed may also remain undecided about the choice and may refrain from voting.
- 4. See the review of this book by Yogesh Atal in the *Sociological Bulletin*, 52(1): 2003.
- 5. Delivered at Zakir Hussain College in Delhi on 22 February 2001.

## Bibliography

- Ahmad, Imtiaz. 1986. 'Political sociology'. In J.V. Ferreira (ed.). *Survey of Research in Sociology and Social Anthropology*, 1969–79. Vol. 3. New Delhi: Satvahan Publication.
- Aloysius, G. 2000. 'Caste in and above history'. In S.L. Sharma and T.K. Oommen (eds.). *Nation and National Identity in South Asia*. Delhi, Orient Longman.
- Ashraf, Ali (ed.). 1995. *The Emerging Political Culture in India*. New Delhi. Hira Publications
- Atal Yogesh. 1962. 'Short-lived alliances as an aspect of factionalism in an Indian village', *The Journal of Social Sciences,* 3(1)*.*