# **7 The Soviet Great Leap Forward: I. Collectivization**

Suddenly and Without Warning

The events of 1929-34 constitute one of the great dramas of history. They need much more space than they can possibly receive here, and a more eloquent pen than the author's to describe them. They need also a sounder base in reliable data than is available at present to any historian, in East or West. For we are now entering a period in which the lines dividing propaganda from reported fact tend to disappear, and statistics too often become an adjunct of the party's publicity office. Official statements and pronouncements by leaders can no longer be checked against counter-arguments made by contemporary critics, since criticism is silenced, or is confined to minor local detail. The whole flavour of intellectual life underwent a drastic change. Anyone who knows Russian can observe the change for himself, just by reading articles in learned journals on social-economic issues published in 1928 and comparing them with what was published in, say, 1932. Between these dates not only was serious criticism rendered impossible, but articles became increasingly the vehicle for strident assertions of brilliant successes and denunciations of real or alleged deviationists as agents of foreign powers. Therefore the historian must, so to speak, change gear, and use his source-material differently when he gets into the thirties. In the most recent years archives have been opened, and become accessible both to Russian and Western scholars, so more information has become available, enabling some blank pages to be filled. However, the prevailing atmosphere affected the quality and content even of confidential reporting.

The dramatic events to be described affected virtually every

aspect of Soviet life, and to treat them chronologically would, on balance, be more confusing than to tackle each sector separately. So we shall begin with collectivization and its consequences, and go on to industry, construction, transport, finance and trade, labour and living standards and the reorganization of planning.

On i June 1929 the total number of peasant members of collectives of all kinds was barely one million, and of these 60 per cent were in the TOZ (loose) type of producers' cooperatives. By 1 October the number had risen to 1.9 million (62 per cent TOZ).<sup>1</sup> It was this increase which gave Stalin the basis for his statement, in his famous article of 7 November 1929, that 'the middle peasant is joining collectives' and that the great turn was under way. It is now agreed by virtually all historians, West and East, that pressure was even then being applied, and that peasants were *not* 'going' collective *en masse.* It seems that, silently and secretly, Stalin and his friends ordered local officials in a few selected areas to try out mass collectivization by whatever means were handy. When the result showed that victory was possible, Stalin, with Molotov and Kaganovich as his closest associates in the matter, decided to launch the collectivization campaign, using for the purpose the activists already mobilized to enforce grain collection by the well-tried 'Urals-Siberian method'. This is convincingly argued by M. Lewin in his already-cited study.

No doubt the final defeat of the right opposition facilitated the opening of the offensive. This, indeed, is a point specifically made by one of the ablest Soviet analysts of the period, Moshkov: 'The condemnation of the rightists enabled the central committee to operate more consistently the line of the offensive against the kulaks ... ' And not only the anti-kulak policy was affected. Moshkov refers also to instructions of the central committee to party organs in selected grain regions, issued in August 1929, urging them to reach high collectivization percentages in that very year. 'In party circles the view was hardening to the effect that only by collectivization could the problem of grain production be solved.' Moshkov laid considerable stress on the effect on the peasants of the 'new system of procurements', which he identifies as having been enforced by the decrees of 28 June 1929 (RSFSR) and 3 July 1929 (Ukraine). These have not, as a rule, been noted

as important by other analysts, and yet Moshkov treats them as in effect signalling the end of NEP in the village.<sup>2</sup>

There is much evidence to support this. Until this date, the forcible collections of grain, which had begun early in 1928, were officially described and viewed as emergency measures. However, these decrees provided for the imposition of procurement plans on particular areas by the government, and empowered the authorities to fine (and in some cases, imprison) recalcitrant households who failed to deliver the quantities specified by the delivery plan as it affected them, and to sell up their property if need be. This power, it is true, was to be exercised by local Soviets, which were obliged to call a general meeting. However, whole villages were now receiving procurement quotas, and were encouraged to place the maximum burden on the kulaks or other prosperous elements. But all were doomed indefinitely to deliver grain surpluses to the state at low prices. Moshkov very properly makes two further comments. Firstly, this decree, as applied by the government, served as the judicial foundation of the first wave of 'dekulakization', which, as we shall note, had begun already in the second half of 1929, without any declaration or decree specifically to that effect. That is to say, in selected graingrowing areas the kulaks were deliberately over-assessed for grain deliveries and they were then expropriated for failing to obey. Secondly, and more fundamentally, further great changes were bound to follow, since 'as the experience of the civil war showed, the [imposed] planned delivery of grain to the state at prices which were unfavourable to the peasants inevitably led to the reduction in production of grain to subsistence level'.<sup>3</sup> In other words, the peasants in general (not just the kulaks) were bound to reduce sowings, once the fundamental basis of NEP was subverted by a return to a kind of prodrazverstka. This method of procurement was successful, at least in the short run. The subdivision of the total procurement plan by regions, the mobilization of party personnel, led to a 49 per cent increase in state procurements of grain over the previous year. This could well have increased Stalin's confidence in the effectiveness of political pressure in general, and so 'procurements went parallel with the process of the wholesale collectivization of whole regions .. . and

were closely linked with it'.<sup>4</sup> There is much in favour of such an interpretation of events.

Be this as it may, after Stalin's article on the 'great turn', published on 7 November 1929, a plenum of the central committee was held on 10-17 November. It decided that there existed 'a move of the broadest mass of poor- and middle-peasant households towards collective forms of agriculture', which was described as 'spontaneous' *(stikhiinaya).* Given that no such spontaneous move existed in nature, while the entire campaign was conducted on the supposition that it did, and given also that there was no kind of inquiry or prior warning, the events that followed were both confused, and above all, ill-prepared. There is not the slightest evidence that there had been a party or state sub-committee engaged in assessing how best to change the way of life of most of the population of a vast country. Since in fact it was to be decided that the loose TOZ was not 'collective' enough, that the *arteP* with its more advanced degree of collectivism was to be preferred, it is truly extraordinary that nothing was done before. December to clarify what kind of *arte?* was intended, for there were many variants: some paid members 'by eaters' *(po edokam,* i.e. in relation to mouths to feed), some in some rough proportion to work done, some in accordance with the land and implements contributed; in some farms a good deal of livestock was collectivized, in others not. Indeed the party cadres were not too clear whether the fully fledged commune, with total collectivization, was not in the minds of the leaders. We shall see that these confusions had considerable influence on events.

As a Soviet writer on this theme has pointed out, 'Excesses .. . were due in part to the fact that there was no clear explanation of the nature of the methods and forms of wholesale collectivization, or of the criteria for its completion .. . Many officials interpreted it .. . as the immediate incorporation of all toiling peasants in kolkhozy.' 'Stalin and his closer co-workers did not consider it essential to discuss the party's new policy for the villages in a broad party forum, such as a congress or conference.' If proper discussion had taken place, many mistakes would have been avoided, asserted another writer.<sup>5</sup>

An all-union collective-farm centre *(Kolkhoztsentr)* was created,

as well as an all-union *Narkomzem* (People's Commissariat of Agriculture), under Yakovlev. The same Yakovlev headed a special politbureau commission set up on 8 December 1929, a month *after* Stalin announced the great turn, to discuss how to collectivize. It sprouted a whole number of sub-committees, among them one on tempos, another on the organizational structure of collectives, yet another on kulaks, etc. On 16-17 December they met to argue various proposals. On 22 December the commission presented proposals to the politbureau, which became the basis of a decree passed on 5 January 1930. It might be proper to conclude that it had no time to consider the colossally complex issues involved. Ahead of any report, orders were already going out to the localities, urging instant action. Thus a telegram from Kolkhoztsentr on 10 December 1929 read: 'To all local organizations in the areas of total collectivization: to achieve 100 per cent collectivization of working animals and cows, 80 per cent of pigs, 60 per cent of sheep and also poultry, and 25 per cent of the collectives to be communes.'<sup>6</sup>

Meanwhile the commission proposed the following timetable 'for total *(sploshnaya)* collectivization': the lower Volga by the autumn of 1930, the central black-earth area and the Ukrainian steppes by the autumn of 1931, the 'left bank Ukraine' by the spring of 1932, the North and Siberia by 1933.

According to evidence published in 1965,<sup>7</sup> Stalin and Molotov pressed for more rapid tempos. By contrast, others - such as Andreyev (party secretary of North Caucasus) and Shlikhter (Ukrainian commissar for agriculture) - argued for delay. They were overruled. The same source, which had access to archives and quotes them, tells that the unfortunate Yakovlev's draft included the provision that collectivization should take place 'with the preservation of private peasant ownership of small tools, small livestock, milch cows, etc., where they serve the needs of the peasant family', also that 'any step towards communes must be cautious and must depend on persuasion'. Both these limits on arbitrary excesses were crossed out by Stalin himself. It was Stalin's fault, therefore, that the decree of 5 January 1930 contained nothing to suggest to ill-prepared and confused local cadres that they were not to go ahead and collectivize all peasant

property down to chickens, rabbits, hoes and buckets. To make their confusion worse, and to ensure the wildest excesses, the head of the party's agitation and propaganda department, G. Kaminsky, declared in January 1930: 'If in some matters you commit excesses and you are arrested, remember that you have been arrested for your revolutionary deeds.'<sup>8</sup> Stalin and Molotov urged all possible speed. The local cadres appear to have understood their task as full steam ahead. It was hardly surprising that there was 'unjustified forcing of the pace'. Yakovlev warned in vain: avoid 'administrative enthusiasm, jumping ahead, excessive haste'. The party cadres were to 'lead the spontaneous growth' *{vozglavlyat' stikhiinyi rost)* of collectivization.<sup>9</sup> He and the recipients of his warning were victims of the myth and the lie. How could they lead a nonexistent spontaneous movement? How could they achieve it voluntarily when they knew that what they saw in front of them was a coercive operation in its very essence? A Soviet researcher found a report in the archives which stated the following: 'Excesses are to a considerable extent explained by the fact that regional and local organizations, fearful of right-wing deviation, preferred to overdo rather than underdo *(predpochli peregnut' chem nedognui<sup>1</sup> )?* Similarly, Kalinin reported that collectivization of all livestock was being undertaken by officials 'not of their own free will, but owing to fear of being accused of right-wing deviation'.<sup>10</sup>

Local officials announced: 'He who does not join a kolkhoz is an enemy of Soviet power.' They had 'either to achieve 100 per cent *(splosknaya)* in two days, or hand in your party card'. The assault was launched, regardless of lack of preparation, regardless of local conditions, of opinion, of everything except the great campaign. There was, one can see, some logic against going slow: peasants who knew what was coming would react by cutting down production, perhaps destroying their tools and livestock. Better get it over, and before the spring sowing.

## The Liquidation of the Kulaks as a Class

But if whole regions were to be 100 per cent collectivized, what was to be done with the kulaks? During the second half of 1929 a

debate on this question went on. It was at this point not yet clear what kind of collectivization campaign there would be, but already the issue of possible expulsion or expropriation of kulaks was posed. The majority view was against such drastic solutions. In June 1929 *Pravda* headed an article with the words: 'Neither terror nor dekulakization, but a socialist offensive on NEP lines.' Others believed in a grave danger to Soviet power in the kulaks," though one might have thought that their opposition was due in large part to the measures which were being taken against them. The debate ceased when Stalin, in his statement to the 'agrarian Marxists' at the end of December 1929, asserted and justified the principle of their 'liquidation as a class'. They were not allowed to enter the collectives, presumably in case they dominated them from within, as they had dominated many a village assembly *(skhod)* in the twenties.

Stalin's justification of these drastic measures showed how, once the opposition was silenced, he became contemptuous of serious argument. Millions were to be uprooted, a mountain of human misery created, because the grain produced and marketed by kulaks could now be replaced by collective and state farms. In consequence,

Now we are able to carry on a determined offensive against the kulaks, eliminate them as a class .. . Now dekulakization is being carried out by the masses of poor and middle peasants themselves .. . Now it is an integral part of the formation and development of collective farms. Consequently it is ridiculous and foolish to discourse at length on dekulakization. When the head is off, one does not mourn for the hair.<• There is another question no less ridiculous: whether kulaks should be permitted to join collective farms. Of course not, for they are sworn enemies of the collective farm movement.<sup>12</sup>

These harsh phrases put a stop to a painful and serious discussion of the kulaks' fate. But in fact, by a mixture of local party cadres' improvisations and semi-spontaneous quasi-looting, the process of dekulakization had begun before Stalin's words had seen the light of day.

At first there was no clear line. Local officials, acting 'at their own risk and peril', began deportations, these being linked at first

not with collectivization but with measures to enforce grain deliveries, as mentioned above. Only on 4 February 1930 was there an instruction issued from the central committee about how to treat the kulaks. Deportation did in fact begin in some regions by the end of 1929, and reached its peak in 1930-31. According to Ivnitsky a total of about 300,000 kulak households were deported (roughly 1.5 million people); he quotes other Soviet estimates ranging from 240,757 (in the official party history) to 381,026, though he thinks that this could have been due to some families being counted twice." However, some estimates of deportations are much higher. For example, Bestuzhev-Lada speaks of the deportation of 'between an eighth and a sixth of the 25 million peasant households'.<sup>14</sup> Nor do we yet know what proportion was resettled under tolerable or intolerable conditions, how many died en route or in the frozen wilderness, how many were treated as 'special resettlers' or ended up in Gulag camps, or found jobs on construction sites. There is ample evidence of appalling ill-treatment. However, Conquest's estimates of kulak deaths do appear to be too high (unlike his estimates of famine victims, of which more below).

What is quite clear is that collectivization went hand in hand with dekulakization, and dekulakization with half-disguised robbery. Poorer peasants seized their neighbours' goods in the name of the class struggle, or with no excuse at all, and the officials found themselves instructed to 'win the support of poor peasants' and were then blamed for 'allowing the distribution of kulak property among the poor and landless, in contravention of party directives'.<sup>15</sup> In fact Stalin intervened to prohibit the dispersal of kulak property among poor peasants, since this would make their subsequent collectivization more difficult by giving them something to lose. His conclusion (in February 1930) was: since dekulakization only made sense in relation to collectivization, 'Work harder for collectivization in areas in which it is incomplete'.<sup>16</sup>

Details of just who was or should have been dekulakized are still inadequately documented. Kulaks were divided into three categories. The first, described as 'actively hostile', were to be handed over to the OGPU (political police) and sent to concentration camps, while 'their families were subject to deportation to distant regions of the north, Siberia and the far east'.<sup>17</sup> The second category was described as 'the most economically potent kulak households'. These were to be deported outside the region of their residence. Finally, the third group, regarded as least noxious, were to be allowed to remain in the region but were to be given land of the worst kind. The property of the first two categories was virtually all to be confiscated. Those in the third category were to be allowed to keep essential equipment, which implied partial confiscation. On their inferior land they were to grow enough crops to meet the very large demands of the state for compulsory deliveries. The same source specifically mentions extremely high procurement quotas, and taxes rising to 70 per cent of their income. Failure to deliver produce or to pay taxes was considered as anti-Soviet activity, and was often followed by deportation. It is clear from the evidence that many of these deportations took place after 1 July 1930, so it is possible that in the end all the persons described as kulaks were in fact deported. Some details of the procedures used may be found in the archives of the Smolensk party committee. Others will be cited in succeeding pages.

It is also clear that persons who were not kulaks at all were arrested and deported. How else can one interpret a warning, to be found in the Smolensk archives, against continuing to deport so-called 'ideological' kulaks, these being plainly opponents of collectivization, rich or poor? In the archives may also be found references to kulaks being robbed of their clothes and boots, and those engaged in the process of dekulakization were known to requisition and drink any vodka found in the kulak house.<sup>18</sup> Orders were issued to stop such behaviour. But what could the government expect? There were few reliable party members in the villages and they had to utilize and encourage any ragged ruffians who could be prevailed upon to expropriate and chase out their better-off neighbours (in the name of the class struggle, of course). The party and police officials found themselves vying with each other in their dekulakizing zeal. If families were separated, children left uncared for, thousands sent on journeys with little food and water to Siberia in railway wagons, then this

seems to have been accepted as an inevitable part of the struggle to extirpate the last exploiting class. There were far more warnings against 'rotten liberalism' and sentimentality than there were against so-called excesses. There is still some dispute as to the extent to which the state was able to mobilize the anti-kulak feelings of poor peasants. Even highly critical literary and historical sources (e.g. Platonov in his *Kotlovan,* and Tendryakov in his autobiographical sketches) refer to such feelings, though attributing them to jealousy of the ignorant, drunken and incapable. Several writers have analysed the background of these petty officials and 'declassed' peasants who joined in the collectivization drive." One would like to see more evidence of the extent of spontaneous action. Some of the resolutions cited in Trifonov's book look suspiciously as if they were adopted by a party activist and rammed down the peasants' throats.

# Coercion and Temporary Retreat

The great assault was launched amid indescribable confusion. It may be, as has been argued by Olga Narkiewicz,<sup>20</sup> that some or much of collectivization remained on paper, or was confined to reports by perplexed, confused or over-enthusiastic comrades. The fact remains that it was announced by 20 February 1930 that 50 per cent of the peasants had joined collective farms, of which most were either arteli or 'communes'. The TOZ was largely discarded. Half of the peasant population in seven weeks!

Of course the threat of being labelled a kulak was widely used as a means of cajoling peasants to join. Those strongly opposed could be, and were, deported as kulaks, whatever their economic status. This was a vast exercise in coercion, and the bewildered peasants wondered what had hit them. No doubt, in the absence of adequate briefing or preparation, there were great variations in different localities. Until much more is published, we simply cannot tell. But this was indeed a 'revolution from above'.

Large numbers of conflicting instructions have been cited by Soviet analysts, which help to explain the variety of policies followed on the spot. Occasional warnings were published in the central press in January-February 1930, particularly on the undesirability of forcing collectivization in the more backward national republics. However, the warnings were sometimes ambiguously worded, and the regional party committees issued equally ambiguous orders. Thus Bogdenko quoted from the archives of the Siberian party resolutions warning severely against excesses, but demanding at the same time the completion of collectivization by that very spring. Since at the date of the 'warning' (2 February 1930) only 12 per cent of Siberia's peasants had been collectivized, the campaign inevitably continued, or even intensified. In Georgia, Armenia, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan there were said to be a few areas (ill-defined) suitable for wholesale collectivization.<sup>21</sup> Not very surprisingly, all these measures produced a sharp reaction from the peasants. Thus in Central Asia alone in the first five days of March 1930 the archives record forty-five open demonstrations *(vystupleniya)* involving 17,400 persons.<sup>22</sup> Another source refers to 'rebellions and agitations' *(tnyatezhi i volneniya),* provoked by 'kulaks and anti-Soviet elements in some places'.<sup>23</sup>

Why deport so many real or alleged kulaks? Did this not, at a blow, deprive Soviet agriculture of its most energetic and knowledgeable husbandmen? Lewin has suggested the most probable reason: to drive the middle peasants into the collectives, not only by scaring them but also by finally slamming in their faces the door to their future advance *qua* individual peasants; that door, it was demonstrated, led to kulak status and that was a fairly sure ticket to Siberia. As well as kulaks, the terminology of the time identified an even less definable category, *podkulachnik,* or kulaksupporter (or 'sub-kulak'), to whom repressive measures were also applied as and when necessary.

A Soviet writer has stated quite frankly that 'most party officials' thought that the whole point of dekulakization was its value as an 'administrative measure, speeding up tempos of collectivization',<sup>24</sup> which clearly means that it had great value as a weapon of coercion in relation to the peasantry as a whole. (Kulaks were not eligible to join the collectives!)

But chaos, despair and coercion would not get the spring sowing done. After encouraging excesses of every kind, Stalin

called a halt. With a rare effrontery, he blamed the local officials. They were 'dizzy with success'. He wrote: 'The successes of our collective farm policy are due, among other things, to the fact that it rests on the *voluntary character* of the collective-farm movement' (his emphasis). He warned against ignoring regional and national differences. He admitted that there was some 'bureaucratic decreeing' of collectivization, which lacked reality, and threats, such as depriving some peasants in Turkestan of irrigation water and manufactured goods unless they joined. In the same article, Stalin advocated the artel' form of collectives and said that within the artel' 'small vegetable gardens, small orchards, the dwelling houses, some of the dairy cattle, small livestock, poultry, etc. are *not socialized<sup>1</sup> .* He denounced the collectivization of poultry, of dwelling houses, of all cows, the removal of church bells, the 'over-zealous socializers'.<sup>25</sup>

This seemed to imply a renunciation of the coercion principle, a condemnation of what the party cadres in the villages had been so feverishly seeking to accomplish, and from the (very) highest level.

Within weeks the proportion of the peasantry collectivized fell from 55 per cent (1 March) to 23 per cent (1 June). Perplexed and demoralized officials were made scapegoats and fools. The letter of one such to Stalin has been published; Khataevich (a prominent party secretary) wrote on 6 April 1930: 'We have to listen to many complaints [from party cadres] that we have been wrongly declared to be dunderheads *[golovotyapy].* Really, instructions should have been given to the central press so that, in criticizing the deviations and excesses which took place, they should attack and mock not only local officials. Many directives on collectivizing all livestock, including the smallest types, came from Kolkhoztsentr, from the agricultural commissariat.'<sup>26</sup> He might have been trying to shame Stalin. (No prize is offered for guessing whether Khataevich survived the great purge.)

Others 'went so far as to forbid people to read Stalin's article, removed the issues of the newspapers containing the article, and so on'. Archives show that some local officials treated the new policy as a surrender to the peasants.<sup>27</sup> In fact the confusion was increased because Stalin's article was ambiguous. He called, it is

#### Coercion and Temporary Retreat 171

true, for the end of excesses and of coercion. But he also called the party to 'make firm' (*zakrepi?*) the existing level of collectivization. It was not too clear whether, and if so on what terms, peasants could be allowed to leave the farms. It took many weeks of clarification before it was finally forced upon party officials in some regions that Stalin's directive, and the resolution of the central committee which followed it, really did mean that one could walk out. The very great regional variations are shown by the following extract from a much longer table:

| Percentage of peasant households collectivized, 193c» |        |                          |        |          |        |  |  |  |  |
|-------------------------------------------------------|--------|--------------------------|--------|----------|--------|--|--|--|--|
|                                                       |        | 1 March 10 Mardh 1 April |        | 1 May    | 1 June |  |  |  |  |
| USSR Total                                            | $55-0$ | $57-6$                   | $37-3$ | ?        | 23.6   |  |  |  |  |
| North Caucasus                                        | 76.8   | $79-3$                   | 64.0   | 61.2     | 58.1   |  |  |  |  |
| Middle Volga                                          | 564    | $57-2$                   | 41.0   | 25.2     | 25.2   |  |  |  |  |
| Ukraine                                               | 62.8   | 64.4                     | 46.2   | $41-3$   | 38.2   |  |  |  |  |
| Central black-earth region                            | 81.8   | 81.5                     | 38.0   | 18.5     | $15-7$ |  |  |  |  |
| Urals                                                 | 68.8   | 70.6                     | 52.6   | 29.0     | 26.6   |  |  |  |  |
| Siberia                                               | 46.8   | 50.8                     | 42.1   | $25-4$   | 19.8   |  |  |  |  |
| Kazakhstan                                            | $37-1$ | 47-9                     | 56.6   | $44 - 4$ | 28.5   |  |  |  |  |
| Uzbekistan                                            | 27.9   | $45-5$                   | 30.8   | 9        | $27-5$ |  |  |  |  |
| Moscow province                                       | $73-0$ | 58.1                     | 12.3   | $7-5$    | $7-2$  |  |  |  |  |
| Western region                                        | $39-4$ | $37-4$                   | 150    | $7 - 7$  | 6.7    |  |  |  |  |
| Belorussia                                            | 57-9   | $55-8$                   | $44-7$ | ?        | ".5    |  |  |  |  |

*{Source:* Bogdenko (citing archive and other materials), p. 31.)

Several conclusions follow. One is the fantastic ups-and-downs in the lives of the large majority of the population of the Soviet Union within a few short months. Another is the variation in the extent to which the peasants could (or were allowed to, or wanted to) leave collectives. Thus a large number were retained, no doubt by appropriate pressures, in such key grain-surplus areas as the North Caucasus and Ukraine, whereas in some other areas collectivization was almost abandoned (see figures for Moscow, the West and Belorussia). Finally, the pressure to collectivize in some Asian republics started late and was continued well after 'Dizzy with success', as the Kazakhstan figures show - and this despite particularly emphatic warning to go carefully and slowly in the complex circumstances of these backward areas. But by the end of April there was an outflow of peasants from the half-baked kolkhozes in all areas, though at different rates, while, in the words of a Soviet scholar, 'conditions in the villages, created by excesses, were strained in the highest degree'. In many areas, a very large proportion even of poor peasants and landless labourers walked out.<sup>28</sup> It is interesting that many of them formed what were described as 'cooperatives of the simplest type' and tried to work together.<sup>29</sup> It is one of the tragedies of this period that this and other kinds of genuine cooperation were so quickly wiped out.

Yet, amid all this chaos, the heavens chose to smile. The weather was excellent, somehow most of the sowing did get done, and the 1930 harvest was better than that of 1929, and notably better than the harvest that succeeded it (see table on page 186).

Official Soviet explanations suffered from an inbuilt defect. Thus an authoritative article published in 1965 took the following line. It asked if it was wrong to press on with collectivization, and answered: 'No. Under conditions of capitalist encirclement and constant threat of intervention, it was impossible to delay for long the reconstruction of agriculture, the liquidation of counter-revolutionary kulaks.' It was admitted that in November-December 1929 Stalin exaggerated the peasants' desire to be collectivized, that he pushed officials into excessive haste and harshness; warnings that 'the Leninist voluntary principle' was being disregarded were ignored by him. In discussing whether heavy losses in livestock could have been avoided, the authors declared: they were avoidable 'if the Leninist principle of the voluntary entry of peasants into kolkhozes were undeviatingly observed'.<sup>30</sup> But this was simply not a tenable position. How can one assert the necessity of collectivization (and defend 'dekulakization' too, thirty years after the event), and solemnly assert that collectivization should have been voluntary? It could not have been done without mass coercion, and they must have known it perfectly well. Even in 1987, so considerable a scholar as Danilov, in an article in *Pravda* (9 August 1987) on 'The Origins and Lessons of Collectivization', while emphasizing that coercion was widely used to force peasants to join, and that they protested,

none the less concluded that in due course 'the peasantry became a class in socialist society, a class of collectivist toilers'. This was also Gorbachev's line, in his speech/of 2 November 1987. However, not only the abuses but also the policy of collectivization are now not merely questioned but denounced, the whole policy characterized as a brutally imposed disaster, and this both by conservative neo-slavophils such as Solzhenitsyn and by radicals of many hues, as well as (after 1987) by Gorbachev.

The old village community organizations (*obshchina*, *mir*) were formally dissolved, in areas subject to collectivization, by a decree of 30 June 1930. Their functions were taken over by the collective farms and by rural Soviets.

## The Offensive Resumed

Gradually, the peasants were forced, persuaded, cajoled, taxed, ordered, back into collective farms. The total figures for the USSR (for July) are as follows:

|                                                             | $193^\circ$ | $i93\text{ }$ | 1932      | 1933 | '934 | '935 | 1936 |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|---------------|-----------|------|------|------|------|
| Percentage of peasant                                       |             |               |           |      |      |      |      |
| households collectivized $23.6$ $52.7$ $61.5$ $64.4$ $71.4$ |             |               |           |      |      | 83.2 | 89.6 |
| Percentage of crop area                                     |             |               |           |      |      |      |      |
| collectivized                                               | 33.6        | 67.8          | 77.6 83.1 |      | 87.4 | 94.1 |      |

(Source: Sotsialisticheskoe stroiteFstvo SSSR (1936), p. 278. State farm area and household plots included.)

The full story of how it was done has yet to be told. Only some of the facts are as yet available. Peasants outside the kolkhoz were given inferior land, were loaded with extra taxes or delivery obligations, or both. There were repeated instances in 1931-2 of compulsory purchase of peasant livestock.<sup>31</sup> More areas were declared as due for all-round collectivization. Thus a decree of 2 August 1931 specified the 'cotton-growing area of Central Asia, Kazakhstan and Transcaucasia and beet-growing areas of the Ukraine and central black-earth regions' as being due for

collectivization during 1931. A long and bitter struggle raged. Peasants slaughtered livestock. Sholokhov has left a vivid picture of what happened:

Stock was slaughtered every night in Gremyachy Log. Hardly had dusk fallen when the muffled, short bleats of sheep, the death-squeals of pigs, or the lowing of calves could be heard. Both those who had joined the kolkhoz and individual farmers killed their stock. Bulls, sheep, pigs, even cows were slaughtered, as well as cattle for breeding. The horned stock of Gremyachy was halved in two nights. The dogs began to drag entrails about the village; cellars and barns were filled with meat. The cooperative sold about two hundred poods of salt in two days, that had been lying in stock for eighteen months. 'Kill, it's not ours any more ... ' 'Kill, they'll take it for meat anyway ... ' 'Kill, you won't get meat in the kolkhoz ...' crept the insidious rumours. And they killed. They ate till they could eat no more. Young and old suffered from stomachache. At dinner-time tables groaned under boiled and roasted meat. At dinner-time everyone had a greasy mouth, everyone hiccoughed as if at a wake. Everyone blinked like an owl, as if drunk from eating.<sup>32</sup>

The new farms lacked all experience in handling the collectivized livestock. Many died of neglect. The party activists from the towns sent to supervise the peasants were ignorant of agriculture, suspicious of advice. There was a crisis in 1932, owing to bad planning, low pay, crude coercion within kolkhozes, poor organization of work, and unfavourable weather.

Collectivization spread into primitive, pastoral Kazakhstan, with catastrophic results. Livestock losses were disastrous everywhere, but in Kazakhstan they virtually wiped out the sheep population.

#### **Kazakhstan, sheep and goats** *(millions)*

| 1928 | 1935 | 1940 |
|------|------|------|
| 19.2 | 2.6  | 7.0  |

*(Source: Nar.khoz. Kazakh. SSSR,i957,p.* **141.)** 

A recent article by three Kazakh historians shows that the losses among the Kazakhs were catastrophic: no less than 40 per cent of the entire Kazakh population perished in 1931-3, from hunger and disease.<sup>33</sup>

Shortages of fodder were a major cause of the reduction in livestock in some areas, notably in the Ukraine, where the state's exactions left very little on which to feed animals. In 1931 sowing suffered acutely from the appalling state of the hungry horses.<sup>34</sup>

Among methods used to force peasants back into collectives were arbitrary exactions known as 'hard obligations' *(tvyordye zadaniya)* to deliver vast quantities of grain to the state. Thus, to take one example, in September-October 1930 in the Crimea 77 per cent of all those assessed for special obligatory deliveries failed to deliver the required amount, despite what the source called 'the toughest struggle', and they were punished by sale of their property, fines, imprisonment, etc., the exact figures being cited from the archives by the source.<sup>35</sup>

Similar measures were taken in other regions. Kulaks had been largely liquidated in 1930, so the attack was now on 'kulak and better-off peasants, and was quite clearly intended, in the winter of 1930-31, to drive the peasants back into the collectives. To cite the same source again, 'This struggle grew into another wave of liquidations of kulaks as a class, which in its turn was directly linked with the new wave of collectivization in the winter and spring of 1931.' This was repeated in 1931-2, and there were also many cases reported where obstinate individual peasants' privately owned horses were compulsorily used on the collective farms.<sup>36</sup> Some victims of these measures were deported, others evaded ever-growing delivery obligations by joining collectives 'voluntarily'. Moshkov commented: 'The [exceptional] delivery obligations affected not only kulaks but also the upper strata of the middle peasants. However, in practice, they were treated differently to kulaks, being given the chance *[sic]* to enter the kolkhozes.'<sup>37</sup> Percentages rose, though detailed evidence shows that some peasants left the kolkhozes, many fleeing to work in towns and on construction sites.

## The 1932-3 Crisis

In 1932, faced with mass pillage of 'socialist' property by the demoralized and often hungry peasantry, the following draconian legislation was adopted, as an amendment to Article 58 of the Criminal Code: pilfering on the railways and of kolkhoz property (including the harvest in the fields, stocks, animals, etc.) was to be punished 'by the maximum means of social defence, shooting, or, in case of extenuating circumstances, deprivation of freedom [i.e. prison or campj for not less than ten years, with confiscation of all property'.<sup>38</sup> Even Stalin did not do such things without good reason. The fact that such laws were passed in peacetime shows that he, at least, knew he was at war. His letter to Sholokhov, which Khrushchev cited thirty years later, showed what he thought. Sholokhov had protested against excesses in the area of the Don in 1933, which had included mass arrests (also of communists), illegal seizures, excessive grain procurements; Stalin in his reply admitted that some officials, in working against 'the enemy', also hit friendly persons 'and even commit sadism'. 'But . . . the honourable cultivators of your region, and not only your region, committed sabotage and were quite willing to leave the workers and the Red Army without grain. The fact that the sabotage was silent and apparently gentle (no blood was spilt) does not change the fact that the honourable cultivators in reality were making a "silent" war against Soviet power. War by starvation, my dear comrade Sholokhov.'<sup>39</sup>

This, of course, was the point made by Stalin in his famous talk with Churchill, reported in Churchill's War Memoirs. Stalin it was who compared his struggle against the peasants with the terrible experience of the war against the Germans.

The essential problem was all too simple. Harvests were poor. The peasants were demoralized. Collective farms were inefficient, the horses slaughtered or starving, tractors as yet too few and poorly maintained, transport facilities inadequate, the retail distribution system (especially in rural areas) utterly disorganized by an over-precipitate abolition of private trade. Soviet sources speak of appallingly low standards of husbandry, with 13 per cent of the crop remaining unharvested as late as mid-September in the Ukraine, and some of the sowing being delayed till after 1 June.<sup>40</sup> Very high exports in 1930 and 1931 (see p. 180, below) depleted reserves, and the rapid growth of the urban population led to a sharp increase in food requirements in towns, while livestock products declined precipitately with the disappearance of so high a proportion of the animals. The government tried to take more out of a smaller grain crop. We now have food and fodder balances for the years 1928-32, and also *per capita* consumption figures.

Kilograms per capita

|              | Bread grains Potatoes |                     |       |                                                                  |      | Meat & lard | Butter |              |
|--------------|-----------------------|---------------------|-------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------|-------------|--------|--------------|
| 1928<br>1932 | 211.3                 | 174.4 2504<br>214.6 | 110.0 | A B A B A B<br>$^{8}7^{\circ}$ Hi' $5^{J}$ -7 24-8 2.97<br>125.0 | 16.9 | A<br>11.2   | 1.75   | 1.55<br>0.70 |
|              |                       |                     |       | $A = \text{Urban} \quad B = \text{Rural}$                        |      |             |        |              |

(*Source:* Moshkov, *Zernovaya problema v gody sploshnoi kolkktivizatsii* (Moscow University, 1966), p. 136, quoting archives.)

These figures show that urban citizens ate more bread and potatoes, in the place of meat and butter. But the peasants ate less of everything. That was the result of deliberate policy. A Soviet scholar commented that the vast increase 'in state procurements during the years of wholesale collectivization, with low levels of grain production, cannot be explained merely by errors, imperfections of planning or ... by the ignoring of the interests of agriculture and of the rural population, as is alleged by bourgeois writers in the West. The country was laying the foundation of a mighty industrial base.<sup>41</sup> Yes, but at the peasants' expense. Procurements in 1931 left many peasants and their animals with too little to eat. The Ukraine and North Caucasus suffered particularly severely. Collectivized peasants relied almost exclusively on grain distribution by kolkhozes for their bread, since money was virtually useless in this period; bread was rationed in towns and unobtainable in the country save at astronomical 'free' prices (see next chapter). These excessive

procurements threatened the very existence of the peasantry in some areas. In fact, according to Moshkov, exactions were so severe that the state had to return grain which had already been collected (21 per cent of the total in West Siberia, for instance) so that there would be some seed, food and fodder. There were tremendous variations between areas and between farms in the same area, owing to the almost incredible arbitrariness of the procurement organs.<sup>42</sup>

All this led in 1932 to trouble, pilfering, indiscipline, concealment of crops. As a result, Stalin evidently decided to relax the procurements pressure somewhat, and the procurement plan for 1932, which had originally been fixed at an impossible 29.5 million tons, was reduced to 18.1 millions, while greater freedom was offered to kolkhozes and remaining individual peasants to sell on the free market, provided the reduced delivery plan was fulfilled first.<sup>43</sup>

However, conditions grew even more chaotic. Procurement organs relaxed their pressure, and, because of the vast disparity between the low state buying prices and the very high free market prices, grain flowed into unofficial channels, and in particular into the peasants' own storehouses, since the harvest was not a good one and the food shortages of the previous winter were vividly recalled. Discipline collapsed in some areas. The reduced state procurement plan was threatened. Telegrams from Moscow had no result. In the North Caucasus the harvest was particularly poor, a mere 4.4-5.9 quintals per hectare, a miserable crop on the best land in the USSR. In this area, and in the Ukraine, evil-intentioned persons 'succeeded in awakening private-property feelings, in diverting many kolkhoz peasants from the correct path and poisoning them with individualism. Some kolkhozes in the North Caucasus and the Ukraine ceased to come under the organizing influence of the party and the state.'<sup>44</sup> (These were very strong words indeed for a Soviet author, indicating a kind of rebellion.)

Furthermore, the 1932 harvest seems to have been substantially overstated in official claims. According to evidence collected by M. Tauger,<sup>45</sup> it was perhaps barely 50 million tons, against the published 69.7, so that even the reduced procurement quotas left

little for the peasants and their animals, especially in areas of traditional grain-surpluses, such as the Ukraine, the North Caucasus and the Lower Volga. So the reduced procurement targets proved too high.

This led to severe counter-measures, which in turn led to the great tragedy: the famine of 1933. 'All forces were directed to procurements.' The law of 7 April 1932, which, as we have seen, provided for the death penalty for pilfering foodstuffs in kolkhozes, was used against those who 'with evil intent refused to deliver grain for [state] procurements. This particularly affected socially alien groups. Organizers of sabotage in kolkhozy were handed over to the courts, including degenerate communists and kulak-supporters among the kolkhoz leadership. In accordance with the central committee directives, regions which did not satisfactorily fulfil procurement plans ceased to be supplied with commodities .. . Illegally distributed or pilfered grain was confiscated. Several thousands *of* counter-revolutionaries, kulaks and saboteurs were deported .. *. ,46* The party was purged. In the North Caucasus 43 per cent of all investigated party members were expelled. There were some appalling excesses. Stalin declared, in a speech to the politbureau on 27 November 1932, that coercion was justified against 'certain groups of kolkhozes and peasants', that they had to be dealt a 'devastating blow'. Kaganovich announced that rural communists were guilty of being 'pro-kulak, of bourgeois degeneration'.<sup>47</sup> Mass arrests went beyond all bounds; half of local party secretaries in the North Caucasus were expelled on the orders of Kaganovich. 'All grain without exception was removed, including seed and fodder, and even that already issued to peasants as an advance [payment for workdays].'<sup>48</sup> The result was 'an extremely grave food shortage in many southern areas', and a 'heavy loss of livestock', which took a long time to repair. Much the same happened in the Ukraine. A local party secretary commented: 'Without administrative pressure on the peasant we will not get the grain, so it does not matter if we overdo things a little.'<sup>49</sup> In January 1933 a more orderly system of compulsory procurements was decreed, based on acreage sown, replacing the purely arbitrary (though nominally voluntary) system of *kontraktatsiya.* But the damage had already

been done. The famine, part and consequence of the struggle described above, was terrible.

Grain procurements did indeed increase, as the following figures demonstrate:

|               | State grain procurements |      |                                                               |      |      |
|---------------|--------------------------|------|---------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|
|               |                          |      | (millions of tons)                                            |      |      |
| 1928          | 1929                     | 1930 | $193^1$                                                       | 1932 | 1933 |
| 10.8          | 16.1                     | 22.1 | 22.8                                                          | 18.5 | 22.6 |
|               | 1964), PP- 175.177)      |      | (Source: Malafeyev, Istoriya tsenoobrazovaniya v SSSR (Moscow |      |      |
| Grain exports |                          |      |                                                               |      |      |
|               |                          |      | (millions of tons)                                            |      |      |
| $19^7-8$      | 1929                     | 1930 | 1931                                                          | 1932 | 1933 |

5.06

1.73

1.69

(Source: Soviet trade returns.)

 $\bullet$   $l_{\mathcal{O}_{\alpha}}$ 

4.76

0.029

We now know a great deal more about the number of 'surplus deaths' (from famine and from diseases which weakened bodies could not resist) in these years, from work by Maksudov, Wheatcroft and, of course, Conquest, as well as by a number of Soviet authors.<sup>50</sup> If, as one must, one includes the Kazakhstan disaster, a total death-roll of 7 million for the period 1931-3 seems likely to be near the truth, the demographic loss being higher because all evidence shows that births showed a steep decline in the hard years. The Ukraine suffered severely, as did the Lower Volga and North Caucasus. I do not agree with Conquest about Stalin's motive: it was surely to strike a 'devastating blow' at peasants in grain-surplus areas, many of whom were Ukrainian, rather than at Ukrainians, many of whom were peasants. (Neither explanation is a consolation for the millions that died.) It was a dreadful time, as historians of every school concur. This was a man-made famine, unlike the 'natural' famine of 1921, and, unlike in 1921, no relief measures were taken; the very fact of famine was shrouded in secrecy for many decades.

In his autobiography Koestler described a visit to Kharkov at this period. As well as hunger there was a breakdown of electricity. Newspapers failed to appear. When they were eventually printed, they mentioned neither food shortages nor the power breakdown. Clearly, historians who believed that there is no fact without documentary proof were hard put to it to describe the events of the period.

Finally to wind up this deplorable story, the 9 million peasants left outside collectives in 1934 were duly attacked. They were, it seems, cold-shouldered and treated as hostile elements, but allowed to survive. This toleration was treated as a 'right-wing deviation'. On 2 June 1934, at a conference of officials on collectivization, Stalin demanded — and this is quoted from the archives - that 'in order to ensure the uninterrupted growth of collectivization, there should be a tightening of the tax screw *(nalogovyi press)* on the individual peasants'.<sup>51</sup> Yet this article ends with the still-compulsory myth (this in 1964!): 'The multimillion peasantry became even more convinced of the incontrovertible superiority of socialist agriculture, of the mighty kolkhoz system.'

The organization structure of kolkhozes was at first quite confused. Stalin laid down that the artel' was to be predominant, and in 1931 91.7 per cent of collectivized land was within arteli (4.7 per cent TOZ, 3.6 per cent communes). However, internal arrangements were exceedingly haphazard, peasants' rights were ill-defined, their incomes uncertain not only in quantity (they remained that until 1966) but also in their nature. How was payment to be made? The June 1931 plenum of the party decided that payment must be in accordance with work done, and not per head or per 'mouth'. A rough-and-ready system of piece-rates was to be devised. This gradually became the *trudoden<sup>1</sup>* (workday unit), which was 'legalized' by decree of 5 July 1932, and more closely defined in January 1933. These and other rules became ultimately embodied in the model charter of kolkhozes, adopted in 1935, of which more in Chapter 9.

## **Party Control and the MTS**

Kolkhozes were under the close supervision and tutelage of the party. The party sent out 25,000 urban activists to act as supervisors, farm chairmen, political officers. Their ignorance of rural questions and misunderstanding of the peasant mind contributed to the errors and excesses of the period. A key element in the control mechanism was provided by the procurement organs *(Zagotzerno,* and others), but perhaps the most important were the Machine Tractor Stations (MTS), which require more detailed examination.

The 'ancestor' of MTS was a 'tractor column', a state-run tractor service, rendered to individual peasants as well as to the few collective or state farms, in the Odessa province. The MTS were organized after a decree of 5 June 1929. At first they were run as a kind of joint enterprise, with peasants buying shares in *Traktortsentr,\*<sup>2</sup>* but they became fully fledged state-controlled organizations. It was decided during the process of collectivization to give the MTS such tractors and other power-driven machines as were available, and to make of them a kind of compulsory service agency, while simultaneously stressing their role as supervisors (decree of 1 February 1930). In January 1933 the party plenum decided to create political departments in the MTS and state farms, of which more in a moment. So from the first the M TS developed into a unique combination of providing both tractor-power and political-economic guidance. Their contractual relationships with kolkhozes had been based, since February 1933, on payments in kind, usually in the form of a percentage of the harvest. Perhaps for this reason 1933 saw the birth of a statistical device, 'biological yield', which, as will be shown later, overstated the harvest. The state's share, received via payments in kind for the work of the MTS as well as by direct procurements, was increased by this device. Tractor production rose substantially in these years, but at first the net effect was merely to replace the haulage power of horses slaughtered during collectivization.

The political departments of the MTS were, on the face of it,

another means of exerting pressure on the peasants. Yet in a welldocumented paper on the subject, the Soviet historian Zelenin shows that things did not always work out that way. The political departments were responsible to the party's central committee, and were not under the party secretary of the district which they operated, a circumstance which caused much friction. Each political department included a representative of the OGPU (political police). The head of the department was, *ex officio,* deputy director of the MTS and charged with vast powers over production plans and procurement activities. These heads were specially selected, largely volunteers. Zelenin's evidence shows that, when they reached the villages early in 1933, they saw with their own eyes the dreadful effects of the excesses described above. They talked to the peasants, they argued, they learnt. Being told to bring some order into the situation in agriculture, they quickly realized that excessive procurements must be cut down, that peasants must be allowed adequate incentives. They found themselves instructed instead to purge the kolkhozes of subversive elements - for Stalin's line was that the enemy, disguised as storemen, bookkeepers, agronomists, was engaged in 'silent sapping'. So it was reported by the political department that, in 1933, in twenty-four provinces of the USSR 34.4 per cent of storemen, 25 per cent of bookkeepers, etc. were dismissed, and 'many were accused of wrecking'.<sup>53</sup> Many political officers came into conflict with their colleagues, who were too apt to arrest and dismiss, as archive material quoted by Zelenin shows. In the end, many political departments began to defend peasant interests, and in particular to protest against excessive grain procurements, especially when the authorities sought to increase delivery plans over and above the norms supposedly laid down by the compulsory procurement decree of January 1933 (a practice which continued). In the June 1934 plenum of the central committee, the head of the grain procurement organization accused local officials, including the heads of political departments, of 'antistate tendencies' in seeking to diminish the state's exactions. Such prominent party leaders as S. Kossior, P. Postyshev, I. Vareikis, also accused the political departments of this. Some political officers had the audacity to draw up food-and-fodder

balances to prove that the state's exactions were excessive, and were sharply condemned: such balances were, it seems, 'kulak tendencies *[sic],* directed to the breach of the law on grain deliveries'.<sup>54</sup> In November 1934 the political departments of the M TS were abolished. Though there remained a deputy-director (political) of the MTS, he no longer had a department, or any special powers *vis-a-vis* the local party organization.

State farms *(sovkhozy)* were, at first, greatly favoured by the regime. However, their high cost and inefficiency led to a change of policy. This is easy to understand if one bears in mind the principal reason for collectivization, which was procurement of produce *at minimum cost.* In the case of kolkhozes, high cost and inefficiency meant simply that the peasant members were very poorly paid, since they divided among themselves whatever was available, with no guaranteed minimum of any kind. But a state farm worker was a wage-earner, and losses made by such farms had to be met out of the budget. The 'ideological' superiority of state farms none the less led to a sharp rise in their numbers, the area sown increasing from 1.7 million hectares in 1928 to 13.4 million in 1932 and 16.1 million in 1935. It declined thereafter, and state farms did not play a major role in Soviet agriculture until after Stalin's death. (More about state farms in Chapter 9.)

### The Free Market and Private Plots

How did the peasants survive the confusion and hardship of the 'revolution from above'? They could not have survived without the toleration, in and after 1930, of some private food-growing, and, after the initial excesses of super-collectivization, they were allowed some domestic animals. Great bitterness was caused by the compulsory acquisition by kolkhozes of livestock, especially cows, under conditions in which the collectives had neither the buildings nor the knowledge or experience for looking after big herds (which have to be kept indoors during the winter), and when milk for peasant children could only be provided from their own cows, in the absence of any alternative source of supply (this remained the case, in most of Russia, even in 1971, let alone in

1931). Gradually a sort of *modus vivendi* emerged, and Stalin himself began to make promises to help peasants acquire cows.ss But the drastic decline in the livestock population made this a rather distant project, and many could manage to keep only goats, which some bitterly described (in whispers) as 'Stalin's little cows'. However, peasant rights became more clearly defined, and gradually there developed an understanding as to the permissible upper limits of collective peasants' private holdings, which emerged finally in the model statute, described in Chapter 9.

The question arose of the right to sell freely after meeting the state's procurement quota, the latter having the legal status of a tax levied on the collective, on peasant members and (more heavily) on the surviving individual peasants. There was sporadic interference with the functioning of any free market, while private traders were being driven out and the process of collectivization completed, and many cases of closing all markets were reported. On 6 May 1932 a decree allowed free sales of grain by kolkhozes and collectivized peasants after the state's procurement plan had been fulfilled. Four days later the same rights of selling in 'markets and bazaars' were extended also to livestock products. On 20 May the tax levied on such sales at markets (this trade never wholly ceased) was lowered, and the right to sell at free prices reasserted. In this decree it was stated that the opening of private shops, and private dealers, were to be barred. On 22 August of the same year, 'speculators and dealers' were to be sent to 'a concentration camp for from five to ten years', to cite the words of the decree.<sup>56</sup> These were the final nails in the coffin of the NEP concept of free trade. Peasant trade was different, in so far as it consisted of sales by the producers of their own surplus produce, and so did not constitute earning a living by trade. Private trade, i.e. buying and selling for profit, was not in fact legalized until March 1991.

In 1933, which was a very difficult year, the right to market grain was more strictly defined: only 'after fulfilling the procurement plan for the whole republic, *krai,* province, and making full provision for seed'.<sup>57</sup> In these years kolkhoz trade was still on the edge of semi-illegality, since arbitrary exactions of all kinds for the needs of the state could happen at any time, with accusations of speculation and 'kulak' behaviour. This, as well as the acute shortages prevailing, caused an extremely steep rise in free-market prices, which will be documented later in this chapter.

Agriculture reached its lowest point in 1933, and then began a painful recovery, the story of which can be left aside for the present.

## Some Statistics

The harvest and livestock statistics of the period were as follows (the 'biological yield' figures, which distorted Soviet data from 1933 until after Stalin's death, are also given, since they were used to falsify reality and to facilitate excessive procurements):

|                                       | 1928  | 1929  | 1930  | 1931 | 1932  | 1933 | 1934 | 1935 |
|---------------------------------------|-------|-------|-------|------|-------|------|------|------|
| Grain harvest, real<br>(million tons) | 73.3  | 71.7  | 83.5  | 69.5 | 69.6* | 68.4 | 67.6 | 75.0 |
| Grain harvest,                        |       |       |       |      |       |      |      |      |
| biological (million                   |       |       |       |      |       |      |      |      |
| tons)                                 | —     | —     | —     | —    | —     | 89.8 | 89.4 | 90.1 |
| Cattle (million                       |       |       |       |      |       |      |      |      |
| head)                                 | 70.5  | 67.1  | 52.5  | 47.9 | 40.7  | 38.4 | 42.4 | 49-3 |
| Pigs                                  | 26.0  | 20.4  | 13.6  | 14.4 | 11.6  | 12.1 | 174  | 22.6 |
| Sheep and goats                       | 146.7 | 147.0 | 108.8 | 77.7 | 52-1  | 50.2 | 5i-9 | 61.1 |

\* The 1932 harvest figure appears to have been overstated and may have been nearer 50 (see p. 178 above).

*(Sources: Sotsialisticheskoe stroitel'stvo, 1936,* pp. 342-3, 354; Moshkov, *Zernovay problema v gody sploshnoi kollektivizasii* (Moscow University, 1966), p. 226.)

Did collectivization in fact contribute to capital accumulation? This has been the subject of controversy, and the reader may be referred particularly to works by James R. Millar and Michael Ellman.<sup>58</sup> It has been correctly pointed out that the real agricultural surplus cannot be measured simply by the volume of sales off the farm; industrial inputs into agriculture and the village must be deducted, and a surplus so defined then depends decisively on price. Evidence is then quoted, especially that presented by the Soviet economic historian Barsov, to show that prices did not move adversely to the village in the years following 1928, when allowance is made for the high free-market prices. Barsov also purports to prove that when valued in 1913 or 1928 prices, or in labour-values, the flow of goods in the two directions did not show any significant rise in the surplus extracted from the village; the contrary is true in some years. From this it may seem to follow that the increased accumulation of capital in the period 1928-37 came not from agriculture but from the urban sector (including former peasants who had migrated to the towns).

This is a most complex subject, which deserves more thorough examination than it can receive here. It is certainly true that the state procured less than it originally intended, out of a much lower output, while having to supply extra inputs to offset losses in draught animals. It is also true that the urban sector also bore sacrifices, that workers' living standards declined. However, apart from serious doubts as to the validity of Barsov's figures, there is an important sense in which the data are misleading in principle; thus the prices of 1913 and 1928, let alone labour-values, bear absolutely no relationship to the relative scarcities of the early thirties. What is the 'value' of bread grain to a starving peasant? The price which ruled in 1928, when there was plenty of bread? The labour-time required to produce it? Another way of expressing the same point is to say that massive use of coercion was needed to take away grain and other products which, as a result of collectivization, had become acutely scarce, and were consequently valued much higher (by peasants and by consumers) than the price paid for them by the state. Secondly, prices in the early thirties had little meaning when goods were so often unobtainable. A ration card, a pass to a special shop, were more important than money in a hard year such as 1933 in which, it should be noted, millions *of peasants* starved. Finally, the evidence on the volume of sales of industrial goods in these years is of very doubtful validity. An intelligent observer, whose reports are in the British Foreign Office archives, noted that when, following a 1932 decree on sending more consumers' goods to villages, he visited rural shops, he found that deliveries had consisted largely of vodka and cosmetics.<sup>59</sup>

So was collectivization actually counterproductive, i.e. did it impede rather than facilitate industrialization in these years? Millar takes the first view, Ellman the second. It seems unnecessary for us to take sides in this debate, important though the issue undoubtedly is, especially as one is conscious that more research is needed.

In looking back at the impact of those years on agriculture and the peasants, critical comment is superfluous. The events described cast a deep shadow over the life of the countryside, of the whole country, for many years thereafter. Much more evidence has recently become available, and this chapter is no more than a bare summary of such evidence. It is to the credit of Soviet scholarship that so much has been made available, after so prolonged a silence (for which the scholars cannot be blamed) about what by common consent must be a painful period, of which many men in high places must have felt ashamed in their hearts.