### **I**

Governance and ethics are intertwined. A government functions within certain broad moral and ethical parameters, integrally linked with the sociological foundation of the polity in which it is articulated. The importance of ethics in governance has acquired a significant place in contemporary theoretical discussion, more so because of the growing decadence in governmental practices largely owing to a decline of ethical values in public administration which is perhaps singularly responsible for the rise of 'corruption' in a virulent form. The possible reason is located in the overgrowth of the state through which bureaucracy has become a 'rent- seeker', ignoring its Benthamite role of being 'a benevolent guardian'. The World Bank- sponsored solution is to downsize the state and allow free play of the market and civil society – consolidating the ideology of neo- liberalism. Whether this is an appropriate strategy for the developing and also underdeveloped nations is a challenging question that needs to be addressed, underlining the importance of 'public' in public administration. This is a challenge that involves a thorough analysis of the circumstances and also the outcome in a historical context because the dwindling of ethics in governance is not an overnight phenomenon, but an offshoot of a long- term process.

 It is difficult to conclusively define the term ethics, which is usually a context driven conceptualization. Nonetheless, on the basis of the literature on administrative ethics, one can derive a meaningful definition of what ethics is all about. One of the prominent thinkers F M Marx, in his 1949 article in *American Political Science Review*, sought to conceptualize the idea by linking it with the prevalent political ideology that the machinery of government is expected to translate into social reality. Public administration is thus an instrument in attaining the purpose of the political order. 'The core of administrative ethics [thus] lies', argued Marx, 'in the ideas that nourish the political system', implying thereby that the administrators are not free to follow their own personal values in the course of their professional activities, but are obligated to be 'conscious agents of a democratic community' and to direct their action 'toward promoting the healthy growth of a free society dedicated to the common good'.1 Ethics is therefore a set of standards that society places on itself to articulate its responses

to societal needs. Mere adoption of rules cannot inject ethics in human behaviour; what is thus required in firmly promoting a culture of integrity in administration is also a set of mechanisms to execute rules and regulations by putting in place competent disciplinary agencies to investigate violations and deviations, and also to impose sanctions quickly.

 Corruption is an important manifestation of the failure of ethics. The word – 'corrupt' – is derived from the Latin word *corruptus*, meaning 'to break or destroy'. The word 'ethics' is from the original Greek term 'ethikos', meaning 'arising from habit'. In defining corruption, the idea of ethics appears very critical. Although corruption represents 'deviation' from established norms, there is hardly a universal definition because of its contextual roots. Nonetheless, the definition provided by Carl J Friedrich seems to have captured its complex texture. For him, corruption is

a kind of behaviour which deviates from the norm actually prevalent or believed to prevail in a given context. . . . It is a deviant behaviour associated with a particular motivation, namely that of private gain at public expense. . . . Such private gain may be monetary one, and in the minds of the general public it usually is, but it may take other forms.2

Corroborating what Friedrich suggests, a recently articulated definition further underlines the characteristics of corruption by stating that corruption

involves the distortion or subversion of the exercise of public office so that it meets partisan or sectional rather than public interests, so that some people gain who should not and some lose (or fail to benefit) who should not.3

Key to a rising grip of corruption, as is evident in this conceptualization, is declining ethics in public life which encourages distortion of values. Public office becomes a space to gratify one's corrupt design and the system loses its vitality to combat tendencies striking at its foundation.

 It is unfortunate that in India corruption has, for many, become a matter of habits, ranging from grand corruption involving persons in high places to retail corruption touching the everyday life of common people. The anti- corruption interventions so far made are seen to be ineffectual and there is widespread public cynicism about them. The interventions are seen as mere posturing without any real intention to bring the corrupt to book. They are also seen as handy weapons for partisan, political use to harass opponents. Corruption is so deeply entrenched in the system that most people regard corruption as inevitable and any effort to fight it as futile. The cynicism is spreading so fast that it bodes ill for our democratic system itself.

In any discussion of ethics in governance, corruption invariably forms an integral part. Containment of corruption, which is endemic in developing countries for historically ordained socio- political reasons, is thus a foremost administrative concern. In some form or other, corruption exists in every country regardless of the level of economic development; the degree may differ and its expanse may be limited. In developing countries, corruption seems to have become integrally connected with public life, which is certainly a source of irritation for everybody, and yet serious efforts at combatting corruption always receive relentless opposition. This is, however, not paradoxical because corruption is considered to be an enabling mechanism for works that cannot be accomplished otherwise. What is hypocritical is the prevalence of corruption and also a strong opposition towards mitigating its debilitating socio- political effects. Being aware of how corruption is weakening public administration, public authorities undertake meaningful steps to address the concern, which may sometime work miracles though gradually fizzle out on most occasions since mere institutional mechanisms may not always be adequate to effectively contain corruption. What is thus critically important is the citizens' involvement in governance; they should be vigilant enough to catch the wrong- doers and those who tend to bend rules to extend favour in exchange for material gains. This is easier said than done. Nonetheless, there is a clear sense in this endeavour which, in course of time, is likely to create an environment in which those who indulge in corrupt practices for personal benefit will be forced to behave because of the public vigilance.

 What is corruption then? One of the most persuasive definitions, which is also easy to comprehend, happens to be the one given by the World Bank. Corruption is, to quote the World Bank, 'the abuse of public funds and or office for private or political gain'.4 This confirms the contention that corruption is a failure in governance. The 1999 report on Human Development in South Asia thus contends that

corruption is one of the most damaging consequences of poor governance. It undermines investment and economic growth, decreases the resources for human development goals, deepens the extent of poverty, subverts the judicial system and undermines the legitimacy of the state. In fact, when corruption becomes entrenched, it can devastate the entire economic, political and social fabric of a country.5

As experiences in South Asia reveal, corruption has a spiralling effect on society, which gradually loses its vitality. The state becomes a hapless entity and is meant to serve the powerful who have appropriated the system to pursue and fulfil private ends. Important institutions of governance remain peripheral as far as the majority is concerned; they are reduced to mere institutional functionaries that are there to uphold the interests of a selected few. As the Human Development report, while underlining the distressing impact of 'entrenched corruption' on human life, further adumbrates by stating,

when corruption becomes entrenched and systemic, its negative influence on economic and social development multiplies. Trust between the state and its citizens collapses. Basic laws and contracts are not honoured. Vast amounts of resources are spent seeking bribes and corrupt gains rather than engaging in productive activity.6

The outcome is devastating for the poor in South Asia who hardly have a voice in governance except during an election when they have, at least in principle, the authority to decide the fate of those involved in electoral battle; otherwise, they remain mere numbers adding to the demographic strength of the countries in the region. This has been very succinctly stated by the 1999 Human Development Report by suggesting that

despite a marked improvement in the lives of a few, there are many in South Asia who have been forgotten by formal institutions of governance. These are the poor, the downtrodden, and the most vulnerable of society, suffering from acute deprivations on account of their income, caste, creed, gender or religion. Their fortunes have not moved with those of the privileged few and this in itself is deprivation of a distressing nature.7

This is the stark reality in South Asia, and there has been a consensus that corruption is primarily a symptom of poor governance. Unless corruption is conclusively tackled, it will lead to 'an era of entrenched corruption'.8 How to address this menace? As per the 1999 Human Development Report,

unless the wider institutional environment that breeds corruption is radically transformed – through economic, electoral, judicial, parliamentary and bureaucratic reforms that restore people's trust in government, specific anticorruption agendas are unlikely to meet with success.9

On the basis of the above discussion, two basic arguments can now be made: first, poor government breeds, inter alia, corruption. One of the major factors for poor governance happens to be the weakening of the institutions that are considered critical in fulfilling the cardinal aims of governance. The reasons for such institutional decline are to be located in the peculiar unfolding of the socioeconomic and political processes of the region, during both colonialism and its aftermath. The second argument which, in fact, is implicit in the suggestion that the 1999 Human Development Report made while seeking to find a way out relates to the idea that a corruption- free society is not a utopia, but can be brought about by radical institutional changes in governance through popular movements, involving people cutting across social, economic and political barriers. The idea is not without substance, as innumerable illustrations can be cited to show that anti- corruption movements in India and elsewhere have led to significant changes in governance. The acceptance of the 2005 *Right to Information Act* which was constantly demanded as an effective means to combat corruption is illustrative here; there is no doubt that the campaign, led by the Mazdoor Kishan Shakti Sangathan since the late 1980s, resulted in the replacement of the archaic colonial *Official Secrets Act* of 1923 by an empowering *Right to Information Act* in 2005.

# **III**

Corruption seems to be pervasive in administration as bureaucracy is usually dubbed as 'a rent- seeking organization'. This is not a modern phenomenon. In his *Arthasastra*, a text that is traced back to the fourth century BC, Kautilya provided a graphic illustration of corruption by saying that

just as it is impossible not to taste the honey (or the poison) that finds itself at the tip of the tongue, so it is impossible for a government servant not to eat up at least a bit of king's revenue.10

For Kautilya, corruption and administration are integrally linked. In common parlance, corruption means embezzlement of any kind that is not justified by norms, practices or rules. This also includes the use of public office for private gains, whereby an official responsible for public office is engaged in activities for private enrichment. The Mughal administration was also sensitive to corruption and steps were devised to contain corrupt practices. In fact, embezzlement of public funds by those associated with governance was considered to be a serious offence that always invited stringent punishment. The system, however, collapsed when administration became terribly chaotic which was often the case especially during the transition from one administrative control to another. Nonetheless, that corruption drew adequate attention during the Mughal administration is beyond question. As Carl J Friedrich underlines, corruption is 'deviant behaviour' justifying private gain at public expense. Corruption is thus a transactional evil where a favour is extended in exchange for private benefits.

 With this definition in view, this segment is devoted to analysing the corrosive effects of corruption in administration in two interrelated parts: on the one hand, the discussion shall concentrate on the possible roots of corruption in India; later, on the other hand, it deals with those instruments and mechanisms that India has evolved to combat corruption. This is not, however, to suggest that the entire administration is corrupt and vitiated; instead, the argument is couched in the form of queries relating to the insidious impact of the desire for private gains at the cost of taxpayers' money. It is difficult to carry out an exhaustive study of the phenomenon, given the space constraint. Hence our aim is to flag up the basic issues that we consider critical in conceptualizing corruption in the context of a developing country, such as India, which is simultaneously a booming economy as well.

 Corruption is ubiquitous in India. In 2016, India ranked 76th out of 168 countries in the Transparency International's Corruption Preparation Index, along with Thailand, Brazil, Zambia and Burkina Faso, among others. In a study

conducted by Transparency International, it was found that more that 62 per cent of Indians had paid a bribe or influenced the officer to extract work in public offices successfully.12 Most of the largest sources of corruption are entitlement programmes and social spending schemes, attached to the central government, including the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and the National Rural Health Mission. The other important source of corruption involves the transport industry, especially the vehicles that are used to ferry goods across the states, which are forced to pay cash in bribes annually to numerous regulatory and police stops on the interstate highways. This is an open secret and nobody seems to feel bad about it; owners of these vehicles willingly pay to ease their movement from one state to another.

 While explaining the growing incidence of corruption in India, the Second Administrative Reforms Commission refers to three factors which are also rooted in India's historical past in colonialism: first, colonialism had created a mindset that had a propensity to exercise power arbitrarily; second, the prevalence of a huge unorganized sector in which those who work are not conscious enough to demand their rights while working – such a workforce can easily be manipulated by those who hold positions of authority in public offices; third, the factors responsible for a corruption- prone mindset are over- regulation, complicated taxes and licensing systems, numerous government departments with uncontrolled discretionary power, monopoly by government- controlled institutions on certain goods and service delivery and lack of transparent laws and processes.

 How to combat corruption? This is too difficult a question to respond in categorical terms because, so long as the mindset remains unchallenged, no institutional/legal mechanism is adequate to uproot corruption and its myriad sources from the polity. However, attempts have constantly been made to weed out the roots of corruption. India since independence has set up more than 45 committees and commissions to strengthen administrative capabilities by making the administrative machinery efficient and accountable. What began with the 1946 Tottenham Committee report, which also focused on the decline of discipline in civil service, was reiterated by the 1948 Economy Committee which was appointed to review the increase in the civil expenditure of the central government since 1938–9 and to make recommendation for the promotion of true economy in the administration 'by the elimination of unnecessary, wasteful or extravagant expenditure'. The argument was forcefully made by N Gopalaswami Ayyanger in his 1949 *Report on Reorganization of the Government Machinery*, which recommended the establishment of an Organization and Method (O & M) division to be made responsible for continued efficiency in the government offices and public services and methods of transaction of public business. This recommendation did not receive a favourable response till the appointment of another committee in 1950 under the stewardship of A D Gorwala. Among the important recommendations, made by the Gorwala Committee, two stand out: (a) creation of an O & M branch in government and a board of two members to be set up to provide necessary drive and direction to administration; and (b) training aiming at precision and surety in the conduct of business and improvement of staff morale and also to encourage the civil servant to see his work in its widest context and to persevere with his/her own educational development.

 In pursuance of the objective of establishing a corruption- free administration, Jawaharlal Nehru, the then Indian premier, set up a Corruption Commission with J B Kripalani, Paul Appleby and A D Gorwala as members. While Gorwala prepared a report on the efficient conduct of state enterprises, Paul Appleby in his *Public Administration in India* (1953) commented on the sources of maladministration in India by stating that

even as it is, the structure of government diffuses responsibility, it retards action before the fact that insufficiently evaluates its course after the fact. There are on the whole too much scrutiny and too many impediments to action before the fact and too little systematic review and scrutiny of action after the fact. The structure of administration restricts and inhibits formal delegation. But there is more unconscious than conscious delegation. The view of the man at the bottom of hierarchy who writes the first note on a file is all important in most instances. Imperfect and insufficient conscious delegation is an important factor in making the heavy overload that grievously burdens the ministers and secretaries.

In Appleby's perception, the administrative ills in India are largely due to internal weaknesses that can be meaningfully addressed by streamlining the staff agencies within the administration. In other words, an effective system of decentralization of administrative authority is necessary to take care of most of the problems crippling Indian administration. While Appleby expressed concern at the declining of efficiency within administration due to 'imperfect delegation', the Shanthanam Committee that submitted its report in 1964 examined the extent of corruption in India and came to the conclusion that corruption was not confined to the lower ranks of public service; the number of cases in which the higher rank officers were involved was alarming. The Committee thus recommended the setting up of the Central Vigilance Commission to look into charges of corruption against civil servants. A well- equipped institutionalized agency, the Commission is also authorized to punish deviant public personnel if it is executed through due process of law.

 There is also no dearth of legalized mechanisms to address corruption and corrupt practices in administration. Of all the preventive steps, one of the most important is the 2005 *Right to Information Act* that legally makes it binding on government officials to provide information requested by citizens or face punitive action. This Act has considerably empowered the citizens, allowing them access to information that had until then remained the exclusive domain of the government officials under the archaic colonial *Official Secrets Act* of 1923. The other empowering act happens to be the Right to Public Service legislation that has already been enacted in 19 constituent states of India. By providing

time- bound delivery of services for various public services rendered by the government to citizens and devising mechanisms for punishing the errant public servant, this act has been effective in containing corruption and enhancing transparency in public dealings and the accountability of those involved in public service delivery. Similarly, the *Prevention of Money Laundering Act* of 2002 is also an attack on corrupt public servants by authorizing the government to confiscate properties that are disproportionate to his/her income.

 One of the major interventions in this regard was the adoption of the 2011 *Whistle Blowers Protection Act*, which provides a mechanism to investigate alleged corruption and abuse of power by public servants and also to extend protection to those exposing deviant behaviour of government officials getting private gain out of public responsibilities. Of all these mechanisms, the institution of *Lokpal* for the country as a whole and *Lakayuktas* for the states is perhaps a significant endeavour towards creating a corruption- free India. The *Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act* of 2013, which came into force in 2014, provides the establishment of Ombudsman- type institutions in India to enquire into the allegations of corruption against public functionaries. The *Lokayuktas* at the state have come into being in several states, though the appointment of a *Lokpal* for the country as whole remains a distant goal, because of the disagreement among the political parties which are not favourably inclined to create a mega- agency to combat corruption regardless of political consequences.

 As shown, institutions for the eradication of corruption are in place in India. Yet, the incidence of corruption does not seem to have declined to a noticeable extent. The scene is disappointing, but not disheartening since the public voice against corruption is too powerful to ignore and forces the public authorities to address the issue. The outcome is the appointment of various commissions/committees, which may not be as effective as they are made out to be; nonetheless, the effort itself is worthwhile, since it exposes the nature and also the pernicious impact of corruption on governance. What is evident is the fact that, in combatting corruption, the role of public authority is as significant as that of an alert public. In fact, they are intermingled: a vigilant public acts as a strong shield against distortions in governance. In other words, constant public monitoring of governance is a deterrent for those in power that will certainly act as an antidote to corruption. Implicit here is the idea that the available institutional protections do not seem to be effective by themselves; they become meaningful in the presence of an alert public that cannot be easily bypassed.

 Corruption in administration is an issue that can never be addressed conclusively for three reasons: first, this is a pathological syndrome, the root of which can be traced back to the colonial days when exercise of power by those at the helm of affairs was far more arbitrary than what is visible now. With its long reign, not only did the colonial state authoritatively consolidate such a design, it succeeded simply because the forces of opposition did not appear to be strong enough; second, the trend continued in independent India with the dysfunctional vigilance machinery, breakdown of organizational integrity, declining importance of accountability in public authorities, logjam of procedural chaos and

vitiated environment of work;13 third, corruption is rooted and also flourishes because of a mindset that challenges neither institutional nor individual delinquency; well entrenched and effective as a mechanism, corruption seems to have become integral to our governance and hence it is better to accept rather than quibble since the situation will not change soon.

 Is corruption inevitable? If that be so, the discussion on integrity in administration seems to be irrelevant. In view of the growing consolidation of public opinion against corruption in India, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to sweep the issue under the carpet. A vibrant democracy along with an alert citizenry is perhaps the best shield against corruption. There is thus a need to develop a counter mindset to scuttle the other mindset which champions an immutable character of Indian administration that cannot function unless couched in corrupt practices. The argument that administration is static defies the fundamental laws of social change; this is further reinforced in the light of the recent happenings in India in which mass energy was released to integrate citizens with governance. The transformation is visible with the involvement of the stakeholders, including the press, which has played a very critical role in creating an environment in which corrupt practices receive immediate public attention. The role of the oversight bodies, acting as watchdogs, cannot also be undermined in the gigantic task of making India free from corruption, as the examples from other countries show.

# **IV**

As is evident, corruption is an outcome of complex processes in which the fundamental pillars of governance do not remain as effective as they are expected to be. In principle, the Constitution of India is perhaps one of the finest legal documents in terms of the principles that it upholds. Yet, this is not adequate to build an edifice of governance that is free from corruption. This is a paradox of India's recent political history, which is usually explained by reference to the historical processes that led to the emergence of India as a politically independent nation. What is most puzzling is to note that corruption is always despised at one level and yet it is being encouraged at another level as perhaps the most effective tool to get work done. The scene in contemporary India does not appear to be as bleak as in the context of the erstwhile 'Licence–Quota–Permit Raj' because of the increasing importance of public services due to utilization of communication technology in governance. In other words, the publicness of governance appears to have been significantly sacrificed in an era when a socialistic pattern of society was eulogized as perhaps the most effective socioeconomic arrangement to effectively address the issues of poverty and maldevelopment. The socio- economic mission that the founding fathers so assiduously nurtured while battling for political freedom from British colonialism remained un- fulfilled and India's development did not take off to the extent it was expected to, despite having endorsed, rather enthusiastically, the state- led development paradigm. Public administration ceased to be public and was

appropriated for private gains. Corruption was endemic, and bureaucracy, instead of being an aid to public well- being, became 'rent- seeking' and 'extractive'. This was never seriously challenged, notwithstanding the availability of institutional mechanisms to combat corruption. The scene had, however, gradually changed following the consolidation of a powerful public voice against corruption that gained momentum as history progressed.

 A perusal of India's democratic polity confirms two fundamental conceptual assumptions of public administration: on the one hand, in terms of the hardware of democracy which includes those major institutions which uphold democracy both in spirit and content, Indian governance is clearly democratic in character; bureaucracy in India is, on the other hand, essentially instrumental, being confined to formulating policies on the basis of political values that the politicians carry to governance. Under these circumstances, governance thus becomes an interface between bureaucracy and its political bosses. As a deviant behaviour, the roots of corruption need to be located in this interface, in which both the permanent and the temporary executives seem to deviate from what they are expected to perform while discharging their role according to the rule book.

The visible aberration does not seem to attract attention, because of what is anthropologically described as a 'cultural deficit' in the polity. Culturally, the deviant behaviour, despite provoking criticism, may not be deviant enough to be absolutely socially 'despicable'. This is indicative of the visible weaknesses of software, to use another computer metaphor, of democracy that undoubtedly leaves an impact on Indian public administration. Corruption can thus be said to be clearly culturally rooted in the Indian context, notwithstanding the wellformed democratic structure of governance, especially in terms of the hardware of democracy. Given the view supporting the cultural rootedness of corruption, the argument that corruption is also contextual gains an easy acceptance. Embedded here is the idea of the context being critical in shaping socio- political views. Instances can be multiplied to show that corruption figures prominently in contemporary public discourse and the voice that is articulated is too powerful to be ignored so easily. Of all instances, the 2011 India against corruption campaign, led by the octogenarian Anna Hazare, is perhaps the most glaring example of a spontaneous people's mobilization against corruption. The movement that hogged the limelight was reduced to a campaign for the creation of an institution – Jan Lokpal – to eradicate corruption. Despite its apparent success in mobilizing support for the campaign, the Anna Hazare movement thus remained constrained with a very limited purpose because the formation of another institution, however strong it may be, does not seem to be adequate to take the bull by the horns since the roots of corruption are far more entrenched in our culture and cannot obviously be tackled successfully by adding one more institution to the prevalent outfits.

Ethics in governance is surely a casualty given the unearthing of scams at regular intervals. One of the factors that led to the defeat of the erstwhile government, led by the United Progressive Alliance in 2014 was its alleged involvement in cases of financial embezzlement of public funds besides misusing public offices for private gains. The National Democratic Alliance government that was formed in 2014 seems to be radically different because of the reported endeavour towards eradicating corruption. The effort is to create an environment, supported by the government, political functionaries and various non-government agencies, to weed out corruption by addressing the root causes. This is a difficult task to accomplish since the problem is, as a commentator emphasizes, 'systemic' in character and India has become, he further characterizes,

a republic of greed [which is] about businessmen purchasing political elites and the political elites walking into wealth that their own entrepreneurship did not create; it is their power to grant permission and licenses that has generated wealth, not their innovative business ideas.14

This is an analytically useful (and also persuasive) formulation, since scams seems to have become integral to India's governance especially in the last few decades. The instances of the involvement of those in governance in scams are far more frequent than before. Is India going through what is conceptually characterized as 'a gilded age', a term coined by Mark Twain and Charles Dudley Warner in their 1873 novel, *The Gilded Age: a tale of today*, to describe how the rampant corruption caused massive inequality in the US? Satirizing greed and corruption in post- Civil War America in the era now referred to as the Gilded Age, the novel is a powerful statement on the pernicious effect of corruption in all walks of life. It has thus been argued that 'both in its rot and heady dynamism, India is beginning to resemble America's Gilded Age (1865–1900) . . . [that] transformed an agrarian US into an economic and industrial giant'.15 As in the US, the business tycoons resorted to all means, fair and foul, to expand their empire; their complicity with the government of the day enabled them to fulfil their desire rather easily. As is evident, similarly to the barons of America's Gilded Age, most of India's billionaires have used 'three methods to tilt the playing field to their advantage: securing rich natural resources such as mine and land; ensuring favourable regulations in various industries, and restraining the entry of foreign competition wherever possible'.16 The task was made easier, because of the collaboration, often collusion, that these favoured business houses had with the government at all levels, as in late- nineteenth-century America. Examples can be multiplied to demonstrate that those in political power extended undue favour to a selected group of industrial and business houses in exchange for, it has also been proved, kickbacks. The political class in India, like its American counterpart, seems to have largely ignored the ill- effect that the massive

corruption had on the government exchequer, in particular, and society, in general. In other words, the moral fabric of Indian politics appears to have crumbled to a significant extent.

 By drawing attention to the uncanny similarity between America's Gilded Age and what is happening in India now, an analyst thus graphically illustrates the point by saying that, despite the fact that

historical analogy is tricky, . . . India today broadly resembles the earlier American experience, both in the rapidity of economic growth and structural transformation from an agrarian to a modern economy, and the accumulation of staggering fortunes, often through illicit means, with the attendant widening gaps between rich and poor.17

Is it thus fair to argue that unregulated and market- based capitalism generates corruption? A global survey of the processes of growth from Bismarck's Germany to that of contemporary East Asia confirms the contention. What happens simultaneously is also the consolidation of politico- ideological forces championing redistribution of wealth and concomitant social policies to correct the prevalent socio- economic imbalances. As history shows, America's Gilded Age led to the rise of 'the Progressive Era, marked by cleaner politics, a bipartisan fight against corruption, more honest business practices and a channelling of private wealth into philanthropy'.18 An analysis of the socio- political processes in the Gilded Age thus reinforces the fact that decline of ethics in governance is clearly contextual; it further endorses the idea that forces challenging the business–government nexus emerge as natural byproducts in circumstances when the hapless victims mobilize themselves against the mighty as perhaps the only means for their survival. In this fight, they are likely to get comrades- in-arms: in the case of the US, the journalists, known as Muckrakers, who exposed through their writings in the highly influential new medium of national magazines, the unholy alliance between the crooked businessmen and equally debased political authority which led to public outcry, government and legal investigations and also enactment of specific laws to address their concerns. The present situation in India does not seem to be different: notwithstanding the gloomy scenario in governance, the fact that scams are being unearthed also confirms the vitality that the system retains despite consolidation of the forces striking at its foundation. Despite the fact that a republic of greed has, in other words, spread its tentacles, rather abrasively, there is a silver lining because the politico- ideological forces opposed to the collusion between business and politics seem to have become too powerful to be ignored so easily.

 As the above discussion reveals, two important ideas seem critical here: first, in some respects, India appears to have entered a Gilded Age which cannot approximate to what America witnessed in the mid- nineteenth century for obvious historical reasons; the processes that account for significant decline of ethics in governance in India have different historical trajectories because of the nature of independence and also the structural continuity of public administration

from its colonial past. India became politically free following the British withdrawal in 1947 though the institutions of governance were allowed to remain, because of her uncritical acceptance of the Westminster form of parliamentary democracy. The second idea is linked with the growing consolidation of a voice for ethics in public life that is being jeopardized because of the rising corruption especially at the behest of those holding political authority. While corruption seems to have gripped the entire political system, there is, however, an equally powerful conglomeration of forces that are opposed to the unholy nexus between the government and corporate houses. Just like the Muckrakers in the Gilded Age in the US, these forces are a powerful aid to the consolidation of opposition in India. In the changed scenario, it may not be easy for the industrial houses to manipulate government machineries according to their personal whims and selfish priorities. On most occasions, it was the public outcry against the misuse of the system for private gain that sustained the anti- corruption tempo to a significant extent. So, scams are the price that one has to pay to bring about the inclusive development that India is aiming for by crafting a developmental alternative to the state- led development paradigm that was so zealously nurtured by the founding fathers and their ideological successors till it was dismantled in 1991 with the acceptance of the New Economic Policy.

# **VI**

There are two major arguments along with one supplementary argument that the book seeks to pursue. Conceptually articulated, the first major argument suggests that the query – ethics in governance – cannot be comprehensively understood within the available parameters of public administration. As is conceptualized conventionally, lack of ethics is attributed to a lack of administrative accountability. This is a very narrow conceptualization, since ethics in governance is also linked with the wider socio- political environment in which ethical considerations do not seem to receive as much attention as is required under normal circumstances. So, the argument that the book offers is derived from the broader socio- economic and political processes shaping differently textured responses to the issues of ethics and also tendencies towards its eclipse. To put it differently, ethics in governance needs to be grasped politically, given its roots in a wider social milieu that may not be entirely supportive, but fail to conclusively challenge forces encouraging corruption because of the peculiar historical circumstances. The second argument, drawing on the distinct US experience of the original Gilded Age, is about those processes that gain momentum once voices against the decline of ethics in governance acquire strength and direction. This has two aspects: on the one hand, it delves into the sustained movements/campaigns against abuse of political authority for private gain; it also draws, on the other hand, upon endeavours at protecting the institutional sanctity of constitutional democracy, which is considered to be an empowering device despite the hopeless situation that appears to have been consolidated due to the scant respect of those holding political power for democratic ethos and practices. The basic

idea that this argument seeks to convey refers to the apparent incompatibility between the institutions in their original form and manifestation and what they gradually became in the course of the unfolding of India as an independent state, while seeking to translate into reality the socialistic pattern of society through state- driven economic development. Along with these two major arguments, the book also articulates a supplementary argument highlighting the contextual nature of efforts towards seeking to reaffirm the ethical roots of public governance amid apparent decadence in all walks of life. This suggests, on the one hand, that there cannot be a universal theoretical design to conceptualize ethics in governance, because of its location- specific nature; nonetheless, the growing consolidation of forces challenging tendencies towards undermining ethics in governance is also a testimony, on the other hand, to the articulation of an equally powerful voice which may not always be homogeneous, but remains united at least in terms of goal and spirit.

# **VII**

Divided into six interrelated chapters, the book provides a long analytical statement on ethics in governance in India. By locating the possible reasons for the decline of ethics in public life, the book also links the wider social environment with the specific nature of ethics- deficit in governance. Exploratory in character, the exercise thus pursues the argument that social environment and ethics in governance are dialectically interconnected. While dealing with the foundational conceptual ideas regarding the citizen–administration interface, Chapter 1 provides an in- depth discussion of the issues that are critical in this respect. The importance of the chapter lies in the fact that, by situating the discussion in a theoretical perspective, it also creates a conceptual edifice for the discussion that follows. Chapter 2 focuses on how democratically decentralized decision making is an antidote to ethics- deficit in governance, contrary to the importance of the state in generating forces supportive of ethics in governance. By analysing critically the role of the two forms of democratic decentralization in India – *Bhagidari* in Delhi and *Panchayati Raj* in West Bengal – the chapter provides significant inputs to understand how they worked towards building an ethicssensitive governance in Delhi and West Bengal respectively. By dwelling on the specific institutional efforts in India that led to the strengthening of governmental agencies responsible for the containment of corruption and malpractices, Chapter 3 seeks to capture how 'the official mindset' worked to weed out corruption. Two Administrative Reforms Commissions, appointed in 1964 and 2005 respectively, will stand in India's administrative history as examples of most powerful interventions striving to create ethically conscious governance. As is always believed, a key to corruption- free governance is an efficient civil service that is also sensitive to the fundamental canons of ethics. This is what is pursued in Chapter 4 which has not only assessed the role of the civil service in a historical perspective, but also dwells on the recommendations of the 1997 Fifth and 2006 Sixth Pay Commissions to show how important the concern for ethics was while

suggesting measures to purge public governance of corruption and malpractices. Divided into two parts, Chapter 5 is a lengthy chapter. Part A is about two major institutional efforts that were undertaken in the era of India's plan- led development. Primarily state- driven exercises, the two attempts – the 1964 Santhanam Committee and the 1977 Shah Commission – are historically significant because, for the first time in independent India, corruption had attracted the attention of the policy makers, because of its pernicious impact on the country's socioeconomic growth. Part B is a critical analysis of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission's recommendations for ethics in governance. That a full report was devoted to ethics in governance confirms the fact that the concern continues to remain critical to those in public authority. Besides the Commission's recommendations, the chapter also dwells on the role of two important committees of parliament – the *Rajya Sabha* ethics Committee and the *Lok Sabha* Committee – which are also significant in creating and nurturing the concern for ethics among parliamentarians. As history has shown, the growing incidence of corruption also provokes mass consternation, which is usually translated into movements against the sources and perpetrators of the corruption. Challenging those charged with abuse of authority, two important national campaigns – the 1974–5 movement, led by Jayaprakash Narayan and the 2011 Anna Hazare campaign – largely spontaneous at the outset, rocked India in an unprecedented way. Seeking to capture the dynamics of these two movements, Chapter 6 is a response to the complexities of events that was reflective of not only a proactive but also a vigilant citizenry. The participants may have been disappointed because the goal was not achieved; nonetheless, by making citizens alert and sensitive to their role in governance, these two movements are watershed events in contemporary India.

# **VIII**

With six chapters, the book thus pursues a narrative on a theme – ethics in governance – in an analytical format that is theoretically informed and conceptually refreshing. By raising newer issues that are not merely administrative, but politically contrived, the book sets in motion specific intellectual queries. These need to be addressed by keeping in view the possible impact of the wider sociopolitical processes on ethics in public authority, because the narrow Weberian notion of internal administrative accountability is now simply inadequate. The basic contribution that the book claims to have made is two- fold: besides providing a brief contextual account of the decline of ethics in governance in India, it has, with appropriate academic depth, also dealt with the phenomenon in a historical perspective. Seeking also to unravel the conceptual intricacies of ethics in governance, the book thus creates a space for a debate on a theme that is being constantly reinvented in the light of the changing priorities of governance both globally and nationally following the dismantling of the erstwhile Soviet Union, representing an alternative ideological discourse.

## **Notes**

- 1 Fritz Morstein Marx, 'Administrative ethics and the rule of law', *The American Political Science Review*, 43, 1949, pp. 1127–8.
- 2 Carl J Friedrich, 'Corruption concepts in historical perspective', in Arnold J Heidenheimer, Michael Johnston and Victor T LeVine (eds), *Political Corruption: a handbook*, Transaction Publishers, New Bruswick, 1989, p. 15.
- 3 Mark Philip, 'The definition of political corruption' in Paul Heywood (ed.), *Routledge Handbook of Political Corruption*, Routledge, Oxford, 2015, p. 22.
- 4 *'Deterring corruption and improving governance in the electricity sector'*, World Bank, April 2009, p. 118.
- 5 Human Development Centre, *Human Development in South Asia: the crisis of governance*, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1999, p. 96.
- 6 Ibid., p. 105.
- 7 Ibid., p. 112.
- 8 Ibid,, p. 105.
- 9 Ibid,, p. 106.
- 10 R P Kangle, *The Kautilya Arthasastra*, Part II, University of Bombay, Bombay, 1972, p. 91.
- 11 Carl J Fredrich, 'Corruption concepts in historical perspective' in Arnold J Heidenheimer, Michael Johnston and Victor T LeVine (eds), *Political Corruption: a handbook*, Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, 1989, p. 15.
- 12 Transparency International India, *India Corruption Study 2005: To Improve Governance: Volume I – Key Highlights New Delhi*. 30 June 2005. pp. 1–3.
- 13 Kamala Prasad, *Indian Administration: politics, policies and prospects*, Pearson-Longman, New Delhi, 2006, pp. 324–26.
- 14 Ashutosh Varshney, 'A Republic of Greed: why Narendra Modi must crack the whip on India's snowballing corruption'. *The Times of India*, New Delhi, 17 July 2015.
- 15 Jayant Sinha and Ashutosh Varshney, 'It is time for India to rein in its robber barons', *Financial Times*, 6 January 2011.
- 16 Ibid.
- 17 Vivek H Dehejia, 'Escaping India's gilded age', *New York Times*, 15 April 2011.
- 18 Jayant Sinha and Ashutosh Varshney, 'It is time for India to rein in its robber barons', *Financial Times*, 6 January 2011.