# **Burmese**

#### **Monique Skidmore**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

In 1989, Burma was renamed the "Union of Myanmar" by the newly constituted State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC). The "Burmese" were renamed the "Myanmarese" or "Myanmars", and the Burmese language was similarly changed to the Myanmarese language. Minority groups in Burma were renamed "National Races," with "Myanmars" used to designate Burmese citizens of all ethnicities residing within Burma. The United Nations recognized the name change but pro-democracy groups use the older terms, especially "Burma", "Burmans", and "Burmese" as a way of protesting at the undemocratic nature of the name changes.

From 1885 until 1937, Burma was designated a province of India as part of the British Raj, and literature of the period regarding Burma is found in Indian manuscripts and journals.

Several armed groups have claimed independence from the military government and insurgent-held areas often publish literature referring to their territory as an independent entity. The chief example is publications from Manerplaw, Kawthoolei, a self-designated independent homeland of the Karen people (and the Karen National Union rebel headquarters) from 1971 until its capture by Burmese military forces in 1995 (Hail, 1995).

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

Shaped like a kite, Burma is the largest country in mainland Southeast Asia. Burma covers 671,000 km<sup>2</sup> and borders the Andaman Sea, the Bay of Bengal, Bangladesh, China, India, Laos, Thailand, and Tibet. Most of these borders are flanked by mountain ranges, including the Himalayas in the north. The central riverland plains are the agricultural heart of the nation with the major north–south river, the Ayeyarwady, flowing to the large delta area that spills into the Gulf of Martaban. The Thanlwin River forms much of the border with China, and the Mekong likewise forms the border between Laos, Thailand, and Burma (The "Golden Triangle"). The Shan Plateau is a rugged, mountainous area bordering China, and tropical jungle covers much of the area bordering Thailand. The eastern borders of the country are home to the Arakanese (Rohingyas), Chin and Naga groups, who are ethnically similar to neighboring populations in India and Bangladesh.

Over 135 minority groups reside in Burma and the range of languages spoken is correspondingly large with over 100 linguistic groups and sub-groups (WOB & NCGUB, 2000). Burmese is the lingua franca, and since the military coup of 1962, the language of internal colonization. It is the language spoken by the majority ethnic groups, the Bamars or Burmans. Karen, Shan, Kachin, Chin, Arakanese, Kayin, Palua, Hindi, Mandarin, and English are just a fraction of the languages one can hear spoken in contemporary Burma. Burmese is a member of the Tibeto–Burman family of languages. In addition, there are members of the Mon–Khmer, Austro–Thai, and Karennic language families. The many different minority groups in Burma are described by the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) as falling into seven "National Races": Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin (or Karen), Mon, Shan, and Rakhine. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) estimates the population to be broken down into the following percentages: Burman, 68%; Shan, 9%; Karen, 7%; Rakhine, 4%; Chinese, 3%; Mon, 2%; Indian, 2%; and "other", 5% (including Thais) (CIA, 2002).

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

A primarily rice-based agricultural society practicing dry rice, wet rice, and swidden agriculture as well as aquaculture, Burmese society was monarchical until the Third Anglo-Burmese War in 1885. The deposing of King Thibaw ended governance by the monarchy and official patronage of the only other significant institution, the *Sangha* (monkhood). Education was in the hands of the monasteries, villages comprised approximately 500 people, and headmen in the central riverland plans were part of a complex political system of reportage, all the way up to the monarch. After British colonization, the complex political units of various groups within Burma (including the *gumlao* and *gumsa* systems of the Kachin, as documented by Edmund Leach) (Leach, 1970) was overlaid with a British administrative system. General Aung San, the founder of the Army, was the architect of Burmese independence. Independence was granted in 1948, one year after Aung San and his parliamentary cabinet was assassinated in a bomb blast. U Nu was elected Prime Minister. A devout Buddhist, U Nu reasserted traditional relationships between lay authorities and the *Sangha* and was seen by some members of the military as being too "traditional" and non-embracing of modernization. In 1962 General Ne Win launched a successful military coup and only resigned in 1988. This period, known as the "Burmese Road to Socialism," turned Burma from the largest rice exporter in Asia, to a UN-declared "Least Developed Country." Following Ne Win's resignation, country-wide pro-democracy demonstrations forced the new dictator, Sein Lwin, to resign. The bloody suppression of the democracy movement birthed the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), whose name was changed in November 1997 to the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC). Tertiary institutions have remained largely closed since 1988 due to student prodemocracy activism, including the December 1996 student demonstrations. Small technical and rural tertiary institutions opened in 2001. The pro-democracy leader, Aung San Suu Kyi (secretary of the National League for Democracy (NLD)), was released from house arrest in May 2002, but then arrested in May 2003.

Two-thirds of the population are agriculturalists, with 10% employed in industry and 25% in the service industry (CIA, 1999, estimates). Economically, the country is in a perilous condition, with inflation estimated at 50% per annum and a thriving black market. Sanctions by the European Union and the United States against investment in Burma killed a building and land speculation boom in the mid-1990s, a boom that screened the laundering of profits from the production and sale of heroin. External debt for 1999/2000 was estimated at US\$6 billion, and Myanmar received US\$99 billion in economic aid in 1998/99. The official rate of kyat per dollar in January 2001 was 6.6, as compared with the unofficial rate in 2002 of 1,000 kyat/ dollar. The government does not publish economic data, but the CIA estimates the percentage of the population below the poverty line at 23% in 1997 (CIA, 2002). The Burma Freedom and Democracy Act, signed into law by the U.S. President in 2003, applied further sanctions and effectively closed down garment factories and other export industries, further imperiling the formal economy.

Burma vies with Afghanistan as the world's largest supplier of heroin and methamphetamines. The highest levels of the military regime are directly implicated in the sanction and control of the drug trade, as is the Wa State Army, and are, until recently, the Shan State Army and various other military groups operating in the Golden Triangle region. Profits from the heroin trade in part also fund the 40-year insurgency against the military regime as well as providing hard currency for some military officials.

Kin terminology emphasizes age groups rather than vertical linkages and there is no ancestor worship in Myanmar. Women do not take the names of their husbands when they marry, and anyone may change their name as often as they like without any formal procedure, although this is rapidly changing with the increased control local security offices have over the recording of significant life events. There is no division of Burmese names into first names and family names. A Burmese name usually consists of several syllables or words. "Tint Tint Khine," for example, means literally "strong but elegant."

Kin terms are self-referential. A man older than oneself is designated *U* (uncle) and someone younger than oneself is referred to as *Maung* (younger brother). A male of approximate or slightly older age is referred to as *Ko* (or elder brother). Older women are designated *Daw* and younger women *Ma*. Residence patterns are most commonly matrilocal, with extended families living in the same house or in separate houses within one compound. Inheritance is bilateral and kin ties are not of importance unless relatives wish to emphasize the bond (Henderson et al., 1971, pp. 67–68).

The Burmese are overwhelmingly Theravada Buddhist (89%), with small populations of Christians (4%) (Baptist 3%; Roman Catholic 1%), Muslims (4%), animists (1%), and others (2%). Astrologers are common, and Hindu temples, mosques and Jewish synagogues are also in evidence. There is an almost unanimous belief in animism in the *Nat* cult a vibrant system of spirit propitiation. *Nat* spirit wives have in recent years been largely replaced by transvestite men who find an acceptable social role in spirit mediumship and dramatic performance. The relationship between animist nature spirits, Nat spirits, and Buddhicized figures is complex and changes over time. Theravada Buddhism is strongest in Burma,

#### **The Context of Health 609**

where a mass lay meditation movement practicing *vissipana* meditation seeks to reform the monkhood and eventually social and political life, from below. Charismatic monks and various sects and cults (*gaings*) exist in Burma where a strong belief in the miraculous and millenarial beliefs hold significant sway in social life and strategies. Astrology, alchemy, magic runes (*in*), spirit propitiation, soul flight, reincarnation, karma, witchcraft, visions and portents, *samatha* and *vissipana*, are but some of the rich store of religious, cultural, and magical knowledge that inform Burmese people's worldviews.

Drama, dance, puppetry, music, painting, and poetry are central to Burmese life and to cultural, religious, and artistic expression. Comedy, political satire, romantic and nationalistic themes, and Buddhist and spirit universes and powers are all expressed through these media. In recent years popular magazines, DVD/video and karaoke huts, and movie theaters have fostered an indigenous movie and rock star scene.

Women's roles in society are limited due to the military hierarchy of the nation and their exclusion from monastic roles other than as donors, administrators, and nuns. Whilst many Burmese women will claim that they are equal because of shared property rules, lack of dowry, and the general ease with which women may enter and leave marital arrangements, human rights groups draw attention to the atrocities and suffering of Burmese women in war zones and in relocated areas where structural and domestic violence, sexual bartering, and prostitution are serious problems.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

In the World Health Organization's (WHO) ranking of the health status of individual countries, Burma ranks almost last, 190 out of 191 nations (WHO, 2001). This statistic represents a spectacular fall in health standards (and living standards more generally) over the last four decades, the period of military rule.

The birth rate in 2001 is estimated at 20/1000 population (CIA, 2002), and the infant mortality rate in 1995 estimated by the WHO to be 50/1,000 live births and under-5 mortality at 101/1,000 live births (compared with the 2001 estimate of the CIA of infant mortality at 74/1,000). CIA health indicators are consistently worse than WHO and Burmese Government figures because they are based on estimates of deaths due to HIV and other future health estimates. The CIA estimates the total fertility rate to be 2.3 children per woman.

The 2002 health statistics issued by the Myanmar Ministry of Health put government expenditure on health at approximately US\$278 million and capital investment in health at US\$13.5 million. The reported number of cases of some childhood diseases has decreased in the past decade, with reported cases of diphtheria dropping from 204 in 1990 to 38 in 2000, and neonatal tetanus falling from 189 reported cases in 1991 compared with 61 in 2000. Similarly, since oral polio vaccine (OPV) coverage began in Yangon in 1982, the number of reported poliomyelitis cases has fallen from 390 to 50 in 2000 (Ministry of Health, 2002).

Burma has two major psychiatric hospitals, one in Rangoon [Yangon] and one in Mandalay. Qualified psychiatrists are rare in Burma. In 1994 there were 130 medical officers and 260 regional officers trained to identify five psychiatric conditions. There is very limited psychiatric training offered by Burmese medical institutes (Skidmore, 1998). There are four medical institutes in Burma, and since 1978 postgraduate training in psychiatry has been possible in Burma. From 1993, consultant psychiatric health services have operated in the 14 state and division hospitals (Sein Tu, 2002). The inadequate government wages mean that doctors working at the psychiatric hospitals operate their own private clinics in the afternoons or evenings. Medication consists almost solely of barbiturates and Thorazine (chlorpromazine). Differential diagnosis is very limited, with dramatic changes in the frequency of diagnostic categories occurring over the last 30 years (Skidmore, 1998).

Mandatory arrest, incarceration, and detoxification of people suspected of heroin and methamphetamine use occurs in Burma. Throughout the country a number of Buddhist detoxification centers exist. Withdrawal is managed with either no medical assistance or with a tincture of opium. Incarceration occurs for approximately 6 weeks. Two hospitals for drug addiction exist (in Putao and Myitkyina), six "major therapeutic centers," and 22 "rehabilitation" centers (Sein Tu, 2002).

Food shortages have been recorded across 10 of Burma's 12 provinces and inflationary pressures continue to push up the price of basic commodities such as rice, oil, and fish (People's Tribunal, 1999). Government quotas on rice production also assist in malnourishing Burmese villagers. In peri-urban settlements ringing Rangoon and Mandalay, two meals per day consisting of rice with *ngapi* (fermented fish sauce) and a very small amount of protein (fish, meat, or legumes) is the norm. Malnourishment of children occurs when women do not have enough breast milk and feed their children the water in which the rice has been cooked. Many Burmese people in peri-urban and rural areas use rice-water and betel nut as appetite suppressants or as food substitutes (Skidmore & World Vision International, 1997a, 1997b).

The Ayurvedic humoral system of "hot" and "cold" foods has become irrevocably muddled in Burma. An enormous amount of indigenous medical knowledge was lost upon British colonization and in the subsequent decades of poverty and civil war. Indigenous medical practitioners trained through the apprenticeship system are now rare, with the new generation being trained in government traditional medicine institutes, hospitals, and clinics. Among the lay population, humoral medical concepts are used in non-consistent and often harmful ways. Pregnant women, for example, often refuse to eat foods that provide adequate dietary protein and fat because of beliefs related to harm of the fetus. In addition, the strong belief in *Nat* spirits means that foods favored by *Nat* are eaten only occasionally. These most ubiquitous of commodities, coconuts and bananas, thus provide a form of dietary proscription that further reduces the available foods to people only occasionally receiving adequate nutrition.

Medical hospitals provide excellent medical care for military officers and their families. Public hospitals are subject to routine theft of equipment and pharmaceuticals, and patients purchase their own medicines at pharmacies or market stalls for use in both biomedical and indigenous medical hospitals.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Medical and medico-religious practitioners are utilized in Burma for a range of emotional, supernatural, mundane, and psychiatric problems. Biomedical physicians are trained at the government institutes of medicine, including training in many biomedical specialities. Overseas training is a common route to specialist training. Private diagnostic services such as X-ray and ultrasound exist in cities and large towns. Opticians and dentists are also common. Specialized nursing institutes also exist and government-trained midwives work in well-populated areas and also provide rural outreach programs.

Community healers (*yankus*) span the spectrum from charlatans to indigenous medical practitioners who practice a variety of traditional and biomedical procedures. This can often mean that medicine is given inappropriately and without regard to side-effects. Illegal trading of medicines from China, Thailand, and India means that Burma's markets are stocked with illegally packaged, misleading products, without cold storage, and often many years past their use-by date.

Indigenous medicine is the first recourse for most Burmese when self-diagnosis of the great majority of daily illnesses occurs in the home. Indigenous medicine is practiced privately by practitioners trained through apprenticeship, and officially, as managed by the traditional medicine department of the Ministry of Health. Utilizing the five tastes, Buddhist principles, knowledge of medicinal plant properties, and the preparation of dried and powdered compounds, traditional medicine is the primary form of medical care in the 40% of the country not covered by basic biomedical healthcare (IPPF, 2002). In addition to traditional medicine practitioners, *lethes*, or traditional midwives, practice delivering babies and the care of pregnant women, and care for women for 6 weeks after the birth. They also practice "massage" and a variety of other methods to abort unwanted fetuses. *Lethes* who specialize in abortion become known as abortionists, but the government will often arrest such women. Abortion is illegal in Burma but poverty and domestic violence lead many desperate women to abortionists.

Astrologers, white magicians, alchemists, wizards, *Nat* spirit mediums, and magic monks are among the medico-religious specialists (*daq sayas*) that Burmese people turn to for emotional, psychiatric, and economic aid. Among the rural population who present to psychiatric hospitals, a variety of these practitioners are sequentially utilized, with psychiatric personnel being used only as a last resort and usually without the patient's consent.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

The most consistent finding arising from the author's fieldwork in peri-urban Burma is that the regularity and

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 611**

volume of blood at menstruation and childbirth is the fundamental indicator of health and well-being for women. Being in good health is contingent upon harmony in and between the body and the universe where the latter includes the socioeconomic and political dimensions of everyday life. Blood flow is the key symbol by which Burmese women's beliefs and practices concerning their well-being can be understood. This generic Burmese pathophysiology is used in the forcibly relocated periurban townships to experience and express the experience of illness and being unwell. Abortion, childbirth, madness, and "weakness" are the major domains in which understandings of the way that blood flows through the body are elaborated, and these lay diagnostic categories give coherence to women's illness, treatment, and local etiologies. Burmese women's health as articulated at the levels of pathophysiology, interpersonal relations, and the local peri-urban environment, necessarily include the wider political and moral economies of Burma. All of the women interviewed by the author are adamant that the body, mind, and soul cannot be well if the physical, political, and spiritual domains are not aligned in harmony. The moral economy of military dictatorship and the enforced economic impoverishment of the majority of peri-urban Burmese are understood by Burmese people to be the underlying causes of ill health in general, and of peri-urban "women's diseases" in particular (Skidmore, 2002a).

Well-being is divided into gender and age categories, with familial and sympathetic causes of illness understood as possible contributing factors to illness. A belief in the contagious spread of leprosy by family and friends of people with the virus leads, for example, to the stigmatization of entire families and social networks and their inability to find or keep employment if there is evidence of a member of the group with leprosy (Skidmore, 1997a).

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Hepatitis, HIV, and other sexually transmitted diseases flourish for a variety of reasons. These include the prevalence of men using prostitution, the practice of polygamy, the rate of heroin addiction in Myanmar (4% for men, 2% for women) (UNDCP, 2001), and other unsafe practices such as re-use of syringes in medical clinics and penisenlarging procedures common in Burmese jails and among fishing communities. Carrying condoms is widely believed by the police and military forces to constitute evidence that a woman is engaged in prostitution, and has been legal only since 1993 (Smith, 1996). In addition, men refuse to buy small- or medium-sized condoms, and a majority of both wives and women working in the sex industry argue that they cannot make their sexual partners use condoms. Most state that it is an inappropriate subject to discuss between the sexes.

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Women's health is divided into three life periods that correspond to three types of illness categories. *Miyet sa* covers all those illnesses believed to occur because of menstruation and up to the period of motherhood. *Miyet leh* refers to illnesses of the "middle years," specifically related to childbirth, breastfeeding, and women's health during their years of raising children. *Miyet so* refers to illnesses that occur around the time of menopause and continue on into old age for women. Each of these stages is concerned with blood flow, especially lack of adequate menstrual flow at puberty and leading up to menopause. "Weakness" is a major diagnostic category believed to result from too little or too much blood flow, but also arising from the use of contraceptives. Emmenogogues are used extensively to increase blood flow and also as an attempt at aborting unwanted fetuses. Many Burmese physicians translate weakness (*thwe aah neh*) as anemia but the category is broader and refers as much to social and material aspects of living as it does to physiological imbalance. The national nutritional program gives the statistic of 89% of pregnant women to be at risk from iron deficiency anemia (WHO, 2002), and the major reason for young women to present to traditional medicine hospital and clinics is amenorrhea (Skidmore, 2002a).

Too much bleeding during and immediately after childbirth and abortions is also a major cause of concern. Childbirth is seen as a particularly dangerous time, but a belief in potential harm to fetus and mother also marks pregnancy as a period when a large number of taboos concerning food and mobility come into play. Abortion is illegal in Burma, but it is not stigmatized in the community. In addition, marriage and divorce are easily acheived, and illegitimate children are not considered different from other children (Skidmore, 2002a).

#### **Infancy**

Burmese midwives deliver babies and perform abortions, primarily through abdominal massage. The postpartum period, *me-dwin*, is marked by sequestration of young mothers, dietary taboos, and attempts to stop the body from losing heat. This means that the body is not bathed in cool water (sometimes no bathing occurs for 6 weeks), and "cold" foods are not eaten. Burmese women usually breastfeed exclusively for at least 2 months, with the water that rice has been cooked in usually given as the baby's first supplemental food. Infants are carried and cuddled by mothers, and rocking cots, hammocks, and swings are used by mothers, sisters, daughters, and grandmothers to continually keep the child in motion when awake (Skidmore, 2002a). In urban, peri-urban, and regional centers, many mothers use antenatal care, but infant mortality remains high, as does maternal mortality, primarily from incomplete abortions. Maternal mortality is as high as 500–580 per 100,00 live births (WHO, 1997). Women present to regional hospitals on a daily basis with hemorrhage from incomplete abortions. Studies conducted throughout Burma indicate somewhere between 33% and 60% of maternal mortality is directly attributed to abortions (Ba Thike, 1997; Khin Than Tin & Khin Saw Hla, 1990; Ministry of Health & UNFPA, 1999). Two studies have found abortion to be the leading cause of maternal mortality in Myanmar (Krasu, 1992; UNICEF, 2000).

Vasectomy is illegal but there is a thriving trade by urban surgeons. Cesarian rates are very high in some areas and many women opt for a hospital birth, especially a cesarian birth so as to also have sterilization following the birth of their second child. Cesarian births are very expensive and there is no uniformity of charge across the urban and peri-urban areas (Skidmore & World Vision International, 1997a, 1997b). These difficult conditions for childbirth mean that infant mortality rates are almost 400% higher in the 40% of the country where no basic biomedical health services exist (IPPF, 2002).

### **Childhood**

Twenty-nine percent of the population is aged 0–14 years (CIA, 2002). Thirty-eight percent of children aged 6–11 had, in 1994, recognizable signs of goiter (WHO, 2002). In 1994, 31% of children under three years of age had unacceptable weight-for-age ratios (WHO, 2002).

Children are traditionally allowed to run free until the age of 12, when they are sent to monastic centers for education and discipline. Many children attend government schools and are teased, mocked, and told parables to teach appropriate social behavior and norms. Children are regarded with great affection and as the embodiment of a family's happiness and wealth. Children have a keen sense of duty to their parents and teachers and may become monks or nuns for short periods of time to repay their parents'love by making merit for them in their coming lives.

### **Adolescence**

The *shinbyu* (for boys) and ear-boring ceremony for girls traditionally mark, for Burmese Buddhists, the coming of age of adolescents and bestows upon them responsibilities of family and personal welfare. For impoverished families this means adolescents must earn money to contribute to family income. For wealthier families it means following Buddhist precepts and being respectful of monks, parents, and teachers, as well as trying to excel at school. In these ways, adolescents prove that they are worthy of the care that their parents have invested in their childhood. Many adolescents feel a fierce sense of duty toward their parents. As young adults, adolescents are required to dress in culturally appropriate ways and to be mindful of Burmese cultural norms and traditions, especially with regard to appropriate gender behavior. For young girls this includes having a chaperone in public.

### **Adulthood**

Domestic violence, sexual bartering, sexual torture, and death from incomplete abortions are all facets of everyday life in the poorest of Burma's townships, especially those townships that have been forcibly relocated from central urban areas to paddy fields on the outskirts of the major cities. Alcohol use is very high in these areas as men's powerlessness becomes apparent in their lack of employment and social status that has resulted from their forcible removal from previous townships (Skidmore, 2002b).

Domestic violence, polygyny (due to the highly mobile nature of the young male workforce), and other forms of marital disharmony have led to a very high divorce rate, paralleled by an almost equal rate of remarriage. This means that families in the relocated townships frequently consist of many step-relations. Incest has been reported by girls and young women when step-brothers, step-fathers, and step-uncles take financial responsibility for the household. Fear of incest and marital rape is widely reported in these townships. Forcible relocation

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 613**

meant smaller land plots and splitting up of extended families which in turn meant less controls over male household leaders (Skidmore, 2002b).

Drug abuse is a significant problem in Burma. Nicotine, betelnut, codeine, and cough mixtures containing codeine, methamphetamine, opium, benzodiazepans, and, especially, heroin are all common substances easily purchased in urban and regional areas. It is relatively rare for women to be addicted to substances other than betel and opium, although alcoholic female patients do present to the psychiatric hospitals and the smoking of cheroot cigarettes is common among older women (Skidmore, 1998). The 1994 WHO smoking survey found that 47% of people aged over 15 are regular smokers (WHO, 2002).

Heroin is available in several grades in Burma, but the most common grade in known as No. 4 heroin and is highly refined. It is available on street corners, in schoolyards, in "shooting galleries," and via "courier" or "delivery" systems where regular deliveries are made to individuals' homes. Benzodiazepans are used as a form of self-medication when heroin is not available or as a form of slow withdrawal from heroin, although the recent availability of large numbers of inexpensive metamphetamines means that multiple drug use strategies are increasingly common (Skidmore, 1998).

The partial payment of government workers with palm oil has led to an enormous increase in heart attack, stroke, and hypertension as evidenced by both non-government organizations (NGOs) and by the presentation of patients at the traditional medicine hospitals (Skidmore, 1998).

The HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate was estimated by the CIA in 2001 to be 1.99%, with 530,000 people living with HIV/AIDS and 48,000 deaths from HIV/AIDS (CIA, 2002). The explosion of prostitution in the forcibly relocated townships coincided with the narcotics-fueled building boom in the capital cities in the mid-1990s. Nightclubs, karaoke bars, and other venues for prostitution proliferated in this lawless atmosphere.

The 40 years of insurgency in the border areas means that trauma is a prevalent medical problem for patients presenting to biomedical hospitals, clinics, and psychiatric hospitals. Such trauma is not confined to adults and is prevalent among soldiers who have seen active service, insurgent fighters, and all adults and children caught up in war zones within the country's borders. In addition, landmines and unexploded ordinances pose grave risks to combatants and residents of contested territory. Finally, forced portering for the army, forced labor, the incarceration of political prisoners, and the existence of remote work camps all further endanger the health of Burmese people (Skidmore, 2002b).

### **The Aged**

Life expectancy rates are low, there is no welfare system in Burma, and aged people have always been cared for within the extended family unit. Wealthier Buddhists may purchase a small home within the grounds of a monastery and so retire there. These Buddhist retirement communities are generally happy places with small garden patches, devotional and volunteer activities that revolve around the monastic cycle, and preparations for the next life. For destitute older people, cataracts and arthritis are major impediments to mobility and no help exists, outside of the charity of monasteries and neighbors.

Within family units, aged people command great respect and continue to wield power over the occupations and living arrangements of their children and grandchildren. They continue to control the family finances although they may spend increasing lengths of time at monasteries. Infrastructure for disabled people is non-existent and most roads are unpaved, making mobility difficult for aged people. They tend to stay home and "guard" the house against theft. When a family member becomes frail or incapacitated, other family members worry that they must stay on their own during the working day, afraid that unscrupulous people will take advantage of their aged relatives.

#### **Dying and Death**

As with all major life cycle events, death is managed for Burmese Buddhists by a series of religious proscriptions and practices that center upon the release of the soul, or butterfly spirit, from the corporeal body. Attachment to the body is not encouraged, but proper management of the enduring spirit is necessary to ensure an auspicious rebirth and avoid being trapped as a ghost.

Green deaths occur when a spirit is unable to leave surviving relatives. This can occur when women and babies die during childbirth, or when husbands die leaving their wives with several children to feed and raise alone. In the periurban townships ringing Rangoon and Mandalay, where infant and maternal mortality is high, several hospitals are known as "green hospitals." This term refers to the number of green deaths and resulting ghosts of babies who reside around the hospitals. Women, especially pregnant women, traveling home at dusk or at night, tie yellow ribbons around themselves or their bicycles to ward off these ghosts.