# **6**

## Jotirao Phule: Social Justice

*Niraj Kumar Jha*

Traditionally ignored in the mainstream academic circles, the articulations of social justice have now found their rightful place in intellectual circles along with the intensified political mobilizations of lower castes across India. The vision and praxis of Mahatma Jotirao Phule has come to be recognized as the pioneering contribution in this field. Dr B. R. Ambedkar, one of the definitive voices on the issue of social equity, acknowledged Phule as one of his gurus.<sup>1</sup> Phule and his colleagues held caste as slavery and at the root of their enslavement they found the Brahmin religious values and machinations. The ideas and arguments which they put forth in the course of their concerted attack on Brahminical hegemony form an ideology which has a vital role in the evolution of Indian perception towards self. No wonder that today social inclusion is the buzz word in policy making of the Indian establishment. In the nineteenthcentury Maharashtra, Jotirao Phule pioneered the lower-caste movement as its leader and most influential theoretician. Remarkably, in his attack on Brahminism, Phule broke new grounds, which throw unconventional theoretical insights on contemporary social realities and facilitate the understanding of the society and politics. He deserves a place of pride in the galaxy of modern Indian thinkers.

#### Life and Times

Jotirao Govindrao Phule was born in a low-caste family of Pune most probably in 1827.2 The family earned their living by growing flowers, fruits and vegetables, which was anyway their caste profession as *mali*s (gardeners). A year before the completion of his secondary school education, he read Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Men', which made a lasting impact on his mind. In 1848, the very year he finished his education, he founded a school for the *shudra* and the *atishudra* girls. He could afford his living without doing a job as by that time his father Govindrao had become a successful contract builder. But his father, fearing a high-caste backlash against his son for running a school for *shudra* and *atishudra* girls, made him leave home with his wife Savitri Bai whom he had married in 1840. Undeterred, he founded yet another school for girls of all castes this time, and later in 1855 an evening school for working-class people. Phule's taking of the gender issue at that time was by all means revolutionary. An attempt on his life was made in 1856 which shows the intensity of the reaction his works had engendered. In 1868, he threw open the drinking water tank in his house to the untouchables. He furthered his espousal of the gender cause by launching a campaign for widow remarriage. He founded the Satyashodhak Samaj (Society of the Seekers of Truth) on 24 September 1873 to realize his reformist vision. He was also a pioneer working for prohibition. He was a nominated member of the Pune Municipal Council from 1876 to 1882. He died on 28 November 1890.3

Phule's lasting contribution, however, is in the field of ideas. His reformative activism soon found articulation in his writings. Beginning with *Shivaji Powada*, a ballad, in 1869, he wrote a number of plays, poems and polemical works. The best known of his works *Gulamgiri* (Slavery) was published on 1 June 1873. This work, in a way, was the manifesto of the Satyashodhak Samaj. *Shetkarya Asud* (Cultivator's Whipcord) was another major work. His last work was *Sarvajanik Satya Dharma Pustak* (The Book of the True Faith), which was published after his death in 1891.4 *Ghulamgiri* focused on the origins of the Brahminical order and its ideological foundations. *Shetkarya Asud* exposed the exploitive character of the order and the last one offered a theology of egalitarianism. All three together presented an ideology which questioned and rejected the Brahminical hegemony both in religious and secular domains and countered its degrading effects on the lower castes and women of all castes.

The ideology Phule propagated can be appreciated only after one gets a feel of the times he lived through. He was born a little after the British conquest of western India. The establishment of the British rule had attracted a mixed response. Initially, the progressive sections of the Indian society had welcomed the British as the harbingers of modernity and a new age. They viewed the British rule as an antithesis to the oppressive feudal order and obscurantism. While hailing the British, the pioneers of the emergent middle class vigorously worked for reforms based on the twin fundamentals of modernity, viz., rationality and humanism. Humanism places men at the core of the human existence and also rejects inequality sanctioned by heaven. This was an eye-opener even to those who were at the lower rungs of the Indian society. They also viewed the British as liberators. The establishment of the British rule made them aware of the predicament and ordeal they endured in the traditional social set-up and also led them to the realization that their conditions were not divinely ordained and were completely alterable.

In this context in western India, the scenario was different from the other parts of the country. The region was ruled by the Peshwas, the de facto Brahmin rulers of the region; the nominal suzerain being the descendents of Shiwaji Bhosale, the founder who carved out a Maratha empire out of the Mughals. Here the traditional Brahminical, almost closed, order flourished with the state support. The order held the Brahmin *varna* or caste at the top of the caste hierarchy as the priestly

#### 72 Niraj Kumar Jha

class and helmsmen in government and administration as men of learning. They were followed by the Kshatriya *varna*, the warriors; the Vaishyas or traders; and the *shudras*, in succession. The last category of castes being at the lowest was consigned to serve the rest. Beyond the pale of these four *varnas*, there were caste communities who are in the current terminology known collectively as dalits. Considered impure and regarded as untouchables, they led the most dehumanized existence. The end of the Peshwa rule in 1818 heralded a new era of hope as well as of despair for the lower castes. First, this led to a severance of the political support to the Brahminical religious values, which at a more practical level ended the denial of education to the *shudras*. The growing number of educational institutions mostly in the hands of protestant missionaries not only provided equal access to all but encouraged the lower-caste pupils in whom they saw a constituency for conversions. With this in view, they criticized Hinduism for depriving them of rights in matters of education and religion. For a person like Phule, educated in one such school, the British rule certainly promised a great opportunity for uplift.<sup>5</sup>

The change in the land tenure regime was also a blow to the traditional order. In the Deccan, the British introduced the *ryotwari* system in which the cultivators paid taxes directly to the state. The ownership of land moved from the community to individual farmers who viewed the traditional *balutedari* system, under which service providers had claims over land produce, as burdensome. On the other hand, the imperial administration carried out considerable public works like constructions of roads, buildings and dams generating a great deal of employment and creation of wealth for non-Brahmins too who worked as sub-contractors and suppliers of building materials.<sup>6</sup> This social mobility among the lower castes heightened their aspirations and they strove to consolidate their gains. However the rising aspirations of the lower castes were stymied by the overwhelming presence of the Brahmins in every field where literary skills mattered. The opportunities the new regime offered them were soon overshadowed by the challenges it threw to them. The expanding administration of the British had offered openings to a larger number of Indians. Naturally, the skills required for such jobs were to the advantage of the high caste Hindus with their traditional association with literacy and education. In addition, for the same reason, they made their mark in professions like law and journalism. In particular it was the Brahmins who benefited the most from the expanding British administration. On the other hand, the unified imperial system brought into existence an all-India leadership constituted of well-educated and high-caste Indians. They pressed for participation in the governance and in response to their demands the British government initiated a process of gradually opening and expanding the access of Indians to the political bodies and higher services. Again in both imperial government and in the dissenting nationalist movement the Indians were mostly high caste Hindus and among them mostly the Brahmins. It was apparent that the British rule, rather inadvertently, reinforced the religious authority of Brahmins by vesting in them an array of political and administrative powers. Phule and his colleagues viewed the Brahmins in their apparently unrelated roles in religious and secular spheres colluding in order to protect their privileges and strengthening their powers over the lower castes. In their game plan, Phule and his fellows realized, the Brahmins would find the greatest ally in the conservative attitude of the lower castes. Phule and his associates thus reached the conclusion that without breaking the Brahmin's religious authority and the hierarchical values on which it was based, any real change was not possible. Therefore, they favoured a long period of benevolent rule of the British to continue so that the lower castes could develop the skills and social resources hitherto denied to them.7

#### Anatomy of Slavery

The Brahmin domination and the plight of the lower castes or the *shudras* and the *atishudras* were the core concerns of Phule's theory and praxis. 'Caste was to him *slavery*, as vicious and brutal as the enslavement of the Africans in the United States, but based in India not only on open conquest and subordination but also on deception and religious illusion'.8 In his introduction to *Gulamgiri* he opens with the crux of his thesis:

It has been conjectured that the Brahmins have ruled this country for more than three thousand years. They had come originally from distant lands, outside India, invaded it, attacked the original inhabitants of this land, conquered and forcibly turned them into slaves and oppressed them in several different ways. … The Brahmins … composed several treatises which they claimed to have obtained directly from God. … It was the decree of God, they wrote, that the *shudras* should diligently serve them and try to please them throughout their lives. Only then, they wrote, would their lives be fulfilled and their birth itself would be justified.9

Phule traces the origin of the predicament of the *shudras* and the *atishudras* to the distant and forgotten past. Deriving his thesis from contemporary studies suggesting that Aryans were not the original inhabitants of India but settlers, he saw the present iniquitous order in which the Brahmins lorded and the rest suffered rooted in the conquest of the land by the invading hordes from Western and Central Asia. He wrote in the preface to *Gulamgiri*:

Recent researches have demonstrated beyond a shadow of doubt that the Brahmins were not the aborigines of India. …. they were an off-shoot of the Great Indo-European race, from whom the Persians, Medes, and other Iranian nations in Asia and the principal nations in Europe like-wise descended. The affinity existing between the Zend, the Persian and Sanskrit languages, as also between all the European languages, unmistakably points to a common source of origin.<sup>10</sup>

Phule deconstructed the Brahminical texts to recast the narratives of warfare and wanton destruction the invading Brahmins perpetrated on the indigenous people in order to establish their unquestionable domination.

The wars of Devas and Daityas, or the Rakshasas, about which so many fictions are found scattered over the sacred books of the Brahmins, have certainly a reference to this primeval struggle. The original inhabitants with whom these earthborn Gods, the Brahmins, fought, were not inappropriately termed Rakshas, that is the protectors of the land. … They eventually succeeded in establishing their supremacy and subjugating the aborigines to their entire control. Accounts of these conquests, enveloped with a mass of incredible fiction, are found in the books of the Brahmins.<sup>11</sup>

Even a thorough military conquest cannot perpetuate a system of domination for long. In order to sustain itself an order needs not only an ideology but an elaborate administration of the relations of inequity. The Aryans for a better hold on the people devised, in Phule's words, 'that weird system of mythology, the ordination of caste, and the code of cruel and inhuman laws, to which we can find no parallel amongst other nations'.12

The institution of caste, which has been the main object of their laws, had no existence among them originally. That it was an after-creation of their deep cunning is evident from their own writings. The highest rights, the highest privileges and gifts, and everything that would make the life of a Brahmin easy, smooth going and happy—everything that would conserve or flatter their self-pride—were specially inculcated and enjoined, whereas the *shudras* and *atishudras* were regarded with supreme hatred and contempt, and the commonest rights of humanity were denied them. Their touch, nay, even their shadow, is deemed a pollution.<sup>13</sup>

Over this vast spread of land, the Brahmins were far lesser in numbers than the numerous *shudras* and *atishudras* and despite that they were able to hold their abhorrent hegemony for so long. Phule unveiled another craft of enslavement.

They realized that they could sustain themselves and their domination only if they divided the *shudras* and *atishudras* and antagonized them against each other. … To achieve this devious goal, they created the fraudulent rigmarole of the caste system and wrote several books to legitimize the caste system. … At that time, a section of these downtrodden people revolted against the Brahmins. In order to take revenge on them, the Brahmins separated them from the others and dictated that neither they nor their children should ever be touched by other people, called *mali* or *kunbi* today. After this, all their trade and commerce ended and they were reduced to a life of abject poverty and had to resort to the practice of eating the flesh of dead animals in order to survive. …This is how the Brahmins have divided the *shudras* into various castes, punished or rewarded them according to their loyalty, and established their control over them.<sup>14</sup>

Phule elaborated the abject degradation of the *shudras* and the *atishudras* under Brahmin rule in detail. Moving depictions of inhuman practices prevalent in India like the one given below in his writing justified his claims.

The *shudras*, who had to travel a lot in connection with their trade or some other business, had to face several problems on the road. It would be very difficult to walk especially in the early morning. This is the time when shadows are cast long. If the *shudra* walking on the road saw a Brahmin approaching, he had to stop walking and sit at the side of the road to avoid casting his shadow on the Brahmin. He would be so afraid of the Brahmin's wrath that he would even inconvenience himself. He would resume walking only once he had made sure that the Brahmin had gone off. In case his shadow fell on the Brahmin, the Brahmin would beat him to pulp and then immediately march off to the river to bathe and wash off the polluting effect of the *shudra's* shadow.<sup>15</sup>

The Brahmins, despite losing their pre-eminence of the Peshwa days, Phule asserted, remained at the helms of affairs. Besides, in their traditional capacity of priests, they exploited the lower castes in various other ways. With their superior education and cunning, they monopolized all higher ranks of emolument under the British administration. From the village level to the Collector's and Revenue Commissioner's Courts and other departments of the public services like engineering, education and others remained in the hands of the upper castes. While they favoured their relatives and fellow caste men, they heaped scorn on the *ryots* and left no opportunity to fleece them. Even the higher European officers generally viewed men and things through Brahmin spectacles and hardly had the correct picture. Phule noted:

Though the Brahmin of the old Peshwa school is not quite the same as the Brahmin of the present day, though the march of Western ideas and civilization is undoubtedly telling on his superstition and bigotry, he has not as yet abandoned his time-cherished notions of superiority or the dishonesty of his ways.<sup>16</sup>

On the other side of the divide, the *shudras* were not only reconciled to their horrendous living conditions but often resisted the people who worked for their liberation. Phule lamented:

The arguments of the Brahmins have been imprinted so firmly on the minds of the *shudras* that they, like the Negro slaves in America, oppose the very people who are willing to fight for them, and free them from the chains of slavery. It is very surprising that the oppressed people choose to remain resigned to their despicable state of existence; they proclaim that they have no complaints about their circumstances and resist the very people who are willing to help them and fight for their rights. Not only do they reject the offer of help, they are willing to fight those very people who want to help them. Now their friends do not stand to gain anything by fighting for the downtrodden.17

Phule's depiction of slavery has strong contents of universality. His writings delineate the process of enslavement, which explain almost every system of domination and subjugation. To begin with, people can be subjugated and for periods spanning millennia by the use of force and violence. This is a fact which he puts across very powerfully and can be substantiated by looking at the history of societies across the globe. In modern history, the established superiority of the white race is based on the brutal uses and display of military power.

Slavery, however, needs to be severed from the possibility of slipping into rebellion and to be harmonized into a cohesive social order wherein the iniquitous relations of privileges and deprivations can be maintained without being questioned. For this, the collective memory is tinkered with. The accounts of resistance, cultural resources and intellectual traditions of the targeted people are deliberately erased from the collective memory and the saga of the victories, martial traditions, and mystical powers of the dominant people are put forth wherever possible.

Willing compliance of the subjugated people, however, needs greater efforts. These efforts include two interrelated methods. First is the policy of keeping the deprived people ignorant. They are denied education and kept away from the world of knowledge. Ignorance or lack of proper knowledge is the very basis of slavery. Secondly, willing compliance is secured through the propagation of an ideology. Traditionally ideologies evolved around perceptions of divine ordination. The subject people were made to believe their existence to be perfectly normal and the imposed drudgeries and deprivations as their divine duty and state respectively. Through all these means, the dominant people of the society constantly impress their superiority over the rest. Other crafts of maintaining slavery include the policy of divide and rule and the regime of reward and punishment. People are not only kept ignorant but also divided. Loyal ones are rewarded and the rebels are punished. With the passage of time, subjected people take their status not only as legitimate but resist and oppose those who work for their liberation. This is the most difficult aspect of a long prevailing hegemony to be challenged; a task which Phule undertook very skilfully.

#### The State of Enslavement

Phule saw the evil impact of enslavement continue unabated during the colonial rule. The rampant fleecing of the *shudra* farmers in the name of religion by the Brahmins and untold harassment and extortion of the farmers by the Brahmin-dominated British administration led to their abject dehumanization. Phule in his *Cultivator's Whip-Cord* narrated the real-life experiences of exploitation and deprivations of the lower castes under the British rule. Phule described elaborately farmers' exploitation in the name of religion. On the one hand, all rituals, festivities, auspicious occasions, pilgrimages and life-cycle ceremonies beginning from conception (*garbhdhaan*) to the last rites (*shraadha*) were pretexts for the Brahmins to extract some offerings from the farmers. They resorted to instilling divine fear, bullying, thuggery and even beggary to achieve their objectives. On the other hand, as the Brahmins dominated all the departments of the government, they harassed and exploited the *shudras* by using their caste connection.

Phule asserted that the *shudras* remained ignorant and exploited till date because the Brahmins had barred education to them from the time they established their rule in ancient times and subsequently very resolutely worked against the forces which could liberate them. The Buddha was one such influence who challenged and shook the foundations of Brahminism. However, later, Adi Shankaracharya revived and reinstated Brahmin supremacy, not only by bringing in some reforms in Hinduism but also with the help of the sword. Similarly, when the followers of Prophet Mohammad invaded India and started to liberate the *shudras*, Brahmins, like Mukundaraja and Dnyanoba, wrote tactical books and 'crazed the ignorant farmer to such an extent that the farmers started to think of the Mohammedans as low, along with the Quran, and started hating them instead'.18 In Maharashtra, a Vedanti called Ramdas Swami conspired with Gangabhat to distance Shivaji from the farmer saint Tukaram and later Shivaji's principal servants, the Brahmin Peshwas, confined his heirs to Satara and became the de facto rulers. At the time when many *shudras* and *atishudras* were redeeming their humanity by converting to Christianity, the Brahmins tried generating all sorts of opinions against Islam and Christianity corrupting the minds of farmers. The farmers so exploited in the name of religion and by the Brahmin-dominated administration were left with hardly any means to send their children to schools. Even if someone had the means, ill advised by the same Brahmins, he did not have the wish or the courage to do so.

The cultivator's situation only worsened during the British rule. Prior to the establishment of the British rule, large number of men from farming families served the native kings and their chiefs and supplemented the income of their families, and were also able to pay their taxes. The British rule eliminated all these grand employers and the peace ensured by the British also led to the rapid growth in population, which combined to put pressure on the land. Earlier, the families which found their farm produce insufficient would supplement their livelihoods by securing produce from nearby forests. The colonial regime monopolized all forests, hills, vacant lands and even pastures and brought these under a mammoth forest department, depriving farmers of their means of subsistence. Meanwhile, the machine-made cheap goods from Britain flooding Indian markets further destroyed the avenues for local employment. The poor labourers, artisans and, in particular, weavers were the worst sufferers and most of them faced acute starvation.

The lower-caste poor, who had lost their ancestral livelihood, could not even take up seafaring for a living as it was tabooed by Brahmins. This deprived them of a major source of income, leaving them to accept their predicament as a natural phenomenon. The landless labourers could hardly find work with peasants with lands as repeated farming on the same land had reduced their fertility. Lower production meant that they could hardly support their kith and kin and were in no position to hire extra hands. The farmers had to bear losses even of their livestock. With the establishment of the British rule, cows and oxen were butchered for eating with impunity. The seizure of pastures by the forest departments had already depleted the supply of feeds for cattle and occurrences of droughts worsened the fodder supply leading to large-scale deaths among them. Epidemics and diseases took their own toll on the animals. With not enough animal power available for cultivation the produce declined further. Even if there was timely rainfall and a good harvest crop stood in the fields, the farmers were unable to protect the crops from wild boars and pigs because they had been disallowed to keep guns by the cowardly government. Despite agriculture being so burdened and production depleted, the government while reassessing the ignorant farmers' lands every thirty years never failed to raise taxes. The farmers often fell into the hands of ruthless moneylenders and in the process they were often totally ruined.

Impoverished farmers were left with hardly any means to send their children to schools. The government raised huge amounts of local funds but opened only a few schools which were manned by the same Brahmins obsessed with rituals of pollution and purity. The futility of education imparted in these schools was manifest by the fact that pupils graduating out of these schools hardly found a government job. Illiterate and ignorant farmers often indulged in feuds among themselves over petty issues and fell prey to local administration. The personnel of revenue, police and justice departments all joined to loot the hapless peasants. The clerks, lawyers and judges all behaved haughtily and showed no respect for the age and social status of the farmers. Despite peasants paying heavy taxes, there was absolutely no one to pay attention to their grievances.

Therefore there is not any manner in which the farmer can convey his condition to the white officer, who are inured in their customary luxury, status, attendants, or to black officers who are engrossed in their wealth, their higher caste and colour, and their rituals of purity …<sup>19</sup>

### Trajectory of Liberation

Phule's treatise on slavery also charted a course for liberation. He held that mythology and other texts of Hindu philosophy and law like Vedas and *Manusmriti* were the deceitful constructs of the Brahmins. He said that the Brahmins propagated their crafty works as divine ordination in order to sanctify their privileges and to condemn the defeated lot to lasting subjection. In order to remove the spell of holy narratives on the believers he adopted a two-pronged strategy with regard to these scriptures. He first trashed the Hindu gods, the incarnations of Vishnu and the associated myths and attempted to shred the rationale, holiness and the grip of the holy texts on the minds of the masses. His depiction of Brahma, the creator of the universe according to the Hindu mythology, is an instance.

… since Brahma had genital organs at four places—mouth, arms, groins and legs (the four *varnas* were born out of those four organs according to the Manusmriti)—each of them must have menstruated at least for days each, and he must have sat aside in seclusion, as an untouchable person, for sixteen days in all, each month. If that was so, then who looked after his house during those sixteen days?<sup>20</sup>

… if Brahma really had four faces, he must have had eight breasts, four belly buttons, four genitals and four anuses.<sup>21</sup>

So a clever clerk called Brahma took the reins of administration in his hands. He was a very cunning person, a turncoat, who could always adapt himself to any situation and achieve his own selfish ends. He was extremely untrustworthy; that is probably why he was called Brahma of the four mouths.22

Secondly, he turned the holy narratives upside down by giving his own versions in which he demonized the Hindu deities, held them as deceitful Brahmin aggressors and commemorated the devilish villains portrayed therein as the heroic defenders of the land. Hindu mythology describes nine incarnations of Lord Vishnu, the upholder of the existence. He is said to have incarnated on earth in order to reinstate the reign of justice. Phule held the different avatars (incarnations) viz., *Matsya, Kachchhap, Varaha, Narsimha* and *Vaman* as successive real warriors chiefs of Brahmins who cunningly defeated the righteous kings of this land viz., Shankhasur, Hiranyaksha, Hiranyakashapu and Bali.

The legend of Bali, the benevolent king of Deccan, who was banished by Vamana, an avatar of Lord Vishnu, to the netherworld has evocatively been portrayed by Phule. Bali was a non-Brahmin king in whose reign equity and prosperity prevailed. Vishnu appeared before Bali as a dwarf Brahmin (Vamana) and sought a piece of land equal to that covered in three steps as a gift. Granted his wish, the short Brahmin turned so big that he covered the whole earth in one step, the whole of heaven with the next and then demanded more land for placing his third step. Bali offered his body. Vamana laid his foot on his chest thus making him his slave and commanded him to the netherworld. People in the western part of the Indian peninsula still celebrate his visit to the earth once a year, as told in the legend, from the netherworld and pray for the reinstatement of his rule. On Vijayadashami, the Brahmin and non-Brahmin divide appears stark with regard to their respective rituals for Bali. On this day, the Brahmin man, with the twig of the Apta tree, pricks the stomach of the image of Bali made of rice flour kept at the threshold of his house and enters the house by putting his foot over the image, whereas in Kshatriya families, women-folk circulate lighted earthen lamps around the face of their husbands and wish for the kingdom of Bali to descend again.

Phule's vilification of Parashurama, another avatar of Vishnu, was absolute. According to mythology, he had annihilated many generations of the Kshatriyas. Phule said that the Kshatriyas were the warriors among the *shudras* who fought against the Brahmins in general and Parashurama in particular. The *Mahars* of Maharashtra was a distorted form of the word *Maha-ari* literally meaning the great enemy, Phule reasoned. This was how they were described by their Brahmin opponents. Phule depicted Parashurama as a ruthless butcher in the name of a warrior who did not spare even new-born babies and pregnant women of the Kshatriyas and pursued them wherever they fled in order to annihilate them. He wrote:

Parashuram was a bully; he was an audacious, vicious and barbarous villain. He did not hesitate to behead his own mother Renuka.23

Phule did not refer to Ramchandra as an avatar of Vishnu but as the son of a Kshatriya chieftain. In Phule's version, Parashuram was defeated by Ramchandra in a battle and the former took refuge in the Tal Konkan and ultimately committed suicide for not being able to bear the disgrace. Similarly, he showed Vamana defeated by Banasura, the successor of Baliraja and perishing under the siege laid by Banasura. But, he concluded, the Brahmins ultimately succeeded by using things like black magic and Vedic incantations having mysterious powers. The vanquished could see the light of liberation by what he called the return of Baliraja. He did not mention an incarnation of Bali but what he may have meant was the emergence of rational and egalitarian ideas. He wrote:

… Baliraja came into this world. He realized that the great Almighty God, our great Father and Creator, had given us the true and holy knowledge and had granted everyone an equal right to it. He fathomed the Divine Will, that this knowledge be shared by all alike.24

He said that millions of Europeans had become the followers of Baliraja and he had brought a tremendous upheaval there. He listed the ancestors of Thomas Paine as the followers of Baliraja. In fact, he said, several Balis appeared to have given a jolt to Brahmin supremacy. Shakya Muni or the Buddha was one of such rational sages. The Buddha, he said, prevailed over the Brahmins but a few escaped to the South and from among them was born Shankaracharya who reorganized Brahminism and with the help of the sword annihilated the followers of Shakya Muni and reinstated Brahmin supremacy which was challenged only with the coming of the British. The British ended Brahmin rule and brought along with them the American and Scottish missionaries, whom Phule regarded as the followers of the Baliraja of the West, that is, Jesus Christ. These missionaries relieved the *shudras* from the bondages of the Brahmins by imparting the true teachings of a God who did not sanctify inequality among human beings. With the British rule and the missionaries' activities, Phule said, the Brahmins were no longer in a position to dominate the *shudras* so they intended to drive away the British. He blamed the Brahmins for deceiving the *shudras* again by inciting them against the British. On the other hand, they continued to occupy various posts under the British administration and from the bottom to the top there was hardly any office without Brahmins. He blamed Brahmin incitements for the various rebellions against the British and in particular for leading the 1857 rebellion. He specifically mentions 'the deshastha brammans from the north like Bhatpande, the konkanstha brahman, Nana, Tatya Topya' were responsible for the rebellion, and the *shudra* princes like Shinde and Holkar for extending all support to the British throughout the rebellion. Phule ridiculed the British for preferring the Brahmins to man the administration despite their treacherous rebellion against them. He called these Brahmin employees of the British as pen-wielding butchers who left no occasion to extort bribes from the *shudras*, favour their own kinsmen, and misguide the busy high European officers so that the miseries of the *shudras* went unnoticed. He very passionately narrated the travails of the poor *ryots* who had to run from pillar to post seeking justice which always eluded them because of the Brahmin grip over the British administration.

Despite the shortcomings of the British administration, he wished the British Raj to continue and demanded greater intervention from the administration. He recommended that the government place at least one English or Scottish preacher in each village with a grant of some land

for his upkeep and assigning him the task of preaching and submitting a report at least once in a year on every occurrence in the village. This would stop the Brahmins organizing revolts against the government and impart true knowledge to the *shudras*, who would not be beguiled by the Brahmins any further. He also recommended that the government not employ individuals of only one caste as *patil* or *kulkarni* but like in the military appoint candidates on the basis of their ability for the job through examinations. He also suggested that the government stop all grants to the education department and divert the funds to the collectorates. He added that the education for pupils of all castes selected on the basis of merit should be free under the close supervision of the European collectors. He appealed to the government to employ people in proportion to their population and if there weren't enough people from all castes then only Europeans should fill those posts. He also suggested that retired Marathi speaking European collectors be made to stay in the villages with pension for life. Their duty would be to keep a close watch on the Brahmins and the *kulkarnis* so that they could prevent mischief and frauds. He wrote:

This will expose all the shameless frauds of the *bhats* in the Education Department and check the anarchy there. This will also enlighten the oppressed *shudras* and true knowledge will enable them to renounce the irrational domination of the *bhats* over them. I am quite convinced that they will never forget the obligations of the Queen, who alone can remove the bond of slavery tied around their necks by the wily Brahmins.25

Phule said that it was foolish to oppose the British who were their saviour. Instead, they had to make the best use of this opportunity for freeing themselves from the slavery of the Brahmins while the British rule lasted. Not only did he hold the uprising of 1857 a Brahmin led rebellion but he also called the nationalist movement a high caste elitist project. He often attacked those Brahmins who were moderate, liberal reformers grouped in organizations like the Prarthana Samaj, Brahma Samaj, Sarvjanik Sabha and the Congress. All these were to him projects for deceiving the masses and establishing upper caste hegemony.26 He openly questioned the *shudras* making a common cause with the Brahmins. He raised questions like:

… Brahmins think of cow-piss as sacred … and they drink cow-piss and purify themselves. And the same *bhats* and Brahmins … think of the *shudra* farmer as low. Thus how will the farmers and Brahmins unite?27

Most *bhat* Brahmins enact all manner of impure things with the dancing girls or harlots in town, but the same Arya *bhats* think it sinful to inter-marry with the simple and innocent farmers' daughters. So how will the farmers and Brahmins unite?28

Most of the *bhats* and Brahmins do not allow the *shudra* farmer to touch the stone or metal idols in their temples, and do not eat with them, even at a distance, but put leftovers in his plate, and are done with it, so how will the farmers and Brahmins unite?29

By mocking the holy mythical figures and portraying them as cunning and brutal invaders, Phule sought to demolish the divine import of the Brahminical scriptures and instil a sense of outrage in the lower castes so that they could rise up to claim their rights. He also sought to boost the morale of the downtrodden by depicting the Brahmins being repeatedly defeated in his restatement of mythology. This was only the starting point of his critique of Brahmin hegemony. He very painstakingly charted the exploitation and oppression of non-Brahmins by the Brahmins in both their religious and secular roles. He gave a vivid account of the Brahmins in their various religious roles as priests, mendicants, fortune tellers, matchmakers, story tellers, custodians of holy places and their fleecing of the lower castes on any conceivable occasion employing all sorts of means like cajoling, frightening, cheating or bullying and he went on to describe their domination and networking in the British administration and professions like law and journalism, in representative bodies like the municipality, and in the nationalist movement. Phule very successfully exposed how the Brahmins reinforced their hegemony from their standing in different walks of life and ensured their domination and privileges at the cost of the toiling peasants and other working peoples.

For overcoming Brahmin hegemony, mere exposure of their latent powers was not enough, nor the subverting of their sacred texts. It required greater efforts. One of the primary focuses of the Satyashodhak Samaj was the removal of Brahmins from ritualistic roles. The campaign won many adherents and the Samaj made available trained non-Brahmin priests for performing marriage and other rituals wherever it could provide. At a broader level, he and his associates championed a Maratha identity drawing resources from the non-Brahmin warrior and cultivator traditions and clever manipulations of Hindu scriptures. The term *Maratha* earlier denoting Marathi speakers was gradually evolved into an identity marker for the labouring and cultivating castes united in opposition to the Brahminical hegemony. And 'it was Phule who, almost singlehandedly, provided the reinterpretations of the past, the potent symbolism and the vivid imagery which was to form the ideological substance of this identity'.30 Along with exhorting the lower caste people to make the best use of the opportunities offered by the British rule he fervently appealed to the British administration to limit the role of Brahmins in administration and keep a check on them so that they could not think of rebelling against the British. In employment and in education he advocated proportionate access for all castes.

#### Critiquing Colonialism

Generally, commentaries depict Phule's main concern being 'Brahminical Colonialism' instead of British colonialism. Anti-Brahminism is indeed the core of Phule's articulations and activities and he viewed British rule as a godsend opportunity to get rid of the Brahminical yoke. Primarily, it was a sense of gratitude for Phule and his associates '… British colonialism inadvertently made available certain normative and cognitive tools with which to fight Brahminical colonialism'.31 Besides, his projections of the colonial rule were coloured by his expectations from the regime. He intended to counter-pose the alien rule against the deeply entrenched high caste hegemony. He often started with scathing criticism of the colonial rule but ended up blaming the lackadaisical officers or the scheming Brahmin employees. In fact his quest of fundamental freedom forbade him to be forthright in his criticism of the colonial regime. In *Shetkarya Asud*, he clearly stated that the peasants' plight has worsened during the colonial rule. In particular, he was very critical of the lazy and luxurious way of life of the European officials who were always inured in pleasure seeking and depended on their scheming subordinates for administration.

It is again very surprising to see Phule writing that the Empire would not last forever when it was at the height of its glory. He wrote in *Gulamgiri,* 'Let me tell you, the English are here today, but who knows whether they will be here tomorrow? They won't be there till eternity. Therefore, all the *shudra* should make haste to free themselves from the ancestral slavery of these bhats'.32 This observation reflected his awareness of the unsustainable character of colonialism. At times, his condemnation of the British rule is too sharp to be overlooked. 'O, cannot the farmer be invited to the governor's court, the farmer, on whose labours the government depends for its army, its ammunition, and the inordinate salaries of its black employees, and the lassitudinous luxury of the white ones, and their pensions? O, should such be the condition of one who is the foundation of all nations? He does not get enough food to feed his belly, not enough cloth to cover himself, and the sword of the taxes to be paid is constantly hanging on his head, and the hunting dogs of the lords do not even sniff at him?'<sup>33</sup> He also said when the peasants would redeem their rights the British would have to flee the country. He wrote, '… the moment the farmer educates himself and acquires knowledge, he will carry his whip on his shoulder, and he will bring the goddess of wealth back to his own house, and make her stay there happily. If this ever happens, the English will have to scream and yell, and travel to America, and somehow to manage to fill their bellies by working hard day and night'.34 The fact being as Gail Omvedt writes, 'Unlike some of the later non-Brahmin leaders who maintained an unqualified loyalty to the Raj, he seems to have viewed it as largely destructive in economic terms; it was only on cultural grounds that he saw it as providing a foundation for the liberation of the masses'.<sup>35</sup>

#### Education for Liberation

Whatever may be the trajectory of subjection of the lower castes their liberation rests primarily on education. Providing education to the masses was the crux of the remedies Phule offered for change. This is the pioneering and lasting contribution of Phule. His prescriptions in this regard have been conceptualized and are practiced as inclusive education in contemporary parlance. He emphatically laid down the lack of education as the root cause of the degradation of lower castes:

Without knowledge, intelligence was lost, without intelligence morality was lost and without morality was lost all dynamism! Without dynamism money was lost and without money the *shudras* sank. All his misery was caused by the lack of knowledge.36

He very skilfully located a formidable source of Brahminic power in their monopoly over knowledge and the knowledge systems ensuring their control over the rest of society and which was being extended, in Phule's analysis, through appropriation of educational facilities in colonial times.<sup>37</sup> What the evil of ignorance could cost to the lower castes could not be better elaborated than by Phule himself:

In sum, since there is no book amongst the *mali, kunbis* and *dhangars* which could be said to have come from god, like the Bible, brave and great kings among them, like the Shindes and Holkars, and the lords of the farmer's children, and cows, cannot even read even basic books of Sanskrit conjugations because of the obstacle of the Arya *bhats*, they do not know that they are human, and what their real rights are. If we say this is not so, then why would the farmers have maintained the tradition of washing the Brahmin's feet, and drinking that water? Why would they have worshipped stone and metal idols, cows, and snakes, and plants, and treated them as gods? Because the Arya Brahmins have kept them ignorant for their own selfish purposes, the farmers do not have the power of balanced thought, and believe in all manner of ghosts and creatures and practise all manner of mumbo-jumbo and magic and waste their own money. They lose their lives too, because they do not believe in medicine but in shamans and magicians.<sup>38</sup>

The primary cause of degradation of the lower castes was the denial of education to them by the Brahmins. He further pointed out that the lower castes were so badly fleeced that they were not in a position to afford education for their children, and even if they had the resources they had the least inclination for sending their children to schools. Often they were ill advised by the very same Brahmins for not sending their children to schools. On the other hand, in colonial India, the schools were so few that they could hardly cater to even a small portion of population. Even those schools were manned by Brahmins, who were reluctant to teach the children of *shudras* and *atishudras.* He also resented the government splurging huge sums on higher education, '… the greater portion of the revenues of the Indian Empire are derived from the *ryot's* labour … That Government should expend profusely a large portion of revenue thus raised on the education of the higher classes for it is these only who take advantage of it, is anything but just or equitable'.39 Phule advocated massive expansion of primary education and employment of trained teachers from lower castes.

#### Gender Justice

Phule's liberation project also engaged the gender issue prominently. It was also a major aspect of his theology discussed below. Besides opening a school exclusively for girls, he also ran a home for pregnant Brahmin widows to deliver their babies, who often killed or abandoned their 'illegitimate' babies. He adopted a baby delivered by a Brahmin widow in this home as his son. He advocated remarriage for Brahmin widows and was against the inhuman Brahmin practice of shaving off the head of their widows. He had defended Tarabai Shinde and Pandita Ramabai when they faced public acrimony for their radical views on gender issues. Phule suggested that gender inequality had to be contingent on general iniquitous caste relations. He equated the status of women with that of the *shudras* and *atishudras* and presented them 'as victims of Brahminic culture and power in common with other lower caste and untouchable people'.40 He did not favour categorization of women on caste lines. To him, women formed a single category of oppressed like the *shudras* and the *atishudras*. He negated *varna* differentiation among women and treated gender as a separate factor for oppression.

In Phule's opinion, women like the *shudras* and *atishudras*, were denied education in order to keep them ignorant. He held Brahminism and *Manusmriti* responsible for evils like abortion and infanticide. Thus he indirectly suggested that it was only Brahmin widows who were victims of the ban on widow marriage and the ideas of purity and chastity. For women too, he suggested knowledge and education as means of liberation.41 Phule held the family as being at the centre of a social organization and also the centre of oppression in society. He was the first one to point out that young brides were used as bonded labour by the family they married into. Phule was convinced that the family and the marriage system must be reformed.<sup>42</sup> He never treated men and women as a single category. He talked of equal human rights for both men and women.

#### Theology of Equality

Unlike Periyar, who led the anti-Brahmin movement in the Madras Presidency, Phule was a believer and had a theology to offer, which sought a 'monotheistic, humane and benevolent'43 makeover of Hinduism. In this endeavour, he rejected the mediatory role played by the Brahmins between God and the believers. His book *Sarvajanik Satya Dharma Pustak* (The Book of True Faith) published posthumously in 1891, which, G. P. Deshpande writes, is 'almost like Phule's final testament' and summarizes his theology.44

Phule's articulation of equality of all human beings, in fact, emanated from his belief in the Creator.

… the Creator of this universe is also the Creator of human beings. It would not be surprising if He, because He is merciful, would want all human beings to enjoy all human privileges and rights.<sup>45</sup>

If the Creator is one, why is there mutual hatred among human beings? Phule raised these questions.

Why is it then that the human beings living in different states and nations hate each other? How and why are the foolish passions of religions and national hatreds generated?46

And he answered:

All the religions and revelatory books that man has produced on our planet, one and all, do not contain a consistent universal truth. This is so because in every such book are to be seen passages interpolated into those texts by certain groups of individuals as the situation in their views warranted and as their dogmatism and mulishness dictated. Consequently those religion or faiths did not in the final analysis work towards the good of all. This in turn resulted in sects and sectarianism. Small wonder that these sects hated and turned against each other.<sup>47</sup>

Phule rejected the ideas of heaven and hell on the simple ground that nobody had seen them and such ideas persisted because they had not been subjected to logical thought.

Phule's theology was a doctrine of social justice, and gender justice was its core component. He said that human beings were superior to all other beings and among humans, the women were superior to men because they bore children and nursed them, were faithful and dependable and sacrificed for the sake of relations. The men, on the other hand, were exploitative and lustful. They kept their women uneducated so that they could not question their authority and immoral way of life. While women were forbidden to remarry even when widowed, men could marry many times and keep many wives. The problem was more acute among Brahmins. Among them old men could marry young girls and when young women became widowed they became victims of the lust of their own family members. This led to other complications like unwanted pregnancies which they were forced to abort and if unsuccessful in aborting they resorted to infanticide.

Phule asserted that the Creator had indeed given men the faculty of discretion to safeguard against lust, but they did not use that discretion. The problem was that they do not apply the same standard of morality for themselves and women. A man could marry many women and justify his action by referring to some religious text, but the same man would be aghast if a woman married more than one man to satisfy her lust. Phule wrote:

If you do not like such behaviour on the part of women (marrying more than one man), is it surprising that women would dislike similar filthy behaviour on the part of men? Both men and women are equally qualified to enjoy all human rights in equal measure. How can anyone then have one standard for women and quite another for lustful, adventurous men?48

Phule also vehemently rejected caste-based differentiation which at that time was accepted as a natural phenomenon. He said that there are no castes in species like animals and birds, how could this exist among human animals? If Brahma created castes, he would have ordained the same for other creatures. And the Brahmins could not claim superior status on the basis of the caste practices, because they hardly bothered with the same practices when wining and dining with the Europeans. Professions did not make castes, as castes did not decide professions. A peasant's sons could become a horticulturist, shepherd or cultivator, but that did not change their caste. Even if the job done by someone of a particular caste was dirty, the caste could not be set aside as an inferior caste; in the same way, a mother could be held as a person of an inferior caste because she cleans the excreta of her baby. And castes did not have some inherent qualities. Good and bad qualities were not hereditary. Well-educated individuals from any caste could compete with individuals from other castes. Thus Phule questioned the legitimacy of caste.

It can be safely said that Phule believed in divine intervention and in his belief all religions were integrated under the divine order and mission. He clearly suggested that the caste system did not have the divine sanction and God had indeed intervened for the destruction of the castesystem. He asserted that the monotheistic Mussalmans, who did not believe in the caste-system, were sent to India by God in order to rescue people from caste-based slavery. But, according to him, the Mussalmans soon immersed themselves in luxuries and thus betrayed the Creator. The merciful God then deprived them of their power and glory and instead civilized the English primitives, granted them qualities like extraordinary valour and sent them to rescue the *shudras* and the *atishudras* from the Aryan Brahmins. Some Englishmen among them following the teaching of a sage of their religion (Jesus Christ or Yashwant as Phule calls him) were in all sincerity making every effort to rescue the *shudras* and the *atishudras* from their unnatural slavery.<sup>49</sup> To Phule, thus, the colonization of India was divinely mandated and He so willed the annihilation of the caste-system in India.

#### Contribution: An Assessment

What Phule presented as 'history' was basically an instrument of his political goal. His writings do point to some broad trends which could have happened but what he says cannot be held 'history' as such. In his accounts the ease with he moves from mythological to historical figures is anything but astounding. He mixes myths with history and correlates them with existing social relations and traditions to make them look authentic. His history can best be called an indicative history. Moreover he does a fantastic makeover of the Hindu mythology and presents that as history. This is again something which cannot pass as acceptable discourse. He may be credited for turning mythology from an ideology of oppression to a tool of liberation but it can only be accepted as a schema of activism rather than theorization.

In fact, Phule's accounts are tactical, and that is more deliberate by intention and forthright in form than the writings of those whom he accuses of such writings in the name of philosophy or religion. Very skilfully he formulated the Hindu social structure to be what G. P. Deshpande calls *dvaivarnik* (two-*varna*), in which society was shown to be polarized into the Brahmins and the non-Brahmins and rejected the prevailing four-*varna* social structure. His formulation resonates of the class struggle thesis of Karl Marx wherein he wipes off all social divisions to show the society to be divided into only two classes. Gail Omvedt attributes Phule's theory containing 'a kind of incipient historical materialism in which economic exploitation and cultural dominance are interwoven. In contrast to a class theory, communities become the basis for contradiction (the *shudra-atishudra* peasantry versus the Brahmin bureaucracy and religious order); in contrast to changing property relations, conquest, force, state power and ideology are seen as driving factors'.<sup>50</sup> While propounding the bipartisan *dvaivarnik* division of Hindu society, Phule brushed aside the multilayered oppression of the caste structure. In the caste system, oppressors are not only Brahmins; they are invariably the dominant caste of any region, and for a caste to be dominant, ritual superiority which the Brahmins command is only one of the several factors. 'Ritually higher status is only one of the four criteria of dominance as defined by Srinivas; the other three are education, economic strength and numerical majority'.51 Post-colonial history testifies to the oppressiveness of caste system persisting despite the changes in the character of regimes in independent India. Most of the governments of the Indian Union are now overwhelmingly manned by the erstwhile lower castes of India or Other Backward Castes (OBC) as they are officially referred to, but caste and gender based oppressions continue unabated.

In this context, it is pertinent to note that the divide between the backward castes and Scheduled Castes persists. Atrocities on dalits are rampant even in Tamil Nadu where the Dravidians hold complete sway and Brahmins are thoroughly marginalized. Omvedt cites Eleanor Zelliot, 'Just as the Justice Party in Madras failed to include significant numbers of Untouchables, the non-Brahmin movement in Maharashtra could not make common cause with Untouchables'. She cites Zelliot to deny the divide and clarifies that even Ambedkar was critical of the hypocrisy of non-Brahmin leaders but he and others never had any doubt that Brahmins were the 'dominant caste' in the system as a whole. Omvedt thus denies the divide and writes, 'In a real sense he (Ambedkar) was the heir of Phule's call for a movement of *shudras* and *atishudras*'.<sup>52</sup> However, the political developments in Uttar Pradesh deny the proposition that these two caste groupings are natural allies. The Bahujan Samaj Party led by Mayawati has turned the Phule-Ambedkarian discourse upside down. The party led by a dalit lady Mayawati having a solid chunk of vote bank in the dalits themselves completely retracted from their anti-Brahmin rhetoric and went to the extent of forming an alliance with Brahmins to defeat a party which has its core support base in the backward castes led by a person from the leading backward caste of the state.

In this context, a general fallacy with most of the articulations and movements of social justice in India can be noticed. In effect, they seek to transfer power from one caste or category of castes to another category of castes and in turn when they succeed they produce counter hegemonies and the emerging hegemonies are often no better than earlier ones. The proponents of social justice seek their cause from the viewpoint of primordial identity groupings instead of seeking justice by creating free and empowered individuals. Mostly they are guided by the psychology of retributive justice amongst groups. This perception of justice betrays medievalism.

Besides, the theory of Aryans being outsider invaders is contested. More than being contentious, the issue as to whether the Aryans were invading settlers from faraway lands or the original inhabitants of this land is irrelevant. It is not possible to establish that there exists a racially separable Aryan stock in India. Even if this divide is accepted for argument's sake, the historical facts are clear that invasions and settlements from outside never ceased in India. Intermingling of invading armies, hordes, immigrating traders, missionaries and the refugees with local populace has been an unceasing process from time immemorial in this subcontinent and drawing a clear divide between an indigenous stock and an original conquering race subjugating the indigenous inhabitants and holding their sway till date is hardly tenable. Moreover, to sift a pure heredity of an Aryan Brahmin from that of a Dravidian Shudra is impossible because it does not exist. Unstoppable sexual encounters among men and women of different castes through ages do not allow such divisions to continue even if such divisions can be speculated to exist in the almost unknown distant past.53

The fact to be appreciated is that Phule attacked a degenerate caste system and its abominable practices by appropriating the same resources on which the system was based. Phule turned the Aryan race theory, current during his times and used by people like Tilak to justify Brahmin superiority, on its head by formulating that Brahmins had indeed descended from the conquering Indo-Europeans, who far from being superior were deceitful and cruel.54 The other ingenious aspect of his polemics was that he presented the different areas of Brahmin activity, in religion, rural economy, and administration which looked unrelated as 'an essentially unitary force' and 'presenting this as a fact so obvious that it needed no particular argument or demonstration to prove it'.<sup>55</sup> On the other side, as he and his associates found the deep religious conservatism of the much oppressed groups being the main hindrance to their reformist agenda, they embarked upon a process of a collective identity formation for all non-Brahmin castes by appropriating the warrior and cultivator traditions of Maharashtra.

His critique of British administration has a ring of contemporariness. His portrayal of the conditions of the peasantry can by an eye opener for today's scholars and activists who fail to account for numerous instances of farmers committing suicide. His critique of the forest department, the need for improving agricultural techniques and practices, the method of land use and farmers' indebtedness shows a passionate concern which is missing today in the academic and civil society presentations of the state of peasantry. In the field of education, Phule asked for greater state funding of primary education and advocated that the higher education might be better left to the efforts of private individuals. Neo-liberals of today would hardly differ from this line of argument. His advocacy of inclusive development policy, free and compulsory education and state intervention for fulfilling basic necessities are concerns of the same intensity today. Even the modern companies can a take a lesson or two from Phule in the corporate social responsibility. Phule had opened a night school for labourers under his employment working at a certain construction site. This school was attended by 2000 labourers and when the project was finished he gave a feast for all of them. His addressing of the gender question was also much ahead of his times. His autonomous treatment of the gender issue and treating women as a single category were anything but revolutionary.

Phule had a rather comprehensive approach to social realities. In the age of ascending Marxism, while the issues of economics dominated the academic world, with the crucial and undoubtedly the more lasting impacts of wars, mythologies and above all, the knowledge systems, access or denial of access to which is the most crucial determinant of social interrelations, on the course of human history were ignored. Phule though encountered mythological symbolism with a matter-of-fact approach and by an imaginative reconstruction of an unsubstantiated 'history', which was hardly logical, but he very convincingly put forth the rather lasting impact these factors made in the Indian case. For instance, the status of Brahmins hardly altered after the onset of the British Empire and their prominence in society continued over ages despite innumerable changes of regimes and even in the so called modes of production. It is after all, politics alone which worked decisively in favour of the socially oppressed in India before and after independence. Very emphatically he showed how religion, politics and economics intertwined to perpetuate a system of a very formidable form of hegemony and domination. Crucial for liberation are education and required intervention from the government. Phule indeed anticipated the role of the government in bringing social change and ensuring social justice. Though his project of social revolution was soon abandoned, and by the 1930s, the non-Brahmin movement was merged with the national movement but its imprints on the national psyche remains indelible. The Indian Constitution was so drafted to become a powerful medium for social engineering, and governmental commitment to inclusive policies is deepening with passage of time. In the first decade of twenty-first century we have seen enactments of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and the Right to Education Act. Both Acts are testimonies of the fulfilment of some of the demands made so passionately in the nineteenth century.

Reading of Phule's writings should not engage too much with the logical incoherencies and factual inconsistencies therein. Methodological or political correctness was not Phule's concern at all. His genius lay in uniting and organizing the suppressed masses for redeeming their humanity. He questioned the status quo and relentlessly worked for the cause of social liberation. Indeed he was not comfortable with the emergent nationalist project, which was surely half-baked as it was more an assertion of elitist privileges than a call for real emancipation of toiling masses. Though the nationalist project for the time being was denied the support of a significant number of people as a result of non-Brahmin mobilizations, and yet the movement prepared ground for greater democratization of society. The moot point is that one can disagree with Phule on all the points he made but cannot deny any of them.

#### Notes and References

- 1. Gail Omvedt, *Dalit Visions: The Anti-Caste Movement and the Construction of an Indian Identity* (New Delhi: Orient Longman Private Limited, 2006), p. 23.
- 2. Accounts differ about the year of his birth; the year of his birth may be either 1827 or 1828.
- 3. G. P. Deshpande (ed.), 'Introduction', *Selected Writings of Jotirao Phule* (New Delhi: Leftword, 2002), pp. 2–4.
- 4. Ibid., p. 3.
- 5. Rosalind O'Hanlon, 'Caste, Conflict and Ideology', *Mahatma Jyotiba Phule and Low-Caste Social Protest in Nineteenth Century Western India* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 5–6.
- 6. Mahesh Gavaskar, 'Colonialism with Colonialism: Phule's Critique of Brahmin Power', in. S. M. Michael ed. *Dalits in Modern India: Vision and Values*, (New Delhi: Sage Publications India Pvt. Ltd), pp. 92–93.