# **Aging**

#### **Jay Sokolovsky**

#### **AN ANTHROPOLOGY OF AGING**

Despite the early seminal book by Leo Simmons, *The Role of the Aged in Primitive Society* (1945), and articles by such luminaries as Gregory Bateson (1950), and Margaret Mead (1967), a concern for a worldwide, crosscultural analysis of aging has developed late in anthropology. It was anthropologists such as Otto von Mering, Jules Henry, Margaret Clark, and Barbara Anderson who first turned the ethnographic approach into a valuable tool for understanding the relationship of aging, local culture, and well-being. In the late 1950s von Mering conducted fieldwork in the geriatric wards of psychiatric hospitals, illustrating how the cultural devaluing of old age led to a withdrawal of psychosocial care for older patients (von Mering, 1957). Jules Henry followed this (1963) with a disturbing ethnographic account of life in three American nursing homes. However, it was only with Margaret Clark's, "The Anthropology of Aging, A New Area for Studies of Culture and Personality (1967)" that a clear direction was offered for anthropological research on aging. This was followed up with *Culture and Aging: An Anthropological Study of Older Americans* co-authored with Barbara Anderson (Clark & Anderson, 1967). Their work examined the cultural dynamics of San Francisco's community-based care of mentally impaired older citizens. Since that time there has been a literal explosion of anthropological works dealing with aging and the aged.

Access to this rapidly expanding literature on aging can be found in several edited compilations and texts: *The Politics of Age and Gerontocracy in Africa* (Aguilar, 1998); *The Cultural Context of Aging, 2nd edition* (Sokolovsky, 1997); *Other Cultures, Elder Years, 2nd edition* (Rhodes & Holmes, 1995); *Old Age in Global Perspective* (Albert & Cattell, 1994); *The Aging Experience* (Keith et al., 1994); *Anthropology and Aging: Comprehensive Reviews* (Rubinstein, 1990); *Aging and Its Transformations* (Counts & Counts, 1985); *Other Ways of Growing Old* (Amoss & Harrell, 1981); *Dimensions: Aging Culture and Health (*Fry, 1981*)*; *Aging in Culture and Society* (Fry, 1980); and *Life's Career, Aging* (Myerhoff & Simic, 1978). There has also been a proliferation of ethnographies illuminating the general cultural dynamics of old age in India (Cohen, 1998; Lamb, 2000; van Willigan & Chadha, 1999); China (Bossen, 2002; Davis-Friedman, 1991); Africa (Bledsoe, 2002; Rasmussen, 1997); Japan (Kinoshita & Keifer, 1992; Thang, 2001; Traphagan, 2003); and the United States (Freidenberg, 2000; Guo, 2000; Myerhoff, 1978; Savishinsky, 2000; Shenk, 1998; Vesperi, 1998). Of particular interest to medical anthropology has been books focusing on health issues and longterm care such as Becker (1980); Foner (1994); Hazan (1980); Henderson and Vesperi (1995); Kaufman (1986); Savishinsky (1991); and Woolfson (1997).1

Importantly, the maturing of an anthropological specialty in aging has unfolded through several works, *New Methods for Old Age Research* (Fry & Keith, 1986); *Age and Anthropological Theory* (Kertzer & Keith, 1984); *Old Age in Global Perspective* (Albert & Cattell, 1994); and *The Aging Experience* (Keith et al., 1994). These volumes have brought to bear the distinct realm of anthropological methods and theory on questions of aging and the aged. The last mentioned of these books reports on Project AGE, the first effort to combine longterm fieldwork with a precise and consistent research protocol to study aging in a variety of cultural settings. This was done in two American communities as well as among residents of Hong Kong, Botswana, and rural Ireland. The research shows how both "system wide" community features (such as social inequality) and "internal mechanisms" (such as values) create distinct contexts for conceptualizing the life cycle, establishing age norms, and influencing the perception of well-being in old age (Fry, 2000).<sup>2</sup>

#### **AGING, ELDERHOOD, AND OLD AGE**

From a biological standpoint aging involves structural and functional changes over time, both maturational and senescent, which normally occur among males and females when they pass puberty. Maturing over a prolonged life span is one of the species-specific traits of *Homo sapiens* (Crews & Garruto, 1994). While most other primates live in multi-aged communities, only human societies have developed systems that require high levels of prolonged material and social interdependence between generations. Moreover, humans are the only primate species where substantial numbers of females survive well past their reproductive span and where surviving older adults past the fifth and sixth decades of life are supported by kin and community when their functional capacity declines. A recent study of Hadza foragers in Africa showed that it was in fact grandmothers and elderly aunts who had the most to do with assuring the survival of children into early adulthood (Hawkes, O'Connell, Blurton Jones, Alvarez, & Charnov, 1998).

The cultural construction of the human life cycle creates substantial variation in how aging and a society's most aged individuals are perceived and treated (Ikels & Beall, 2000). Human cultural systems recognize the importance of life cycle patterns by linguistically creating labels delineating a stage of late adulthood. The conception of being "old" is a near human universal and is culturally constructed by a variety of measures. Only one study to date has systematically used worldwide data to examine this issue. Anthropologists Anthony Glascock and Susan Feinman (1981) found that in a random sample of 60 societies there were three basic means of identifying a category of "old": change of social/economic role; chronology; and change in physical characteristics. Their study produced the following conclusions:

- 1. A shift in social/economic roles was the most common marker of being designated as old. Typical examples are: one's children having their own kids; changes in a person's productive activities; or beginning to receive more goods and services than you give.
- 2. A change in physical capabilities is the least common marker. Severe frailty or dementia are quite rare as initial indicators of being called old. This suprising result happened because sampled societies typically create a category of old starting before many people encounter much radical signs of physical decline.
- 3. About half of the societies use multiple definitions of being aged. Such varied markers of aging are commonly applied to distinct categories of the "old" itself, which can include a phase of oldness linked to images associated with a movement toward death and the loss of normal functioning.

# **THE CULTURAL CONSTRUCTION OF ELDERHOOD AND OLDER ADULTHOOD**

Steve Albert and Maria Cattell in *Old Age in Global Perspective* (1994) make a helpful distinction between elders, old age, and ancients. A notion of elderhood appears to exist in most non-Western societies and is largely based on combining social and functional definitions of one's place in the life cycle. It is used as a marker of social maturity for population cohorts in relation to others in the community. This is contrasted to boundaries of old age which can take some of the criteria of elderhood and combine them with how a person's individual physical being and behavior reflect the biological aging process. In many tribally organized societies elderhood is accomplished by passing through ritual transitions and is not necessarily tied to extended chronological years. Persons who do not pass these ritual markers will not be considered elders, no matter what their age. Among Australian aboriginal tribes as well as in Africa's pastoral peoples, persons could enter the beginning ranks of elderhood in their early 30s, and proceed over time and through ritual passage into different elder statuses.

Cultural perceptions of older adulthood or old age link changes in the person's physical being (reduction of work capacity, beginning of menopause) with social changes (such as the birth of grandchildren) to create a culturally defined sense of oldness. Like elderhood, this social boundary can have various gradations that can even extend beyond the point of death into a category of ancestors (Kopytoff, 1971). However, many societies also recognize those truly *ancient* adults who show sharp declines in functioning as a different category of old. For example, to the *Ju/'hoansi* people of Botswana old age is perceived to begin relatively early and can start in a person's mid-40s when and if changes in physical capabilities begin to diminish functional ability. Here there are three levels of "old," a beginning early stage, a frail but functional stage, and a physically disabled designation. Counterbalancing the *Ju/'hoansi* linkage of older adults with physical decline is a powerful association with greater spiritual and emotional strength often put to use by the aged in healing rituals or settling disputes (Rosenberg, 1997).

#### **GENDER AND AGING**

A global view of aging shows that women age somewhat differently than men (Cattell, 1995). Although there are slightly more males born than females in most populations, almost universally it is the latter gender which on average survives the longest. At age 15, women in the United States have a life expectancy eight years greater than men, and when they reach age 65 they can expect to survive four more years than their male counterparts. For Third World nations, there is typically about half this difference in life expectancies. Here, for those over age 60 the gender ratio is relatively close, about 90 men for every 100 women, contrasted to a full 20% fewer males still alive than females in more developed nations.

Various writers have noted that for women, the fourth and fifth decades of life, in its association with menopause, often provide a key turning point in both the biological and social worlds of females and may mark the beginning of a label of old. Cross-cultural work in this area has shown the need for sophisticated research that takes a bio-cultural approach to this issue (du Toit, 1990; Flint & Samil, 1990; Kaufert & Lock, 1992; Lock, 1993). The complex interplay of biology, nutrition, and culture in shaping women's experience of menopause is analyzed by Yewoubdar Beyene's in *From Menarche to Menopause: Reproductive Lives of Peasant Women in Two Cultures* (1989). She compares Mayan and Greek women living in rural villages and finds that their experience of menopause and aging strongly differed, despite similar values and behaviors regarding menstruation and childbearing. Greek women had a substantial, wellbalanced diet, married late, and averaged only two pregnancies. Here, menopause was associated with growing old and the start of a "downhill course in life." A strong majority reported hot flash or cold sweat symptoms. The Mayan women, in contrast, consumed a much poorer inconsistent diet, married early, and had many closely spaced pregnancies. Females here looked foward to aging citing anticipated new freedoms and social passage to higher status in old age. She found that *none* of these women reported symptoms of hot flashes or cold sweats and they welcomed menopause.

In terms of social transformation many authors have begun to document a common pattern in non-industrial societies of dramatic positive changes of role, power, and status by women as they pass into the middle and latter adult years (Brown, Subbaiah, & Therese, 1994; Kerns & Brown, 1992). Gutmann (1987) has suggested that universal intrapsychic personality development best explains the frequent reversals observed among older adult women, while other theorists have stressed the cultural turning points linked to procreative and family cycles. For example, Rasmussen in studying the Tuareg in Africa argues that female androgyny in late adulthood is not simply being more male but part of expressing transformations of female personhood through time, involving realignment of kin hierarchies and other social strata affecting both males and females (Rasmussen, 1987, p. 29).

#### **STATUS OF THE AGED**

In many traditional societies studied by anthropologists, older adults commonly function as a storehouse of knowledge about such things as kin ties, health, religious rituals, lore, and myth which explain tribal origins as well as in-depth knowledge about the environment. Among many African tribal peoples, older adults are the gatekeepers for the ritual management of life, from the naming of children to the planting songs chanted by West African village women to assure the younger female farmers that the harvest will be good.

It is clear from the ethnographic literature that great age does not guarantee good treatment. Pamela Amoss and Steven Harrell propose that there are two key factors that determine how older adults fare in their particular cultural settings. First is the relative balance between the contributions older persons make to the costs they represent. Second is the control over resources important to younger members of the community. They sum this up succinctly by predicting that:

The position of the aged in a given society can be expressed in terms of how much old people contribute to the resources of the group, balanced by the cost they exact, and compounded by the degree of control they have over valuable resources. (Amoss & Harrell, 1981, p. 6)

Various studies using the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF) have corroborated in many respects the association of status and deference with the control of informational and administrative roles as well as valued activities and extended family integration (Silverman, 1987). Silverman's analysis finds that in terms of resource and information control, only certain types of control, particularly administration and consultation, correlate with beneficient treatment of the elderly. Some forms of supernatural information control, especially transformational powers, were in fact a potential threat to the elderly. Under conditions of rapid change, older women who are linked to esoteric power such as witchcraft, may be seen as great liabilities and put to death. This happened in great numbers in Europe during the middle ages (Bever, 1982) and in certain areas of East Africa during the mid-1990s ("Witchcraft–a violent threat," 2000).

This darker side of aging—various types of nonsupportive and even harsh treatment directed toward the elderly—has been studied in worldwide statistical studies (Glascock, 1997; Silverman, 1987). These studies make clear that being old in a small-scale, face-to-face community does not necessarily prevent cultural variants of severe neglect and abuse from occurring. In Glascock's study killing of the aged was found in about one fifth of his global sample, finding 84% of the societies exhibiting various forms of *non-supportive* treatment. This was defined as involving either killing, abandonment, or forsaking of the elderly. In a similar study Silverman and Maxwell (1987) noted "negative deference" (harsh treatment) in 62% of their cases. Importantly, it was commonly found that both supportive as well as death-hastening behavior co-exist in the same social setting. Both studies found that cultural distinctions drawn between *intact*, fully functioning aged and *decrepit* individuals who find it difficult to carry out even the most basic tasks are critical. As Barker's (1997) ethnographic analysis of the frail aged on Niue Island also shows, it is persons placed in the decrepit category toward which geronticide or deathhastening is most frequently applied.

# **AGING AND SOCIETAL TRANSFORMATION**

The dramatic upsurge in the longevity of older citizens in Third World countries is a legacy of the last two decades. This demographic change has been intertwined with powerful modernizing events including alterations in economic production, wealth distribution, an explosion of super-sized cities, and the often violent devolution of large states into smaller successor nations (Lloyd-Sherlock, 2000). Modernization theory is the primary model for considering the impact of major worldwide changes on the elderly. Donald Cowgill, the first to suggest a number of discrete postulates and later in developing a more elaborate model, has been the most dominant writer on this subject (Cowgill, 1974, 1986). The hypothesized decline in valued roles, resources, and respect available to older persons in modernizing societies is said to stem from four main factors: modern health technology; economies based on scientific technology; urbanization; and mass education and literacy. There has been a very lively debate over the validation of this model (see Rhoads & Holmes, 1995, pp. 251–285 for an excellent review). Historians in particular have sharply questioned the model, saying it is not only ahistorical but that, by idealizing the past, an inappropriate "world we lost syndrome" has been created (Kertzer & Laslett, 1994; Laslett, 1976). For example, summing up research on the elderly living in Western Europe several hundred years ago, historian Andrejs Plakans states, "There is something like a consensus that the treatment of the old was harsh and decidedly pragmatic: dislike and suspicion, it is said, characterized the attitudes of both sides"

A study by Vincentnathan and Vincentnathan (1994) of three untouchable communities in the South Tamil Nadu area of India illustrates the complexity of this issue. In the poorest communities, the assumption of respect and high status as a prior condition did not hold. Elders here had no resources to pass on. Providing material resources for the elders through new modernization programs became a basis for binding together the young and old. However, increased education of the young led many children and young adults to feel superior to parents. Over time, generational relations deteriorated sometimes involving high levels of abuse and killing of the aged—closer to the predictions of modernization theory.

# **AGING POPULATIONS IN A GLOBAL CONTEXT**

(Plakans, 1989).

Until the very end of the last millennia, much of the world's population had an *average* expectancy of life less than half the *potential* years humans could live, namely about 120 years. Moreover, adolescents under age 15 were much more numerous than adults over age 60. This is changing very rapidly. Since 2000, in industrialized nations the older segment of the population has exceeded

| Region                     | Population aged<br>60 years or older.<br>Percentage of total<br>population |      | Percentage 80 years<br>or older |      | Potential Support<br>Ratio (number of<br>persons aged<br>15–64 years per<br>aged 65 years<br>or older) |      |
|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|---------------------------------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|
|                            | 1999                                                                       | 2050 | 1999                            | 2050 | 1999                                                                                                   | 2050 |
| More developed<br>regions  | 19                                                                         | 33   | 16                              | 27   | 5                                                                                                      | 2    |
| Less developed<br>regions  | 8                                                                          | 21   | 9                               | 17   | 12                                                                                                     | 4    |
| Least developed<br>regions | 5                                                                          | 12   | 7                               | 10   | 18                                                                                                     | 8    |

**Table 1.** Some Demographic Comparisons Between More and Less Developed Regions

*Source*: United Nations (1999). "Population Aging, 1999." United Nations, Population Division, Sales No. E.99.XIIII.11. Reprinted with permission.

those under age 15, a transformation to be replicated in other regions by 2050 (Kinsella & Velkoff, 2001). By 2030 most Third and Fourth World regions will still not have reached the level of "societal aging" now faced by North America, much of Europe, and Japan. However, "young/youthful" nations such as Brazil, Indonesia, and Mexico will witness the oldest part of their population (over age 65) at least double—and even quadruple in the case of Indonesia.

Despite the oncoming rapidity of aging in many developing nations, their demographic profile, especially for the least developed nations, will still show a relatively youthful population by 2050 (see Table 1) and maintain a moderately high Potential Support Ratio (eight younger adults for each person over age 65). In some areas, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa, the AIDS epidemic has caused the overall life expectancy to drop precipitously over the past 10 years and consequently has played havoc with traditional systems of intergenerational support and exchange (Sankar, Luborsky, Rwabuhemba, & Songwathana, 1998).

Population aging is of more demographic concern in the middle range countries ("less developed regions") which will see a near doubling of the portion of the elderly over age 80 occurring at the same time as a three-fold drop in the Potential Support Ratio. In Latin American and Asian nations in this category, by mid-century, populations will present a demographic aging profile that is similar to the one found in more developed nations today. Such changes are already causing China to rethink some of its policy stressing patrilineal based family support and care of elders (Arnsberger et al., 2000; Ikels, 1997). Part of the reason for the rapid aging in such Third World nations is the dramatic drop in overall fertility rates. In Asia and Latin America birth rates have fallen about 50% during the period from 1965 to 1995, from 6 to 3 children per woman (Kinsella & Gist, 1995; World Bank, 1999). Over the first two decades of the 21st century, Mexico, Ghana, India, Indonesia, and most of the Caribbean nations will actually have minimal or even negative annual growth among 0–14 year olds, while persons over age 65 will grow at rates between 2.1% and 3.2% each year (World Bank, 1999). Such changes will have an enormous impact on the nature of communities which anthropologists study and force medical anthropologists to more seriously examine midlife and late adulthood.

### **NOTES**

1. There have also been a good number of recent special issues of journals which have focused on the anthropology of aging. These include: "Positive Adaptations to Aging in Cross-Cultural Perspective." Special Issue of *Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology, 16*(1), 2001; "Aging and Eldercare," *Journal of Family Issues*, *21*(6), 2000; "Home Health Care and Elders: International Perspectives." Special Issue of *Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology*, *8*(4), 1993; "Cultural Contexts of Aging and Health," Special Issue of *Medical Anthropology Quarterly*, *9*(2), 1995.

## **REFERENCES**

- Aguilar, M. (Ed.). (1998). *The politics of age and gerontocracy in Africa: Ethnographies of the past and memories of the present*. Lawrenceville, NJ: Africa World Press.
- Albert, S., & Cattell, M. (1994). *Old age in global perspective: Crosscultural and cross-national views*. New York: G. K. Hall.
- Amoss, P., & Harrell, S. (Eds.). (1981). *Other ways of growing old: Anthropological perspectives*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Arnsberger, P., Fox, P., Xivlan, Z., & Shixun, G. (2000). Population aging and the need for long-term care: A comparison of the United States and the People's Republic of China. *Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology*, *15*, 207–227.
- Barker, J. (1997). Between humans and ghosts: The decrepit elderly in a Polynesian society. In J. Sokolovsky (Ed.), *The cultural context of aging: World-wide perspectives* (2nd ed., pp. 407–425). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Bateson, G. (1950). Cultural ideas about aging. In E. P. Jones (Ed.), *Research on aging*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Becker, G. (1980). *Growing old in silence*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Bever, E. (1982). Old age and witchcraft in early modern Europe. In P. Sterns (Ed.), *Old age in preindustrial society* (pp. 150–190). New York: Holmes & Meier.
- Beyene, Y. (1989). *From menarche to menopause: Reproductive lives of peasant women in two cultures*. Albany: State University of New York Press.
- Bledsoe, C. (2002). *Contingent lives: Fertility, time and aging in West Africa*. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
- Bossen, L. (2002). *Chinese older women and rural development*. Totowa, NJ: Rowan & Littlefield.
- Brown, J., Subbaiah, P., & Therese, S. (1994). Being in charge: Older women and their younger female kin. *Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology*, *9*, 231–254.
- Cattell, M. (1995). Gender, aging and health: A comparative approach. In C. Sargent & C. Brettell (Eds.), *Gender and health: An international perspective* (pp. 87–122). New York: Prentice Hall.
- Clark, M. (1967). The anthropology of aging: A new area for studies of culture and personality. *Gerontologist*, *7*, 55–64.
- Clark, M., & Anderson, B. (1967). *Culture and aging: An anthropological study of older Americans*. Springfield, IL: Charles Thomas.
- Cohen, L. (1998). *No aging in India*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Counts, D., & Counts, D. (Eds.). (1985). *Aging and its transformations: Moving toward death in Pacific societies*. New York: University Press of America.
- Cool, L., & McCabe, J. (1987). The "scheming hag" and the "dear old thing": The anthropology of aging women. In J. Sokolovsky (Ed.),

*Growing old in different societies: Cross-cultural perspectives* (pp. 56–68). Acton, MA: Copley.

- Cowgill, D. (1974). The aging of populations and society. *The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences*, *415*, 1–18.
- Cowgill, D. (1986). *Aging around the world*. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
- Cowgill, D., & Holmes, L. D. (Eds.). (1972). *Aging and modernization*. New York: Appleton–Century–Crofts.
- Crews, D., & Garruto, R. (Eds.). (1994). *Biological anthropology and aging*. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Davis-Friedman, D. (1991). *Long lives: Chinese elderly and the communist revolution*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- du Toit, B. (1990). *Aging and menopause among Indian South African women*. Albany: State University of New York Press.
- Flint, M., & Samil, R. (1990). Cultural and subcultural meanings of the menopause. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences*, *592*, 134–148.
- Foner, N. (1994). *The caregiving dilemma*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Freidenberg, J. (2000). *Growing old in El Barrio*. New York: New York University Press.
- Fry, C. (1981). *Dimensions: Aging, culture and health*. Brooklyn, NY: J. F. Bergin.
- Fry, C. (1980). *Aging in culture and society, comparative viewpoints and strategies*. Brooklyn, NY: J. F. Bergin.
- Fry, C. (2000). Culture, age, and subjective well-being: Health, functionality, and the infrastructure of eldercare in comparative perspective. *Journal of Family Issues*, *21*, 751–756.
- Fry, C., & Keith, J. (1986). *New methods for old age research*. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
- Glascock, A. (1997). When killing is acceptable: The moral dilemma surrounding assisted suicide in America and other societies. In J. Sokolovsky (Ed.), *The cultural context of aging: World-wide perspectives* (2nd ed., pp. 56–70). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Glascock, A., & Feinman, S. (1981). Social asset or social burden: Treatment of the aged in non-industrial societies. In C. Fry (Ed.), *Dimensions: Aging, culture, and health* (pp. 13–32). Hadley: MA: Bergin & Garvey.
- Guo, Z. (2000). *Ginseng and aspirin: Health care alternatives for aging Chinese in New York*. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Gutmann, D. (1987). *Reclaimed powers: Toward a new psychology of men and women in later life*. New York: Basic Books.
- Hawkes, K., O'Connell, J. F., Blurton Jones, N. G., Alvarez, H., & Charnov, E. L. (1998). Grandmothering, menopause, and the evolution of human life histories. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, *95*, 1336–1339.
- Hazan, H. (1980). *The limbo people*. Boston, MA: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
- Henderson, N., & Vesperi, M. (1995). *The culture of long term care*. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Henry, J. (1963). *Culture against man*. New York: McGraw-Hill.
- Ikels, C. (1997). Long-term care and the disabled elderly in urban China. In J. Sokolovsky (Ed.), *The cultural context of aging: World-wide perspectives* (2nd ed., pp. 452–471). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
- Ikels, C., & Beall, C. (2000). Age, aging and anthropology. In R. Binstock & L. George (Eds.), The *handbook of aging and the social sciences* (5th ed., pp. 125–139). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.