# **Municipal Bonds**

Municipal bonds are bonds issued by local and state governments to raise funds for public works with interest payment(s) that are generally exempt from federal taxes, and often from state and local taxes as well. An investor who buys a bond will receive interest payments at a stated yield rate until the bond reaches maturity, at which time the principle, or *par*, will be returned. Not all municipal bonds are tax exempt. Those intended for purposes not essential to the public good, such as those issued to finance sports arenas, for example, are taxable. Typically though, the terms *municipal* and *tax exempt* are synonymous.

There are two main types of municipal bonds: *general obligation* and *revenue.* Both are used to raise funds for public works, but they differ in how they generate the proceeds to service the interest and/or principal payment(s). General obligation bonds use tax revenue to pay back bondholders, while revenue bonds use money generated from the works themselves; a toll road, for instance, would pay the bond interest using monies raised by tolls. Neither is necessarily a more secure investment. General obligation municipal bonds, which tie interest payments to taxes, are rated based on the creditworthiness of their issuers. Since these are local or state governments, they are assessed by comparing the strength of their tax base to their debt service requirements. Revenue bonds, in contrast, are rated based on their *debt service coverage ratio*, which divides the amount of interest to be paid by the amount of money available, as estimated by analysis of past and future data. Moody's, Standard & Poor's, and Fitch Ratings are the large commercial ratings agencies that establish the basis for most assessments of municipal bond ratings.

Revenue bonds generally yield more than general obligation bonds do, though neither is considered risk-free; taxes cannot be raised without limit to pay back general obligation investors during a financial crisis, nor can revenue bonds be guaranteed to always cover their debt service. If a bond's credit quality falls, its yield will increase and its price will drop, which will make it more attractive to investors. Both types can be resold in the secondary market, though not without considerable cost.

Bond insurance, purchased by the issuer to cover both the principal and interest in case of default, can also be a factor in the rating of particular bond. A bond backed by a bond insurance firm carries the firm's investment rating, though that rating will change if the insuring firm's rating is downgraded. The yields on insured bond are generally somewhat lower than they otherwise would be, but investors have an extra safeguard against the risk of default, which has the ancillary benefit of making these bonds easier to resell in the secondary market. It is important for investors to know what the rating of a particular bond, or bonds of that type, would be if it were uninsured.

Another factor which investors consider when evaluating a municipal bond is its coupon rate, meaning the rate at which it pays interest until it matures. A bond's coupon rate can be fixed or it may be reset periodically; this latter type is referred to as a *floating-rate* or *variable-rate* issue.

Several specialized subsets of municipal bonds exist, with particular revisions to key features. For instance, municipal bonds may be issued as "refunded" bonds, which are backed by US Treasury bonds held in escrow. Municipalities that issued bonds at higher interest rates in the past can issue new bonds, "refunded bonds," at lower rates to redeem the principal of these older bonds; the proceeds from the sale of the new bonds are used to buy US Treasury securities, which back the coupon payments for the original bonds, freeing them of any default risk. These refunded bonds typically have shorter maturities and corresponding low interest-rate risks. Because their yields are backed by funds held in escrow and are therefore risk-free, these are highly valued bonds, almost always carrying an AAA rating.

Municipal notes are another category of municipal bonds. Municipal notes have maturities less than three years and are issued in anticipation of some future municipal revenue, either from taxes or bonds.

Municipal zeros, another special type of municipal bond, are issued at a discount from their *par* value, which refers to the amount of their principal. When they reach maturity, they are redeemed for their full par value, with the difference between the two rates equaling a specified compounded annual yield. Because municipal zeros pay no interest, potential investors must carefully consider the creditworthiness of their issuers. Issuers also retain a fuller freedom to *call* these bonds, meaning that they can collect these bonds before they mature, at a price discounted from par.

Some municipal bonds are issued with *put* provisions, meaning that purchasers can tender the bond back to the issuer at par, which offers security for investors, though not without trade-offs. The total return on these bonds is usually lower, and in the case that interest rates decline, they will appreciate less than comparable long-term bonds.

Many other specialized types of municipal bonds attract different investors. *Dedicated tax-backed bonds* or *structure/asset bonds* meet their debt service with certain revenues, such as sales taxes, dedicated to repayment of the debt. Other types include *letter of credit back bonds, moral obligation bonds*, and *taxallocation bonds.*

Several aspects influence municipal bond pricing. Municipal bonds can be priced at a discount, at par, or at premium. The bond's features, including its maturity, call features, and credit quality, influence its price. A *call risk* refers to the possibility that the issuer will redeem a bond before its maturity date, meaning that purchasers will not earn the subsequent interest. Issuers typically may redeem bonds at stipulated dates, starting at 10 years from the date of issue, and at 5-year intervals thereafter, at prices increasing from par, though housing bonds can have more irregular call features. A substantial drop in interest rates may cause an issuer to call a municipal bond.

Municipal bond pricing can vary because of the disparities between broker markups and the general lack of transparency in the pricing process. In general, smaller lots, those with values less than \$25 000, are more difficult to sell and so are marked up disproportionately by brokers, and their prices can be unpredictable. Larger lots generally sell at narrower price ranges. Other price factors include whether the bond is well known and widely traded, and whether it is insured. Much of the price information available though still applies generally to very large lots, purchased wholesale by institutions, not by individual investors.

Municipal bonds can be bought from brokerage firms, both full service and discount, including those who specialize in municipal bonds, in addition to banks. All of these offer online-purchasing options, though generally with both markups and "transaction fees" added on. Buying bonds as they first become available is known as *buying at issue*, which has several attractive features. During this short time, bonds are sold at a uniform price, often at par, and dealers anxious to sell will offer good prices, which results in attractive yields.

While buying municipal bonds, it must be borne in mind that a key distinction exists between premium and discount bonds. Premium bonds yield more than discount bonds, assuming an equality of credit quality and maturity, because their yield to maturity, the amount they will earn with interest over their lifespan, will be equal to their actual yields. In contrast, discount bonds have yields, which include a taxable capital gain because they are sold at prices below their maturity value. Only coupon interest is exempt from federal taxes, which lowers discount bonds' actual yield below their quoted yield to maturity. Premium bonds have a higher coupon value, meaning that they produce more interest income, making them better suited to investors who want their shortterm municipal bond holdings to yield an income to reinvest. Others looking to hold onto their bonds to maturity and use them to fund long-term investments will be better served by discount bonds.

While municipal bonds are generally free from federal taxes, which is their most attractive feature, state or local taxes may still apply. Out-of-state buyers may be exempt from these taxes. Other tax considerations include the alternative minimum tax, which applies to bonds for "nonessential" projects issued after August 7, 1986, but typically only for buyers with large incomes. This is also true of *de minimus* taxes, which applies to discount bonds. Taxability of a bond at the local, state, or federal level is not the only criterion to determine its potential value to an investor; depending on which tax bracket the investor is subject to, a taxable bond may still offer a higher yield.

#### **Municipal Bond Arbitrage**

In recent years, many bond traders, investment banks, and hedge funds have created leveraged bond portfolios that utilize what we may call municipal bond arbitrage strategies. The origin of municipal arbitrage is the generally cheaper pricing of long maturity municipal bonds relative to similar fixed income investments. There are two approaches: those that use tender option bond programs to augment the yield spread earned by hedging municipal carry trades, and those that use basis trading strategies to exploit volatility in the relative value of municipals. Both types of arbitrage impact the municipal market as a whole by increasing liquidity and improving price discovery.

Municipal arbitrage is similar to other types of fixed income arbitrage; it targets pricing inefficiency, hedges against the fluctuation of interest rates, and uses leverage. However, unlike its now infamous cousin, mortgage-backed security arbitrage, opportunities in municipal arbitrage, though not without their own risks, arise from the inherent structure of the municipal market, rather than from the sheer complexity of modeling risk in that market.

## **The Structure of Municipal Bond Arbitrage Strategy**

Municipal bond arbitrage trades are typically hedged against interest rates with LIBOR swaps [2]. The trader makes a semiannual fixed payment at a market rate set at the time of the swap, and receives a variable payment set at the quarterly LIBOR reference rate. As interest rates fluctuate, so does the swap's value.

The price value of a basis point is calculated by comparing a one basis point change in interest rates across the yield curve to the corresponding change in the value of an interest-hedged position. This is also known as the *swap's dollar duration*. The hedge ratio is the ratio of the dollar durations of the swap position and the original bond position.

As his/her starting point is a municipal carry trade, the trader also seeks to generate income by locking in the municipal yield premium; when financing and hedging costs are subtracted from this is, it is known as the *net spread*. The municipal *versus* LIBOR yield ratio is thus a supplementary source of profit or loss.

### **Hedging**

The basis of a hedged position is the difference in value between the hedge and the security that is hedged by it. The greater their dissimilarity, the greater the basis risk—in other words, the risk that the hedge position will diverge in value from the hedged position. The arbitrageur attempts to isolate the basis risk of a dubiously priced security by hedging against other risks, as in the interest-rate swaps previously described. Yield curve risk can be hedged by taking a bond position of the same tenor. Tax risk, issuer default risk, and liquidity risk should also be considered, though they are simply considered part of the basis in calculating the municipal/LIBOR yield ratio.

The arbitrageur must also determine a suitable hedging ratio once the hedge itself is chosen. This is typically done by balancing the dollar durations of one basis point of the bond and one basis point of the hedge. At the same time, the arbitrageur proceeds under the assumptions that the yield on the bond and the yield on the hedge will not remain symmetrical and that this yield ratio itself is influenced by interest-rate changes. What the arbitrageur must attempt to anticipate is the hedge beta, or the change in municipal yields that accompanies any change in taxable yields. Traders use several methods to estimate hedge beta. Ratio-based hedges use the yield ratio itself, supposing that it will revert to a mean or to the overall market. Regression-based hedges differ in that they account for the usual inverse correlation between yield ratios and interest rates. Alternately, some traders consider the interest-rate variance as the key component of the position and hedge accordingly. It is also possible to hedge against the callability of longer municipal bonds (which is typically priced into quoted yields).

## **Tender Option Bonds, Variable-rate Demand Obligations, and Leverage**

Most municipal bond arbitrage strategies incorporate leverage, which is enabled by tender option bond programs (TOBs) that securitize bonds or bond portfolios and thus allow them to be financed at what amounts to tax-exempt rates [1]. Leverage is achieved in the taxable bond market by means of repurchase transactions, in which the owner of a security sells it to a second party while agreeing to repurchase it later at a higher price. If a lender provides similar means to purchase a municipal bond, the interest he receives will still be fully taxable. However, borrowers cannot deduct this interest cost, since they are purchasing a tax-exempt security. As a result, borrowers will generally receive a lower yield from the lender even though they are financing at a higher rate.

In order to finance the municipal bond purchase, the tender option bond trusts can separate the bond into a tax-efficient component and a second component that is exposed to tax risk (along with liquidity risk and the other risks that account for its yield curve premium) by creating the following:

- 1. A short-term, variable-rate instrument backed by a long-term municipal bond.
- 2. An instrument that passes the upside and downside of this collateral to an investor who seeks leveraged exposure to a municipal bond.

Tender option bond programs are sponsored by most major municipal bond dealers. All of these programs allow customers to structure leveraged municipal bond position by issuing short-term money-market securities collateralized by long-term municipal bonds (sometimes called *floaters*) in tandem with securities that represent a leveraged position in the collateral (sometimes called *residuals*).

The fate of the underlying bonds is largely determined by the residual holders, who generally hold the right to require the floater holders to tender their securities with a 1-day notice, allowing the former to terminate the trust and liquidate the underlying bonds. Floaters have priority access to payments from the trust, which allows them to take advantage of a rise in short-term rates (leaving, perhaps, little income to the residuals).

As with variable-rate demand obligations (VRDOs), the rate on the floaters is set by the remarketing agent at a level that allows the bond to be remarketed at par. When the underlying bonds are deposited, the trust becomes the legal owner. The trustee administers the trust and its payments on behalf of the beneficial owners, that is, the holders of the floaters and the residuals. TOBs are tax partnerships in order to preserve the underlying bonds as tax exempt, which means that there are specific guidelines that govern gain sharing and termination and tend to discourage active trading of the underlying bonds. Both types of tender option bond securities are only available as private placements.

Some companies are able to efficiently finance municipal bonds without TOBs; the tax code stipulates that interest costs are deductible if tax-exempt obligations are less than 2% of the taxpayer's assets. (Municipal bond broker–dealers can deduct interest costs in this manner by classifying a portion of their inventory as equity-funded rather than as debtfunded).

Furthermore, some tender option bond programs offer pooled trusts to increase leverage, new tools for hedging such as credit default swaps are available, and nontraditional participants (e.g., foreign taxpayers) are entering the market through municipal ratio swaps. Even market participants who do not use arbitrage strategies should be aware of these developments because of their potential to impact the shape of the market as a whole.

### **References**

- [1] Fabozzi, F.J. & Feldstein, S.G. (2008). *The Handbook of Municipal Bonds*, Wiley, New York.
- [2] Namvar, E.. (2006). *An Introduction to Municipal Bond Arbitrage*, University of California, Irvine, Working Paper.

## **Further Reading**

- Fabozzi, F.J. (2001). *The Handbook of Fixed Income Securities*, 6th Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York.
- Fabozzi, F.J. (2007). *Bond Markets, Analysis, and Strategies*, 6th Edition, Pearson, New Jersey.
- Thau, A. (2001). *The Bond Book*, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York.

#### **Related Articles**

**Bond**; **Bond Options**; **LIBOR Rate**; **Swaps**.

ETHAN NAMVAR