# **Jat**

#### **Sunil K. Khanna**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

The Jats constitutes one of the largest and diverse communities living in northwestern India and Pakistan. According to Westphal-Hellbusche and Wesphal (1964), the Arabic equivalent of Jat is *Zutt*, a generic term used for "men from India." The word *Jat* also means "bunch of hair" and the Jats themselves claim that they have descended from the hair of lord Shiv. According to Ibbetson (1916), Jats are of Indo-Aryan (or Indo-Scythian) descent. Bowles (1977) argues that the word *Jat* in the Punjabi language means a "grazer" or "herdsman," but notes Ibbetson's (1916) suggestion that a shift from the Punjabi soft "t" to a hard "t" in some Muslim areas means an agriculturalist.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Jats are distributed over a wide and diverse geographic area—from the hot and humid regions in northwestern India to the hills and plains in southern Pakistan—presenting extensive cultural, linguistic, and religious diversity. Some Jat groups have also been identified in the Maldives, Russia, and Ukraine. Different Jat groups living in India and Pakistan speak different dialects of Hindi, Urdu, Sindhi, and Punjabi.

## **OVERVIEW OF THE CULTURE**

It is important to note that each Jat community presents certain unique cultural characteristics, which makes it difficult to generalize about the Jats as a culturally homogenous group. Any attempt to generalize about Jat culture and/or its characteristics is therefore problematic. This account does not attempt to represent the vast cultural diversity and regional variation among the Jats. Instead, it presents some of the cultural characteristics shared by the Jat communities inhabiting the northwestern provinces of India and southern Pakistan.

There is considerable disagreement among scholars over the caste ranking of the Hindu Jats. Throughout the 1900s, several scholars and Jat politicians and activists have used three very different labels for Jat identity. While some have identified the Jats as members of the warrior group (*Kshatriya*) (Qanungo, 1982), others have argued that they belong to the "backward castes." Freed and Freed (1993) argue that until 1958, the Jats were not considered members of the three twice-born *varnas*. Instead, the Jats were ranked as "clean menial workers" (*Shudras*). Some suggest that the Jats rank below the *Rajputs* in the warrior group primarily because of the practice of widow remarriage (Lewis, 1965). Recently, the Jat community has been added to the list of "Other Backward Communities" primarily based on poor economic and education status of the Jats in India.

The Hindu Jats in India generally follow *Arya Samaj*—a reform sect of Hinduism, which originated in the mid 1800s. Generally, the Jats follow the teachings of Swami Dayananda Saraswati, the founder of the *Arya Samaj*. According to Datta (1999), the Jats living in the northwestern plains of India belong to the *Shudra* group. Primarily because of the influence of the Arya Samaj, the Jats claimed a *Rajput* descent and a *Kshatriya* status.

Fuchs (1974) defines the Jats as a Central Asian nomadic group that immigrated into northwestern India. Serological and anthropometric studies of the Jats in Haryana—a north Indian state, suggest a close association between the *Rajputs* and the Jats (Khanna, 1995). The Jats in India primarily practice Hindu religion, however, some Jat groups in Punjab embraced Sikh religion around the 17th century. These Jat groups are called Jat Sikhs or Sikh Jats. In western Punjab, now in Pakistan, the Jat community adopted Islam between 8th and 10th centuries AD.

Notwithstanding social, linguistic, and religious and diversity, the Jats are one of the major landowning agriculturalist communities in South Asia. Generally, Jat communities in India primarily engage in agriculture and live in permanent village settlements in rural and urbanizing areas. However, some groups are nomadic herdsmen. As agriculturalists, the Jats grow cereals such as wheat, maize, and millet, and cash crops such as sugarcane, fruits, and vegetables. Typically, Jats live in villages in which their community is in numerical majority and dominates the economic and sociopolitical aspects of the village life. In Haryana as well as in Delhi, Jats are locally referred to as chiefs (*chowdharies*). The title symbolizes their ancestral control over the village land and their socioeconomic dominance in the village (Pradhan, 1966).

The Jats practice subcaste (*gotra*) exogamy in arranging marital alliances. Ideally, subcastes of the father, mother, paternal grandmother, and maternal grandmother are to be avoided. Residence after marriage is patrilocal and the inheritance of property patrilineal. Agrarian needs also forced the practice of widow remarriage among the Jats, especially levirate (Chowdhry, 1994). The practice of levirate is called *Karewa*, *karao*, or *chaddar andazi* among the Jat communities in northwestern India. It involves marriage by the simple ritual of a man throwing a white sheet (or chaddar) over the widow's head, signifying his acceptance of her as his wife (Chowdhry, 1994). Such marriages are described as "wearing bangles in the name of her husband" (*chura pahenana*). Sometimes levirate alliances are primarily symbolic in order to protect the right over property and to avoid a sexual indiscretion on the part of the widow.

# **THE CONTEXT OF HEALTH: ENVIRONMENTAL, ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND POLITICAL FACTORS**

Throughout northwestern India and southern Pakistan, state-sponsored health care delivery programs and services as well as efforts by numerous non-governmental organizations have led to significant improvements in health care access for all rural and urbanizing communities. Members of the Jat community in these regions now receive health care from allopathic and non-allopathic physicians. In India, the state sponsored Maternal and Child Health (MCH) programs and the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) have expanded the public health care system to urbanizing and rural areas. These programs involve recruitment of village-level workers (*Anganvadi*) and their training in prenatal, perinatal, and neonatal care. Most commonly, local midwives are selected as village-level workers and are trained at state sponsored instructional workshops. These trained health care workforce then serve as crucial links between the community and the government trained health care practitioners.

Most Jat villages in northwestern India are part of one of the Maternal Child and Family Welfare (MCFW) target zones of the regional Primary Health Center (PHC). A recent family planning survey suggests high acceptance of family planning methods among the Jats of New Delhi (Khanna, 1995). Child immunization records in this region indicate that Jat children are immunized in a timely manner. The success of the state sponsored programs among the Jats living in urbanizing villages can be attributed primarily to the easy availability and utilization of state sponsored health care services. Furthermore, the social position and networks of the *Anganvadi* workers in these villages play an important role in this process. They regularly visit and pursue the parents to utilize the available health care services. Khanna (2001) reports that in Shahargaon—an urbanizing Jat village in New Delhi—increasing awareness of health care and close proximity to state-sponsored and privately run health care services, especially those for mothers and children, have led to an overall increase in the utilization of these services and a corresponding decrease in family size among members of the Jat community.

## **MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS**

Traditionally, Jats received health care from traditional doctors (*vaidys*) practicing *Ayurvedic* and/or Greek (*Unani*) medicine, *homeopathic* physicians, midwives, and local self-trained village healers who practice popular medicine. With increasing government support and sponsorship for western medicine, a large number of Jats are now using the services of allopathic doctors at the local dispensaries, primary health centers, hospitals, and private clinics.

For childbirth, Jat women prefer at-home deliveries with the help of a local village midwife. In Shahargaon, just like in many other Jat villages, the village midwife belongs to the low caste of Untouchables (*Balmiki Harijans*). It is important to note that due to increasing urban contact and improvement in state-sponsored health care delivery, most Jat communities now have access to biomedical services (Khanna, 2001). This has brought significant changes in birth practices among the Jats; gradually leading to increased medicalization of pregnancy and childbirth and a corresponding decrease in the roles of the village midwife. Nowadays, Jats have access to trained

#### **Sexuality and Reproduction 779**

midwives and/or biomedical doctors for prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal health care. Notwithstanding these changes, health care during prenatal and perinatal periods is primarily a responsibility of Jat women and Jat men play little or no role in this arena.

# **CLASSIFICATION OF ILLNESS, THEORIES OF ILLNESS, AND TREATMENT OF ILLNESS**

In spite of the increasing use of western medicine and technology among the Jats, traditional ideas of health, illness, and healing, generally associated with *Ayurvedic*, *Homeopathic*, and *Unani* healing systems constitute the core theories of illness. Generally, the Jats use nonbiomedical systems of healing for chronic health conditions. The non-biomedical treatments prescribed generally involve herbal and plant medicines, seasonal do's and dont's, dietary changes, etc. Among the Jats, non-biomedical categories "hot" and "cold" foods are generally associated with seasons and physiologic effects (Freed & Freed, 1993).

The *Ayurvedic* system of medicine adopts a holistic approach through dietary and lifestyle changes, herbal medicine, and exercise to cure chronic disease and maintain individual health. The *Ayurvedic* system of medicine is based on the ancient knowledge contained in *Atharvaveda*. It deals with the totality of individual and social health including preventive and curative aspects. In fact, *Ayurveda* is a way of life based on certain emphasis on diet, lifestyle, and Yoga practices suitable for an individual according to his/her constitution. The constitution, in turn, is determined on the basis of the predominance of or loss of equilibrium in one or more of the humor, viz. Gas (*Vata*), bile (*Pitta*), or phlegm (*Kapha*). Based on the symptoms produced due to excess or deficiency of particular fault (*dosha*), the *Ayurvedic* practitioner selects remedial measures in the form of herbs, plant medicine, and metal salts.

The present health and healing culture among the Jats of northwestern India and Pakistan involves an eclectic use of treatments and therapies from several distinct healing traditions, namely, *Ayurveda*, *Homeopathy, Unani*, and biomedicine. In addition, local healers use a combination of ideas related to disease causation and treatment modalities borrowed from a variety of healing traditions and practices.

The Jats in north India continue to believe in numerous mother goddesses, many of whom serve as the names of diseases, especially those of childhood. Most Jat communities identify two mother goddesses namely, *Sitala* and *Khasra* for smallpox and skin rashes, respectively. In order to protect children and family members from illness, evil eyes, and harmful spirits, the Jats tie protective amulets made of iron, gold, silver, copper, beads, cloths, and strings on children's wrists, ankles, and around their necks (Freed & Freed, 1993). Beliefs associated with evil spirits are more common among Jat women than among Jat men. More commonly in rural Jat communities, diseases like tetanus, diarrhea, and measles are often associated with spirit possession and evil eye. Jat women are expected to worship local deities and observe charms (*totkas*) in order to ward off evil spirits and cure diseases among family members, especially children (Chowdhry, 1994).

## **SEXUALITY AND REPRODUCTION**

Before discussing sexuality and reproduction among the Jats, it is important to note that members of this community no longer live in isolated communities. Most Jat communities are currently experiencing rapid social change brought about by urbanization and technological diffusion, especially in terms of increasing access to education, health care, and the mass media. Such changes have perceptibly influenced everyday life among the Jats. Amidst rapidly changing social and economic environments, the Jats are experiencing significant shifts in their health and economic well-being as well as in their traditional cultural ethos.

Among the Jats, culture-bound beliefs and practices associated with gender, conception, prenatal period, childbirth, postpartum care, childhood, puberty, adulthood, and old age are central to perceptions of health, illness, and well-being. Such beliefs and associated practices significantly influence the utilization of health care. Like other agriculturalist communities in South Asia, the Jat patriarchal system constitutes core cultural values, customs, laws, social roles, and metaphors that clearly subscribe to the larger Hindu ideas and ideals of male dominance. Under the Jat peasant patriarchal system, there is little equality or symmetry between men and women. As compared with men, Jat women are generally given little choices, especially with regard to marriage, mobility, education, and employment. Extensive ethnographic evidence suggests gender-specific neglect against women among the Jats (Das Gupta, 1987; Khanna, 1995). The customs and traditions of a patriarchal society are suggested as underlying causes of the overall neglect of women leading to their poor overall physical health (Jeffery et al., 1989; Khanna, 1997). These studies conclusively demonstrate the adverse effect of the culturally prescribed subordination of Jat women on their reproductive health and survival. Culturally prescribed practices associated with a biased allocation of intrahousehold resources for health care and food have been argued to be responsible for the poor overall health and high morbidity rates among Jat women.

Among the Jats, marriage marks the socially acceptable initiation of reproduction. However, it involves two distinct events—the actual social event associated with marriage and the consummation of marriage. Traditionally, marital alliances are arranged with the help of the village barber who assists Jat parents in finding a suitable match for their children and in finalizing the timing, exchange, and other important details associated with marriage. After a suitable match has been arranged by Jat parents, an elaborate religious ceremony marks the marital bond. The consummation of marriage (*gauna*), however, takes place usually within one or two years of marriage. Before a marriage has been consummated the bride stays at her natal home. The term *liviayo* refers to the time in the *gauna* ceremony when the bridegroom, along with his other relatives, comes to take the bride to her affinal village. Recently, there has been a considerable decrease in the time gap between marriage and its consummation among the Jats. On both occasions, however, the bride's family is expected to arrange for feasts for the marriage party and to provide gifts for the groom's relatives. Some Jat communities have traditionally preferred "double marriages," which involve marital alliances between sets of sisters and sets of brothers. Such marriages are described by Jats as more realistic and suitable to an agricultural way of life and three-generation patrilocal extended family system (Khanna, 1995; Kolenda, 1987).

## **HEALTH THROUGH THE LIFE CYCLE**

Anthropologists have often used events marking life transitions as age categories signifying major divisions of life. Earlier research among the Jat communities in north India provides detailed accounts of the rites of passage, highlighting the importance of rituals and ceremonies associated with birth, marriage, and death (Lewis, 1958). The Jats recognize an individual's life cycle into the three major stages (*ashram*) as prescribed by the traditional Hindu views. In *brahmacharaya-ashram*, the individual as a student follows a strict code of chastity (*brahmacharaya*) and learns from his teacher (*guru*). In the next stage or *grahastrha-ashram*, the individual is expected to take household responsibilities (*grahastha*) and fulfill his duties toward his family and his *dharma. Vanprasthaashram* marks the third state of life in which the individual begins the hermitage phase of life and returns to contemplation and for guiding family and society. The fourth and final stage, *sannyas-ashram*, marks the beginning of the renunciation phase of life. The individual is expected to renounce all the "outer" goals of life and to begin learning about spirituality away from all social or political concerns (Lewis, 1958).

Among the Jats, specific ceremonies or events are often associated with the transition of an individual through different stages of life and that in each life stage, individuals are expected to perform the social roles prescribed for that life stage. It is, however, important to note that the traditional Hindu views do not separate life stages based on gender. Peasant patriarchal system among the Jats and the corresponding gender stratification place severe constraints upon the activities and roles of Jat women throughout the lifecycle. These constraints directly affect Jat women's ability to access health care.

### **Pregnancy and Birth**

Both pregnancy and childbirth are considered auspicious events among the Jats. Childbearing constitutes an important part of an adult Jat women's life. During the time of a woman's labor, family members gather in the house and women perform important roles associated with childbirth. If the child is a boy, the relatives bang a metal place (*thali*) or fire in the air to announce his birth. Because of a strong son preference among the Jats, the birth of a son is considered an auspicious occasion of happiness and rejoicing. No such celebrations take place on the birth of a girl. The happiness on the birth of a son is shared by members of the affinal and natal families of the mother as the birth of a son improves the social status of the mother in the affinal patrilineage. The affinal family of the mother receives gifts, special food items, and money from the natal family. These contributions are comparatively smaller in case of the birth of a daughter. This practice, however, is limited to the first-born daughter. For

#### **Health through the Life Cycle 781**

subsequent daughters the natal family generally does not send gifts and money to the affinal family.

### **Infancy**

A great deal of demographic, ethnographic, and health research among northwestern peasant communities in India, especially among the Jats, indicates sex differentials in health and mortality during infancy and early childhood. While several factors have been identified as causing excessive female mortality during infancy and early childhood, culturally prescribed patterns of son preference and daughter neglect are considered important proximate determinants of gender differentials in morbidity and mortality among the Jats. The mortality patterns among the Jats correspond with the South Asian pattern of sex differentials: males generally have equal or slightly higher mortality rates than females during the first month of life and lower mortality rates than females after the first month of life.

Ethnographic research suggests that Jat parents tend to show preferential treatment for sons, generally investing more household resources toward ensuring their survival. Infant girls are considered relatively more resistant to disease than an infant boy. A daughter is often equated with *kikkar*—a thorny bush that grows wild and does not require much nurturing.

### **Childhood**

Gender role socialization begins very early in the life of a Jat individual, often before children are even aware of their sexual identity. This may happen even before the development of an internal motive for conforming to sex role standards. Jat parents and the community play important roles in reinforcing norms of expected behavior. Jat girls, generally socialized under strict patriarchal control, came to understand their limited sex role options and the rigid patterning of these options.

For the young girl discrimination in terms of nutrition and health care allocation occurs in conjunction with a constant reinforcement of her gender identity.

The individual and additive effects of cultural and biological factors invariably lead to lower survival rates for Jat girls than boys, and negatively influence their overall growth and development patterns, reproductive health, and fertility (Khanna, 1997).

### **Adolescence**

Son preference and daughter neglect has continued among the Jats in spite of increased urban contact as well as access to and utilization of education and health care services. In the Shahargaon—an urbanizing Jat community located in the outskirts of New Delhi, India, recent shifts in the economy and occupation based on agriculture to urban jobbased economy, and improvements in education and health care facilities have not significantly changed traditional patterns of son preference and daughter neglect. Jat sons are viewed as economic and political assets, adding to the strength and prestige of the family, but daughters are perceived as an economic and moral burden. While Jat parents expect their teenage sons to enroll in schools and colleges, for a majority of Jat daughters, adolescence invariably marks the end of their education experience. Rarely are they allowed to study beyond the middle school level available at the village school. Most Jat parents in Shahargaon feel that the daughter should be educated up to a level so that she can write letters to her parents and take care of her children's health and education.

As the development of secondary sexual characteristics and the onset of menarche signal a girl's emerging sexuality, Jat girls are expected to spend more time in the house and take responsibility of the domestic workload. Jat girls are expected to help prepare and serve food and take care of their younger siblings. Culturally mediated concerns for virginity, marriage, and workload expectations lead Jat parents to enforce seclusion and strict parental control of mobility, education, and occupation of Jat daughters. The imposition of a strict conduct of behavior invariably leads to agitation, apprehension, and emotional anxiety among young Jat girls. Although the onset of menstruation is regarded as a natural event, women rarely discuss this issue amongst themselves. Delayed menarche is often considered an indicator of infertility. Irregular menstrual cycles are believed to be associated with a sexual indiscretion on the part of the girl and a source of great anxiety for parents. One of the major parental concerns is the fear of a daughter's emerging sexuality and of any dishonor which sexual activity could bring to the family. Anxiety over menstruation and lack of knowledge adds emotional distress to the psychosocial development of an adolescent girl.

Health care behavior among the Jats also indicates a strong bias favoring sons over daughters. Generally, Jat sons receive "modern" health care at an earlier stage of their illness than Jat girls. In comparison to Jat girls, Jat boys are more likely to be taken to biomedical "specialist" doctors and clinics. An ill son is a matter of great concern and anxiety for the family members while an ill daughter soon becomes the target of insults and parental frustration. Girls during this stage of their life have little or no control over their health and are dependent on decisions of the elder family members.

An adolescent Jat girl's life in her natal home is often emically described as life in a state of transition, at the threshold, or living inbetween two worlds. She is considered a "commodity" (*paraya dhan*) that belongs to some one else. Life stages like puberty and development of secondary sexual characteristics reinforce the idea of her temporary existence in her natal home.

### **Adulthood**

Jats prefer early marriage, especially in the case of girls. Among the Shahargaon Jats, the average age at marriage is 16 years (Khanna, 1995). Jat parents observe strict patterns of subcaste (*gotra*), village, and at times, regional exogamy while arranging marital alliances for their children. Jats practice patrilocality—a cultural practice that requires the bride to leave her natal home after marriage in order to live with her husband's family. The "adjustment" process for the young Jat bride in her affinal home involves meeting conjugal responsibilities, often from a position of complete ignorance, and dealing with the daily demands of the household chores. She is expected to maintain veil (*purdah* or *ghunghat*) from senior men in the family and the community.

Expectations to produce a son usually result in early pregnancy among the Jats. Early marriage followed by early childbearing increases the risk of obstructed labor and reproductive morbidity. Due to increase availability of health care in most rural and urbanizing areas of northwestern India, the Jats generally seek prenatal and perinatal health care from state-sponsored health clinics. Jat women in the household are primarily responsible for health care during and after pregnancy.

Among the Jats, sex and gender are contrasting concepts. Jat parents do not think of their children only in terms of a child's sex because what concerns them most is whether the child is a son (*beta*) or daughter (*beti*). These terms invoke an entire set of cultural values and behavioral norms associated with the sex of the child. While the birth of a son is considered a good gift or an indication of the family's good fortune, that of a daughter is considered a sign of distress and anxiety. Some of the commonly used proverbs expressing strong son preference among the Jats include:

to selling a son" (*jisney gharka dudh baech diya usne apna puut baech diya*).

On the other hand, common household names for daughters include:

*Rambatheri* (God, this one is enough) or *Rambheji* (this daughter belongs to God and he will take care of her).

Among the Shahargaon Jats, increasing urban contact and access to health services and reproductive technology, especially prenatal diagnostic technology, have provided Jat parents with a reliable means for reducing family size and limiting the number of daughters in the family. Shahargaon Jats are using temporary methods of contraception for reducing the number of children per family and achieving the desired family composition by using ultrasonography to identify the sex of the fetus and, in some case, aborting female fetuses. In a survey of 127 Shahargaon Jat women in 45 or less age category, 28.3% women used ultrasonography to identify the sex of the fetus and 13.4% women opted for sex-selective abortions between 1989 and 1994. The majority of Shahargaon Jat parents (68%) expressed desire for a small family size, and considered two sons and a daughter to be the ideal family composition (Khanna, 2001).

It is important to note that despite considerable improvements in economic and educational status brought about by urbanization, the use of prenatal diagnostic technology and sex-selective abortion of female fetuses suggests the continuation of the son preference and daughter neglect reminiscent of the Jat agrarian ethos. Notwithstanding the legality of abortion in India, well-equipped and professionally operated screening and abortion facilities are not readily accessible to all rural and urbanizing Jat communities. By seeking repeated ultrasonographic examinations and, at times, abortion services, Jat women are at increasing risk of complications resulting from unsafe and unhygienic abortion procedures, including reproductive tract infection. In the context of the generalized lack of knowledge and social stigma associated with reproductive health problems in the Jat community, Jat women are less likely to seek treatment for reproductive health problems.

### **The Aged**

Older members in the Jat community command considerable social prestige and respect. The Jats prefer to live in joint families with older men as heads of the household. While men enjoy high status and respect in the family primarily by virtue of their gender, Jat women have to

<sup>&</sup>quot;The number of sons is equal to the number of sticks and the number of sticks determines the amount of land controlled by a family" (*jitney ladke utney lath, jitney lath utna kabza*); and "selling milk is equivalent

#### **Location and Linguistic Affiliation 783**

contribute male heirs to the husband's patrilineage in order to gain authority and power in the family. Often older Jat women's primary responsibilities include direct supervision of their children's socialization. Among the Shahargaon Jats, the elderly women lack physiological knowledge associated with menopause and experience a wide range of menopausal symptoms such as tension, headaches, swelling, and loss of appetite. Some informants also reported a feeling of resentment and anger. Although the elderly Jats rarely seek health care for minor health problems, the joint family system among the Jats provides financial security and facilitates timely health care. Even at this stage in life, Jat men have a privileged social status over Jat women.

### **Dying and Death**

The Jats generally observe 13 days of pollution after death. Jat men are expected to show considerable behavioral restraints during the days of pollution, while Jat women are expected to express their grief in public. The dead are cremated by following the traditional Hindu ritual of cremation in which the eldest son plays an important role. At the death of a married woman, rituals and practices reinforce the notion that she does not belong to her husband's patrilineage. Her sister(s) and natal women relatives prepare the body for cremation and funeral rites.

## **REFERENCES**

- Bowles, G. T. (1977). *The people of Asia*. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
- Chowdhry, P. (1994). *The veiled women: Shifting gender equations in rural Haryana 1880–1990*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Datta, N. (1999). *Forming an identity: A social history of the Jats*. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
- Freed, R. S., & Freed, S. A. (1993). *Ghosts: Life and death in north India*. Washington, DC: The American Museum of Natural History.
- Fuchs, S. (1974). *The aboriginal tribes of India*. Delhi: Macmillan India.
- Ibbetson, D. (1916). *Punjab castes*. Lahore: India Press.
- Khanna, S. K. (1995). *Gender discrimination, maternal health, and pregnancy outcomes in north India*. Doctoral dissertation, Syracuse University.
- Khanna, S. K. (1997). Traditions and reproductive technology in an urbanizing north Indian village. *Social Science & Medicine, 44*(2), 171–180.
- Khanna, S. K. (2001). *Shahri* Jat and *dehati Jatni*: The Indian peasant community in transition. *Contemporary South Asia, 10*(1), 37–53.
- Kolenda, P. (1987). *Regional differences in family structure in India*. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
- Lewis, O. (1958). *Village life in northern India*. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Pradhan, M. C. (1966). *The political system of the Jats of northern India*. Bombay: Oxford University Press.
- Qanungo, K. (1982). *History of the Jats: Contribution to the history of northern India*. New Delhi: Surajmal Memorial Education Society.
- Westphal-Hellbusch, S., & Westphal, H. (1964). *The Jat of Pakistan*. Berlin: Duncker & Humbolt.

# **Lijiang Naxi**

#### **Sydney Davant White**

## **ALTERNATIVE NAMES**

Currently, the "Lijiang Naxi" and the "Yongning Naxi" (or Mosuo) are officially classified by the People's Republic of China government as members of the same Naxi "minority nationality," with the Mosuo designated as a "branch" of the Naxi; however, both groups see themselves as significantly different peoples. This entry focuses on the Naxi of the Lijiang area, specifically the Naxi of the Lijiang basin. During the Republican Period (1912– 49 CE), the contemporary Naxi of the Lijiang area of the People's Republic of China (PRC—1949–present) were referred to by Joseph Rock (1947) as the Na-khi; the contemporary Mosuo of the Yongning area (officially referred to as the Yongning Naxi, and sometimes also as the Naru, Naze, or Na by various scholars) were referred to by Rock as the Hli-khin.

## **LOCATION AND LINGUISTIC AFFILIATION**

The Lijiang basin has historically been the geographical, political/administrative, economic, and cultural center