**280 Reproductive Health**

*Population policies reconsidered. Health, empowerment, and rights* (pp. 223–234). Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.

- Field, J. A. (1968). Beginning of the birth control movement. In L. B. Young (Ed.), *Population in perspective* (pp. 79–106). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Gage, T. B. (2000). Demography. In S. Stinson, B. Bogin, R. Huss-Ashmore, & D. O'Rourke (Eds.), *Human biology. An evolutionary and biocultural perspective* (pp. 507–551). New York: Wiley–Liss.
- Germain, A., Nowrojee, S., & Pyne, H. H. (1994). Setting a new agenda: Sexual and reproductive health and rights. In G. Sen, A. Germain, & L. C. Chen (Eds.), *Population policies reconsidered. Health, empowerment, and rights* (pp. 27–46). Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. *Science, 162*, 1243–1248.
- Hardin, G. (1969). *Population, evolution and birth control: A collage of controversial issues*. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
- Hardin, G. (1974). Living in a lifeboat. *Bioscience, 24*, 561–568.
- Hardin, G. (1993). *Living within limits*. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Harpending, H. C., Sherry, S. T., Rogers, A. R., & Stoneking, M. (1993). Genetic structure of ancient human populations. *Current Anthropology, 34*, 483–496.
- Harris, M., & Ross, E. R. (1987). *Death, sex, and fertility: Population regulation in preindustrial and developing societies*. New York: Columbia University Press.
- Hartmann, B. (1995). *Reproductive rights and wrongs: The global politics of population control* (Rev. ed.). Boston, MA: South End Press.
- Hertzman, C. (2001). Health and human society. *American Scientist, 89*, 538–545.
- Klein, R. (2000). Archeology and the evolution of human behavior. *Evolutionary Anthropology, 9*, 17–36.
- Livi-Bacci, M. (2001). *A concise history of world population* (3rd ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Malthus, T. R. (1968). Essay on the principle of population. In L. B. Young (Ed.), *Population in perspective* (pp. 8–29). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J. & Behrens, III., W. W. (1974). *The Limits to Growth: A report for the Club of Rome's project on the predicament of mankind*. Second Edition. New York: Universe Books.

- Miller, B. D. (1987). Female infanticide and child neglect in rural North India. In N. Scheper-Hughes (Ed.), *Child survival. Anthropological perspectives on the treatment and maltreatment of children* (pp. 95–112). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: D. Reidel.
- Nag, M. (1973). Anthropology and population: Problems and perspectives. *Population Studies, 27*, 59–68.
- National Strategies for Sustainable Development (2001). *Sustainable development: Concepts and approaches*. Retrieved from http://www.nssd.net/References/SustDev.htm.
- Neurath, P. (1994). From Malthus to the Club of Rome and back. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharp.
- Polgar, S. (1972). Population history and population policies from an anthropological perspective. *Current Anthropology, 13*, 203–211.
- Ramos, R., Kennedy, K. I., & Visness, C. M. (1996). Effectiveness of lactational amenorrhoea in prevention of pregnancy in Manila, the Philippines: Non-comparative prospective trial. *British Medical Journal, 313*, 909–912.
- Ren, D., Navarro, B., Perez, G., Jackson, A. C., Hsu, S., Shi, Q. et al. (2001). A sperm ion channel required for sperm motility and male fertility. *Nature, 413*, 603–609.
- Segal, U. A. (2001). India. In B.M. Schwartz-Kenney, M. McCauley, & M. A. Epstein (Eds.), *Child abuse. A global view* (pp. 51–65). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
- Shapiro, T. M. (1985). *Population control politics. Women, sterilization and reproductive choice*. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
- Sherry, S. T., Rogers, A. R., Harpending, H., Soodyall, H., Jenkins, T., & Stoneking, M. (1994). Mismatch distribution of mtDNA reveal recent human population expansions. *Human Biology, 66*, 761–775.
- Simon, J.L., & Kahn, H. (Eds.). (1984). *The resourceful earth. A response to Global 2000*. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
- Stringer, C. B. (1994). Out of Africa. A personal history. In M. H. Nitecki & D.V. Nitecki (Eds.), *Origins of anatomically modern humans* (pp. 149–172). New York: Plenum Press.
- Thornton, R. (1987). *American Indian holocaust and survival*. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
- Whiting, J. W. M. (1964). Effects of climate on certain cultural practices. In W. H. Goodenough (Ed.), *Explorations in cultural anthropology* (pp. 511–544). New York: McGraw-Hill.
- Wolpoff, M. H., & Caspari, R. (1997). *Race and human evolution*. New York: Simon & Schuster.
- Wood, J. W. (1994). *Dynamics of human reproduction. Biology, biometry, demography*. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

# **Reproductive Health**

#### **Andrea Whittaker**

### **INTRODUCTION**

Research on reproductive health within medical anthropology encompasses people's emic perspectives on all matters related to sexuality and reproductive processes and functions. Some of the earliest works to describe ethnophysiological understandings include Ashley Montagu's (1949) work on understandings of conception, fetal development, and embryology among Australian indigenous peoples. Likewise, Malinowski's (1932) work

#### **Menstruation and the Reproductive Life Cycle 281**

in the Solomon Islands and Margaret Mead's (1928) work in Samoa may be seen as antecedents to modern work on the subject of sexuality. Early work on reproductive customs include Ford's (1964) comparative work listing beliefs and practices in 64 societies.

In the last 30 years studies focusing upon reproductive health have grown exponentially. Concern over the issue of world population growth in the late 1960s and 1970s spurred increased interest among anthropologists toward involvement into population issues. Anthropologists Steven Polgar and Moni Nag led a movement encouraging anthropologists into "population anthropology" researching fertility in Third World settings and promoting the need for anthropological research within high fertility societies (Nag, 1972; Polgar, 1972). The spread of international public health programs concentrating upon family planning, maternal and child health also promoted anthropologists' involvement in applied research on reproductive health issues. This coincided with the growth of feminist scholarship documenting the experiences of women and the nature of sex and gender, and the development of sexual research and gay studies. The HIV/AIDS pandemic has also demanded better understandings of sexual behaviors and the management of sexual health.

Anthropological work on reproductive health draws upon disciplines of public health, demography, biosocial approaches, post-structuralism, feminist theories, political economy, and historical approaches. The proliferation of studies on gender and sexuality across various disciplines has produced a rich literature that has greatly influenced anthropological approaches to sex and reproduction. Methodologically work on reproductive health has also highlighted the difficulty of gathering data on tacit knowledge and sensitive issues such as sexuality, forcing the development of innovative techniques. Two observations may be made about this body of work in general. First, the majority of work concerned with issues of reproductive health is by women anthropologists, and correspondingly, there remains a paucity of studies devoted to understandings of male reproductive health.

# **MENSTRUATION AND THE REPRODUCTIVE LIFE CYCLE**

In all cultures, women and men's reproductive health is invested with complex meanings that refer to their potency, fertility, and sexuality. Studies from Papua New Guinea and Australia provide notable cases where high values are placed upon both male and female roles in reproduction and nurturance and emphasize reproduction as a cosmological principle (e.g., Suggs & Marshall, 1971). Societies differ in the degrees to which they mark the commencement of young women and men's reproductive lives. Initiation ceremonies have long been a focus of anthropological interest exploring the links between social and moral order and the sexual and social maturity of youth. Ritual circumcision and sexual instruction may occur as part of these rites (Herdt, 1982; Richards, 1956).

Early studies emphasized the symbolic elaborations of menstruation. A re-evaluation argued for studies of menstrual ritual to be contextualized within the larger cultural system (Buckley & Gottlieb, 1988). For example, early ethnocentric works on menstruation analyzed Native American menstrual taboos as signs of female defilement and degradation. Buckley's (1988) reanalysis of Yurok data and Wright's (1982) work among the Navaho show that menstrual blood is a generative substance of enormous power which is considered dangerous when not involved in reproduction. Secluding menstruating women is not necessarily a mark of defilement and pollution, but can mark women's power. In contrast, in Turkey, menstruation is considered polluting, reflecting the subordination of women's interests (Delaney, 1988).

The quality and regularity of menstrual flows may also be understood to be related to a woman's moral and social status (Rasmussen, 1991; Sobo, 1992). In rural Thailand, a regular heavy menstrual flow of red blood is indicative of a healthy body and indicates the expulsion of "bad" blood. Irregular menstruation, or blood that is "thin" or "black, bruised and congealed," or any discharges, are signs of ill-health and bodily imbalance. The retention of bad blood within a woman's body may cause varied bodily and emotional states: weakness, bad moods, irritability, insanity, skin rashes, headache, dizziness, ulcers, and paleness (Chirawatkul, 1996; Whittaker, 2000). Likewise, understandings about the function of blood in provincial Iran are associated with beliefs about the nurturing and polluting qualities and the physical weakness of women and highlight how emic definitions of reproductive health may include aspects not considered by biomedicine to be associated with reproduction. Menstrual blood is believed to be "dirty" blood that must be released so as to cleanse the body each month (DelVecchio Good, 1980). Any disruption to menstrual flow due to the use of contraceptives such as the pill is understood to cause heart distress, weak nerves, lack of blood, aches and pains, and is frequently cited as a reason for discontinuing use.

Similarly, the experience of menopause depends on the ways in which cultures label the event and the assumptions made about women's lives (Beyene, 1989). Studies indicate that in some cultures the cessation of menstrual cycles is considered unremarkable and not necessarily the most important marker of female aging, nor associated with the same bodily symptoms associated with menopause in many industrial societies (Rasmussen, 2000). The meanings of menopause differ between cultures. Menopause is understood as a time of enhanced social status, and freedom for women in some cultures (Chirawatkul & Manderson, 1994; Kerns, 1985; Vatuk, 1985), and associated with enhanced sexual pleasure released from the fear of pregnancy (Beyene, 1989; Brown, 1982; Brown & Kerns, 1985). In the United States, menopause is associated negatively as a time of biological atrophy (Martin, 1987). In Japan, Lock has described the ways in which menopausal symptoms are labeled as signs of selfishness (Lock, 1988). Beliefs about the production of menstrual blood also impact upon understandings of the menopause. In Iran, menstrual blood signifies a woman's fertility and its loss is considered a sign of loss of youth, fertility, and physical attractiveness, because of the drying out of the womb (DelVecchio Good, 1980). The introduction and widespread use of hormone replacement therapies (HRT) as a treatment for "menopausal syndrome" in both industrialized and developing countries raises new issues as to the medicalization of menopause and the impact upon local understandings of older women and their lives.

A controversial issue addressed by some medical anthropologists is that of female genital surgery (also known as female circumcision or female genital mutilation), which involves the injury to, or partial, or total removal of external genitalia for cultural reasons practiced in many parts of the world, including some countries of the Horn of Africa and the Middle East, parts of Southeast Asia, especially Indonesia and Malaysia, and among immigrant communities from these areas. Campaigns against female genital surgery have been emotionally charged. Anthropological studies have provided understandings of the meanings and context of these practices (Gruenbaum, 1996, 1999; Obermeyer, 1999; Shell-Duncan & Hernlund, 2000). For example, in the Northern Sudan, Boddy explains infibulation within local values of beauty, enclosedness, and culturalized fertility. Girls are "veiled" through infibulation, men are "unveiled" at circumcision (Boddy, 1982). Ellen Gruenbaum argues that factors that perpetuate female circumcision and inhibit change can only be understood by examining the broader social, economic, and political context of the practice (Gruenbaum, 2001).

### **FERTILITY REGULATION**

Cultures differ in their understandings of fertility and the process of conception. For example, work on Sri Lanka (Nichter & Nichter, 1987) has found the first few days immediately following the cessation of menstruation is considered the most fertile, due to perceptions that the womb is most open to conception before and immediately after menstruation. Likewise, women are considered fertile immediately following childbirth due to the open state of the womb. Humoral notions of hot/cold and wet/dry also affect fertility. Given that the "safe period" is a common means of family planning in Sri Lanka, the provision of fertility cycle education combined with the use of condoms could result in a more effective usage of the "safe period" both for those wishing to postpone or space their children, or for those wishing to fall pregnant.

Many cultures have detailed knowledge of herbs, foods, and medicines for fertility regulation. Newman's edited work (1985) documents herbal medicines and other techniques used for menstrual regulation, the management of pregnancy, and assistance with labor in seven cultures, including Chinese–Malay, Afghanistan, Egypt, Colombia, Peru, Costa Rica, and Jamaica. Indigenous means of fertility regulation remain popular even when modern means of contraceptives are available, because they coincide with local understandings of the body, are controlled by women, are readily available and are socially and culturally acceptable. Humoral rationales underlie many cultures' understanding of reproductive processes and many of the indigenous medicines used in fertility regulation involve manipulating the body's humoral balance to enhance fertility or to delay it. In Cali, Colombia, one cause of menstrual delay is understood to be impurities in the womb or menstrual blood, or the accumulation of cold in the vagina. Remedies that purify the womb and restore humoral balance or others defined

#### **Fertility Regulation 283**

as purgatives are used to cure delayed menstrual periods (Browner, 1985).

Anthropological studies show how contraceptives are understood to work on women's and men's bodies in a wide variety of perceived ways and with a wide range of effects, and are mediated by a variety of social relationships, institutions, knowledges, beliefs, and practices (Russell, Sobo, & Thompson, 2000). Access to and use of modern contraceptive technologies has had a dramatic impact upon women's reproductive health, not least of which is a decrease in maternal mortality due to childbirth and induced abortion. It has had a major impact upon women's lives and bodies, enabling women to play greater roles as producers and allowed couples greater control over the timing of children and the number of children they may have. For many women and men this has had positive effects allowing them to express their sexuality free from the anxiety of pregnancy. At the same time, the use of modern contraceptives also involves a range of negative side-effects, of variable severity. These have primarily affected women who are the main users of contraceptives. An important debate within studies of fertility regulation by feminist anthropologists has been the extent to which modern contraceptives enhance women's empowerment and reproductive choice and rights (Petchesky & Judd, 1998).

Medical anthropologists have been involved in a range of "acceptability studies" to assess how local beliefs, social and cultural contexts, and behaviors will affect the acceptability of various fertility regulation methods (Polgar & Marshall, 1978). Across different cultures, the modes of action of various contraceptives differ and reveal local understandings of the workings of the body and factors influencing fertility. Neither the physiological responses nor attitudes toward any contraceptive technology can be distinguished from the wider context in which it is used (Gammeltoft, 1999). McCormack (1985) notes how in Jamaica the contraceptive pill is thought to work by mechanically blocking sperm from reaching the uterus. Pills are believed to build up within the body over time, requiring the use of a castor oil "wash-out" to cleanse the body, or periodic cessation of the pill. Other studies have suggested other modes of action of the pill, from weakening the body and blood, or through heating and drying out the womb (DelVecchio Good, 1980). In Northeast Thailand, injectable contraceptives are frequently associated with side-effects, such as tired arms, amenorrhoea, thinness, weakness, and chills, as the "bad" blood that is normally expelled through menstruation accumulates in the body causing a cold state (Whittaker, 2000). In Vietnam, the intra-uterine device (IUD) is understood to weaken a woman's blood and be detrimental to her health (Gammeltoft, 1999). In many places, such as Peru, the IUD is understood to be capable of moving through the body and cause injury to the heart or lungs (Maynard Tucker, 1986).

Contraception is associated with increased weakness and vulnerability to ill health in many cultures, which may be mitigated by following other folk medical practices and dietary regimes. For example, Morsy (1980) and Nichter (1996b) report that in Sri Lanka and Egypt, respectively, the ingestion of powerful drugs such as oral contraceptives is understood to require the consumption of nourishing foods to strengthen the body. Only rich women who can afford a "nourishing" diet are considered able to take the oral pill. In this way, sideeffects from contraception may also be mediated by class.

The meanings of contraceptives and the negotiation of their use are influenced by and influence local economic values, ethical and religious concerns, political ideologies, gender relations, and kinship systems (Russell et al., 2000). Decisions whether to adopt family planning methods also entail considerations of social and economic constraints. Sobo's work in Jamaica highlights the importance of issues of power, gender relations, and trust involved in the use of contraceptives (Sobo, 1993a, 1993b). In other contexts, such as Bangladesh, where use of contraceptives may invoke a husband's anger and violence, women may prefer to use contraceptives that can be administered clandestinely and infrequently (Stark, 2000).

Studies of contraception have also entailed the study of the health care systems delivering services. Anthropologists have studied the ways in which delivery of services reflects the broader social and political context and the quality of the relationships between health workers and their clients. Maternowska's (2000) study of a family planning clinic in Haiti provides an analysis of the power relations and how these reflect and perpetuate the ideologies and political and economic realities of wider society. Thompson (2000) describes how in Chiapas, Mexico, within the context of an ongoing guerilla campaign by indigenous people against the state, family planning is suspected of being part of a genocidal campaign to limit the number of indigenous people. As local elites, health care workers can reinforce the views of local people as ignorant and ignore or deride the fears and side-effects reported by users (Nichter, 1996b; Whittaker, 1996).

### **PREGNANCY OUTCOMES**

In parallel with public health interest in maternal and child health during the 1960s and 1970s, ethnographic studies drew attention to the diverse ways of managing pregnancy, childbirth, and mothering (see the entry Birth). The management of pregnancy, birth, and the postpartum period has important consequences for women's reproductive health. Long-term complications of pregnancy and childbirth include uterine prolapse, fistulae (holes in the birth canal that allow leakage of urine or feces from the bladder or rectum) incontinence, painful intercourse, and infertility. Obstructed labor can cause permanent nerve damage causing loss of sensation in the feet and legs, and infections can cause pelvic inflammatory disease, damaging the reproductive system. Although there is a large anthropological literature on birth and maternity, there remains scant material on women's experiences of such conditions.

In many cultures, the postpartum period is defined as one of vulnerability for both mother and child and is characterized by a reduction of household and work responsibilities, minimal social interactions, and support from female kin. Appropriate actions taken through the postpartum period are also believed to ensure a woman's continued reproductive health, strength, and beauty in many cultures. In a number of Southeast Asian cultures, the practice of "mother roasting" following birth involves a period during which the new mother rests close to a constantly burning fire for a period that varies from several days to several weeks as part of a measure to restore the humoral balance to a woman's body. Childbirth causes a "cold" state requiring the gradual restoration of heat to her body (Manderson, 1981; Mougne, 1978; Rice & Manderson, 1996; Sich, 1981; Whittaker, 1999).

Postpartum practices also involve dietary restrictions. Foods may be avoided due to their humoral status as "cold" foods, or for metaphorical reasons, for example some strong smelling foods are believed to affect the quality of the breastmilk. Anthropological studies of dietary practices and restrictions during pregnancy and in the postpartum period have also helped clarify to what extent such practices may negatively impact upon women's health and the pregnancy outcome (Laderman, 1983; Manderson, 1986; Nichter, 1996a). Laderman (1983, p. 70) found in her study of Malay postpartum diets that many foods in the unmarked, "safe" categories are those essential for life, whereas foods in the "dangerous" categories are supplementary foods that are easily removed or reduced in the diet.

Despite an enormous literature on family planning, birth, and maternity, there is little written about the distressing events of miscarriages, stillbirths, and neonatal deaths. As Cecil suggests, this lack of anthropological interest in pregnancy loss is surprising given that it highlights fundamental issues such as the definition of when life begins, when and how a fetus/baby is defined as human, and at what point a child is admitted into the social order (Cecil, 1996; Morgan, 1990). A number of studies in Western countries highlight the difficulty in defining pregnancy loss in Western cultures which assume successful outcomes to pregnancies, glorify motherhood, and evade the experience of death (Hey, Itzin, Saunders, & Speakman, 1989; Lovell, 1983; Oakley, McPherson, & Roberts, 1984). Common themes run through accounts of pregnancy loss cross-culturally (Cecil, 1996). First is the emphasis upon women's responsibility to maintain a healthy pregnancy. Across many societies greater emphasis is placed upon prohibitions on activities and diet by women, providing commentary on existing notions of gender in a given society. Another common theme is the relationship between the fetus and the supernatural. In many cultures the fetus is defined as between the two worlds, with complete human status not ascribed until some later point, sometimes years after birth. Finally, pregnancy loss draws out the importance of understanding social and gender relations, as miscarriage is commonly defined as caused by the intentional or unintentional actions or desires of another human agent.

The ferocious debate over abortion raging in the United States inspired a number of studies analyzing abortion as a practice and as a political and social construction and its relationship to the social and economic context, transformations in gender relations, and changing sexual culture. Feminist analyses of abortion history, practice, and politics within the United States (Luker, 1984; Petchesky, 1990) demonstrate how control over reproduction is a critical site of contest, reflecting broader economic, social, and ideological concerns over women's status and roles, and competing constructions of gender relations, sexuality, and motherhood. Luker (1984) and Ginsburg (1989) gave insight into the worldviews and

#### **Reproductive Tract Infections 285**

social circumstances of activists on both sides of the abortion debate and the reformulation and redefinition of gender oppositions. Until recently few ethnographic studies considered the meanings of abortion in other cultures. Exceptions include studies on the *mizuko kuyo* rituals for aborted fetuses of Japan (LaFleur, 1992), and edited volumes detailing emic understandings of abortion and menstrual regulation within various social contexts (Githens & Stetson, 1996; Indriso & Fathalla, 1999; Rylko-Bauer, 1996). Whether in countries with restrictive abortion laws or not, the studies in these collections highlight the relationship between the social and ideological context, the economic situation of women, and the quality of abortion care they can access.

# **INFERTILITY AND FERTILITY ENHANCEMENT**

The links between the moral order and reproductive health are particularly marked in cases of infertility. The inability to bear a child is understood to reflect moral status, and in particular is usually blamed upon the woman who may suffer abuse and ostracism. In Africa, infertility carries a grave social stigma, and there is an elaborate range of traditional remedies used to address it (Ebin, 1994; Kielmann, 1998). Likewise, Chinese medicine reflects the cultural emphasis placed upon fertility (Farquhar, 1991) and women are often subjected to intense traditional and biomedical interventions to conceive (Handwerker, 1998).

The dissemination of new technologies for prenatal testing, fertility enhancement, selective reproduction, and cloning technologies, as well as new contraceptive technologies, including male contraceptives, pose new examples of the intervention of biomedicine into reproduction and its social impact. Feminist researchers have questioned the value and effects of some new reproductive technologies and the complex ways in which women are positioned in their use of these technologies and how they gain and lose power over reproduction in the process (Birke Himmelweit, & Vines, 1990; Franklin, 1990; Rapp, 1990, 1991, 1999; Sandelowski, 1990, 1991). For example, women's access to and choices about prenatal testing is mediated by differences in class position, racial–ethnic, and religious backgrounds and provides another example of "stratified reproduction" (Lock, 1998; Rapp, 1999). Surrogacy arrangements are also challenging kinship relationships and definitions (Kaplan, 1999; Modell, 1989). Although these technologies are increasingly available in developing countries, there is little work on the practices and meanings of amniocentesis and other reproductive technologies such as in-vitro fertilization (IVF) in these settings.

### **REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INFECTIONS**

Reproductive tract infections, including sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are a major cause of infertility, genital cancers, pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy, poor pregnancy outcomes, and infections in neonates, and are often less symptomatic, more easily contracted, and have more serious and lifethreatening consequences for women than for men. For example, chlamydia infection is a common STD with serious consequences for women's health including increasing risk of ectopic pregnancies, infertility, and neonatal morbidity (Millar, 1987). Human papilloma virus, the causative agent of genital warts, is associated with cervical cancer. STDs are socially influenced by such factors as the number of sexual partners, use of contraceptives, sexual behaviors, and general health care practices. Beliefs and meanings surrounding gender and sexuality, fertility, STDs, hygiene, and health care are all crucial to developing prevention strategies and reducing the impact of STDs, along with studies of the psychosocial consequences of infection and its economic consequences.

There is a relatively small literature relating to reproductive tract infections in men and women. In part this is because these topics are extremely sensitive and in many cultures associated with shame and social stigma. While the incidence of reproductive tract infections and other conditions in developing countries is substantial, many women do not seek treatment from the formal health sector for these problems, or else postpone treatment until the condition is acute. Work conducted in Vietnam (Gammeltoft, 1999; Whittaker, 2002), in Thailand (Boonmongkon Nichter & Pylypa, 2001; Whittaker, 2000), and among Vietnamese migrants (Kendall, 1987), concentrates upon the ethnophysiology of vaginal discharge and its relationship to ideas of strength, humoral balance, and cleanliness. The presence of vaginal discharge may be associated with a "dirty" womb and may be believed to indicate a transgression against the moral order. Sobo's (1993a, 1993b) study of Jamaican ethnophysiology explores how the body and culturally constructed idioms of health and sickness serve as metaphors for the social and moral order. In Thailand, understandings of the causation and detection of cervical cancers are linked to ideas about the strength of the womb, its cleanliness and dryness, and the presence of an injury or infection which is understood to develop into an ulcer (Boonmongkon et al., 2001). Such understandings have public health ramifications for cervical cancer screening programs and notions of risk (Chavez, Hubbell, McMullin, Martinez, & Mishra, 1995). In South Africa, pap smears to check for cervical cancer are believed to be a preventive measure to clean the womb (Wood, Jewkes, & Abrahams, 1997). In Northeastern Brazil, campaign messages linking cervical cancer with sexual activity are interpreted by many women to mean that once a woman is no longer sexually active she need not continue to be screened (Gregg, 2000).

There remains little anthropological research on male reproductive health. Apart from early studies on ritual or informal couvades (Browner, 1983; Riviere, 1974) and male initiation, there has been little attention paid to male ethnophysiology, attitudes toward infertility, their roles in sexual negotiation, and reproductive decision-making (Rosen & Benson, 1982; Whiteford & Sharinus, 1988), roles in birth (Ebin, 1994), experience of paternity (Katz & Konner, 1981), and practices surrounding STDs. For example, Nichter describes men's use of self-medication for the treatment of suspected STDs (Nichter, 1996c) and prophylactic practices to avoid infection, such as washing the penis in disinfectives and the consumption of purges. Recent programs promoting male involvement in family planning and HIV/AIDS programs have encouraged research in these fields.

### **SEXUALITY AND HIV/AIDS**

In their review, Davis and Whitten note that anthropological approaches to the cross-cultural study of sexuality typically reflect prevailing values in the West at the time (Davis & Whitten, 1987). Sexuality remains a provocative subject area with a range of ethical and methodological difficulties. There remain few detailed ethnographic studies on sexuality and sexual health (Vance, 1991), especially in relation to aging and sexuality, youth sexuality (Burbank, 1988; Manderson & Rice, 2002), homosexual practices (Taylor, 1985), sexual violence, transsexualism, or other cross-gender behavior/third gender identification in cross-cultural settings (Nanda, 1985; Nanda & Francher, 1980; Shah, 1961). Little anthropological work has explored gender reassignment and sex change surgery.

Much of the recent work on sexuality is in response to the advent of HIV/AIDS (see the entry HIV/AIDS). How people categorize the disease affects their perceptions of risk and preventive behaviors (Ingstad, 1990; Lyttleton, 2000). Farmer's influential ethnography traced the emergent collective representations of AIDS in a rural village in Haiti across six years (Farmer, 1992). From associations with outsiders, villagers gradually incorporated AIDS into local understandings of illnesses produced by dirty blood, to a more severe form of a locally defined illness. As villagers had direct experience of the illness through infected people, AIDS became defined as a "sent illness" and associated with TB. He traces the increased politicization of AIDS within the discourse of Haitian people and the political economy of AIDS through which poor people are at greater risk.

How people categorize their sexual encounters also affects their perceptions of risk. Parker (1987) shows how the sexual categories of Brazil are based on notions of passivity and activity and are not absolute. He noted that the very notion of safe sex runs counter to Brazilian notions of eroticism and that campaigns that depend on homosexual identity would be limited in their impact. Studies of commercial sex workers also point to the need to understand sexual networking and how sex workers differentiate between clients and intimate others and factors contributing to the use of condoms (Renaud, 1997).

Studies of HIV/AIDS also include attention to the social consequences of the disease for people infected, but also their families and communities (Barnett & Blaikie, 1992). Because of its associations with sex, particularly non-monogamous, commercial, or homosexual sex, intravenous drug use and blood, HIV/AIDS has evoked stigmatization and fear (Quam, 1990; Songwathana & Manderson, 2001).

### **CONCLUSION**

The meanings, beliefs, and practices surrounding reproduction are structured historically and culturally by local and global forces (Ginsburg & Rapp, 1991, 1995; Greenhalgh, 1995; Jolly & Ram, 2001; Ram & Jolly, 1998). Reproductive experiences are structured by

#### **286 Reproductive Health**

#### **References 287**

macro- and micro-relations of power, class, and gender politics in which relationships of power act selectively to encourage and empower certain groups of people to reproduce (Ginsburg & Rapp, 1991, 1995; Handwerker, 1990). An anthropology of reproductive health draws the researcher into the fundamental anthropological question of the problem and process of people's agency in daily life (Carter, 1995; Lock & Kaufert, 1998) and the degree to which intimate decisions, behavior, and practice are structured by social institutions, and the political economy. As demonstrated in the studies above, understanding of reproductive health behaviors and practices requires familiarity with the social, economic and cultural context, general therapeutic understandings, notions of embodiment, and core cultural concepts within a cultural setting. Large gaps remain in our knowledge of cultures of reproductive health and pose epistemological and methodological challenges for the discipline of medical anthropology.

### **REFERENCES**

- Barnett, T., & Blaikie, P. (1992). How households, families and communities cope with AIDS. In T. Barnett & P. Blaikie (Eds.), *AIDS in Africa: Its present and future impact* (pp. 86–109). London: Belhaven Press.
- Beyene, Y. (1989). *From menarche to menopause: Reproductive lives of peasant women in two cultures*. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
- Birke, L., Himmelweit, S., & Vines, G. (1990). *Tomorrow's child: Reproductive technologies in the 90s*. London: Virago.
- Boddy, J. (1982). Womb as oasis: The symbolic context of pharaonic circumcision in rural Northern Sudan. *American Ethnologist, 9*(4), 682–698.
- Boonmongkon, P., Nichter, M., & Pylypa, J. (2001). *Mot luuk* problems in northeast Thailand: Why women's own health concerns matter as much as disease rates. *Social Science & Medicine, 53*, 1095–1112.
- Brown, J. K. (1982). Cross-cultural perspectives on middle-aged women. *Current Anthropology, 23*, 143–156.
- Brown, J. K., & Kerns, V. (Eds.). (1985). *In her prime: A new view of middle-aged women*. South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey.
- Browner, C. H. (1983). Male pregnancy symptoms in urban Colombia. *American Ethnologist, 10*(3), 494–510.
- Browner, C. H. (1985). Traditional techniques for diagnosis, treatment, and control of pregnancy in Cali, Colombia. In L. F. Newman (Ed.), *Women's medicine. A cross-cultural study of indigenous fertility regulation* (pp. 99–123). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Buckley, T. (1988). Menstruation and the power of Yurok women. In T. Buckley & A. Gottlieb (Eds.), *Blood magic: The anthropology of menstruation* (pp. 187–209). Berkeley: University of California Press.

- Buckley, T., & Gottlieb, A. (Eds.). (1988). *Blood magic: The anthropology of menstruation*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Burbank, V. (1988). *Aboriginal adolescence: Maidenhood in an Australian community*. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Carter, A. T. (1995). Agency and fertility: For an ethnography of practice. In S. Greenhalgh (Ed.), *Situating fertility: Anthropology and demographic inquiry* (pp. 55–85). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Cecil, R. (Ed.). (1996). *The anthropology of pregnancy loss: Comparative studies in miscarriage, stillbirth and neonatal death*. Oxford, UK: Berg.
- Chavez, L. R., Hubbell, F. A., McMullin, J. Martinez, R. G., & Mishra, S. I. (1995). Structure and meaning in models of breast cancer and cervical cancer risk factors: A comparison of perceptions among Latinas, Anglo women, and physicians. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 9*(1), 40–74.
- Chirawatkul, S. (1996). Blood beliefs in a transitional culture in Northeast Thailand. In P. Liamputtong Rice & L. Manderson (Eds.), *Maternity and reproductive health in Asian societies* (pp. 247–260). Amsterdam: Harwood Academic.
- Chirawatkul, S., & Manderson, L. (1994). Perceptions of menopause in Northeast Thailand: Contested meaning and practice. *Social Science & Medicine, 39*(11), 1545–1554.
- Davis, D. L., & Whitten, R. G. (1987). The cross-cultural study of human sexuality. *Annual Review of Anthropology, 16*, 69–98.
- Delaney, C. (1988). Mortal flow: Menstruation in Turkish village society. In T. Buckley & A. Gottlieb (Eds.), *Blood magic: The anthropology of menstruation* (pp. 75–93). Berkeley: University of California Press.
- DeVecchio Good, M.-J. (1980). Of blood and babies: The relationship of popular Islamic physiology to fertility. *Social Science & Medicine, 14B*, 147–156.
- Ebin, V. (1994). Interpretations of infertility: The Aowin people of southwest Ghana. In C. MacCormack (Ed.), *Ethnography of fertility and birth* (2nd ed., pp. 131–151). Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
- Farmer, P. (1992). *AIDS and accusation: Haiti and the geography of blame*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Farquhar, J. (1991). Objects, processes and female infertility in Chinese medicine. *Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 5*, 370–399.
- Ford, C. S. (Ed.). (1964). *A comparative study of human reproduction*. New Haven: Human Relations Area Files Press.
- Franklin, S. (1990). Deconstructing "desperateness": The social construction of infertility in popular representations of new reproductive technologies. In M. McNeil, I. Varcoe, & S. Yearley (Eds.), *The new reproductive technologies* (pp. 200–229). New York: St. Martin's Press.
- Gammeltoft, T. (1999). *Women's bodies, women's worries: Health and family planning in a Vietnamese rural community*. Richmond, UK: Curzon Press.
- Ginsburg, F. (1989). *Contested lives: The abortion debate in an American community*. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Ginsburg, F., & Rapp, R. (1991). The politics of reproduction. *Annual Review of Anthropology, 20*, 311–343.
- Ginsburg, F. D., & Rapp, R. (Eds.). (1995). *Conceiving the new world order: The global politics of reproduction*. Berkeley: University of California Press.