### **REFERENCES**

- Bindon, J. R., Knight, A., Dressler, W. W., & Crews, D. E. (1997). Social context and psychosocial influences on blood pressure among American Samoans. *American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 103*, 7–18.
- Cassel, J. C., Patrick, R., & Jenkins, C. D. (1960). Epidemiological analysis of the health implications of culture change. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 84*, 938–949.
- Cassel, J. C. (1976). The contribution of the social environment to host resistance. *American Journal of Public Health*, *104*, 107–123.
- Caudill, W. (1958). *Effects of social and cultural systems in reactions to stress*. New York: Social Science Research Council.
- Dressler, W. W. (1982). *Hypertension and culture change: Modernization and disease in the West Indies*. South Salem, NY: Redgrave.
- Dressler, W. W. (1993). Social and cultural dimensions of hypertension in blacks: Underlying mechanisms. In J. G. Douglas & J. C. S. Fray (Eds.), *Pathophysiology of hypertension in blacks* (pp. 69–89). New York: Oxford University Press.
- Dressler, W. W. (1999). Modernization, stress and blood pressure: New directions in research. *Human Biology, 71*, 583–605.
- Dressler, W. W., & Bindon, J. R. (2000). The health consequences of cultural consonance: Cultural dimensions of lifestyle, social support and blood pressure in an African American community. *American Anthropologist, 102*, 244–260.

- Dressler, W. W., & Santos, J. E. D. (2000). Social and cultural dimensions of hypertension in Brazil: A review. *Cadernos de Saúde Pública, 16*, 303–315.
- Henry, J. P., & Cassel, J. C. (1969). Psychosocial factors in essential hypertension. *American Journal of Epidemiology, 90*, 171–200.
- Janes, C. R. (1990). *Migration, social change and health*. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- McGarvey, S. T. (1999). Modernization, psychosocial factors, insulin and cardiovascular health. In C. Panter-Brick & C. M. Worthman (Eds.), *Hormones, health and behavior* (pp. 244–280). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Panter-Brick, C., & Worthman, C. M. (Eds.). (1999). *Hormones, health and behavior*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Romney, A. K., Weller, S. C., & Batchelder, W. H. (1986). Culture as consensus: A theory of culture and informant accuracy. *American Anthropologist, 88*, 313–338.
- Scotch, N. A. (1963). Sociocultural factors in the epidemiology of Zulu hypertension. *American Journal of Public Health, 53*, 1205–1213.
- Waldron, I., Nowotarski, M., Freimek, M., Henry, J. P., Post, N., & Witten, C. (1982). Cross-cultural variation in blood pressure. *Social Science & Medicine, 16*, 419–430.
- Worthman, C. (1999). Epidemiology of human development. In C. Panter-Brick & C. M. Worthman (Eds.), *Hormones, health and behavior*, (pp. 47–104). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

# **Diabetes Mellitus and Medical Anthropology**

#### **Leslie Sue Lieberman**

## **INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS**

Diabetes mellitus is a group of metabolic diseases characterized by high blood sugar or hyperglycemia. Chronic hyperglycemia results from defects in insulin secretion from the pancreas and/or insufficient insulin action in muscle and adipose tissue. Diabetes is characterized by both under- and over-secretion of insulin, the hormone that transports glucose across cell membranes. Diabetes is associated with long-term damage and dysfunction of the pancreas, eyes, kidneys, nerves, heart, and large and small blood vessels (American Diabetes Association [ADA], 2002a; Harris, 1995).

In type 1 or juvenile diabetes the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas are attacked by the individual's immune system resulting in a decrease in insulin production. Type 1 diabetes is designated as an autoimmune disease and accounts for approximately 5% of the cases of diabetes worldwide. Individuals with type 1 diabetes require insulin.

Type 2 diabetes or adult-onset diabetes is characterized by hyperinsulinism in response to the resistance of target tissues to the transport of glucose into cells. Obesity is a significant risk factor for type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 90% of diabetes worldwide and is often considered a "disease of modernization" since it occurs disproportionately among populations adopting a Westernized lifestyle (Baschetti, 1998; Joe & Young, 1994; Popkin, 2001). It may be controlled through diet, exercise, and medication.

Approximately 5–10% of diabetes is due to other causes that are often transient rather than chronic.

These include gestational diabetes occurring during pregnancy  $(2-5\%)$ , drug or chemically induced diabetes, genetic syndromes, infections, and other endocrine diseases. A classification of diabetes lists more than 50 specific causes (ADA, 2002a; Centers for Disease Control, 2001).

### DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA

Symptoms of diabetes include: frequent urination (polyuria), hunger, thirst (polydipsia), weight loss, blurred vision, and skin itchiness. In children there may be growth impairment. Among type 2 diabetics insulin resistance may be present for a number of years prior to the development of elevated blood glucose levels. When insulin production can no longer compensate for peripheral tissue resistance, blood glucose levels rise, reaching the criteria for a diagnosis of diabetes.

The World Health Organization (WHO) diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus include a medical history of diabetes or a fasting plasma glucose level ≥140 mg/dl (7.8 mmol/L) or a plasma glucose level 2 hr after a meal of  $\geq 200$  mg/dl (11.1 mmol/L). However, the National Diabetes Data Group in the United States has a criterion of a fasting plasma glucose level of ≥126 mg/dl (7.0 mmol/L) (ADA, 2002a; WHO, 1985). An oral glucose tolerance test is also used for diagnosis. If the plasma glucose level is  $\geq 200 \text{ mg/L (11.1 \text{mmol/L}) 2 hr}$ after consuming a standard 75 mg oral glucose load, then a provisional diagnosis of diabetes is made. Normal plasma glucose levels are  $\geq 110 \text{ mg/L (6.1 mmol/L)}$ . Individuals with "pre-diabetes" or impaired glucose tolerance have fasting plasma glucose levels between 110 mg/dl and 126 mg/dl, or an oral glucose tolerance test equal to or exceeding 140 mg/L (7.8 mmol/L).

The 2-hr plasma glucose levels have been set at a cut point where the prevalence of eye disease (retinopathy) and kidney disease (nephropathy) increase dramatically. However, in certain populations (e.g., Pima Indians and Pacific Islanders) with high a prevalence of type 2 diabetes the cut point at which there is a marked increase in complications is lower ( $\leq 126$  mg/dl). These include the Pima Indians of Arizona and several Pacific Island populations.

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus (ADA, 2002a) recommend testing

for diabetes for individuals who have the following characteristics: (1) are overweight with a body mass index (BMI)  $\geq$  25 kg/m<sup>2</sup>); (2) have a first-degree relative with diabetes; (3) are members of high-risk ethnic populations (e.g., African American, Hispanic American, Native American, Asian American, or Pacific Islander); (4) delivered a baby weighing  $> 9$  lb; (5) have ever had gestational diabetes mellitus; (6) are hypertensive  $(\geq 140/90 \text{ mmHg}); (7) \text{ have HDL cholesterol} \geq 35 \text{ mg/dl}$ (0.90 mmol/L); (8) have triglycerides  $\geq 250$  mg/dl (2.82 mmol/L); or (9) had impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fasting glucose levels on previous testing.

### DIABETES COMPLICATIONS

Diabetes is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States. Among diabetics heart disease is the primary cause of diabetes-related deaths and is  $2-4$  times higher in people with diabetes than those without the disease (ADA, 2002a; Centers for Disease Control, 2001). A life-threatening consequence of type 1 diabetes is diabetic coma due to ketoacidosis resulting from the exclusive use of fat as an energy source.

The most frequent complications of long-term diabetes occur because of abnormalities in the blood vessels and nerves caused by chronic hyperglycemia. Diabetes is the leading cause of blindness, kidney failure, and amputations of the lower limb. There are also abnormalities that occur in the immune, cardiovascular, and digestive systems as well as periodontal disease, sexual dysfunction, and complications of pregnancy (ADA, 2002a; Harris, 1995). Diabetes also is associated with psychological and social dysfunction. Because type 2 diabetes often does not have an acute onset, it may go undiagnosed for a number of years until a consequence of the disease is treated and the underlying diabetes is diagnosed (ADA, 2002a; Centers for Disease Control, 2001).

In the United States, Native Americans exhibit the highest mortality and complication rates of any ethnic groups. The Native American population's age-adjusted diabetes mortality rates for 1991-93 were 11.9/100,000 for the United States but 31.7/100,000 for all Indian Health Service areas (Gohdes & Acton, 2000). Native American diabetics are four times more likely than their white counterparts to experience a lower limb amputation and six times more likely experience end stage renal disease or kidney failure. In Oklahoma, a state with more

#### **Diabetes Epidemiology**

than 30 tribes, 24% of Oklahoma Indians have diabetic retinopathy (ADA, 2002b).

### DIABETES EPIDEMIOLOGY

In 2000 the worldwide estimate by the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) was 151 million adults (20–79 years) with type 2 diabetes. This is an increase from 30 million in 1985 and 135 million in 1995. There is a projected global estimate of 300 million people in 2025 (IDF, 2001). Because higher energy intakes and lower energy expenditures are having differential impacts on developed and developing countries, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes in developing countries is expected to increase by 170% compared with a rise of 41% in developed countries between 1995 and 2025 (IDF, 2001). Approximately half this increase will be Asian and Pacific Islander populations. China is predicted to have a prevalence increase of 68%, followed by India (59%) and other Asian countries and the Pacific Islands (41%) (Joslin Diabetes Center,  $2002$ ). By comparison, the worldwide estimate for type 1 diabetes was 4.9 million in 2000 and is not expected to show a major increase in prevalence.

The Diabetes Atlas 2000 (IDF, 2001) contains estimates of diabetes prevalence in 130 countries including more than 5.5 billion people within the seven regions of the IDF. Lowest regional rates are in Sub-Sahara Africa and the highest rates in the Western Pacific, Countries with a prevalence of diabetes between  $1.5\%$  and  $3.9\%$ include Chile, China, the Philippines, Ireland, Brazil, Argentina, the United Kingdom, Peru, Thailand, Norway, South Africa, Columbia, and Venezuela, Countries with a prevalence of diabetes between 4% and 8% include Turkey, Indonesia, Portugal, Finland, Poland, India, Greece, Korea, Melanesia, Hungary, Israel, Japan, the United States (6.2%), and New Zealand. Countries between 8% and 12% include Egypt, Cuba, and Singapore. A number of Caribbean and South Pacific Island countries, Mexico, Papua New Guinea, Bahrain, Hong Kong, Pakistan, and the Czech Republic range from 12% to 15% (Table 1) (IDF, 2001).

The three tiers of prevalence represent countries from all parts of the world demonstrating genetic and ethnic diversity. Because most of these countries are small, the top 10 countries in terms of numbers of individuals with diabetes is very different. In descending order theses are: India, China, the United States, Pakistan, Japan, 337

Indonesia, Mexico, Egypt, Brazil, and Italy (Table 2) (IDF, 2001). In the United States the adult prevalence rates vary widely among and within ethnic groups. These are: 15.1% of American Indians and Alaska Natives, 13% non-Hispanic "Blacks," 10.2% Hispanic/Latino Americans, and 7.8% non-Hispanic "Whites" (Harris, 1995).

The most comprehensive epidemiological data exist for Native Americans. Among Native Americans one of every five is affected with diabetes (Indian Health Service, 2000). Age-adjusted rates of diagnosed diabetes in the Indian Health Service Areas for fiscal year 1995 are highest  $(115/1,000)$  for the Pima and Papago of Arizona

Table 1. Prevalence of Diabetes (20–79 Age Group) in the Top 10 Countries

| Country                                                                                                                 | Prevalence (%) |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Papua New Guinea                                                                                                        | 15.5           |
| Mauritius                                                                                                               | 15.0           |
| Bahrain                                                                                                                 | 14.8           |
| Mexico                                                                                                                  | 14.2           |
| Trinidad and Tobago                                                                                                     | 14.1           |
| Barbados<br>Aruba<br>Bermuda<br>British Virgin Islands<br>Cayman Islands<br>Grenada<br>Hong Kong<br>St. Kitts and Nevis | 13.2<br>12.1   |
| Pakistan                                                                                                                | 11.8           |
| Czech Republic                                                                                                          | 11.7           |
| Tonga                                                                                                                   | 11.5           |

Table 2. People with Diabetes (20-79 Age Group) in the Top 10 Countries

| Country       | Number of people<br>(millions) |
|---------------|--------------------------------|
| India         | 32.7                           |
| China         | 22.6                           |
| United States | 15.3                           |
| Pakistan      | 8.8                            |
| Japan         | 7.1                            |
| Indonesia     | 5.7                            |
| Mexico        | 4.4                            |
| Egypt         | 3.4                            |
| Brazil        | 3.3                            |
| Italy         | 3.1                            |

#### **338 Diabetes Mellitus and Medical Anthropology**

and lowest (26/1,000) for Alaskan populations (Gohdes & Acton, 2000). These rates have increased dramatically over the last two decades. Approximately 50% of Pima adults aged 35 and older have diabetes (Knowler, Pettitt, Bennett, & Williams, 1983). Other dramatic increases have been reported for the Navajo Indians (Glass, 1996), Cree and Ojibwas Indians in Canada (Young & Harris, 1994), and Alaskan Natives (Gohdes et al., 1996). Most prevalence studies indicated that females have higher rates of diabetes than males (Lee, Howard, & Savage, 1995). In addition, rates of diabetes are higher with increasing Indian heritage (Lee et al., 1995). Genetic studies have determined that there is a genetic propensity for diabetes among the Pima (Baier, Bogardus, & Sacchettini, 1996; Farook et al., 2002).

Starting in the 1990s there has been a rapid increase in the number of Native American children with type 2 diabetes. The primary factor is obesity (Salbe et al., 2002) associated with centrally distributed fat (Goran, & Gower, 1999) and high fasting insulin levels or insulin resistance (Pettitt, Moll, & Bennett, 1993). Many of these children were exposed to high circulating glucose levels in mothers with type 2 diabetes or with gestational diabetes (Ghodes & Acton, 2000), therefore there is an intergenerational affect of diabetes during pregnancy.

Latinos are the fastest growing minority group in the United States: Mexican American (60%), Puerto Rican (12%), and Cuban (6%) with smaller numbers of Central American and South Americans. Puerto Ricans live primarily in the North East corridor, Cuban Americans primarily, in Florida, and Mexican Americans in the Southwest. By age 45, 20% of Latino Americans have diabetes and by age 65 diabetes has been diagnosed in more than 33% of Latinos regardless of their country of origin (Davidson, Seltzer, & Bressler, 1994; Harris, 1991; Weller et al., 1999). Sixty percent of the increase in diabetes prevalence in the United States in the 1990s is attributed to Latino populations (ADA, 1994). Heredity is an important factor and Latinos with a higher percentage of Native American admixture are at greater risk for diabetes (Stern et al., 1992).

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in secondand third-generation Japanese Americans, particularly males, in the Seattle area is twice as high as the prevalence for the population with European ancestry and four times greater than the non-migrant population in Japan (Fujimoto, Leonetti, Kinyoun, Newell-Morris, & Shuman, 1987).

Diabetes is a costly disease. The economic burden of diabetes is estimated in direct healthcare costs to patients and the additional costs of lost wages, disability, and premature death. In the United States this was \$98 billion in 1997 (approximately \$12,000/patient) (Diabetes Public Health Resource, www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/ estimates.htm, May/2002). Per patient costs for other countries in U.S. dollars are estimated to be over \$3,000 for Belgium, Germany, and France with slightly lower levels for other European countries and the United Kingdom (\$2,000) (IDF, 2001). The rising incidence and prevalence of type 2 diabetes will present a tremendous economic burden for many countries.

## **POPULATIONS STUDIED BY MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGISTS**

A search of the Human Relations Area Files in 2002 indicated only 46 documents with brief references to diabetes. Wiedman (2001) notes that the majority of research on diabetes by anthropologists has occurred in a very limited number of societies primarily in North American and Canadian Native populations (Harris et al., 1997). In Canada the Dogrib in the Northwest Territory have been the focus of research by Emoke Szathmary and her colleagues since the late 1970s (Ritenbaugh, Szathmary, Goodby, & Feldman, 1996; Szathmary, 1986, 1990, 1994a, 1994b; Szathmary & Ferrell, 1990; Szathmary, Ritenbaugh, & Goodby, 1987). Other populations that have been studied are the Sandy Lake Cree (Gittelsohn et al., 1995, 1996), Anishinaabe Ojibway (Garro, 1987, 1995; Garro & Lang, 1994), urban Indians in Toronto (Hagey, 1984), the Metis, who are a heterogeneous group of Indians and Europeans (Bruce, 2000), and a number of Inuit and non-Inuit Indians in the Canadian Artic (Young, 1987, 1993; Young, Chateau, & Zhang, 2002; Young, Szathmary, Evers, Wheatley, 1990; Young, Scharer, Shubnikoff, Szathmary, Nikitin, 1992).

In the Continental United States extensive multidisciplinary studies have been made with the Pima Indians of Arizona since the 1960s (Knowler et al., 1983; Knowler, Williams, & Pettitt, 1988; Knowler, Pettitt, Saad, & Benett, 1990; Kozak, 1996; Ravussin, Valencia, Esparza, Bennett, & Schulz, 1994; Reid et al., 1971). Anthropologists have studied other southwestern populations including the Navajo (Evaneshko, 1994; Hall,

#### **Medical Anthropology and Diabetes 339**

Hickey, & Young, 1991, 1992, 1994; Ritenbaugh, 1981), the Zuni (Cole, Teufel-Shone, Ritenbaugh, Yzenbaard, & Cockerham, 2001; Leonard, Wilson, & Leonard, 1986; Teufel & Ritenbaugh, 1998), and Yuman tribes (Smith, 1970). Other Native American populations that have been studied by anthropologists include: the Oklahoma Cherokee and Kiowa Apache (Wiedman, 1987, 1989), the Creek (Russell et al., 1994), the Oklahoma Choctaw (Carson-Henderson, 2002), the Florida Seminole (Joos, 1984; Smith & Weidman, 2001), the North Dakota Sioux (Garro & Lang, 1994; Lang, 1985, 1989, 1990), the Seneca of New York (Judkins, 1975), and the Oregon Kalamath (Joos & Ewart, 1988). In addition to the classic article by epidemiologist Kelly West (1974), physician Dorothy Gohdes has published a number of useful overviews of diabetes among Native American populations (Gohdes, 1996; Gohdes & Acton, (2000); Ghodes, Kaufman, & Valway, (1993); Ghodes, Rith-Najarian, & Acton, 1996). Rokala, Bruce, and Meiklejohn (1991) have published an extensive annotated bibliography of studies of North America Native populations. In 1994 Szathmary reviewed the diabetes literature for Native American populations.

Mexican Americans have been studied by a number of anthropologists (Caldwell et al., 1996; Chakraborty et al., 1993; Hunt, Arar, & Akans, 2000; Hunt, Arar, & Larme, 1998; Joos, Mueller, Hanis, & Schull, 1984; Mueller et al., 1984; Urdaneta & Krehbiel, 1989; Weller et al., 1999). Diabetes among African Americans has been studied by Frate, Ginn, and Keys (2000); Lieberman (1987); Lieberman, Probart, and Schoenberg (1999); Winter et al. (1987). Leonetti and colleagues (Fujimoto et al., 1987) describe work with Japanese Americans.

Little work has been done by anthropologists or with an anthropological perspective in Mexico, Latin America, or the Caribbean. The Mexican Pima have been studied by Ravussin and colleagues (Ravussin et al., 1994; Valencia, Bennett, Ravussin, & Esparza, 1997) and Winkleman (1989) has published on ethnopharmacology in Baja California. Crews, Kamboh, Mancilha-Carvalho, and Kottke (1993) worked among the Yanamami in Brazil. Gulliford (1996) has worked in Trinidad and Tobago.

A significant body of research has been accomplished for Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific Islands. Zimmet and anthropology colleagues have been involved in long-term, multidisciplinary studies among a number of Pacific Island populations (Zimmet, Kirk, Serjeantson, Whitehouse, & Taylor, 1982; Zimmet, Kirt, & Serjeantson, 1995; Zimmet, Taft, Guinea, Guthrie, & Thoma, 1977). Anthropologists have produced an indepth record of diabetogenic lifestyle changes among the Samoans (Bindon & Baker, 1985; Bindon, Crews, & Dressler, 1991; McGarvey, 1994; McGarvey, Bindon, Crews, & Schendel, 1989). O'Dea and colleagues have studied acculturation among Australian Aborigines (O'Dea, 1984; O'Dea, Spargo, & Akerman, 1980).

Wiedman (2001) notes that there are uninvestigated areas of the world that in the future will be of interest for medical anthropologists engaged in diabetes research. Little or no anthropological research on diabetes has been done in Asia, Africa, the Middle East, India, or Europe. Gang (1995) was the first anthropologist to study diabetes in Korea and Ramachandran, Snehalatha, Latha, and Manoharan (1999) studied urbanization and diabetes among Asian Indian populations.

## **MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY AND DIABETES**

Since the 1960s anthropologists have published on a diversity of topics related to type 2 diabetes. Weidman (2001) cites over 130 articles, chapters, and books published from 1975 to 2001 by anthropologists. These articles have appeared in anthropology, medical, epidemiology, and nutritional science journals

Diabetes research is multifold: evolutionary and genetic aspects; lifestyle factors, especially dietary factors; traditional and contemporary explanatory models of illness; and interactions with the biomedical healthcare system. Research has been spurred by the wide range of differences in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes among populations, its devastating societal impact, and its rapidly increasing worldwide incidence and prevalence.

In addition to Weidman's (2002) review, there are other comprehensive reviews by anthropologists. Eaton was the first to present a biocultural overview of diabetes in *Medical Anthropology* (Eaton, 1977). In 1989 *Medical Anthropology* devoted an entire issue to diabetes with an introduction by Urdaneta and Krehbiel (1989). Lieberman published reviews of diabetes in 1993 with a focus on history and in 2000 with a focus on diet. The following sections are an overview of these major themes.

## **BIOMEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE EVOLUTION OF DIABETES: THRIFTY GENOTYPES AND PHENOTYPES**

Anthropologists have been interested in evolutionary models of type 2 diabetes that explain the vastly different prevalence rates among worldwide populations. Of interest is the current epidemic in populations with multiple generations of high diabetes rates (i.e., Pima Indians), in newly designated populations with rapidly increasing incidence rates (i.e., urban South African populations), and in children and adolescents in populations that have had a history of high prevalence rates among adults (i.e., African American youth) (Lieberman, 1993, 2000).

Geneticist J. V. Neel first proposed a thrifty genotype for glucose utilization among Native American populations as an evolutionary explanation for their high prevalence rate of type 2 diabetes (Neel, 1962, 1982; Neel, Weder, & Julius, 1998). He hypothesized that a feast and famine existence conferred a selective advantage and increased reproductive fitness for those individuals who had the ability to release insulin quickly, to thriftily store energy during times of food abundance, and to efficiently utilize energy depots during dietary deprivation (Neel, 1962, 1982). Recently, Campbell and Cajigal (2001) postulate specific selection for thriftiness of the physiological mechanisms enhancing energetic efficiency of skeletal muscle.

Shifts to modern lifestyles with increased food abundance, a lack of periodic food shortages, and a reduction in energy expenditure rendered a once adaptive genotype detrimental. The result is obesity, type 2 diabetes, and other characteristics of Syndrome X or insulinresistance metabolic syndrome, including high blood lipids and hypertension (Raven, 1988). Many authors have expanded on this hypothesis in other populations including additional selective pressures of cold stress from water and long ocean-going voyages for Pacific Island populations (Bindon & Baker, 1985; Zimmet et al., 1982) and extreme cold stress for Eskimo and Aleut populations (Shepard & Rode, 1996). High seasonal energy demands during slavery for African Americans posed an additional stress (Gibbs, Cargill, Lieberman, & Reitz, 1980; Lieberman, 2003).

Weiss (1990), Weiss, Cavanagh, Buchanan, and Ulbrecht (1989), and Weiss, Ferrell, and Hanis (1984) have hypothesized that New World Syndrome, a collection of metabolic disorders characterized by diabetes, obesity, high blood lipids, gallstones, and gallbladder cancer,

# **340 Diabetes Mellitus and Medical Anthropology**

resulted from a combination of founder effect and selective pressures encountered in harsh Arctic environments by the first New World immigrant populations. Wendorf (1989) has a slightly different scenario. He suggested that selection for thrifty genotypes occurred when the ancestors of Paleoindians migrated south of the northern ice-free corridor and were confronted with unfamiliar non-Arctic hunting conditions. These conditions, he hypothesized, precipitated food shortages and selection favoring those who are able to store calories efficiently. These scenarios are confounded by evidence of multiple migrations. For example, there are low rates of diabetes among the more recent Canadian Athapascan speakers; however, this is not the case for U.S. Athapascans. These differences in prevalence suggest that gene– environmental interactions play important roles in diabetes risk (Sievers & Fisher, 1981; Szathmary, 1986).

Most of the literature on genetic thriftiness has focused on selective pressures operating in adulthood. Kuzawa (1998) focuses on human infancy and early childhood. He reviewed the literature supporting a strong selective advantage of a quick insulin trigger with enhanced fat storage as a hedge against infant morbidity and mortality. Refeeding after starvation or respiratory and diarrheal illnesses is accompanied by increases in insulin production. Furthermore, infants who have suffered nutritional compromise in utero and are small for their gestational age gain weight with appropriate nutritional interventions but demonstrate reduced glucose tolerance and are at high risk for insulin resistance metabolic syndrome, or Syndrome X, later in life (Barker, 1994, 1999; Phipps et al., 1993; Raven, 1988). The Barker hypothesis of prenatal origins of later life diseases, including diabetes, compliments the thrifty gene hypothesis (Kuzawa, 1998).

Szathmary (1986, 1990) and Ritenbaugh and Goodby (1989) questioned the utility of the thrifty gene model for explaining high rates of diabetes in indigenous North American populations because the diets of the founding New World populations were likely high in protein and fats and low in carbohydrates. Therefore, they hypothesized there would not be intense selection pressure for rapid glucose uptake but instead enhanced gluconeogenesis whereby glucose is produced from proteins. This thriftiness for metabolic conversion would have been an adaptation rendered disadvantageous by modern diets high in carbohydrate. Allen and Cheer (1996) write of a non-thrifty genotype with a slow insulin trigger that would have conferred protection against

#### **Dietary Transitions, Lifestyle Factors, and Diabetes 341**

diabetes and obesity in dietary environments of abundance with high carbohydrate and fat intakes. They suggest this might have been the case for some European and Middle Eastern populations who also have a high rate of lactase sufficiency in adulthood.

Data from other parts of the world also suggest similar but more recent dietary transitions, among Australian Aborigines (O'Dea, Spargo, & Akerman, 1980) and other Pacific Island populations (Zimmet et al., 1982, 1995). On the island of Nauru in Micronesia more than 30% of individuals over the age of 15 have diabetes (Zimmet et al., 1977). These high rates are most likely the result of nutritional and cold selection as well as founder effect in which members of the small initial island population carried thrifty genes. Expanded beyond carbohydrate utilization, the model has implications for thriftiness in the metabolism of other previously limited dietary constituents that have now become abundant (e.g., salt, cholesterol); and, conversely, dietary constituents that were once abundant and are now limited (e.g., dietary fiber) (Broadurst, 1997). Broadhurst (1997) makes a case for diabetogenic effects of reduced omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA), chromium, plant phytochemicals, and fiber in contemporary Western diets relative to paleonutrition and traditional diets.

In conclusion, the thrifty gene hypothesis does not fit all cases well, but it does raise the possibility of a strong genetic explanation for the high rates of type 2 diabetes for many populations in conjunction with other microevolutionary processes and recent lifestyle changes. Understanding thrifty geneotypes has implications for health policy (Benyshek, Martin, & Johnston, 2001).

## **BIOMEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGY AND OBESITY: THE PRIMARY RISK FACTOR FOR TYPE 2 DIABETES**

More than 80% of new cases of type 2 diabetes are associated with obesity. This association has been demonstrated in many populations worldwide. Furthermore, risks correlate not only with the degree of adiposity but with the duration and distribution of body fat. A centripetal distribution of fat is a separate risk factor for both cardiovascular disease and diabetes and occurs more frequently in populations with high diabetes prevalence (Harris, 1991; Joos et al., 1984; Lieberman et al., 1999; Mueller et al., 1984). The risk occurs for both adults and

increasingly in youth (Chakraborty et al., 1993; Dietz, 1998; Young & Rosenbloom, 1998).

Obesity and diabetes are linked to each other, and both are linked to dietary acculturation that involves the consumption of a surfeit of energy regardless of the food source (Kuhnlein & Receveur, 1996; Popkin, 2001; Teufel, 1996). Obesity has been extensively studied in populations with high diabetes prevalence. Overweight and obesity are in excess of 60% of the adults among Native Americans (ADA, 2002b; Hall et al., 1992; Hanley et al., 2000; Joos, 1984; Knowler et al., 1990; Young, 1996), Mexican Americans (Joos et al., 1984), African Americans (Kuczmarski et al., 1994; Kumanyika, 1993, 1994; Lieberman, 2000, 2003; Roseman, 1985), Native Hawaiian, Samoan and other Pacific Island populations (Baker, Hanna & Baker, 1986; Bindon & Baker, 1985; Kumanyika, 1993; Zimmet et al., 1995) and population in developing countries (Drewnowski & Popkin, 1997; Lieberman, 2003; Popkin, 1998; 2001). In addition to the health risks associated with excessive adiposity, it also plays a significant role in the microevolutionary models of diabetes etiology and epidemiology developed by geneticists and biological anthropologists.

## **DIETARY TRANSITIONS, LIFESTYLE FACTORS, AND DIABETES**

Anthropologists have explored cultural models of illness and the experience of being a person with diabetes. Cultural etiological models often include dietary elements, especially sugar and processed foods, that represent a departure from traditional, ethnically important diets (Kuhnlein & Receveur, 1996). Although many studies discuss the historical trends in type 2 diabetes as a result of modernization, Westernization, or even "cokacolization" and "McDonaldization" as creating obeseogenic and diabetogenic environments (Drewnowski & Popkin, 1997; Eaton, Eaton, & Konner, 1999; Popkin 1998, 2001; Wickelgren, 1998), only a few anthropological studies have explicitly documented these changes.

Dietary acculturation takes many forms depending on: (1) food availability including the influences of the environment, technology, and politics; (2) food selection including the influences of cultural preference, affordability, and education; and (3) biological needs, including the influences of age, sex, physical activity, and state of health (Kuhnlein & Receveur, 1996; Stinson, 1992).

#### **342 Diabetes Mellitus and Medical Anthropology**

Szathmary et al. (1987) found that the Dogrib of Canada retained traditional dietary items and added new foods, thereby increasing diet breadth and caloric intake. The Sandy Lake Cree classified foods and illnesses into "Indian" and "White Man's" groups with the notion that the consumption of "White man's" junk foods leads to diabetes (Gittelsohn et al., 1996).

A series of studies dating from the 1970s have documented changes in diet, activity level, stress, migration patterns, and concomitant biological and pathological trends among Samoans (Baker, Hanna, & Baker, 1986). The Samoans represent a natural laboratory for studying modernization because genetically similar populations occupy traditional, transitional, and modern environments, Western Samoa, American Samoa, and Hawaii, respectively. Acculturation has increased obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease (Bindon & Baker, 1985; McGarvey et al., 1989).

The National Institutes of Health have been studying the Pima Indians of Arizona since the 1960s (Knowler et al., 1983). The Pima provide an opportunity for looking at both transitions within the Arizona Pima and contrasts with a genetically similar but culturally traditional segment of the population having separated about 1,000 years ago and residing in North West Mexico. Both Pima groups have a history of arid land agriculture, growing corn, beans, squash, and cotton. Irrigation systems attracting game and fish were used to supplement the diet with hunting, trapping, and fishing. The Pima also forage for desert food plants. Data collected for both Pima Indian groups include anthropometric measurements, body composition, and metabolic, dietary, and physical activity data. The Mexican Pima have a lifestyle characterized by high-energy expenditures with subsistence and wage labor (i.e., road construction, mining, and wood milling) and a traditional diet very low in fat, especially animal fats and high in fiber (50 g/day) (Ravussin et al., 1994; Valencia et al., 1999; Narayan et al., 1998).

For Mexican Pima, the main dietary staples are four varieties of beans, corn processed as tortillas, and potatoes. The main source of protein and carbohydrates is from corn and wheat flour tortillas that are prepared with vegetable fat and beans that are fried with vegetable oils or shortenings. In addition, coffee with sugar, eggs, milk, rice, soda, pasta soups, green pepper, tomatoes, and cabbage are consumed frequently. Little meat is eaten. This diet is slightly higher in calories than the traditional diet of the Tarahumara Indians (McMurphy, Cesqueira, Connor, & Connor, 1991). By contrast, diets among the Arizona Pima are highly acculturated, comprised of processed and fast foods (Narayan et al., 1998).

Mexican Pima are short with body mass indices (kg/m<sup>2</sup> ) (BMIs) averaging 25.1 for women and 24.8 for men relative to the Arizona Pima with BMIs of 35.0 and 30.8 for women and men, respectively. A person with a BMI of 30 or larger is considered to be obese. The prevalence of type 2 diabetes for Mexican and Arizona Pima was 6.3% and 54% for women and 10.5% and 37% for men (Ravussin et al., 1994).

A similar comparison between Mexican Americans living in San Antonio and Mexicans living in Mexico City suggests that environmental factors play a significant role in the etiology of type 2 diabetes (Stern et al., 1992). These genetically identical groups showed marked differences in type 2 diabetes with Mexican Americans having far greater obesity and type 2 diabetes prevalence rates than their Mexican counterparts.

O'Dea (1984) and O'Dea et al. (1980) performed an interesting experiment among diabetic Australian Aborigines. A temporary reversion to traditional lifestyle led to marked improvements in both carbohydrate and lipid metabolism.

A dietary change common to all these cases has been the increased consumption of sugar and refined carbohydrates (Popkin, 1998, 2001). Since the key diagnostic feature of diabetes is high blood sugar, often accompanied by sugar in the urine, diabetes is frequently spoken of as "sugar diabetes" and "I've got sugar" or "I've got high sugar" (Carson-Henderson, 2002; Ferzacca, 2000; Lieberman et al., 1999). All carbohydrates cause a rise in blood glucose, and the glycemic index, a measure of the impact of food or a meal on the rise in blood glucose, has a significant but transitory effect on both insulin production and glucose homeostasis (Jenkins et al., 2002; Lieberman, 1993). In general, processed carbohydrate foods have higher glycemic indices than the traditional or unprocessed forms (Jenkins et al., 2002). The modernization of diets has reduced dietary fiber and increased both the fat and refined carbohydrate content of meals (Eaton & Konner, 1985; Trowell & Burkitt, 1981). These changes are linked to both obesity and diabetes among Native North Americans (Gittelsohn et al., 1995; Reid et al., 1971; Ritenbaugh et al., 1996; Smith & Wiedman, 2001; Szathmary, 1990, 1994b); African Americans (Kumanyika, 1988; Lieberman, 1987); Japanese Americans (Fujimoto et al., 1987); Caribbeans (Gulliford, 1996), and Hispanics populations (Stern et al., 1992).

#### **Traditional Healthcare Beliefs and Practices 343**

Wiedman (1987, 1989) tracked economic changes from subsistence farming to a cash economy and the rise of diabetes prevalence among the Cherokee of Eastern Oklahoma. He notes that diabetes was unknown prior to 1940. Economic and dietary ethnohistorical data have illuminated the epidemiological transition and the rise of diabetes among the Pima of Arizona (Knowler et al., 1983; Ravussin et al., 1994); the Seminole of Florida (Joos, 1984); the Navajo (Hall et al., 1994); First Nation populations of Canada (Bruce, 2000; Szathmary, 1986, 1990, 1994a, 1994b; Young, 1987, 1993), Australian Aborigines (O'Dea, 1984; O'Dea et al., 1980; Thompson & Gifford, 2000), and Samoans (Baker et al., 1986).

An area affected by modernization of diet, ecological changes, and transitions in medical care is the use of traditional herbal medications for diabetes and its complications (Gang, 1995; Winkleman, 1989). This is an area that has not been well studied by medical anthropologists. Grover, Yadav, and Vats (2002) and Dharmananda (1996), respectively, provide primers on Indian and Chinese herbal medicines for diabetes. Studies have demonstrated the efficacy of herbal compounds in controlling hyperglycemia (Chen, Gong, & Zhai, 1994; Gang, 1995).

## **TRADITIONAL HEALTHCARE BELIEFS AND PRACTICES**

This section briefly examines traditional healthcare beliefs and practices concerning diabetes etiology, pathogenesis, treatment, and prognosis in selected cultures by anthropologists and other social and medical scientists.

### **Korean, Chinese, and Asian Indian Traditional Medicine**

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is known as "the rich man's disease" in Korea. It was not until after the 1960s that diabetes began a rapid increase at an estimated rate of 3–4% per year, with an estimated 500,000 in the year 2000 (Korean National Federation of Medical Insurance, 1993). Gang (1995) investigated traditional and biomedical practices among diabetic Koreans aged 20–80 years. Fifty patients used primarily Western medicine and 33 used primarily traditional therapies. Western therapies included diet, exercise, insulin, or oral medications. Fasting blood glucose levels for patients using traditional treatments averaged 165.8 mg/dl compared with

206.1 mg/dl for patients using Western medicine. Both groups of patients avoided fatty foods, alcohol, and foods containing sugar. Some diabetics substituted unpolished rice, black soybeans, and barley in place of the traditional polished rice at main meals. Black soybeans are the most popular item in a diabetic diet. The majority of patients also included increases in exercise, especially walking. Gang (1995) also studied social support and life satisfaction that were higher among those practicing traditional therapies.

Korean traditional medicine includes elements of Chinese and Japanese medical traditions. Health and disease are explained in terms of the balance of *Ki* (or *Chi* in Chinese medicine). Diabetes in Korean medicine is defined as the imbalance of two *ki*'s, defined as energy, force, breaths of air, or vital fluids. The symptom *So*, meaning exhaustion, refers to weight loss resulting from abnormal heat in the stomach and large intestine further causing hormonal changes and/or abnormalities in the energy force among the kidneys, liver, gallbladder, and *Samcho*, an imaginary organ in Korean medicine. The abnormal heat inside the body results in thirst. Three types of diabetes are defined according to where energy is trapped in the body (Gang, 1995).

The function of the body is also regulated by five elements: wood, fire, earth, metal, and water. These elements form an ever-flowing cycle in a particular production sequence. A violation of this sequence can lead to a disease. Severe anger exemplified by the element wood also can cause diabetes (*Sogalbyong*) because anger causes heat to enter the liver, creating a malfunction. The wood *Ki* also controls sugar addiction. According to the relationship sequence based on the five elements, metal controls wood. When salt is heated to 1,000C it produces a white metal. This pure salt is used for the treatment of diabetes.

Anther popular traditional therapy is Raw Vegetable Therapy based on the balance between *Yin* and *Yang* and six elements. Diabetes in the Raw Vegetable Therapy approach is identified in terms of pulse rates. These pulses are taken at various sites in the body detecting problems of the spleen and stomach that generally cause diabetes. Beta cells that produce insulin are *Yang* and blood sugar is considered *Yin*. Normal blood sugar levels are achieved with the balance of these two forces.

Breathing Therapy includes both cleansing the body and energizing it so that *Ki*, the energy force in air, is regarded as a nutrient. According to Taoism the nutrition provided by air through breathing is even more vital to health and longevity than that provided by food and water through digestion (Reid, 1989).

In addition, herbs are recommended for the control of diabetes and 99 different herbs have been promoted as therapeutic in the control of diabetic symptoms. These include root of the wild rose, aloe, plantains, mushrooms, willow leaves, ginseng, chicory, and various enzymeincluding foods. The ingestion of certain animal products are efficacious: dog, snake, deer horns, and mudfish (Gang, 1995). An ongoing health ethnography project in Florida provides unpublished data for Korean Americans using herbs and acupuncture to treat diabetes.

The development of type 2 diabetes in China was first recognized as a problem in 1980, especially in the urban areas (Xiu & Shang, 1985). Factors that influenced the increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes included increased caloric intake, increases in refined carbohydrate, urbanization, mental stress, and aging of the population. Xiu and Shang (1985) note major public health efforts focusing on education, organization, and prevention of type 2 diabetes in China using traditional Chinese medicine, herbs, and biomedicine.

Diabetes in Indian Ayurvedic medicine has a complex etiology and pathogenesis. The human body is composed of three fundamental elements, or *dosas* (wind, bile, phlegm). Health is maintained by a balance of these elements and consequentially a disturbance of equilibrium leads to disease. There are three *dosas* that control various aspects of physiology; each *dosa* has five divisions and a disturbance in anyone of these can cause diabetes. In addition, the body contains 13 categories of *srotas* or channels of circulation through which pass basic tissue elements, *doshas*, and waste products. Lack of exercise, sleeping during the day, an excessive intake of fatty food, and alcohol consumption can disturb the *srotas* involved in carrying the vital substances that comprise fat tissue, thereby resulting in diabetes. Excessive consumption of yogurt, the flesh of animals living in water and marshes, rice, wheat, starch, and especially refined foods, are seen to play a role in the etiology of diabetes in Ayurvedic medicine. Traditional approaches involve reducing the body fat to effectively regulate the function of the pancreas and the use of glucose. Medications include the use of bitter gourd and other botanicals: long pepper, fenugreek, turmeric, Indian pennywort, bitter melon, gurmar, aconite, blue rocket, Frier's cap, caltrops, ground burnut, and puncture vine (Broadhurst, 1997; Grover et al. (2002). Most vegetables are recommended for individuals with diabetes, but sugar, rice, potato, bananas, cereals, and fruit are to be avoided and fat is to be ingested in limited quantity.

### **African-American Traditional Medicine**

African Americans, the second largest minority in the United States, have a diabetes rate 33% greater than "Whites" (Tull & Roseman, 1995). The heterogeneous traditional medical system combines African healing, Civil War era medicine, West Indian Voodoo, fundamentalist Christianity, and European medical and anatomical systems (Snow, 1974). A fundamental belief is the direct connection between the forces of nature and health. Seasonal (e.g., phases of the moon) and natural climatic events as well as lucky numbers play a role in illness prevention, etiology, treatment, and prognosis. Health is considered to be "good fortune" and is part of God's plan but must include appropriate self-care of the mind, body, and spirit (Lieberman et al., 1996, 1999). Traditionally, the major causes of illness were: (1) exposure to "cold" causing mucus and the clotting of blood that can lead to headache, hypertension, and stroke; (2) "dirt" or germs leading to heat, fever, rashes, and inflammation; (3) improper diet resulting in "high" or "low" blood and high sugar or diabetes; and (4) improper conduct or parental transgressions causing disorders in children. The author has encountered this in the explanatory model for type 1 diabetes among children at an outpatient clinic in the Southeast U.S.

Grannies, herbalists, herb doctors, root doctors, and spiritual healers engaged to diagnose and treat conditions. Supernatural or magical illnesses caused by sorcery or voodoo, or rootwork that can hex an individual, require healers with supernatural powers (www.diversity resources.com/health2k/health/african2.html, accessed 8/2002). Today these healers rarely treat type 2 diabetes. African Americans generally rely on biomedicine although herbal home remedies and dietary precautions are employed along with insulin and oral medication. "Worriation" or stress has been stated as a cause of type 2 diabetes and its complications (Lieberman et al., 1996).

### **Native American Traditional Medicine**

American Indian patients have a range of diabetes causal agents: traumatic events, infectious agents, transgression of cultural or supernatural norms, an imbalance of the harmonious processes of nature, an affliction of malevolent spirits, the loss of one's soul, or the malicious intent of another individual (Levy, 1983). In contrast, Choctaw

#### **Medical Anthropological Studies of Patient–Provider Interactions 345**

patients in Carson-Henderson's study do not attribute diabetes to supernatural influences or taboo transgression, but to diet, especially sugar, and "White man's culture" (Carson-Henderson, 2002). The idea that the illness occurs without external causation is difficult for many persons to understand. The concept of obesity, an internal state, causing the disease is puzzling since overweight and large body size are signs of prosperity and health. In particular, elderly patients view obesity as healthy because in their youth being slender was considered a sign of illness (Brosseau, 1994; Gohdes, 1988). Furthermore, a plump body is considered to be attractive to the opposite sex (Gohdes, 1988; Hickey & Carter, 1994). Therefore, when diabetics are placed on a special diet and told to lose weight, this creates problems for other family members as well (Joe & Young, 1994).

The high rates of diabetes-related mortality and complications among Native Americans have led to a resignation concerning the inevitability of developing diabetes. There is also resentment focused on "the White man" for creating the conditions for a diabetogenic lifestyle (Carson-Henderson, 2002). There is a distrust of physicians based on the perception that diabetes is due to White man's food and pollution of the environment. These ideas are found among Dakota Native Americans (Lang, 1985, 1989), the Papago (Hoffman & Haskell, 1984), the Ojibway, and the Cree (Garro, 1995; Hagey, 1984).

Home management dietary and medication complexities coupled with a fatalism regarding complications can elicit fear and grieving related to the diagnosis of diabetes. Goforth-Parker (1994) conducted a study in rural Oklahoma using unstructured interviews and clinical observations to elicit disease processes and insights into the lived experience of diabetes. The responses were constructed into thematic patterns that illuminated these concerns.

Some Indian patients utilize traditional healers. The Indian Health Service estimates the use of traditional Indian medicine by tribes ranging from 70% to 90% depending on the age group (Carson-Henderson, 2002; Hollow, 1999). Within the Choctaw nation the traditional healers are called *Chattah Alikchi* or "Choctaw Doctor." The *alikchi* occupies the role of a spiritual leader and is similar to a shaman. The *alikchi* deal with both spiritual and biological complaints. Among the Ojibway, healers are consulted on diabetes care. Healers provide herbal medicines said to be effective in controlling diabetes. Individuals taking these medicines must abstain from alcohol. Healers are described as "gifted" because of their ability to communicate with and be guided by spiritual beings. However, most Native Americans and Canadian Natives also access biomedical physicians when a diagnosis of diabetes has been made.

### **Latino and Hispanic Traditional Medicine**

Many cultural factors, including diet, activity patterns, and health beliefs and practices, are involved in the high prevalence of diabetes among Latino populations. Most Latinos believe diabetes is hereditary. Fifty-eight percent in the ADA survey (1994) agreed with the statement "Diabetes is hereditary, and therefore there is nothing anyone can do avoid getting it." This fatalistic attitude toward diabetes truncates both preventative and treatment measures. In the ADA survey, 60% of respondents indicated that a healthy diet was the best way to reduce the chances of getting diabetes by eating less sugar (38%), controlling one's weight (17%), and exercising (18%). Most Hispanics receive biomedical care for their diagnosed diabetes.

Health beliefs show great heterogeneity within and between ethnic groups. The traditional system is based on a hot–cold dichotomy of foods, physiological states, illnesses, and medications (Weller et al., 1999). Diabetes is classified as a hot ailment. Health is restored or maintained by a balance of hot and cold elements. Traditional healthcare practitioners such as *curanderos* are consulted for treatment of diabetes and its complications. Herbs and medicinal preparations may be purchased from *botanics*. Many herbs are thought to have a beneficial effect on diabetes. Nopal or prickly pear cactus lowers blood glucose (Broadhurst, 1997). Papaya is also thought to cure diabetes. Prayer is an important component of healing activities. The majority of Latinos are Catholic (Hunt, Arar, & Akana, 2000; Hunt, Valenzuela, & Pugh, 1998; Weller et al., 1999).

## **MEDICAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF PATIENT–PROVIDER INTERACTIONS**

A number of anthropologists have explored the beliefs, discourse, and behaviors of diabetes patients and their healthcare providers. Carson-Henderson (2002) found four distinctive patterns on the Choctaw Reservation in Oklahoma. Her dissertation focused on the cultural

construction of diabetes among Choctaw diabetics and native Health Care Providers. The traditional model was characterized by delayed care-seeking, reduced dietary compliance, and the perception that non-compliance was part of traditional culture. The mainstream model was characterized by more immediate care-seeking, and increased dietary compliance. Native American providers held either a uniform practice model characterized by the idea that there were no differences in cultural constructions of diabetes among the Choctaw diabetics relative to main stream medicine, or they articulated a negotiated practice model characterized by acknowledgment that two culturally different systems coexist in terms of careseeking and compliance. The greatest discordance was seen in the traditional model patients and the uniform practice model providers since the latter group did not acknowledge that there were cultural differences.

Lang (1989) explored the problems of home management of diabetes, particularly the prescribed dietary changes among the Dakota. She found a lack of knowledge concerning treatments, a concern over their efficacy, and a depersonalization of the illness that was conceptualized in terms of Dakota ethnic identity.

Lieberman, Probart, and Schoenberg (1991, 1996) found similar problems implementing dietary changes among elderly, rural southern African American women. Some of the issues related to communication. For example, dietitians prescribing "fresh" foods were unaware that the term had two meanings. The first was the common meaning of recently grown and unprocessed, while the second negative meaning referred to unseasoned and tasteless foods. In addition, there were conceptual differences with regard to the food categories of "carbohydrates" and "fats." Dietitians conceptualize these as macronutrients and dietary exchange categories but African American women combined these categories in a taxon labeled "fattening foods" or "foods diabetics should not eat."

Garro's work among the Canadian Anishinaabe employed a formal cultural consensus methodology to define causal explanations for diabetes (Garro, 1995) and extended this to a study of the Dakota (Garro & Lang, 1994). These models cite the rapid change in lifestyle with modernization and acculturation as the causal agents. Like other groups, modernization has led to a sense of loss of balance, a loss of control over one's life, and uncertainty about the future.

Clinical encounters between patients and providers often involve linguistic and meta-linguistic miscommunication and misdirected expectations based on differences in world views (Hagey, 1984; Hunt, Arar, & Akana, 2000; Hunt, Arar, & Larme, 1998; Hunt, Valenzuela, & Pugh, 1998; Larme & Pugh, 1998; Miewald, 1997; Ferzacca, 2000; Woolfson, Hood, Seckler-Walker, & Macauley, 1995). Physicians describe the difficulty in explaining the complex etiology and pathophysiology of diabetes and its long-term consequences (Cohen, Tripp-Reimer, Smith, Sorofman, & Lively, 1994; Loewe, Schwartzman, Freeman, Quinn, & Zuckerman, 1998). Physician and patient communication is further complicated by the vastly different cultural constructs embodied in language (Evaneskho, 1994; Ferzacca, 2000; Garro, 1995; Garro & Lang, 1994). Other issues concern widely held perceptions by health providers (Loewe et al., 1998) and that patients are non-compliant. However, Hunt and colleagues (Hunt, Arar, & Larme, 1998; Hunt, Valenzuela, & Pugh, 1998) found that repeated exposure and long-term interactions altered Mexican American patients' concepts of diabetes.

Other researchers have brought into focus the ethnocentrism of the biomedical paradigm that emphasizes individual motivation and self-care denying both community and family-based cultural priorities. Economic, political, and racial inequalities act as barriers to all aspects of healthcare (Miewald, 1997; Wiedman, 2001).

Medical anthropologists have examined the interactions of cultural and structural barriers in the healthcare system. For example, Latinos have a late diagnosis of diabetes and high rates of complications because of low socioeconomic status, reluctance of patients to visit a doctor, lack of access to adequate healthcare, no health insurance, language barriers including a lack of basic English (25%), and a low number of bilingual/bicultural physicians (Davidson, Seltzer, & Bressler, 1994). Stern et al. (1992) estimate that among Mexican Americans 60% of diabetes-related blindness, 60% of diabetesrelated foot and leg amputations, and 51% of kidney failures could have been prevented with proper care.

## **DIABETES EDUCATIONAL AND COMMUNITY-BASED INTERVENTIONS**

A number of Native American and Canadian populations have recognized the importance of lifestyle changes in diabetes prevention (Stolarczyk, Gilliland, Lium, & Owen, 1999). Consequently, Native populations are becoming more actively involved in the planning, implementation, and evaluation of diabetes programs

#### **Conclusion 347**

(Gohdes & Acton, 2000; Joe & Young, 1994; Olson, 1999; Wiedman, 2001). Community interventions have developed with the cooperation of tribal and indigenous organizations, public health agencies, and healthcare professional organizations (Young, 2001). These interventions often focus on community rather than individual responses to diabetes preventive activities. A good example is the program among the Sandy Lake Cree that focused on collective responsibility for the burden of diabetes in their community (Gittelsohn et al., 1995, 1996; Hanley, Harris, Gittelsohn, & Andres, 1995).

A public health campaign of educating tribal members on low-fat diets, cigarette smoking, and exercise was developed by a Mohawk community (Hood, Kelly, Martinez, Shuman, & Secer-Walker, 1987). An important and successful school and community-based project was initiated among the Zuni Indians of New Mexico (Cole et al., 2001; Teufel & Ritenbaugh, 1998). The Zuni Diabetes Prevention Program eliminated soft drinks and snack foods from school vending machines, provided good-tasting water, promoted a school-based wellness and exercise program, and developed supportive social networks. These interventions resulted in increased activity, decreased soft drink consumption, and a decrease in the incidence of hyperglycemia.

A unique curriculum has been adapted and implemented in Pueblo communities (Carter, Gilliland, & Perez, 1997; Gohdes, Rith-Najarian, & Acton, 1996; Teufel & Ritenbaugh, 1998). Most Indian Health Service prevention and treatment programs involve dietary advice, food preparation techniques, and exercise (Broussard, 1991; Indian Health Service, 1990). Culturally targeted educational materials on gestational diabetes have been developed (Rhoades, 2000). Hagey's (1984) innovative pedagogical approach used Native American metaphors in a diabetes prevention narrative incorporated into traditional story-telling for urban Canadian Indians.

However, for most tribes, prevention education, monitoring, and cultural appropriate counseling are lacking or very limited (Carson-Henderson, 2002; Rhoades, 2000). Additionally, a lack of resources and rapid staff turnover confound the problems of education, follow-up, and longterm care. Loewe et al. (1999) add another dimension, namely the fatalism and pessimism on the part of physicians and other healthcare providers for diabetic patients to engage in successful self-management of their illness.

Native American health issues are further complicated by the enormous heterogeneity within and between tribes. There are 554 federally recognized Indian tribes in the United States. Materials developed for one patient population are not easily transferable to others. Carson-Henderson (2002) warns against trait listing of specific characteristics of tribes and the use of trait lists in over-generalizing homogeneity resulting in inappropriate programs and educational materials.

The ADA's Diabetes Assistance and Resource (DAR) Program is an innovative project designed to provide education and motivation to Latinos by working with government agencies and Latino community-based organizations. Recognizing that women are the gatekeepers of a family's health and welfare in Latino communities, the DAR Program developed a successful community-based outreach activity called "Diabetes Home Health Parties" where peer educators, Diabetes Lay Counselors, or Consejeras De Diabetes are trained (Davidson et al. 1994). The ADA has been active in developing educational materials and programs that target U.S. ethnic groups (www.diabetes.org).

### **CONCLUSION**

Type 2 diabetes is rapidly becoming a worldwide epidemic as populations adopt modernized or Westernized lifestyles. Evolutionary evidence for the selective advantage of diabetes thrifty genotypes and phenotypes predisposes humans to the deleterious and diabetogenic effects of contemporary culture. Recent dietary changes are characterized by an abundance of calorically dense, sugary and fatty foods with low fiber content. In addition, labor-saving, energy-efficient daily activity patterns reduce caloric needs and energy expenditure. The result is a high prevalence of obesity, insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, and other physiological abnormalities comprising Syndrome X.

Medical anthropologists have investigated the medical, social, and cultural responses to diabetes among ethnic groups in the United States and Canada where diabetes is in high prevalence. Less attention has been paid to other parts of the world where diabetes is just now becoming a chronic disease of epidemic proportions. The topics reviewed in this entry include: diabetes diagnosis and epidemiology; descriptions of dietary beliefs, consumption patterns, and subsistence activities; traditional medical system beliefs, attitudes, and healthcare patterns; problems of diagnosis and treatment encountered within the biomedical healthcare system; and the development of educational and community-based diabetes intervention programs. The research and publication trends documented by Weidman (2001) clearly indicate that medical anthropologists will