# 13 Outline of a revisionist theory of modernitv<sup>1</sup>

Sudipta Kaviraj

# Outline of the theory that needs revision

What this chapter offers is, in a literal sense, an outline. It needs fuller theoretical elaboration (Kaviraj 2000, 1994). It also needs more detailed discussion of historical evidence. Its focus is a question usually neglected in current social theory. How should a theory of modernity cope with historical difference? My dissatisfaction with received modernization theories has been driven by my parochial interest in Indian history, just as that theory was devised by the need to understand the equally parochial interest of making sense of primarily European history. But if modernity is viewed as a process that expands from the West to other parts of the world, this raises not merely a historical but also a theoretical question. It is certainly necessary to understand the history of modernity in other settings, but also to ask what shape the theory should assume if it is to deal with this expanding historical diversity. The original theory went through two later extensions. The first appears legitimate: the application of the European theory of modernity to cover non-European societies that originated and functioned as extensions of the Western world – like Canada. America and Australia – on the partially correct ground that their social histories were sufficiently similar to Europe's. But some historical sociologists have objected to this simple transfer.<sup>2</sup> There was a second extension of the 'European' theory of modernity which was of a very different character. This was the widespread application of this theory in the 1950s to non-European societies in the form of sociological theories of modernization, political theories of 'political development' and economic theories of growth (Shils 1968). To put it schematically, but not inaccurately, all these were theories of 'transition'. All such theories expected societies which started their transformation towards modernity later to follow the examples and, to be more precise, the institutional forms of European history of the nineteenth century, especially, the manner in which social theory interpreted the history of these forms. To put it in Marx's graphic phrase, modern European history showed to the societies of Asia, Africa and Latin America 'the images of their future' (Marx 1969a: 19).

#### Disaggregating the general theory of modernity

At the most abstract level, the 'general theory of modernity' can be seen to consist of two large proposals about modern history. The *first thesis* states that the transformation of European societies was not just another instance of usual historical change; it was a new kind of newness. Marx, Weber, and earlier writers like Guizot agreed that the birth of modern Europe saw the emergence of a new civilization which altered the relations of forces between the various cultures or civilizations of the world. This thesis is mainly inward looking, comparing modern Europe with previous European social forms. There is a *second thesis* that was, in a strict sense, absent from the work of earlier thinkers like Kant, Hegel or Guizot and really emerged in the works of Marx and Weber. In these earlier thinkers there was certainly a vivid sense of the growing superiority of the newly emergent European civilization, often so strong that it affected the linguistic usage of the term 'civilization'. Before this conceptual and theoretical change, the European Christian civilization was contrasted to others like the Islamic, Chinese or Hindu; but after this change, European self-definition altered this usage crucially, and contrasted the *civilized* society of Europe with other societies which were rude (including those which would have been regarded as different civilizations before) or where civilization was merely rudimentary or clearly inferior.

This move achieved two changes simultaneously – both in the direction of losing differentiation and towards homogeneity. First, this encouraged a falsely homogeneous picture of modern European civilization. Second, correspondingly, using this contrast as a major characteristic, it produced a falsely homogeneous picture of other civilizations by emphasizing their 'rudeness' - i.e., pre-modernity. By this conceptual re-description, this new theory recast the relation between Europe and other parts of the world. Europe now contained a new kind of civilization that was universalistic in several ways. It was based on universal principles in two senses. First, they were based on and justifiable by appeals to rules of a universal reason; and secondly, as a corollary, its achievements could be in principle achieved by all other human societies. This was accompanied by a strong belief that as reason and enlightenment spread across the world, these achievements – both practical and moral – would be owned by other peoples and realized in their societies. Modernity would thus be a universal civilization, and the rest of the world was now seen as future recipients of this civilization of modernity. In the works of Marx and Weber this rather general historical expectation was given more explicit and theoretical form.

This theory common to Marx and Weber reflected with greater accuracy the new relation of power that had emerged between modern Europe and its colonial possessions. By the end of the nineteenth century the theory had two parts: the first provided a 'theory' of the causes, present character and probable future trends of modernity in Europe; the second offered a *hypothesis* that this form had the power to destroy earlier social forms in the rest of the world and install a universal social form. I wish to suggest that we should accept the first part of this theory because, between its many ver $sions - from Hegel down to Foucault, Western social theory is still answering those$ questions – it provides powerful, rich and still evolving conceptions of modern European history. However, in the light of our constant difficulties, we should reject the second part suggesting an easy diffusionist teleology, and install in its place a theory which holds that there is a logic of self-differentiation in modernity. The more modernity expands and spreads to different parts of the world the more it becomes differentiated and plural. To invoke Dipesh Chakravarty's phrase, Europe can be 'provincialized' (Chakrabarty 2002) only if we recognize that although its origins were certainly European, modernity's subsequent global expansion forces it increasingly to leave behind and forget its origins.

In fact, the two sub-theories that the common theory housed within itself were of quite different character. The first theory was working on actual historical evidence. and applied casts of interpretative/explanatory understanding on an historical process

*after the fact.* The second theory contained a body of hypothetical ideas about the expected transformation of non-European societies, where the processes of modernity had not yet begun: the theorization was therefore *prognostic* and primarily speculative. It extrapolated trends from the European case to other cultures, without close inspection of what actually happened when modernity began to appear in these social contexts. The two theories, though plausibly connected by an abstract frame of expectation, were really of rather different kinds, based on different kinds of evidence and followed different methods of reasoning.

### Structure and history in Marx's thought: the idea of 'trajectories'

In one sense, the kind of thinking I am proposing is not altogether new. Antecedents of this form of analysis can be found in the classical theories, though, for understandable reasons, these remained mere sketches, and were not elaborated at full length. In all three significant thinkers of historical modernity, traces of such analyses about varying forms and trajectories can be found. I shall illustrate this by analyzing some parts in Marx's writings on capitalism, and then make a case that we should take up that strand, and develop it in the case of non-European cultures (Roy 2000).

Two types of theoretical arguments can be found in Marx's sprawling works on the rise of capitalism. It is well known that the precise methods of analysis differ between Marx's economic and political writings. When commenting on the constant ebb and flow of politics – in France or Germany – he maintains an *historicist* method<sup> $3$ </sup> of describing events which are unique in their agents, in the forces which act in them, and in their historical outcomes. Although there are attempts, particularly when dealing with Germany, to discern a long-term pattern (Marx 1969b) there is a sense that the fluctuations of political life are too sudden and chaotic to plot onto serene designs of progress. When writing about economic life, by contrast, Marx's mode of presentation is predominantly *structural*, delineating in persistent detail the fundamental arrangement of relationships in the capitalist economy, describing its elements and the determinate relations between them to produce an invariant architecture. Sketches of historical analyses of capitalist development are interspersed throughout the argument but generally subordinated to this structural view. But if we look closely, it is possible to suggest a significant difference between the two ways of thinking about capitalism in Marx's works. Although the structural form of writing encourages a view that capitalism is a 'universal form', i.e., wherever it arises, it eventually produces an economy of the same structural design, the historical analyses seem to suggest a very different implication.

If we look at Marx's understanding of the *history* of capitalism, as opposed to its *structure*, two rather different ways of thinking can be distinguished in his reflections about the evolution of capitalist social forms. In Marx's early writings, down to the middle period, there is a clear expectation that, although the capitalist mode of production emerged in different times and conditions in specific European societies, and social and political institutions associated with the rise of the capitalist economy take even more complex patterns of evolution, eventually all societies tend historically towards a single structural form in which social relations are commoditized or become, in some sense, abstract and commodity-like (Lukacs 1971; Habermas 1986; Chapter IV). It is possible then to extend this in Lukacs's style to conceive of a necessary pattern of interconnected structures of capitalist economy, bureaucratized states,

market-dominated cultures, nuclear families – all as part of a global design of modernity. The rise of capitalism therefore meant the establishment of a similar kind of society in all European countries. In later writings, Marx takes an increasingly more complex view about this historical question; and it appears that, instead of a belief in an equi-final trajectory of capitalist evolutions, it moves towards a more plural vision of historical paths. Finally, this perception led to the well-known distinction in the final chapters of *Capital I* and parts of *Capital III* between the 'first way' of capitalist development, which Marx designates as 'really revolutionary', and a separate path designated as 'late capitalism' in which both the purely economic logic of capitalist evolution of the economy and associated sociological and political transformations settle into a distinctive 'second way' (Marx 1971: 334). In the 'first way', capitalism drives forward the political forces of democracy; in the second, it retards and obstructs them (Marx and Engels 1972, 1942). If we read this division in European modernity not as a partial and temporary obstruction but as a dynamic pattern, we arrive at an interesting theoretical conclusion. At least by implication, this is then the beginning of a theory of 'multiple modernities' within the Western world itself, and inside the canonical traditions of Western social theory. This would suggest that although the impulses towards a capitalist economy, urbanization, and political democracy are all general tendencies in the history of modern Europe, there are different configurations of their complex figuration, and even differential *trajectories* within the history of European modernity.

It is this second theory in Marx which seems to have more explanatory power in understanding the modern history of Europe. Paths of German, Italian and Russian modernity, taken in this wider and more complex sense, diverged significantly from the earlier English and French trajectories, and led to an immense historical conflict in Europe about which of these could establish itself as dominant and 'universal', until this contest was decided by the violence of the Second World War. This will also lay to rest the unconvincing idea of a spontaneous combustion of democracy in all European cultures that pervades the less historically sensitive version of social science common sense. Drawing on this alternate theory, we can ask: if the history of the West itself shows a tendency for forms of modernity to diffract, how can we reasonably expect them to be homogeneous when modernity goes out of the frame of European history into other continents and cultures (Taylor 2004). Let me make this point independently of Marx's theory.

## Two views of Western modernity

## Symmetry and sequence

Theorists who analyze modern European history acknowledge that the phenomenon called modernity is not a single, homogeneous process, but a combination of several which can be isolated and distinguished. When we are talking about modernity, we are talking about a number of processes of social change which can be studied or analyzed independently of each other  $-$  such as, capitalist industrialization, the increasing centrality of the state in the social order (Foucault's 'governmentality'), urbanization, sociological individuation, secularization in politics and ethics, the creation of a new order of knowledge, vast changes in the organization of family and intimacy, and changes in the fields of artistic and literary culture. If modernity is shown to be

analytically decomposable into these constituent processes, that raises a further and crucial question: how should we view the relationship among them?

Broadly, there are two ways of answering this question, which I shall designate as 'theories' of *symmetry* and *sequence*. The conventional theory that dominates the common sense of social science accepts the *symmetrical* view. It suggests, first, that these separate processes are linked by a *functional* relation of interdependence, and second, in consequence, these processes develop *symmetrically*.

## Functionalist conceptions of modernity

To put it schematically, if modernity consists of five distinct isolable processes, say A. B. C. D and E. this theory holds that they are *functionally dependent* on each other. i.e., either all of them would emerge, evolve and survive interdependently, or none at all. Besides, the emergence of *any one* or more of these constituents creates conditions for the emergence of the others, leading eventually to the establishment of the whole constellation. Finally, since they tend to emerge simultaneously, their historical development is likely to be parallel and symmetrical. In some theoretical models, as in Weber, these are all seen as instantiations of some larger, more abstract, general principle like 'rationality'. The rise of a capitalist economy based on economic rationality is not accidentally related to the growth of bureaucratization in state practices; they are deeply linked because bureaucratic rationality is simply the application of the same general rational principles to the sphere of the state's activity. The rise of secular ethics, or the decline of religious culture in spheres of social and family life, can then be seen as being related to this process, as a further instance of a general, comprehensive 'rationalization' of life. Despite the well-known differences between Marx and Weber's theoretical pictures of a capitalist society, there can be a powerful overlap. Clearly, this is precisely how the capitalist society is viewed by an influential strand in Western Marxism. Lukacs conceives of the capitalist society as an 'expressive totality' in Althusser's phrase, 'a circle of circles', with the principle of rationality in the axial circle at the centre of this design (Lukacs 1971; cf. Althusser 1969). These processes can be given separate histories, but they are not really causally separate; because of their strong functional connection, their histories are bound to be symmetrical. Early capitalist economies are found to be linked to the rise of liberal ideologies, and early impulses towards constitutionalism (anachronistically over-interpreted as democracy), the first signs of *gesellschaft*-based associationism, and experiments with state secularism. The period from the fifteenth to the seventeenth centuries is thus a period of the rise of *modernity* in the literal comprehensive sense, i.e. the simultaneous rise of all these processes, each supporting the others. It is not surprising that slowly all these interdependent processes literally mature and eventually assume the enchanting form that we recognize as advanced capitalist democracies of today, which have ended history by becoming the collective object of desire of all human beings.

#### The sequential view

The symmetrical view still remains the dominant view in social theory, almost a default setting to which social science literature reverts absent mindedly (Shils 1968; Toulmin 1992). However, historical research about European modernity over the last few decades has moved in a different direction and calls, by implication, for a radically

different theoretical model. Change in historical interpretation has been fuelled, among other things, by critical discussions on the relation between capitalism and democracy. Although conventional Marxist understanding regarded democratic institutions initially as functionally connected to the capitalist economy – as the ideal political superstructure of the capitalist mode of production – a heterodox line of thought claimed that democratic forms were not simply functional reflexes of the bourgeois economy, but political practices imposed upon a reluctant and hostile bourgeoisie by popular struggles of the working class (Thompson 1974). This view of a more contradictory rather than functional relation between capitalism and democracy has been subsequently widely accepted amongst historians, disrupting the benign hypothesis of capitalism inevitably creating the conditions for the growth of democratic politics. If the second view is accepted, the real history of European modernity comes out in a far more complicated way. It would then appear that the rise of capitalism was decisive and transformative for the economy precisely because of the absence of democracy in political life. In the absence of even rudimentary rights of resistance and legitimate protest against the intensifying demands of capitalist industrial work discipline, an unwilling and resisting peasantry, driven out of the countryside by economic distress, could be forcibly shaped into the familiar sociological form of the modern industrial proletariat. To put it schematically, the initial success of the capitalist productive organization was due precisely to the general absence of democratic institutions. Once capitalist industry was entrenched, and had reshaped the structure of the whole European economy into a general bourgeois form, working class political movements gradually drew democratic rights as concessions from the entrepreneurial classes and political elites. To characterize democracy as a necessary functional concomitant of capitalist economy is an astonishingly rationalizing and indolent way of viewing historic upheavals like the Chartist movement. It produces an ideologically rationalizing picture of capitalism as producing inevitable democratic political effects, showing it in a better light than it deserves historically. And it is indolent because it simply projects anachronistically into the past a state of affairs that has existed for a limited period since the 1920s. By the late nineteenth century, proletarian and lower class movements in major parts of Western Europe had secured substantial rights of political participation; and when the universal suffrage was conceded in early twentieth century, the poor in industrial capitalist societies could use their votes strategically to demand and eventually achieve the structure of a welfare state. This revisionist view of the historical relation between the economic logic of capitalism and the political logic of democracy leads to two further implications.

The narrower conclusion is that instead of emerging and evolving symmetrically, and being related functionally, capitalism and democracy had a contradictory at least oppositional relation for a long period in the early history of modernity. They could only develop sequentially. But after the rise of democracy modified some of the worst features of early capitalist iniquity, some (but not all) Western European societies developed the familiar outline of the 'advanced capitalist society', which combines the advantages of capitalist wealth and democratic freedom. According to a sequential reading of the history of Western modernity, this achievement was possible precisely because, in the West, all the different features of modern society did not emerge at the same time. These elements could not have been functionally related.

Let me show what the wider theoretical implications of this revisionist reading of history will be by taking up briefly the single example of thinking about democracy in India. In political science literature, authors often point to the existence of various *preconditions* for the success of democracy. If we turn the conditions that are known to have existed at the time of the rise of European democracy, and treat them as preconditions for all other subsequent cases, the explanation of the sheer existence of Indian democracy becomes inordinately difficult. The conditions under which democracy arises in the West and in India are different in several significant respects:

- 1 In the West real democracy came to a capitalist society which was already economically converted into a capitalist form of production and already fairly wealthy in international terms of comparison (whether this was because of colonialism or not is a contested question that we can leave aside because that is irrelevant to my argument).
- 2 By the time universal suffrage democracy emerged, the sectoral structure of the economy was already transformed by the industrial revolution, and a relatively small agricultural sector existed against a much larger industrial working force (see Varshney 1995).
- 3 The secular *state* as a political device was long established, and secular legal arrangements established on the basis of a social consensus (cf. Nandy 1998; Madan 1998; Bhargava 2001b; Kaviraj 1998: 293–98).
- 4 Literacy levels were high, if not universal, while in India, at the time of the adoption of the constitution, literacy levels were below 3 percent, and that meant an ability just to sign one's name.
- 5 Processes of social individuation were far advanced, and medieval communal bonds were already in serious decline.
- 6 To use Foucault's terminology, European societies had already established 'states of governmentality'.
- 7 What Weber termed a bureaucratic state or a *rechtstaat* already existed in many Western European countries.

Were these differences in the historical conditions when democratic institutions were introduced likely to cause serious differences in the pattern in which democracy functioned and evolved?

## Sequence and structure

Answering that question depends on how we conceive the relation between sequence and structure. Theorists who believe in the symmetrical model recognize that there is often a difference in sequence in which key modern processes are introduced in a particular society. However, to their way of thinking, this does not make a material difference in the longer term. Because of the functional connection, through which different elements of the modernist paradigm support and reinforce each other, after a time, when most of the essential elements are put in place, modern societies tend to look very similar. But it would follow from the sequential reading of European modernity that the sequence did matter substantially. Instead of the difference being gradually whittled down, the difference of origins and the set of initial conditions settled into radically different paths, so significant that while 'first way' capitalism led to the growth of political democracy in England and France, 'second way' capitalism in Germany. Italy and Russia preempted the growth of democratic institutions altogether, a dark prediction made with some force in Engels's last writings in the 1890s (Engels 1969).

## Alterations to the theory

#### Four reasons for historical differentiation

In the next part of this chapter I shall offer four reasons for differentiation of trajectories, and provide some illustrations of such complexity from the history of modern India. These are not exhaustive; there can conceivably be other reasons for the differentiation of paths and institutional forms. But these show us why a revisionist theory is required.

#### Two meanings of 'initial conditions'

The first reason is connected to the diversity of 'initial conditions'. Modernity is a transition into a transformed set of institutions from a prior set that were different. In some theories of modernity, universality is seen as a feature of modern institutions, but certainly not of pre-modern ones. Clearly, pre-modern is a *secondary* description of such societies, and a naïve reading of this term might suggest that it is an invariant condition; but clearly it is not. Modernity might be uniform, but what exists before it must be structurally diverse. This is a suggestion that should be acceptable to both sides, those who believe in theories of symmetry and sequence. These structures constitute the 'initial' or prior conditions from which modern institutions begin to arise.

The phrase 'initial conditions', used widely in historical explanations, appears unproblematic at first, but it is possible to detect two meanings in the use of this phrase. First, initial conditions might refer to those conditions that simply happen to exist as surrounding circumstances when a historical process of modern transformation starts. In this case, it is normal to expect that as the new process establishes itself its effects will slowly obliterate those initial circumstances. These would be initial in the sense that these conditions would exist at the start, when the process is weak, or immature, but would not leave any serious consequence when it matures. The initial character implies that these conditions are to be transcended. But in historical thinking initial conditions can also be used with a much stronger meaning. In this case, initial historical conditions in which processes of modernity begin to work impart to those processes and institutions specific qualities and forms which condition their further evolution. Initial conditions, to use Gadamer's terminology, remain 'effective-historical' (1981: 305ff).

#### The 'translation' of practices

Initial conditions in which modern institutions and processes arrive in particular societies determine the subsequent shape of their modernity to a substantial extent. In fact, there is no new unused 'place' to write modern practices on. Practices are 'written' upon pre-existing practices. Postcolonial theorists sometimes refer to this general pattern of events as 'hybridity'. But hybridity is an excessively general term, and does not distinguish between the many distinct ways in which the traditional and the Europeanderived modern might relate and configure. At times, the older and newer practices might tend in the same direction, and become miscible, as, for instance, in the case of the idioms of traditional religious toleration and modern secular institutions in India. In other cases, they might be more oppositional or contradictory. Consequently, while

accepting that the idea of hybridity captures a historically significant fact, it is essential to emphasize the need for further conceptual refinement. A second conceptual strategy to capture this process is to regard them as a form of 'translation', which is a suggestive way of thinking about them, but with some attendant difficulties. In a literary translation too, two languages interact, and what is produced as the end effect is generally acknowledged to be more a fusion of meanings, rather than a simply one-way writing of the meanings of a text into an entirely different passive language. Language is never passive to that extent. Even in literary translations, it is impossible to turn off the connotative effectivity of the receiving language to ensure the transfer of meanings from the language of the text. The historical argument is largely similar; the social effectiveness of the prior practices are never entirely neutralized by the reception of new ways of doing things.

## Specificities of sequence

The second reason for differentiation is simply drawn from the earlier discussion about sequencing. If sequencing plays a causative role in the specific formation of modernity in each particular society, it follows that the exact pattern of the interweaving or braiding of the processes would be of crucial importance. For example, several current discussions about Indian democracy can instantiate a larger debate about the precise sequencing effects of the component processes. To take but one example, observers have pointed out that one of the major problems for government policy is that Indian democracy operates in an economic environment in which the major part of the population still pursues agricultural occupations. Because of their electoral weight, the agrarian sector extracts huge subsidies from elected governments; yet such subsidies, apart from their efficiency, run up against a more fundamental limit, because a smaller sector of the economy – around 25 percent – cannot indefinitely subsidise a sector that is much larger in size (Varshney 1995). This is a sequence problem because Indian democracy arose at a time when the economy was largely agricultural.

## Improvization

Third, modernity in traditional societies introduces processes of institutional change that are driven either by some kind of structural logic  $-$  like the operation of a market in which capitalist firms produce the primary products for the society's consumption – or an institutional norm – like democratic government, or secular states where institutions are deliberately organized around certain general principles. In the second type of cases, the historical evolution of modernity takes the form of 'generative' processes: they are centred around acceptance of distinctive fundamental *principles* which groups of actors – politicians, classes, communities – constantly seek to fit to their determinate historical circumstances. In the construction and running of institutions, the principles are more fundamental than external forms. Following these norms does not make any sense, unless these are translated into institutional forms, and institutional forms operate under initial conditions of intelligibility specific to these societies. Improvization, in this sense, i.e., not simply copying them from other successful democracies, but fitting them to a society's peculiar circumstances, is of the essence of the unfolding of the modern. As a result of such historical improvisation, it is likely that institutions of democracy or capitalism or secularism would tend to develop unprecedented features

and institutional idiosyncrasies in different historical settings. Unlike conventional political science, the proper way of judging them is not to take a map of European institutions and decide whether the new forms are 'correct' or not  $-$  by judging if they fitted the European 'norm' – but to test them more abstractly and philosophically against the relevant principles.

To take a well-known Indian example, K. C. Wheare, the English political scientist, measured Indian federalism against the 'dominant' American-derived model, and decided to characterize it as 'quasi-federal' (1963), causing much avoidable anguish to a generation of Indian constitutionalists who made heroic attempts to defend the conceptual respectability of the Indian federation. Obviously, the correct response to Wheare was not to try to prove that the Indian system was really like the American one and that Wheare had empirically misjudged it. The correct response would have been to recognize that Wheare had used an inappropriate measure, and to theoretically endorse the Indian politicians' improvisation on the received architecture of federalism to suit the Indian political context. After all, the real test for a political institution of one country is not whether it resembled another, but if it could respond effectively to the political demands it was likely to encounter. Quite often, the only way of entrenching an institutional system in a different culture is precisely to break away from a slavish adherence to European precedents. What would have appeared unacceptably heterodox to the Euro-normal thinking of conventional political science in Wheare's time should be seen as a case of major success in imaginative political architecture.

# Reflexivity

Finally, it is commonly acknowledged that one of the major features of the culture of modernity is the principle of reflexivity. This is a difficult and many-sided notion, and quite different aspects of modern culture and its typical institutions are regarded as reflexive in different senses. I shall deal with a few features, but there could conceivably be some others, which are left out of my discussion. Theories of modernity, which offer different judgments about it in descriptive or evaluative terms, concur that a central principle driving different spheres of modern culture was rational questioning or criticism. Appeals to authority were culturally undermined in vastly divergent fields – from art to scientific enquiry  $-$  and an appeal to rational argument and critical judgment finally decided acceptance of a proposition or a point of view. Weberian sociology suggests that this principle of rational-critical judgment animates the politics of liberal democracy, modern scientific culture, the constant search for economic efficiency, and modernity's re-foundation of ethics on human reason. Precisely because it is a common principle that organizes institutions in such divergent fields, this also provides a kind of overarching normative link between various aspects of the modern civilization.

This capacity for rational consideration and arriving at judgments that are argumentative, dialogical, provisional and revisable has another obvious field of application. In modern cultures people turn their capacity for rational reasoning and criticism upon themselves  $-$  at least in two ways. Reflexivity leads to assessments of their own conduct from an *exterior* point of view, which was unavailable to non-European societies before the arrival of Western ideas. New influences broke the obviousness and the immovability of cultural habitus, the impossibility of conceiving the world in any except an 'internal' way. Reflexivity however cannot stop there, simply using Western modernity as an exterior point of view that comprehensively undermines traditional

cultures. The capacity for critical reflection extends to assessments of institutions and practices of Western modernity as well, leading to two further results. Reflection on the precise conditions in which a group of people or even individuals wish to realize some modern principle does give rise to improvisation and proliferation of new forms. If the Japanese develop techniques of running modern capitalist firms in innovative ways, saying that they do not conform to earlier known management patterns is hardly an effective argument.

Indeed, proliferation of new forms of this kind feed back into the older versions of institutions as well – extending the repertoire of capitalist management. More significantly, latecomers into modernity have the vast expanse of the historical experience of modern European civilization open for critical examination before them. If they take the impulse of critical reasoning and rejection of authority seriously, they will recognize that the unquestioned prestige of Western modernity, at least of its dominant ideological narrative, is a most formidable authority in contemporary culture which works exactly like other sources of authority, and needs critical evaluation. In fact, the powerful idea that animates the modern ideal – that individuals and societies should live an elective life, as they choose or think fit – requires this critical response. Turning the faculty of critical reasoning upon oneself, one's own situation, conduct, ideals, on one's own society and its practices, thus results in a critical reading of all history, including that of the modern West. Modern culture leads to an application of the same critical criteria to the experiences of Western modernity itself, though advocates of Western modernity are unnecessarily startled by this assertion. The peculiar popularity of Marxism among the intelligentsia of the colonial world is perhaps linked to the fact that it offered them a way of being both modern and anti-Western. It is entirely conceivable that a late entrant into modernity might not applaud every aspect of modern European civilization. They might reject some major proposals of modern politics or ethics, after subjecting them to rational criticism. The intellectual results of this kind of critical reasoning are not expressions of opposition to modernity, but an essential continuation of its spirit. The final reason for the deviation of new modernities from the old European ones is disillusionment with the overall pattern of life that European modernity itself has gradually elaborated over the last centuries. Disillusionment with aspects of Western modernity is likely to encourage the logic of institutional improvization even further. The historically declining imaginative power of the West, despite its military dominance, makes it unlikely that diverging trajectories of the modern in other parts of the world can be folded back into recognizable Western patterns – that people can be persuaded to force their futures into versions of the Western past.

# Conclusion

#### A second threshold of social theory

If true, this argument has large implications. It appears that social theory in the widest sense – not merely in the explicit form of 'theory', but also as the inexplicit assumptions and methods that animate social science research in general – has entered an interesting critical period, because of a fundamental imbalance. One of the major new developments in social knowledge has been the addition of a vast body of careful historical knowledge about non-European societies to the immense documentation of Western life that already existed. But this extension has also led to an underlying theoretical crisis, because the more interesting and perceptive work on other societies is evincing increasing discomfort with the structure of received theory, simply because its major presuppositions, arguments, examples and generalizations were all drawn, quite naturally, from the stock of European historical experience. It is proving impossible to force this new body of intractable evidence into the received theoretical architecture. This might suggest that social sciences have imperceptibly reached a significant threshold. The methodological dispute in German sociology in the early twentieth century indicated that the common methods of natural science do not easily cross over into the very different field and materials of social science; scientific enquiry needed a methodological retuning when it crossed this boundary. In contemporary social science, we have reached a similar boundary between the West and other societies  $-$  a threshold that requires the social sciences to have significantly different concepts and theoretical generalizations. Producing what I have called 'secondary' descriptions is not a particularly promising response to this problem. It is necessary to preserve and continue the great tradition of Western theory without being imprisoned within its borders.<sup>4</sup>

In the last analysis, what this chapter suggests may be a matter of historical common sense. But the imaginative power of social theory is so overwhelming that much of contemporary mainstream social science – particularly the hinge that crucially links modern social theory, which developed in Europe to the emerging social science research of other societies  $-$  simply disregards this central question. It is time that this view, now a heterodoxy, becomes a new commonsense.

## Notes

- 1 This is an abridged version of the article that appeared in *European Journal of Sociology*, 46(3), 2005.
- 2 S. N. Eisenstadt (2000) has suggested that if we think closely about American history, we are forced to recognize the first case of emendation in the direction of a theory of multiple modernities' (cf. Gaonkar 2001; Bhargava 2001a): i.e., there were peculiarities in American history and colonialism, the presence of three different races, the resultant use of endemic violence against racially subordinated communities or peoples – which made American modernity sufficiently different from the standard European cases to call for a serious attempt at theoretical differentiation.
- 3 Historicist in the strict sense used by German thinkers like Dilthey, not in the very different sense used by Popper (1945) in his Cold War study. In the first sense, historicism means staying away from law-like generalizations specific to natural sciences, and treating each historical situation as unique. Popper's idiosyncratic use means almost the opposite  $-a$  belief in inexorable historical teleology. Unfortunately, in much contemporary writing, the second sense has overshadowed the first.
- 4 In recent debates in Indian political thought, several authors have suggested a comparable programme. See for instance, Partha Chatterjee's attempt to theorize a distinction between civil and political society, in a way that is entirely different from European precedents: Chatterjee 2004; Chakrabarty 2002: Chapter I, where he explains what he means by 'provincializing'; Rajeev Bhargava's work on secularism points to significant changes in the theory of secularism in Indian nationalist discourse (Bhargava 2001). I make a similar point in 'In search civil society' (Kavirai and Khilnani 2001: Chapter 15).

# References

Althusser, Louis (1969) 'The materialist dialectic', *For Marx*, London: Allen Lane, Penguin.

 $-$  (1974) 'The outline of a theory of historical time', in Louis Althusser and Etienne Balibar (eds) Reading Capital, London: NLB.