# **Insurance Derivatives**

Derivatives are financial instruments whose value depends on some underlying variables. Insurance derivatives are those derivatives that are related to insurance. Roughly speaking, there are two main types of insurance derivatives in the market. The first type is the so-called catastrophe derivatives (*see* **Catastrophe Bonds**). They are similar to ordinary financial derivatives like options (*see* **Options: Basic Definitions**) and futures (*see* **Forwards and Futures**) except that the underlying variables are not financial instruments but insured natural catastrophe risk. The second type is equity-linked products. These are policies sold by insurance companies in which payoffs to the investors are linked to the performance of other financial instruments like equities and stock index.

# **PCS Catastrophe Insurance Options**

A traditional way that insurance companies can get capital injection (in the form of debt or equity) in the event of a natural catastrophe is through the so-called contingent capital programs. This process permits access to risk capital only if following a loss exceeds a certain threshold. However, insurance risk is not transferred in this arrangement. To enhance the claims-paying ability of insurers and reinsurers following severe natural catastrophes, and to take advantage of the global capital markets, securitization (*see* **Securitization**) of catastrophe insurance risk has been proposed in recent years so that the risk can be transferred from the insurance industry to the capital market.

Catastrophe insurance derivatives (CAT-derivatives) were first developed by the Chicago Board of Trade in 1992. The first generation of derivatives included futures and options of futures. For a detailed description of these contracts, we refer to [29] and [7]. Reference [37] contains a concise summary of catastrophe derivatives. In 1995, the first generation derivatives were replaced by property claim service (PCS) catastrophe insurance options. Underlying these options are some catastrophe loss indices compiled daily by PCS. These indices reflect estimated and published insured losses due to natural catastrophes for a defined region and a defined time period. Let *X* = *(Xt)t*<sup>≥</sup><sup>0</sup> be a stochastic process modeling a PCS loss index. The value of this process at time *t* can be interpreted as the accumulated insured losses (*see* **Accumulated Claims**) due to natural catastrophes up to time *t*. The payoff of a European type CAT-derivative with maturity *T* depends on the value of the index at time *T* , that is, payoff = *φ(XT )* for some function *φ*.

#### *Models of the PCS Loss Index*

Since the index value represents the accumulated insured losses due to catastrophic events, and catastrophic events occur unpredictably, it is natural to model the loss index by a continuous time stochastic process with jumps (*see* **Jump Processes**) at random time points. For example, Cummins and Geman [16] modeled the instantaneous claim process as a geometric Brownian motion with jumps:

$$dS_t = \alpha S_{t-} dt + \sigma S_{t-} dW_t + k \cdot dN_t \qquad (1)$$

where *k* is a positive constant representing the losses due to catastrophes and *N* is an independent Poisson process (*see* **Poisson Process**; **Point Processes**) with constant intensity. This Poisson process counts the number of catastrophic events that occurred in the past. The process *S* models the instantaneous loss amount, and hence accumulated losses up to time *t* (that is, the index value up to time *t*) is given by

$$X_t = \int_0^t S(u) \, \mathrm{d}u \tag{2}$$

Assuming the market is arbitrage-free (*see* **Arbitrage Strategy**; **Fundamental Theorem of Asset Pricing**), or, equivalently, the existence of an equivalent martingale probability measure (*see* **Equivalent Martingale Measures**), the valuation problem of futures contracts written on the loss index *X* is equivalent to that of Asian options (*see* **Asian Options**) written on *S* with zero exercising price. Therefore, the valuation problem of CAT-futures is transformed to a standard Asian option pricing problem. In [22], the authors have modeled accumulated losses directly by a jump diffusion:

$$dX_t = S_t dt + k dN_t \tag{3}$$

where the process *S* is a geometric Brownian motion (*see* **Black–Scholes Formula**) representing the randomness in the reporting of the claims, *k* is a positive constant, and *(Nt)* is a Poisson process with constant intensity. This model preserves the quasi-completeness of insurance derivative markets obtained by applying the Delbaen and Haezendonck methodology [19] to the class of layers of reinsurance (*see* **Reinsurance**) replicating the call spreads (*see* **Call Spread**) [21]. To derive a unique price of insurance derivatives written on the index *(Xt)*, the authors assumed that the insurance market is both arbitrage free and complete. The justification of completeness is that one can choose an equivalent martingale measure that best fits the prices of various reinsurance layers. By using the techniques of stochastic time changes (*see* **Time Change**) and Laplace transforms, the authors obtained quasi-analytical solutions for CAT-option prices.

Aase [1] modeled the loss index using a compound Poisson process:

$$X_t = \sum_{k=1}^{N_t} Y_k \tag{4}$$

where *N*, as before, is a Poisson process counting the number of catastrophic events in the past, and *Yk* is the jump size of the index at the random time point of occurrence of the *k*th catastrophe. It was assumed that *Y*1*, Y*2*,* ··· form an independent and identically distributed sequence and are independent of the counting process *N*. The compound Poisson process is commonly used in actuarial risk theory (*see* **Insurance Risk Models**) to model aggregate losses. The loss index modeled in this way is time homogeneous with independent increments. These properties were justified empirically by the actuarial studies performed by Levi and Partrat [27]. Aase investigated the valuation problems of CAT-futures and derivatives on futures. In the framework of partial equilibrium theory with uncertainty, the author derived closed form formulas under some specific assumptions on the utility functions (*see* **Utility Function**). A similar model was used by Chang *et al.* [11] to evaluate CATfutures and futures call spreads. They applied the randomized operational time approach to transform the compound Poisson process to a more trackable pure diffusion. Embrechts and Meister [20] generalized Aase's compound Poisson model to mixed compound Poisson process with stochastic intensity. Similarly, Dassios and Jang [18] used the Cox process to model the claim arrival process for catastrophic events. As pointed out in [36], a market comprises a risk-free bond and a loss index alone is very often incomplete because of two reasons: (i) the underlying loss index *(Xt)* is not traded and hence it is impossible to construct a hedging portfolio (*see* **Hedging**) based on the bond and the index; and (ii) there is no instrument to hedge the stochastic jump sizes of the loss index.

# **Equity-linked Insurance Products**

Traditionally, annuities are contracts sold by insurance companies to provide a stream of fixed payments over the life of the contract. In recent years, variable annuities in the United States are getting more popular with investors. In contrast to traditional annuity products, the payments of a variable annuity are linked to the performance of a portfolio of securities like stocks, bonds, and mutual funds. Through investing in variable annuities, investors can not only participate in the stock market but also partially hedge the downside risk of the market. Nowadays, variable annuities with guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits (GMWBs) are quite common. Policyholders are allowed to withdraw funds on an annual or semiannual basis without a penalty as long as the withdrawal rate is less than a prespecified level. With the GMWB, the sum of cash flows received by the policyholder is guaranteed to be at least the original premium paid. Other common riders include guaranteed minimum death benefit (GMDB), guaranteed living benefit (GLB), guaranteed minimum income benefit (GMIB), and guaranteed minimum accumulation benefit (GMAB). For example, with the GMDB rider, a variable annuity will pay to the policyholder's beneficiary the greater of the account value or a guaranteed minimum amount (such as the total purchase payments). Products similar to variable annuities are also sold in other countries, such as unit-linked annuities in the United Kingdom and segregated funds in Canada. A concise description of the various guaranteed benefits in these contracts can be found in [29, 30].

A similar product is the equity-indexed annuity (EIA). EIA was first introduced by Keyport Life in 1995, and is one of the most successful innovations in the financial markets in the last decade. The notional amount of EIAs sold has increased dramatically in recent years. Essentially, EIA is an equity-linked deferred annuity whose returns are based on the performance of an equity mutual fund or a stock index like S&P 500. Moreover, return on the initial premium is guaranteed. On each anniversary of the contract, the insurance company measures the growth of the underlying index and credits that calculated growth to the investors. If the growth is negative, the companies normally would still guarantee a certain minimum rate of return, say 3%. However, the guaranteed rate is typically much less than the rate of return offered on US Treasury securities with the same maturity. Since return on the initial premium is guaranteed, EIA can be regarded as a fixed interest deposit with an embedded call option (*see* **Call Options**) on an underlying index. Since options are implicitly embedded in EIA contracts, various option pricing and hedging techniques are applicable. For detailed discussions and descriptions on equity-linked insurance products, we refer to [23, 26, 32, 39, 40], and [25].

In the literature, the main emphases about variable annuities and EIA have been on pricing and hedging of the options embedded in the contracts. For example, Brennan and Schwartz [10], Boyle and Schwartz [9], and Bacinello and Ortu [3] used standard martingale techniques to price and hedge the embedded options in variable annuities under the assumption that the market is complete. Moller [32–34] investigates pricing and hedging of insurance contracts in the presence of mortality risk. Bacinello and Ortu [4, 5], Nielsen and Sandmann [37], Miltersen and Persson [31], Bacinello and Persson [6], and Zaglauera and Bauerb [41] studied the situation when interest rate risk presents, assuming that the financial market is complete. In an incomplete market, there is no unique fair option price. Perfect hedge by selffinancing trading strategies does not exist. As an alternative to perfect hedge, Boyle and Hardy [8] and Hardy [24] studied delta hedging (*see* **Delta Hedging**) for the options embedded in contracts with GMDB. Another possible way is to construct hedging strategy that minimizes certain measure of the intrinsic risk. For instance, Moller [32–34] and Lin and Tan [27] studied the effect of mortality risk on the risk minimization hedging strategies in the presence of interest rate risk. Coleman *et al.* [14] studied hedging strategies for options embedded with ratchet features, under both equity (including jump) risk and interest rate risk. They assumed that the market is complete under mortality risk, but the financial market is incomplete, due to a suitable equity model for fat tails or to discrete hedging. Coleman *et al.* [15] compared the relative performances of delta hedging and dynamic discrete risk minimization hedging strategies in the presence of both jump risk and volatility risk.

Recent research also studied the embedded withdrawal and surrender options of equity-linked insurance products. For example, Bacinello [2] used discrete-time binomial models (*see* **Binomial Tree**) to study the fair valuation problem of participating policies embedded with a surrender option. Chu and Kwok [13] analyzed the withdrawal right embedded in dynamically protected funds. Siu [38] studied the withdrawal and surrender options of a participating life insurance policy by modeling the underlying assets as Markov-modulated geometric Brownian motion. Cheung and Yang [12] studied the optimal surrender time for equity-linked products in a discrete-time regime-switching model (*see* **Regimeswitching Models**). They examined the impact of the Markov transition matrix on the optimal surrender strategy. Milevsky and Salisbury [30] developed the pricing model of variable annuities with GMWB under both static and dynamic withdrawal policies. In [17], the authors have studied the optimal withdrawal strategy using techniques in singular stochastic control theory (*see* **Stochastic Control**).

# **References**

- [1] Aase, K.K. (1999). An equilibrium model of catastrophe insurance futures and spreads, *Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance* **24**, 69–96.
- [2] Bacinello, A.R. (2003). Fair valuation of a guaranteed life insurance participating contract embedding a surrender option, *Journal of Risk and Insurance* **70**, 461–487.
- [3] Bacinello, A.R. & Ortu, F. (1993). Pricing of equitylinked life insurance with endogenous minimum guarantees, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **12**, 245–257.
- [4] Bacinello, A.R. & Ortu, F. (1993). Pricing of guaranteed security-linked life insurance under interest rate risk. Actuarial approach for financial risks. *Transactions of the Third AFIR International Colloquium*, Rome, 35–55.
- [5] Bacinello, A.R. & Ortu, F. (1994). Single and periodic premiums for guaranteed equity-linked life insurance under interest rate risk: the "lognormal \$+\$ Vasicek" case, in *Financial Modeling*, L. Pecatti & M. Viren, eds, Physica-Verlag, 1–25.

- [6] Bacinello, A.R. & Persson, S.A. (2002). Design and pricing of equity-linked life insurance under stochastic interest rates, *Journal of Risk Finance* **3**, 6–21.
- [7] Banks, E. (2005). *Catastrophic Risk: Analysis and Management*. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.
- [8] Boyle, P. & Hardy, M. (1997). Reserving for maturity guarantees: two approaches, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **21**, 113–127.
- [9] Boyle, P. & Schwartz, E. (1977). Equilibrium prices of guarantees under equity-linked contracts, *Journal of Risk and Insurance* **44**, 639–680.
- [10] Brennan, M. & Schwartz, E. (1976). The pricing of equity-linked life insurance policies with an asset value guarantee, *Journal of Financial Economics* **3**, 195–213.
- [11] Chang, C.W., Chang, J.S.K. & Yu, M.T. (1996). Pricing catastrophe insurance futures call spreads: a randomized operational time approach, *Journal of Risk and Insurance* **63**, 599–616.
- [12] Cheung, K.C. & Yang, H. (2005). Optimal stopping behavior of equity-linked investment products with regime switching, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **37**, 599–614.
- [13] Chu, C.C. & Kwok, Y.K. (2004). Reset and withdrawal rights in dynamic fund protection, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **34**, 273–295.
- [14] Coleman, T.F., Kim, Y., Li, Y. & Patron, M. (2007). Robustly hedging variable annuities with guarantees under jump and volatility risks, *Journal of Risk and Insurance* **74**, 347–376.
- [15] Coleman, T.F., Li, Y. & Patron, M. (2006). Hedging guarantees in variable annuities under both equity and interest rate risks, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **38**, 215–228.
- [16] Cummins, J.D. & Geman, H. (1994). An Asian option approach to the valuation of insurance futures contracts, *Review of Futures Markets* **13**, 517–557.
- [17] Dai, M., Kwok, Y.K. & Zong, J. (2008). Guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefit in variable annuities, *Mathematical Finance* **18**, 595–611.
- [18] Dassios, A. & Jang, J.K. (2003). Pricing of catastrophe reinsurance and derivatives using the Cox process with shot noise intensity, *Finance and Stochastic* **7**, 73–95.
- [19] Delbaen, F. & Haezendonck, J. (1989). A Martingale approach to premium calculation principles in an arbitrage-free market, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **8**, 269–277.
- [20] Embrechts, P. & Meister, S. (1997). Pricing insurance derivatives, the case of CAT futures. *Proceedings of the 1995 Bowles Symposium on Securitization of Insurance Risk* , Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia. Society of Actuaries, Monograph M-FI97-1, 15–26.
- [21] Geman, H. (1994). CAT calls, *Risk* **7**, 86–89.
- [22] Geman, H. & Yor, M. (1997). Stochastic time changes in catastrophe option pricing, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **21**, 185–193.

- [23] Grosen, A. & Jøgensen, P.L. (2000). Fair valuation of life insurance liabilities: the impact of interest rate guarantees, surrender options, and bonus policies, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **26**, 37–57.
- [24] Hardy, M. (2000). Hedging and reserving for singlepremium segregated fund contacts, *North American Actuarial Journal* **4**, 63–74.
- [25] Hardy, M. (2004). Options and guarantees in life insurance, in *Encyclopedia of Actuarial Science*, J.L. Teugels & B. Sundt, eds, John Wiley & Sons, 1216–1225.
- [26] Lee, H. (2001). Discussion of valuing equity-indexed annuities, *North American Actuarial Journal* **5**, 133–136.
- [27] Levi, C. & Partrat, C. (1991). Statistical analysis of natural events in the United States, *ASTIN Bulletin* **21**, 253–276.
- [28] Lin, X.S. & Tan, K.S. (2003). Valuation of equityindexed annuities under stochastic interest rate, *North American Actuarial Journal* **7**, 72–91.
- [29] Meister, S. (1995). Contribution to the mathematics of catastrophe insurance futures. Technical report. Department of Mathematics, ETH Zurich. ¨
- [30] Milevsky, M.A. & Posner, S.E. (2001). The titanic option: valuation of the guaranteed minimum death benefit in variable annuities and mutual funds, *The Journal of Risk and Insurance* **68**, 91–126.
- [31] Milevsky, M.A. & Salisbury, T.S. (2006). Financial valuation of guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **38**, 21–38.
- [32] Miltersen, K.R. & Persson, S.A. (1999). Pricing rate of return guarantees in a HJM framework, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **25**, 307–325.
- [33] Moller, T. (1998). Risk-minimizing hedging strategies for unit-linked life insurance contracts, *ASTIN Bulletin* **28**, 17–47.
- [34] Moller, T. (2001). Hedging equity-linked life insurance contracts, *North American Actuarial Journal* **5**, 79–95.
- [35] Moller, T. (2001). Risk-minimizing hedging strategies for insurance payment processes, *Finance and Stochastics* **5**, 419–446.
- [36] Muermann, A. (2001). *Pricing Catastrophe Insurance Derivatives*. LSE FMG Discussion Paper Series No. 400.
- [37] Muermann, A. (2004). Catastrophe derivatives, in *Encyclopedia of Actuarial Science*, J.L. Teugels & B. Sundt, eds, John Wiley & Sons, 231–236.
- [38] Nielsen, J.A. & Sandmann, K. (1995). Equity-linked life insurance: a model with stochastic interest rate, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **16**, 225–253.
- [39] Siu, T.K. (2005). Financial fair valuation of participating policies with surrender options and regime switching, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **37**, 533–552.

- [40] Streiff, T.F. & DiBiase, C.A. (1999). *Equity Indexed Annuities*, Dearborn, Chicago.
- [41] Tiong, S. (2000). *Equity indexed annuities in the blackscholes environment*. Doctoral thesis. The University of Iowa, Ames.
- [42] Zaglauera, K. & Bauer, D. (2007). Risk-neutral valuation of participating life insurance contracts in a stochastic interest rate environment, *Insurance: Mathematics and Economics* **43**, 29–40.

# **Related Articles**

**Catastrophe Bonds**; **Economic Capital Allocation**; **Insurance Risk Models**; **Option Pricing: General Principles**; **Reinsurance**; **Securitization**.

KA CHUN CHEUNG